Foreign Relations of the United States, 1945–1950, Emergence of the Intelligence Establishment (U.S. Department of State, Office of the Historian, 1996)
Public domain. Sourced from the U.S. Department of State, Office of the Historian: Foreign Relations of the United States (https://history.state.gov/historicaldocuments/frus1945-50Intel).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

================================================================================

Emergence of the Intelligence Establishment (Foreign Relations of the United States, 1945–1950, Retrospective Volume)

Title pageForeign Relations of the United States, 1945–1950

Retrospective Volume

Emergence of the Intelligence Establishment

Editors:C. Thomas Thorne, Jr.David S. PattersonGeneral Editor:Glenn W. LaFantasie
United States Government Printing Office

Washington
1996

U.S. Department of State

Office of the Historian

Bureau of Public Affairs

This experimental e-book was generated on May 21, 2013.

Please visit the Office of the Historian e-books web page to access updates.

About the Electronic EditionAbout the Electronic Edition

The Office of the Historian at the U.S. Department of State has embarked on a program to
release an ebook edition of the Foreign Relations of the United States
(FRUS) series, which was established in 1861. Far lighter and more portable
than printed editions of FRUS, the ebook edition offers the full content of each
volume and makes use of the full-text search and other reading features of most ebook
devices and applications, including bookmarking and note-taking. Unlike the web-based
edition of FRUS, the ebook edition, once downloaded, can be accessed even without
internet connectivity.

In creating the FRUS ebook edition, we endeavored to maintain fidelity with the
original printed edition. Representing original page numbers from printed editions in ebooks
has proved to be difficult. For readers who need to cite material in this ebook, we
recommend citing document numbers instead of page numbers. Document numbers are persistent,
media-neutral identifiers. Please note that since the indexes in older FRUS volumes
refer to page numbers rather than document numbers, we have found certain indexes cannot be
used “as is” in ebook versions and so have been omitted from the ebook edition of
pre-Johnson administration volumes. Volumes from the Johnson administration onward, whose
indexes reference document numbers, are unaffected by this issue.

The Office of the Historian has worked to ensure that this ebook is error-free and works on a
broad range of devices. Please email
history_ebooks@state.gov with any feedback.

To learn about updates to this ebook, other ebooks, and the ebook initiative in general,
visit our ebooks homepage,
and follow us on Twitter at @HistoryAtState.

Office of the Historian

Bureau of Public Affairs
U.S. Department of State
May 2013

Emergence of the Intelligence Establishment (Foreign Relations of the United States, 1945–1950, Retrospective Volume)Contents

Preface

List of Sources

List of Abbreviations

List of Persons

Emergence of the Intelligence EstablishmentFounding of the National Intelligence Structure, August 1945-January 1946 (Documents 1-71)

Department of State Intelligence (Documents 72-94)

From the Strategic Services Unit to the Office of Special Operations (Documents 95-136)

Souers' Tenure as Director of Central Intelligence (Documents 137-154)

Vandenberg's Tenure as Director of Central Intelligence (Documents 155-195)

The National Security Act of 1947 (Documents 196-240)

Psychological and Political Warfare (Documents 241-316)

Hillenkoetter's Tenure as Director of Central Intelligence (Documents 317-421)

National Security Council Intelligence Directives, 1947-1950 (Documents 422-435)

Index

PrefacePreface

The Foreign Relations of the United States series presents
the official documentary historical record of major foreign policy decisions and
significant diplomatic activity of the United States Government. The series
documents the facts and events that contributed to the formulation of policies
and includes evidence of supporting and alternative views to the policy
positions ultimately adopted.

The Historian of the Department of State is charged with the responsibility for
the preparation of the Foreign Relations series. The
staff of the Office of the Historian, Bureau of Public Affairs, plans,
researches, compiles, and edits the volumes in the series. This documentary
editing proceeds in full accord with the generally accepted standards of
historical scholarship. Official regulations codifying specific standards for
the selection and editing of documents for the series were first promulgated by
Secretary of State Frank B. Kellogg on March 26, 1925. These regulations, with
minor modifications, guided the series through 1991.

A new statutory charter for the preparation of the series was established by
Public Law 102-138, the Foreign Relations Authorization Act, Fiscal Years 1992
and 1993, which was signed by President George Bush on October 28, 1991. Section
198 of P.L. 102-138 added a new Title IV to the Department of State's Basic
Authorities Act of 1956 (22 USC 4351, et seq.).

The statute requires that the Foreign Relations series be
a thorough, accurate, and reliable record of major United States foreign policy
decisions and significant United States diplomatic activity. The volumes of the
series should include all records needed to provide comprehensive documentation
of major foreign policy decisions and actions of the United States Government,
including facts that contributed to the formulation of policies and records that
provided supporting and alternative views to the policy positions ultimately
adopted.

The statute confirms the editing principles established by Secretary Kellogg: the
Foreign Relations series is guided by the principles
of historical objectivity and accuracy; records should not be altered or
deletions made without indicating in the published text that a deletion has been
made; the published record should omit no facts that were of major importance in
reaching a decision; and nothing should be omitted for the purposes of
concealing a defect in policy. The statute also requires that the Foreign Relations series be published not more than 30
years after the events recorded.

The editors of this volume, which was completed in 1991, are convinced that it
meets all regulatory, statutory, and scholarly standards of selection and
editing.

Scope and Design of This Volume and Its Relationship to the
Foreign Relations Series

By the beginning of the 1980s a significant amount of previously highly
classified information about wartime and post war intelligence activities of the
United States Government had been disclosed in formal testimony to the Congress
or in unofficial books and articles by individuals with varying degrees of
knowledge and access to the record and experience of the intelligence community.
It became apparent to the editors of the Foreign
Relations series that intelligence institutions and operations became
an increasingly important element in the formulation and execution of American
foreign policy in the administration of President Truman and in succeeding Presidential administrations. Nearly
all of more than 50 volumes documenting the foreign policies of the Truman administration had been researched,
declassified, and published by the early 1980s. Only scattered bits of the
record of the impact of intelligence on policymaking and execution had been
included in these volumes. Nearly all of that material came from the papers
preserved at the Harry S. Truman
Presidential Library and the copies of papers submitted to or emerging from the
National Security Council and available to official historians at the Department
of State and other government agencies. Access, which was severely limited, did
not, in any case, guarantee inclusion of selected documents in the Foreign Relations volumes as many sensitive issues
remained undeclassifiable. The lack of understanding of the record of
intelligence operations, analysis, and clandestine activities combined with the
special information security protections for these records severely handicapped
the compilers of the Foreign Relations volumes of the
Truman years.

Recognition by the editors of the Foreign Relations series
of the important gaps in the published volumes coincided with a steady slippage
beyond the 30-year line in publishing the 75 or more volumes documenting the
foreign policy record of President Eisenhower. The notion of a Foreign Relations
retrospective volume to publish important documents not available or
declassifiable at the time of original publication arose at this time. The
Foreign Relations Advisory Committee, which was established by the Department of
State in 1955 and met annually, periodically considered with general favor such
a supplementary volume as a possible method of gathering and disclosing
important documents not included in earlier volumes.

By the mid 1980s the editors of the Foreign Relations
series decided to explore the possibility of a retrospective volume for the
Truman administration or some portion
of that period. As a first step the editors aimed at a volume that would document the institutional foundations of
the interrelationship between foreign policy and intelligence. Preliminary
research indicated that a significant segment of the important, high-level
record of this aspect of intelligence activities was already available or could
probably be declassified. Such a volume could lay the groundwork for subsequent
volumes on substantive issues, if declassification became possible.

During the mid and late 1980s, research went forward slowly on the proposed
1,000-page volume on the institutional foundations of foreign policy and
intelligence through 1950. Initial research by staff members of the Office of
the Historian was expanded and completed by C. Thomas Thorne, Jr., a retired
Deputy Director of the Department of State's Bureau of Intelligence and
Research. The CIA History Staff, headed by Dr. J. Kenneth McDonald, provided
important cooperation. More than 1,000 documents from the CIA and from CIA
records accessioned by the National Archives and Records Administration were
collected during the initial research. In light of the large quantity of
documentation available the editors decided to confine this volume to the major
aspects of the organization of the high-level administration of intelligence in
1945-1950. These were more clearly the formative years of the intelligence
institutions and their relationships to the Department of State. As it emerged,
therefore, the project appeared to be manageable and clearly focused and one
that would provide the Foreign Relations series with an appropriate initial
retrospective volume.

This volume confronted the editors with unprecedented documentary editing
challenges. The documents used to compile this volume were special and unique by
Foreign Relations standards. Rather than diplomatic
correspondence or the record of negotiations and formulation of foreign policy
decisions, the editors compiled a record of high-level governmental plans,
discussions, administrative decisions, and managerial actions that established
institutions and procedures for the central coordination of intelligence
collection and analysis and covert action. Although the proposals and efforts of
the leaders of the Department of State influenced the emergent central
intelligence institutions, much of the record included in this volume documents
the advice, actions, and initiatives of principals and groups in other
departments and agencies, all of whom helped to lay the foundations for the new
centralized intelligence bureaucracy. The editors adopted a generally
chronological approach to the presentation of the documents but organized the
volume into separate, topical chapters. Each chapter is preceded by an
introductory essay that seeks to explain the documents included and place them
in a broader historical context. These chapter introductions cite unpublished
records as well as published sources and narrative texts.

In preparing this volume the editors sought to limit their selection of documents
to those dealing with the planning and establishment of national intelligence
coordination and national intelligence policies. The editors did not seek to
document the planning and implementation of specific intelligence operations or
the impact of intelligence appraisals upon particular foreign affairs
policymaking or negotiations. Intelligence reports, estimates, and analyses
dealing with particular regions, countries, or issues have not been
included.

The preparation of this volume raised special compiling problems for the editors
of the Foreign Relations series. The collection of the organizational planning
documents and the records of the administration of early post-war intelligence
activities was particularly difficult. Many of the relevant records appear to
have been destroyed or are widely scattered in various agency archival holdings.
More than the usual number of original documents were found to be missing or
impossible to locate because of the repeated and rapid shifting of various
intelligence functions among organizations. The high security level of these
records also frustrated research. It also became clear to the editors that some
of the most important decisions were made without written records having been
kept.

The selection and editing of this volume was completed in November 1991. The
editors are convinced that this volume presents a full and comprehensive
documentary record of the planning and inauguration of central governmental
institutions with responsibilities for coordinating intelligence activities in
the formulation and execution of American foreign policy. The volume fully meets
the spirit and the letter of the October 1991 Foreign Relations statute. The
declassification process of this volume and the microfiche supplement was not
completed until July 1994. The preparation for publication of this volume, so
unusual by Foreign Relations series standards, was not
completed until the end of 1995.

Since the time this volume was compiled in 1991, Department of State historians
have greatly expanded their access to other relevant bodies of records within
the Department, in the Bureau of Intelligence and Research, at the Central
Intelligence Agency, and in other agencies and commissions. There may be
additional documents that might otherwise have been included had they been
available before 1992. The editors decided, however, that the urgency of making
this volume available to readers after nearly 10 years of preparation outweighed
the possible omission of additional relevant information. Should such
information become available during subsequent research, it will be included in
future retrospective volumes on intelligence activities and foreign policy.

Sources for This Volume

The Foreign Relations statute requires that the published record in the Foreign Relations series include all records needed to provide comprehensive
documentation on major foreign policy decisions and actions of the U.S.
Government. It further requires that government agencies, departments, and other
entities of the U.S. Government cooperate with the Department of State Historian
by providing full and complete access to records pertinent to foreign policy
decisions and actions and by providing copies of selected records. The editors
believe that in terms of access this volume was prepared in accordance with the
standards and mandates of this statute, although access to some records was
restricted, as noted below.

The editors had complete access to all the retired records and papers of the
Department of State: the central files of the Department; the special
decentralized files (“lot files”) of the Department at the bureau, office, and
division levels; the files of the Department's Executive Secretariat, which
contain the records of international conferences and high-level official visits,
correspondence with foreign leaders by the President and Secretary of State, and
memoranda of conversations between the President and Secretary of State and
foreign officials.

The editors also had full access to the papers of Presidents Roosevelt and Truman and other White House foreign policy records.
Presidential papers maintained and preserved at the Presidential libraries
include some of the most significant foreign affairs-related documentation from
other federal agencies including the National Security Council, the Central
Intelligence Agency, the Department of Defense, and the Joint Chiefs of Staff.
All of this documentation was made available for use in this and other volumes
of the Foreign Relations series thanks to the consent of these agencies and the
cooperation and support of the National Archives and Records Administration.

In preparing this volume, the editors reviewed records in a variety of archives
and sources, many not usually researched for Foreign Relations volumes. The
records of such bodies as the National Intelligence Authority, the Intelligence
Advisory Board, and the Intelligence Advisory Committee provide fairly
satisfactory documentation on policy and institutional issues in the early
history of the intelligence system. At the same time, recorded discussion of
substantive matters at this level of the national intelligence structure is
rare. Perhaps the most satisfactory documentation in the collection is in the
first chapter on the founding of the national intelligence structure in
1945-1946, where policy debates were well reflected in the records and where
senior levels of government, including the White House, were actively
involved.

Department of State records on intelligence are reasonably good for the critical
period from September 1945 to April 1946. On the transition from the Strategic Services Unit (SSU) to the Office of Special Operations (OSO), and in Latin America, from FBI to OSO, the
material is relatively thin. The background of the intelligence provisions of
the National Security Act of 1947 is fairly well documented at the outset but
both the quality and the quantity of the material quickly diminishes. There are
informative documents on the origins of NSC 4-A
and 10/2, but the subsequent policy record is fragmentary. For the general
history of U.S. intelligence under Directors of Central Intelligence Souers,
Vandenberg, and Hillenkoetter the documentary record becomes increasingly
abundant, but it also tends to become more bureaucratic and more formal without
necessarily becoming more informative. Records for these periods give a
generally satisfactory picture of the main issues but often have an impersonal
character that tends to obscure the conflicts and concerns that frequently
motivated the participants.

President Truman took a general interest
in the formation of the intelligence system; thereafter he was satisfied that it
was performing in a way that met his needs and was less involved. The
Presidential and NSC documents used, although
relatively few in terms of the total size of the collection, provide major
insights into key periods and issues covered by the volume. The editors had full
access to these materials at the National Archives and Records Administration
and the Harry S. Truman Library, as well
as to the records of the Department of State. The latter, especially the files
of the Executive Secretariat and the Bureau of Intelligence and Research, were
relevant to virtually every part of the collection but particularly to the early
post-war debates over intelligence, the struggle over the intelligence
organization of the Department of State, and the Dulles Report and its aftermath.

The Office of Management and Budget records in Record Group 51 at the National
Archives provided much of the information on efforts of the Bureau of the Budget
to shape the emerging national intelligence structure in 1945-1946. The best
documentation on this subject is by an insider, Budget Director Harold Smith, whose diary entries (actually,
memoranda of conversation) for the same period are in the Franklin D. Roosevelt Library. The Leahy files in Record Group 218 at the
National Archives (Records of the Joint Chiefs of Staff) provided many of the
early documents on the formative period of the intelligence system.

Central Intelligence Agency records constitute the largest single group of
materials used in this compilation and require special description. Basically
three separate collections of CIA records were used.

The first of these was the Troy Papers, in Record Group 263 (Records of the
Central Intelligence Agency) of the National Archives and Records
Administration. This collection was compiled by and declassified for Thomas Troy
in connection with the preparation of his book, Donovan and the CIA, which was originally issued as a Central
Intelligence Agency publication. The Troy
Papers consist mainly of copies of documents from various archival collections,
bringing together material from a number of sources on the history of U.S.
intelligence from the 1930s through the passage of the National Security Act of
1947 and the creation of the Central Intelligence Agency, including the most
important and relevant military records. Practically all of these papers have
been declassified and are freely available to researchers.

The second group of Central Intelligence Agency records consists of the
historical collections located in and maintained by the CIA History Staff,
Center for the Study of Intelligence. These collections consist of documents,
some of them still classified, selected over time by personnel of the various
components of CIA as having significant historical value and which have been
transferred to the physical custody of the History Staff to ensure their
continuing availability as part of the historical record. In some cases, it
appears that individual parts of the collections were originally working or
reference files maintained by personnel of various offices of the Agency. A
number of the early records in these collections are typescript copies including
many made for Arthur B. Darling, the first CIA Historian; these seem to be the
only form in which a number of documents have survived. Documents in the
historical collections tend to vary widely in nature and quality and usually
provide only a partial record, but they nonetheless are a major resource and
have been widely drawn upon in the preparation of this volume.

Members of the CIA History Staff selected materials from the historical
collections for review by the compilers of this volume, who had unimpeded access
to the records thus selected. Documents provided under this procedure remained
classified and, if finally selected for publication, were then submitted for
regular declassification review.

The third category of Central Intelligence Agency records used consists of
archives held either by the Agency's records management organization or by
individual organizational components of the Agency. In the preparation of this
volume, the CIA History Staff gave the fullest cooperation to Department of
State historians, not least by sharing its knowledge of the history of the U.S.
Intelligence Community. CIA historians gathered records in other parts of the
Agency that appeared relevant to the compilers' work. These records were first
reviewed by appropriate CIA offices to determine whether the Department of State
Historians' Office could have access to them. Once access was granted, copies of
selected documents were made available. Copies received under this procedure
remained classified and, if selected for publication, were submitted for
declassification review. From the experience gained in the preparation of this
volume, from discussions with CIA historians, and from references in the records
themselves, it appears that Central Intelligence Agency holdings of early Intelligence Community records are
scattered and, in many instances, fragmentary or incomplete.

This volume is supported by a microfiche supplement that reproduces additional
documents judged to be of less value but still relevant and useful. In a few
cases the transmittal pages of documents in the print volume are included for
completeness and clarity in the supplement. The microfiche supplement also
contains the complete text of some documents that were judged too long for
inclusion in full in the print volume, and from which only extracts were
printed.

The CIA Center for the Study of Intelligence has also published its own facsimile
volume, entitled CIA Cold War Records: The CIA under
Harry Truman (edited by Michael Warner), which reproduces 81 documents covering
1945-1953. Twenty-five of these documents are included in the printed Foreign Relations volume or microfiche supplement.

Three books among the growing literature on intelligence published in recent
years were particularly useful to the compilers as guides through the
documentation. All were originally CIA internal documents that were sanitized
and published and, although they were written from different points of view,
they provide painstaking, detailed, and heavily documented reconstruction of the
early history of the national intelligence system.

The first, Thomas Troy's Donovan and the CIA, contains the most comprehensive
account available of the formation of the Central Intelligence Agency, from the
wartime debates over intelligence to the signing of the National Security Act of
1947. The second, Arthur B. Darling's The Central Intelligence Agency: An
Instrument of Government, to 1950, is a published version of an internal history
written by the CIA's first historian in 1952-1953. And the third, Ludwell Montague's General Walter Bedell Smith as Director of Central
Intelligence, October 1950-February 1953, originally a 5-volume classified CIA
study with the same title, deals mainly with events beyond the period covered by
this volume. Montague's work is valuable
both because he was a participant in, as well as an observer of, many of the
events of which he writes and because he supplemented his own recollections by
research in the records and by extensive interviews and correspondence.
Montague regarded his work as a
corrective to Darling's history which, in Montague's view, incorporated a number of judgments that were a
“distortion” of the early period of CIA's history.

The List of Sources lists the particular files and collections consulted and
cited in this volume.

Editorial Methodology

The documents are presented chronologically according to Washington time or, in
the case of conferences, in the order of individual meetings. Memoranda of conversation are placed according
to the time and date of the conversation, rather than the date the memorandum
was drafted.

Editorial treatment of the documents published in the Foreign Relations series
follows Office style guidelines, supplemented by guidance from the General
Editor and the chief technical editor. The source text is reproduced as exactly
as possible, including marginalia or other notations, which are described in the
footnotes. Texts are transcribed and printed according to accepted conventions
for the publication of historical documents within the limitations of modern
typography. A heading has been supplied by the editors for each document
included in the volume. Spelling, capitalization, and punctuation are retained
as found in the source text, except that obvious typographical errors are
silently corrected. Other mistakes and omissions in the source text are
corrected by bracketed insertions: a correction is set in italic type; an
addition in roman type. Words or phrases underlined in the source text are
printed in italics. Abbreviations and contractions are preserved as found in the
source text, and a list of abbreviations is included in the front matter of each
volume.

Bracketed insertions are also used to indicate omitted text that deals with an
unrelated subject (in roman type) or that remains classified after
declassification review (in italic type). The amount of material not
declassified has been noted by indicating the number of lines or pages of source
text that were omitted. Entire documents withheld for security reasons have been
accounted for and are listed by headings, source notes, and number of pages not
declassified in their chronological place. The amount of material omitted from
this volume because it was unrelated to the subject of the volume, however, has
not been delineated. All brackets that appear in the source text are so
identified by footnotes.

An unnumbered source note to each document indicates the document's source,
original classification, distribution, and drafting information. This note also
provides the background of important documents and policies and indicates if the
President or his major policy advisers read the document. Every effort has been
made to determine if a document has been previously published, and this
information has been included in the source footnote.

Additional footnotes summarize pertinent material not printed in the volume,
indicate the location of additional documentary sources, provide references to
important related documents printed in other volumes, describe key events, and
provide summaries of and citations to public statements that supplement and
elucidate the printed documents. Information derived from memoirs and other
first-hand accounts have been used when appropriate to supplement or explicate
the official record.

Advisory Committee on Historical Diplomatic Documentation

The Advisory Committee on Historical Diplomatic Documentation, established under
the Foreign Relations statute, reviews records, advises, and makes
recommendations concerning the Foreign Relations series. The Advisory Committee
monitors the overall compilation and editorial process of the series and advises
on all aspects of the preparation and declassification of the series. Although
the Advisory Committee does not attempt to review the contents of individual
volumes in the series, it does monitor the overall process and makes
recommendations on particular problems that come to its attention.

Declassification Review

The final declassification review of this volume, completed in 1994, resulted in
the decision to withhold 2.24 percent of the documentation selected for the
print volume, including 7 documents denied in full. In the microfiche supplement
2.61 percent of the documentation selected was withheld, including 5 documents
denied in full. The remaining documents provide an account of the origin and
development of the U.S. foreign intelligence structure during 1945-1950.

The Division of Historical Documents Review of the Office of Freedom of
Information, Privacy, and Classification Review, Bureau of Administration,
Department of State, conducted the declassification review of the documents
published in this volume. The review was conducted in accordance with the
standards set forth in Executive Order 12356 on National Security Information,
which was superseded by Executive Order 12958 on April 20, 1995, and applicable
laws.

Under Executive Order 12356, information that concerns one or more of the
following categories, and the disclosure of which reasonably could be expected
to cause damage to the national security, requires classification:

1) military plans, weapons, or operations;

2) the vulnerabilities or capabilities of systems, installations, projects, or plans
relating to the national security;

3) foreign government information;

4) intelligence activities (including special activities), or intelligence sources
or methods;

5) foreign relations or foreign activities of the United States;

6) scientific, technological, or economic matters relating to national security;

7) U.S. Government programs for safeguarding nuclear materials or facilities;

8) cryptology; or

9) a confidential source.

The principle guiding declassification review is to release all information,
subject only to the current requirements of national security as embodied in law
and regulation. Declassification decisions entailed concurrence of the
appropriate geographic and functional bureaus in the Department of State, other concerned agencies
of the U.S. Government, and the appropriate foreign governments regarding
specific documents of those governments.

Acknowledgments

The editors wish to acknowledge the assistance of officials at the Franklin D. Roosevelt and Harry S. Truman Libraries, the National
Archives and Records Administration, and other specialized repositories that
assisted in the collection of documents for this volume. J. Kenneth McDonald,
former Chief Historian of the Central Intelligence Agency, and Mary McAuliffe,
former CIA Deputy Chief Historian, provided valuable assistance in arranging
access to that agency's materials.

Neal H. Petersen made the initial collection of documents, which was later
expanded by Edward C. Keefer and William Deary. C. Thomas Thorne, Jr., wrote the
narrative introductions to each chapter. Thorne also selected and edited the
material presented in this volume with the guidance of former General Editors
John P. Glennon and Glenn W. LaFantasie. Thorne planned the volume, and David S.
Patterson conducted a comprehensive final review. Vicki E. Futscher prepared the
lists of sources, persons, and abbreviations, and she, Rita Baker, and Deb
Godfrey did the copy and technical editing. Barbara Ann Bacon of the Publishing
Services Division oversaw the production of the volume. Do Mi Stauber prepared
the index.

William Z. Slany
The Historian
Bureau of Public Affairs

May 1996

List of SourcesList of Sources

Department of State

A/MS Files: Lot 54 D 291

Consolidated administrative files of the
Department of State for 1949-1960, as maintained by the Management Staff of the
Bureau of Administration.

Central Intelligence Agency

Central Intelligence Agency Records

Records held by the CIA records management
organization or by individual organizational components of the Agency and made
available by CIA historians.

History Staff/Historical Files

Selection of documents from various components
of CIA transferred to the custody of the CIA History Staff.

National Archives and Records Administration,
Washington, D.C.

Record Group 51, Records of the Office of
Management and Budget

Director's File, Series 39.27, Intelligence
Series 39.29, OSS Organization and Functions

Record Group 59, Records of the Department of
State

Administration Files: Lot 53 D 28

Subject files of the Office of the Assistant
Secretary for Administration for 1944-1947.

Decimal Files, 1945-1949

Diplomatic Branch Reference File, Minutes of the
Committee of Three, 1944-1947

INR Files: Lot 58 D 776

Subject files for 1945-1956, as maintained by
the Office of the Special Assistant to the Secretary of State for Research and
Intelligence, which includes information on the birth of the intelligence
organization in the Department of State and a history of the national
intelligence structure.

INR Files: Lot 62 D 42

Subject files mainly from 1957 to 1960, but also
containing some pre-1957 documents, as maintained by the Office of the Director
of the Bureau of Intelligence and Research.

Bureau of Administration Files: Lot 79 D 137

Intelligence files of the Bureau of
Administration for 1942-1951.

Lot File No. 122

Records of various committees covering
1943-1952, including the records of the Secretary's Staff Committee
1944-1947.

Policy Planning Staff Files: Lot 64 D 563

Master file of documents, drafts, records of
meetings, memoranda, and related correspondence for 1947-1953 of the Policy
Planning Staff.

S/S-NSC Files:
Lot 63 D 351

Serial master file of National Security Council
documents and correspondence and related Department of State memoranda for
1947-1961, as maintained by the Executive Secretariat.

S/S-NSC Files:
Lot 64 D 148

Miscellaneous files concerning subjects
considered by the National Security Council during 1949-1962, as maintained by
the Executive Secretariat of the Department of State.

S/S-NSC
(Miscellaneous) Files: Lot 66 D 95

Administrative and miscellaneous National
Security Council documentation, including NSC
Records of Action for 1947-1963, as maintained by the Executive Secretariat.

Record Group 80, General Records of the Department of the
Navy

SecNav/CNO Top Secret Correspondence File
1945

Records of Secretary of the Navy James Forrestal for 1940-1947 and general
correspondence for 1944-1947.

Record Group 107, Records of the Office of the Secretary of
War

Top Secret (Correspondence)

Subject file of the Secretary of War,
1945-1947.

Record Group 218, Records of the Joint Chiefs of Staff

Papers of the Joint Chiefs of Staff and the
Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff.

Record Group 263, Records of the Central Intelligence
Agency

Background documents from various sources made
available to Thomas Troy in connection with the preparation of his book on the
founding of the Central Intelligence Agency.

Record Group 273, Records of the National
Security Council

Official meeting minutes file.

Record Group 353, Records of Interdepartmental and
Intradepartmental Committees

Case files of various governmental committees,
including the State-War-Navy Coordinating Committee and State-Army-Navy-Air
Force Coordinating Committee, 1944-1949.

Roosevelt Library, Hyde Park, New
York

Papers of Harold
Smith

Truman Library, Independence,
Missouri

Miscellaneous material filed by the
Administrative Assistant in the President's Office, Office of Strategic
Services.

Papers of Clark M.
Clifford

Files of Clark M.
Clifford, including National Intelligence Authority and National
Military Establishment: CIA.

Papers of George M.
Elsey

Papers of Harry S.
Truman

Files of Harry S.
Truman, including President's Secretary's Files, Subject File,
and Official File.

Papers of J. Anthony
Panuch

Papers of Samuel I.
Rosenman

Published References

U.S. National Archives and Records
Administration. Public Papers of the Presidents of the United
States: Harry S. Truman, 1945, 1946,
1947, 1948, 1950. Washington: U.S. Government Printing Office, 1961,
1962, 1963, 1964, and 1965.

Warner, Michael, ed., CIA Cold War Records:
The CIA under Harry Truman. Central
Intelligence Agency: Washington, 1994.

Memoirs and Histories by Participants

Note: The Department of State takes no responsibility for
the accuracy of these memoirs nor does it endorse their interpretation of
events.

Acheson, Dean, Present at
the Creation: My Years in the State Department. New York: W.W. Norton,
1969.

Braden, Spruille, Diplomats and Demagogues: The Memoirs of Spurille Braden . New York:
Arlington House, 1971.

Darling, Arthur B., The
Central Intelligence Agency: An Instrument of Government, to 1950.
University Park: The Pennsylvania State University Press, 1990.

Montague, Ludwell Lee, General Walter Bedell Smith as Director of Central Intelligence, October
1950-February 1953. University Park: The Pennsylvania State University
Press, 1992.

Troy, Thomas F., Donovan and the CIA: A History of the
Establishment of the Central Intelligence Agency. Frederick, Maryland:
University Publications of America, 1981.

Truman, Harry
S., Memoirs: Year of Decision, volume I.
New York: Doubleday, 1956.

——, Memoirs: Years of Trial
and Hope, volume II. New York: Doubleday, 1956.

List of AbbreviationsList of Abbreviations

AAF, Army Air Forces

ACC, Allied Control
Council/Commission

ACI, Advisory Committee on
Intelligence, Department of State

AD/ORE, Assistant Director for
Reports and Estimates

ADPC, Assistant Director for Policy
Coordination

ADSO, Assistant Director for Special
Operations (CIG and CIA)

AEC, Atomic Energy Commission

AGF, Army Ground Forces

AMET, American Mediterranean European
Theater

ATC, Air Transport Command

BOB, Bureau of the Budget

CCC, Combat Command
Chiefs/Congressional Country Club

CCS, Combined Chiefs of Staff

CE, Division of Central European
Affairs, Department of State

CG, Commanding General

CIBI, Counter Intelligence Corps,
British

CIC, Commander in Chief

CIG, Central Intelligence Group

C/L, Legislative Counsel, Office of the
Counselor, Department of State

CO, Commanding Officer

COAPS, Coordination, Operations, and
Policy/Planning Staff

CON, Office of Controls; Office of
Consular Affairs, Bureau of Administration, Department of State

CSP, Chief, Special Projects Division,
Office of Policy Coordination

DCI, Director of Central Intelligence
(CIG and CIA)

DDCI, Deputy Director of Central
Intelligence (CIG and CIA)

DNI, Director of Naval
Intelligence>

DOD, Department of Defense

DRA, Division of Research for American
Republics, Department of State

ECA, Economic Cooperation
Administration

ETO, European Theater of
Operations

EUR, Bureau of European Affairs,
Department of State

FBI, Federal Bureau of
Investigation

FBIS, Foreign Broadcast Intelligence
Service

FC, Division of Foreign Activity
Correlation, Bureau of Administration, Department of State

FE, Office of Far Eastern Affairs,
Department of State

FEA, Foreign Economic
Administration

G-2, intelligence section of divisional
or higher staff

G-5, civil affairs section of
divisional or higher staff

GSC, General Staff Corps

IAB, Intelligence Advisory
Board

IAC, Intelligence Advisory
Committee

IAD, Acquisition and Distribution
Division, Office of Research and Intelligence, Department of State

ICAPS, Interagency Coordinating and
Planning Staff

IIC, Interdepartmental Intelligence
Committee

INR, Bureau of Intelligence and
Research, Department of State

IPDP, Intelligence Photographic
Documentation Project

IRIS, Interim Research and
Intelligence Service

JANIS, Joint Army-Navy Intelligence
Studies

JCS, Joint Chiefs of Staff

JIC, Joint Intelligence
Committee

JIS, Joint Intelligence Staff

JISPD, Joint Intelligence Studies
Publication Board

JRDB, Joint Research and Development
Board

Le, Legal Adviser

METO, Middle East Theater of
Operations

MID, Military Intelligence Division,
Department of the Army

MIS, Military Intelligence Staff, War
Department General Staff

MO, Morale Operations, Office of
Strategic Services

MOB, Morale Operations Branch, Office
of Strategic Services

MTO, Mediterranean Theater of
Operations

NA, Office of Northeast Asian Affairs,
Office of Far Eastern Affairs

NAP, North Atlantic Pact

NIA, National Intelligence
Authority

NIE, National Intelligence
Estimate

NIG, National Intelligence
Group

NIS, National Intelligence Survey;
National Intelligence Summary

NME, National Military
Establishment

NSC, National Security Council

NSCID, National Security Council
Intelligence Directive

NSRB, National Security Resources
Board

OBP, Office of Budget and Planning,
Bureau of Administration, Department of State

OCD, Office of Collection and
Dissemination

OCI, Office of Current
Intelligence

ODA, Office of Departmental
Administration, Bureau of Administration, Department of State

OFS, Office of the Foreign Service,
Bureau of Administration, Department of State

OIE, Office of Intelligence and
Educational Exchange

OIR, Office of Intelligence
Research

OLI, Office of Libraries and
Intelligence Acquisition

ONE, Office of National
Estimates

ONI, Office of Naval Intelligence,
Department of Navy

OO, Office of Operations

OPC, Office of Policy
Coordination

OPD, Operations Division, War
Department

ORE, Office of Research and
Evaluation; Office of Reports and Estimates

OSO, Office of Special
Operations

OSS, Office of Strategic
Services

OWI, Office of War Information

PSB, Psychological Strategy
Board

R, Secretary of State's Special
Assistant for Research and Intelligence

R and A, research and
analysis

RDB, Research and Development
Board

SANACC, State-Army-Navy-Air
Coordinating Committee

SHAEF, Supreme Headquarters, Allied
Expeditionary Forces

SI, Secret Intelligence, Office of
Strategic Services

SID, Strategic Intelligence Digest

SIS, Special Intelligence
Service

SO, Special Operations

SPG, Special Procedures Group, Office
of Special Operations

SR, Situation Report

SS, Schutzstaffel (German elite
guard)

SSU, Strategic Services Unit, War
Department

SWNCC, State-War-Navy Coordinating
Committee

UNO, United Nations
Organization

USCIB, U.S. Communications
Intelligence Board

USFA, U.S. Forces in Austria

USFCT, U.S. Forces,
ChinaTheater

USFET, U.S. Forces, European
Theater

USSBS, U.S. Stragetic Bombing
Survey

USSTAF, U.S. Strategic Air
Forces

WDGS, War Department General
Staff

X-2, counterintelligence unit

List of PersonsList of Persons

Acheson, Dean, Under Secretary
of State, August 16, 1945-June 30, 1947; Secretary of State from January 21,
1949

Allen, George V., Assistant
Secretary of State for Public Affairs, March 31, 1948-November 28,
1949

Appleby, Paul H., Director of
the Bureau of the Budget from 1946

Armstrong, W. Park, Jr.,
Acting Special Assistant to the Secretary of State for Research and
Intelligence, October 1, 1947-January 21, 1948; thereafter Special Assistant
to the Secretary of State for Research and Intelligence

Babbitt, Theodore, Assistant
Director for Reports and Estimates, Central Intelligence Group and Central
Intelligence Agency, July 1947-November 1950

Benton, William, Assistant
Secretary of State for Public Affairs, September 17, 1945-September 30,
1947

Bissell, Major General Clayton
(USA), Assistant Chief of Staff for Military
Intelligence

Blum, Robert, Office of the
Secretary of Defense, 1947-1949

Braden, Spruille, Assistant
Secretary of State for American Republic Affairs, August 25, 1945-June 27,
1947

Brownell, Brigadier General George A.
(USA), Executive Officer, Office of the Assistant
Secretary of War for Air

Bush, Vannevar, Chairman,
Research and Development Board

Butler, George H., member,
Policy Planning Staff, from February 24, 1948

Byrnes, James F., Secretary of
State, July 3, 1945-January 21, 1947

Cabell, General Charles P.,
Director of Intelligence, Office of the Deputy Chief of Staff, U.S. Air
Force; member, Intelligence Advisory Committee

Cassady, Thomas, Office of
Special Operations, Central Intelligence Group and Central Intelligence
Agency, to 1948

Chamberlin, Stephen J.,
Director of Intelligence, War Department General Staff; member, Intelligence
Advisory Board

Childs, Prescott, Chief,
Interagency Coordinating and Planning Staff, from 1947; Chief, Coordination,
Operations and Policy Staff, from October 5, 1949

Clark, Tom C., Attorney
General, June 30, 1945-July 28, 1949

Clayton, William L., Assistant
Secretary of State for Economic and Business Affairs until August 16, 1946;
Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs, August 17, 1946-October 15,
1947

Clifford, Clark M., Naval Aide
to the President until July 1946; thereafter Special Counsel to the
President

Correa, Mathias F., Special
Assistant to the Secretary of the Navy; member, National Security Council
Survey Committee, 1948

Craig, Major General Horace A.
(USA), Chief of the Operations Division, War
Department General Staff; Deputy Chief, Intelligence Advisory Council, from
August 7, 1950; Assistant Director, Office of Special Services, from
December 1, 1950

Denfeld, Admiral Louis E.
(USN), Chief of Naval Operations, December 15,
1947-November 2, 1949

Donovan, William J., Director,
Office of Strategic Services, until October 1, 1945

Dulin, R. E., Deputy Chief,
Special Procedures Group

Dulles, Allen W., Chairman,
National Security Council Survey Committee, 1948

Dunn, James C., Assistant
Secretary of State for European, Far Eastern, Near Eastern and African
Affairs until November 11, 1946

Earman, John S., secretary to
the National Intelligence Authority, 1947; Office of the Director of Central
Intelligence from 1947

Eberstadt, Ferdinand, prepared
the Eberstadt Report on Service Unification for Secretary of the Navy
Forrestal, 1945

Eddy, William A., Special
Assistant to the Secretary of State for Research and Intelligence, August 1,
1946-October 1, 1947

Edgar, Donald, Chief,
Interdepartmental Coordinating and Planning Staff, Central Intelligence
Group and Central Intelligence Agency, July 1946-October 1947

Elsey, George M., Assistant
Naval Aide to the President, 1945-1946; Assistant to the Special Counsel to
the President, 1947-1949

Forrestal, James V., Secretary
of the Navy until September 1947; Secretary of Defense, September 17,
1947-March 28, 1949

Fortier, Brigadier General Louis J.
(USA), Chairman, Ad Hoc Committee of the Central
Intelligence Group (the Fortier Committee), from 1946

Foskett, Rear Admiral James H.
(USN), Naval Aide to the President, July
1946-February 1948

Foster, William C., Deputy
Administrator, Economic Cooperation Administration

Galloway, Colonel Donald H.
(USA), Assistant Director for Special Operations,
Central Intelligence Group and Central Intelligence Agency, July 11,
1946-December 27, 1948

Gingrich, Rear Admiral John E.
(USN), Director of Intelligence and Security, Atomic
Energy Commission

Gray, Gordon, Secretary of the
Army, June 20, 1949-April 12, 1950

Harriman, W. Averell,
Representative to Europe of the Economic Cooperation Administration,
1948-1950; Special Assistant to the President from 1950

Hill, Arthur M., Chairman,
National Security Resources Board

Hillenkoetter, Rear Admiral Roscoe
(USN), Director of Central Intelligence, Central
Intelligence Group and Central Intelligence Agency, May 1, 1947-October 7,
1950

Hoover, Herbert, former
President; Chairman of the Commission on Organization of the Executive
Branch of the Government

Hoover, J. Edgar, Director,
Federal Bureau of Investigation

Houston, Lawrence, General
Counsel to the Central Intelligence Group and to the Central Intelligence
Agency from 1946

Huddle, J. Klhar, Assistant
Director for Research and Evaluation (changed to Assistant Director for
Reports and Estimates in late 1946), Central Intelligence Group, September
1946-May 1947

Humelsine, Carlisle H.,
Executive Secretary, Department of State, June 1947-January 1950; Deputy
Assistant Secretary of State for Administration from January 1950; Assistant
Secretary of State for Administration from July 1950; Deputy Under Secretary
of State for Administration from August 1950

Inglis, Thomas B., Chief of
Naval Intelligence from 1945

Jackson, William H., member,
National Security Council Survey Committee, 1948; Deputy Director of Central
Intelligence, from October 7, 1950

Johnson, Louis, Secretary of
Defense, March 28, 1949-September 19, 1950

Joyce, Robert P., Office of
Special Operations (Central Intelligence Group) liaison to the Department of
State, 1946-June 1947; Political Adviser on Trieste, 1947-1948; Senior
Consultant (representing the Secretary of State), Office of Policy
Coordination, from September 1948; Policy Planning Staff, Department of
State, from December 1948

Kennan, George F., Deputy for
Foreign Affairs, National War College, August 1946-July 1947; Director,
Policy Planning Staff, Department of State, May 5, 1947-December 31, 1949;
Counselor of the Department of State from August 4, 1949

Kent, Sherman, Vice Chairman,
Board of National Estimates, Central Intelligence Agency, from November
1950

Ladd, Milton, Assistant
Director, Federal Bureau of Investigation

Langer, William L., Special
Assistant to the Secretary of State for Research and Intelligence until July
1946; Chairman, National Board of Estimates, Central Intelligence Agency,
from November 1950

Lay, James S., Jr., member,
Central Intelligence Group from January 1946; secretary, Intelligence
Advisory Board, January 1946-September 1947; Office of Reports and
Estimates, Central Intelligence Group, 1947; Assistant to the Executive
Secretary, National Security Council, September 1947-January 1950; Executive
Secretary, National Security Council, from January 1950

Leahy, Admiral William D.
(USN), Chief of Staff to the Commander in Chief;
presided over the Joint Chiefs of Staff, July 1942-March 1949

Lovett, Robert A., Assistant
Secretary of War for Air, to December 1945; Under Secretary of State, July,
1, 1947-January 20, 1949

Lyon, Frederick B., Director,
Office of Controls, Department of State, from 1945

Magruder, Brigadier General John
(USA), Deputy Director for Intelligence, Office of
Strategic Services, until September 1945; Director of Strategic Services
Unit, War Department, October 1, 1945-April 4, 1946; Senior Consultant
(representing the Secretary of Defense), Office of Policy Coordination, from
September 1948

Marshall, General George C.
(USA), Chief of Staff, U.S. Army, until November
1945; Secretary of State, January 21, 1947-January 20, 1949; Secretary of
Defense from September 21, 1950

Matthews, Francis P.,
Secretary of the Navy from May 25, 1949

McCarthy, Frank, Assistant
Secretary of State for Administration, September 1, 1945-October 11,
1945

McCloy, John J., Assistant
Secretary of War until November 1945

McCormack, Alfred, Special
Assistant to the Secretary of State for Intelligence and Research, September
28, 1945-April 23, 1946

McDonald, George C.,
Assistant Chief of Air Staff; Executive Officer, Office of the Assist-ant
Secretary of War

McWilliams, William J.,
Assistant Director, Executive Secretariat, Department of State, from August
23, 1948

Montague, Ludwell L., Chief,
Central Reports Staff, Central Intelligence Group, March-July 1946; Acting
Assistant Director, Central Intelligence Group, 1946; Office of Reports and
Estimates, September 1946-November 1950; Central Intelligence Agency
representative to the National Security Council, September 1947-October
1950; Office of National Estimates from November 1950

Moseley, H. W., secretary,
State-Army-Navy-Air Force Coordinating Committee

Nimitz, Admiral Chester W.
(USN), Chief of Naval Operations, December 15,
1945-December 15, 1947

Panuch, J. Anthony, Deputy to
the Assistant Secretary of State for Administration from November 15,
1945

Patterson, Robert P.,
Secretary of War, September 27, 1945-July 18, 1947

Petersen, Howard C., Assistant
Secretary of War, 1945-1947

Peurifoy, John E., Assistant
Secretary of State for Administration, March 17, 1947-August 10, 1950

Pforzheimer, Walter,
Legislative Counsel to the Central Intelligence Group and to the Central
Intelligence Agency from 1946

Roosevelt, Franklin D.,
President of the United States until April 12, 1945

Rosenman, Samuel I., Special
Counsel to the President

Royall, Kenneth C., Secretary
of the Army, September 18, 1947-April 27, 1949

Russell, Donald Stuart,
Assistant Secretary of State for Administration, September 24, 1945-January
20, 1947

Sargeant, Howland H., Deputy
to the Assistant Secretary of State for Public Affairs, from October 1,
1947

Smith, Harold D., Director of
the Bureau of the Budget, 1945-1946

Smith, Russell Jack, Office of
Reports and Estimates, Central Intelligence Agency, June 1947-November 1950;
thereafter Office of National Estimates, Central Intelligence Agency

Smith, Walter B., Director of
Central Intelligence from October 7, 1950

Snyder, John W., Director,
Office of War Mobilization and Reconversion

Souers, Rear Admiral Sydney W.
(USN), Director of Central Intelligence, Central
Intelligence Group, January 22, 1946-June 10, 1946; Executive Secretary,
National Security Council, August 1947-January 1950; Special Consultant to
the President from January 1950

Sprague, W. A., member,
Intelligence Survey Group

Stimson, Henry Louis,
Secretary of War until September 27, 1945

Stone, Donald C., Assistant
Director for Administrative Management, Bureau of the Budget

Stone, William T., Director,
Office of Information and Educational Exchange, Department of State

Sullivan, John L., Secretary
of the Navy, September 18, 1947-May 24, 1949

Symington, W. Stuart,
Secretary of the Air Force, September 18, 1947-April 24, 1950

Tamm, Edward A., Assistant to
the Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation

Truman, Harry S., President of
the United States from April 12, 1945

Vandenberg, Lieutenant General Hoyt S.
(USAF), member, Intelligence Advisory Board, January
1946-May 1947; Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, U.S. Army, 1946;
Director of Central Intelligence, Central Intelligence Group, June 10,
1946-May 1, 1947; Chief of Staff, U.S. Air Force, from April 30, 1948

Webb, James E., Under
Secretary of State from January 28, 1949

Whitney, C. V., Assistant
Secretary of the Air Force

Wisner, Frank G., Deputy
Assistant Secretary of State for the Occupied Areas, 1947-1948; Assistant
Director for Policy Coordination, Central Intelligence Agency, from
September 1, 1948

Wright, Colonel Edwin K.
(USA), Executive Director of the Intelligence Division,
War Department General Staff, February-June 1946; executive to the Director
of Central Intelligence (Central Intelligence Group), June 26, 1946-January
20, 1947; Deputy Director of Central Intelligence, Central Intelligence
Group and Central Intelligence Agency, January 20, 1947-March 9, 1949

Emergence of the Intelligence EstablishmentEmergence of the Intelligence Establishment

Founding of the National Intelligence Structure, August 1945-January 1946 (Documents 1-71)

Department of State Intelligence (Documents 72-94)

From the Strategic Services Unit to the Office of Special Operations (Documents 95-136)

Souers' Tenure as Director of Central Intelligence (Documents 137-154)

Vandenberg's Tenure as Director of Central Intelligence (Documents 155-195)

The National Security Act of 1947 (Documents 196-240)

Psychological and Political Warfare (Documents 241-316)

Hillenkoetter's Tenure as Director of Central Intelligence (Documents 317-421)

National Security Council Intelligence Directives, 1947-1950 (Documents 422-435)

Founding of the National Intelligence Structure, August 1945-January 1946Founding of the National Intelligence Structure, August 1945-January 1946: Document List

Introduction

Document 1: Memorandum From the Assistant to the Counselor (Doyle) to Secretary of State Byrnes

Washington, August 21, 1945.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Records of the Department of State, Decimal File 1945-49, 101.5/8-2145. Secret.

Document 2: Memorandum From E.R. Baker of the Bureau of the Budget Staff to the Assistant Director for Estimates (Martin)

Washington, August 24, 1945.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 51, Records of the Office of Management and Budget, Series 39.19, OSS Organization and Functions, Box 67. No classification marking.

Document 3: Memorandum From the Director of the Office of Strategic Services (Donovan) to President Truman

Washington, August 25, 1945.

Source: Truman Library, Miscellaneous Material Filed by the Administrative Asst. in the President's Office, Office of Strategic Services. Secret.

Document 4: Memorandum From the Assistant Director for Administrative Management of the Bureau of the Budget (Stone) to the Director of the Bureau of the Budget (Smith)

Washington, August 27, 1945.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 51, Records of the Office of Management and Budget, Series 39.19, OSS Organization and Functions. No classification marking.

Document 5: Memorandum From the Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation (Hoover) to Attorney General Clark

Washington, August 29, 1945.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 263, Records of the Central Intelligence Agency, Troy Papers, FBI Documents. Personal and Strictly Confidential. Drafted by Tamm.

Document 6: Letter From the Director of the Office of Strategic Services (Donovan) to the President's Special Counsel (Rosenman)

Washington, September 4, 1945.

Source: Central Intelligence Agency Historical Files, HS/HC 801, Item 29. No classification marking.

Document 7: Memorandum From the Director's Assistant (Tamm) to the Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation (Hoover)

Washington, September 6, 1945.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 263, Records of the Central Intelligence Agency, Troy Papers, FBI Documents. No classification marking.

Document 8: Memorandum From the Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation (Hoover) to Attorney General Clark

Washington, September 6, 1945.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 263, Records of the Central Intelligence Agency, Troy Papers, FBI Documents. Personal and Strictly Confidential. Drafted by Tamm.

Document 9: Memorandum From the Director of the Office of Strategic Services (Donovan) to President Truman

Washington, September 13, 1945.

Source: Truman Library, Miscellaneous Material Filed by the Administrative Asst. in the President's Office, Office of Strategic Services. No classification marking. Donovan saw the President on September 13, but only for a brief ceremonial occasion. (Ibid., President's Appointment Book, File of Matthew Connelly) Also reproduced in CIA Cold War Records: The CIA under Harry Truman, p. 3.

Document 10: Memorandum From the Director's Assistant (Tamm) to the Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation (Hoover)

Washington, September 17, 1945.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 263, Records of the Central Intelligence Agency, Troy Papers, Box 8, Folder 15. No classification marking.

Document 11: Memorandum From Arnold Miles of the Bureau of the Budget Staff to the Assistant Director for Administrative Management of the Bureau of the Budget (Stone)

Washington, September 19, 1945.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 51, Records of the Office of Management and Budget, Director's File, Series 39.27, Intelligence. No classification marking.

Document 12: Memorandum From the Secretary of the Navy's Special Assistant (Correa) to Secretary of the Navy Forrestal

Washington, September 19, 1945.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 80, General Records of the Department of the Navy, Records of Secretary of the Navy James Forrestal 1940-1947, General Correspondence 1944-1947, 80-1-19, Box 129. No classification marking.

Document 13: Memorandum From the Joint Chiefs of Staff to Secretary of War Stimson and Secretary of the Navy Forrestal

Washington, September 19, 1945.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 80, General Records of the Department of the Navy, SecNav/CNO Top Secret Correspondence File 1945, A8, Box 21, Folder A8. Top Secret. Also reproduced in CIA Cold War Records: The CIA under Harry Truman, pp. 8-10.

Document 14: Executive Order 96219621

Washington, September 20, 1945.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 51, Records of the Office of Management and Budget, Series 39.19, OSS Organization and Function. The source text is labeled “immediate release.” Also printed in 3 CFR 431-432. Smith's account of the signing by the President is in the Roosevelt Library, Papers of Harold Smith, Box 4, Conferences with the President 1945, September 20, 1945. See the Supplement.

Document 15: Letter From President Truman to Secretary of State Byrnes

Washington, September 20, 1945.

Source: Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: Harry S. Truman, 1945, p. 331. On the same date Truman also sent a letter to General Donovan informing him of the signing of Executive Order 9621 and thanking him for his services. (Ibid., p. 330) see the Supplement.

Document 16: Memorandum From the Assistant Director for Administrative Management, Bureau of the Budget (Stone) to the Director of the Bureau of the Budget (Smith)

Washington, September 20, 1945.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 51, Records of the Office of Management and Budget, Series 39.19, OSS Organization and Functions. No classification marking.

Document 17: Memorandum From Attorney General Clark to President Truman

Washington, undated.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 51, Records of the Office of Management and Budget, Director's Files, Series 39.27, Intelligence. Secret. In a covering memorandum to a slightly different draft of this memorandum, September 21, Hoover told Clark that “it is essential to consummate the Government program upon this subject at the earliest possible date, and accordingly, I believe that any affirmative action which may be taken to advance this program should be taken very promptly.” (Ibid., RG 263, Records of the Central Intelligence Agency, Troy Papers, FBI Documents) See the Supplement. The memorandum apparently was not sent to Truman. In October 22 covering letters, Clark sent Smith and Appleby of the Bureau of the Budget copies of this plan. See the Supplement for the October 22 letters. (National Archives and Records Administration, RG 51, Records of the Office of Management and Budget, Director's Files, Series 39.27, Intelligence)

Document 18: Memorandum From G.E. Ramsey, Jr., of the Bureau of the Budget Staff to the Assistant Director for Estimates of the Bureau of the Budget (Martin)

Washington, September 24, 1945.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 51, Records of the Office of Management and Budget, Director's Files, Series 39.27, Intelligence. No classification marking.

Document 19: Memorandum From the Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation (Hoover) to Attorney General Clark

Washington, September 27, 1945.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 263, Records of the Central Intelligence Agency, Troy Papers, FBI Documents. Personal and Confidential.

Document 20: Letter From Secretary of War Patterson and Secretary of the Navy Forrestal to Secretary of State Byrnes

Washington, September 29, 1945.

Source: Central Intelligence Agency Historical Files, HS/HC-802, Item 9. Top Secret.

Document 21: Memorandum From the Director of the Strategic Services Unit of the Department of War (Magruder) to the Assistant Chief of Staff for Military Intelligence, War Department General Staff (Bissell), the Acting Director of Naval Intelligence (Inglis), and the Secretary of State's Special Assistant for Research and Intelligence (McCormack)

Washington, October 1, 1945.

Source: Central Intelligence Agency Historical Files, HS/HC-135. No classification marking.

Document 22: Memorandum From Morton B. Chiles of the Federal Bureau of Investigation to the Director (Hoover)

Washington, October 2, 1945.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 263, Records of the Central Intelligence Agency, Troy Papers, FBI Documents. No classification marking.

Document 23: Memorandum From the Secretary of State's Special Assistant for Research and Intelligence (McCormack) to the Director of the Strategic Services Unit, Department of War (Magruder)

Washington, October 4, 1945.

Source: Central Intelligence Agency Historical Files, HS/HC-135. No classification marking. Copies were sent to Stone, Inglis, and Bissell.

Document 24: Memorandum From the Director's Assistant (Tamm) to the Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation (Hoover)

Washington, October 4, 1945.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 263, Records of the Central Intelligence Agency, Troy Papers, FBI Documents. No classification marking.

Document 25: Memorandum From the Chief of Naval Operations and Commander in Chief, U.S. Fleet (King) to Secretary of the Navy Forrestal

Washington, October 9, 1945.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 80, General Records of the Department of the Navy, SecNav/CNO Top Secret Correspondence File, 1945, Box 21, Folder A8. Top Secret.

Document 26: Memorandum From Secretary of the Navy Forrestal to Secretary of War Patterson

Washington, October 13, 1945.

Source: Central Intelligence Agency Historical Files, HS/HC-31, Item 22. No classification marking. The source text is an extract transcribed in July 1952 for the CIA Historian. The original document has not been found.

Document 27: Memorandum From Secretary of the Navy Forrestal to Secretary of State Byrnes

Washington, October 13, 1945.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Records of the Department of State, Decimal File 1945-49, 101.5/10-1345. No classification marking.

Document 28: Minutes of Meeting

Washington, October 16, 1945.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Records of the Department of State, Diplomatic Branch, Reference File, Minutes of the Committee of Three, 1944-1947. Top Secret.

Document 29: Memorandum From the Director of the Strategic Services Unit, Department of War (Magruder) to the Assistant Secretary of War (McCloy)

Washington, October 20, 1945.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 263, Records of the Central Intelligence Agency, Troy Papers, Box 10, Folder 73. Secret.

Document 30: Memorandum From the Assistant Chief of Staff for Military Intelligence of the War Department General Staff (Bissell) to Secretary of War Patterson

Washington, October 22, 1945.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 263, Records of the Central Intelligence Agency, Troy Papers, Box 10, Folder 73. No classification marking.

Document 31: Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for Administration (Russell) to the Secretary of State's Special Assistant for Research and Intelligence (McCormack)

Washington, October 22, 1945.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 263, Records of the Central Intelligence Agency, Troy Papers, Box 10, Folder 73. No classification marking.

Document 32: Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of War for Air (Lovett) to the Assistant Chief of Staff for Military Intelligence of the War Department General Staff (Bissell)

Washington, October 23, 1945.

Source: Central Intelligence Agency Historical Files, Penrose Document No. 12. Secret. Also addressed to the Assistant Chief of Staff, Operations Division; the Assistant Chief of Air Staff-2; the Assistant Chief of Staff, G-2, Army Ground Forces; the Director of Intelligence, Army Service Forces; the Director, Strategic Services Unit; and the Chief of the Special Planning Division, War Department Special Staff.

Document 33: Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for Administration (Russell) to Secretary of State Byrnes

Washington, October 24, 1945.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Records of the Department of State, Decimal File 1945-49, 101.5/10-1345. No classification marking.

Document 34: Report by the Director, Strategic Services Unit, Department of War (Magruder) to the Assistant Secretary of War for Air (Lovett)

Washington, undated.

Source: Central Intelligence Agency Historical Files, Penrose Papers. Secret. Attached to the source text is an October 26 memorandum from Magruder to Lovett. This memorandum, and Part I of the report, and two appendices are in the Supplement.

Document 35: Memorandum From the Assistant Director for Administrative Management, Bureau of the Budget (Stone) to the Assistant Director, Bureau of the Budget (Appleby)

Washington, October 26, 1945.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 51, Records of the Office of Management and Budget, Director's Files, Series 39.27, Intelligence. Confidential.

Document 36: Memorandum From the Assistant Chief of Staff, Operations Division, Department of War (Hull) to the Assistant Secretary of War for Air (Lovett)

Washington, October 28, 1945.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 263, Records of the Central Intelligence Agency, Troy Papers, Box 10, Folder 73. Top Secret.

Document 37: Letter From the Assistant Director of the Bureau of the Budget (Appleby) to Attorney General Clark

Washington, October 31, 1945.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 51, Records of the Office of Management and Budget, Director's Files, Series 39.27, Intelligence. Secret. Revised by Appleby on October 30.

Document 38: Memorandum From the Director of the Bureau of the Budget (Smith) to President Truman

Washington, October 31, 1945.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 51, Records of the Office of Management and Budget, Director's Files, Series 39.27, Intelligence. No classification marking. Drafted by George F. Schwarzwalder on October 25.

Document 39: Letter From the Secretary of State's Special Assistant for Research and Intelligence (McCormack) to the President's Chief of Staff (Leahy)

Washington, October 31, 1945.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 263, Records of the Central Intelligence Agency, Troy Papers, Box 10, Folder 73. No classification marking. Leahy met with McCormack on this date to discuss “the formation of a Central Intelligence Service.” (Library of Congress Manuscript Division, Papers of William D. Leahy, Leahy Diaries 1945, p. 182)

Document 40: Memorandum From James S. Lay, Jr., of the Office of the Special Assistant for Research and Intelligence to the Secretary of State's Special Assistant for Research and Intelligence (McCormack)

Washington, November 2, 1945.

Source: Central Intelligence Agency Historical Files, HS/HC-32. Confidential.

Document 41: Memorandum for Information

Washington, November 2, 1945.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 263, Records of the Central Intelligence Agency, Troy Papers, Nov. 1945. Secret. The date is handwritten on the source text.

Document 42: Memorandum From the Lovett Committee to Secretary of War Patterson

Washington, November 3, 1945.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 263, Records of the Central Intelligence Agency, Troy Papers, Nov. 1945. Top Secret. Brigadier General Carter W. Clarke sent this report to the members of the Committee on November 6. In his covering memorandum he wrote that Lovett had directed him to inform the Committee that Secretary Patterson had approved the report. (Ibid.) See the Supplement.

Document 43: Memorandum From the Assistant Director (Ladd) to the Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation (Hoover)

Washington, November 5, 1945, 10:30 a.m.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 263, Records of the Central Intelligence Agency, Troy Papers, FBI Documents. No classification marking.

Document 44: White House Memorandum

Washington, November 5, 1945, 10:30 a.m.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 263, Records of the Central Intelligence Agency, Troy Papers, FBI Documents. No classification marking.

Document 45: Minutes of Meeting

Washington, November 14, 1945, 10 a.m.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Records of the Department of State, Decimal File 1945-49, 101.61/11-1445. Top Secret. No drafting information appears on the source text. Another copy is ibid., Diplomatic Branch Reference File, Minutes of the Committee of Three, 1944-1947.

Document 46: Paper Prepared for the Secretary of State's Staff Committee

Washington, November 15, 1945.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 353, Records of Interdepartmental and Intradepartmental Committees—State Department, Lot File No. 122, Records of the Secretary's Staff Committee 1944-47. Secret. The Secretary's Staff Committee, organized in 1944 by Secretary of State Stettinius to formulate and coordinate Departmental policy, included as members the Secretary, the Under Secretary, and the Assistant Secretaries as well as selected other officers. There is no drafting information on the source text, but it is the “McCormack Plan” for national intelligence organization as distinct from the “McCormack Plan” for the Department of State's own internal intelligence organization.

Document 47: Memorandum of Meeting

Washington, November 19, 1945, 3 p.m.

Source: Central Intelligence Agency Historical Files, HS/HC-135. Top Secret. The date on the memorandum is October 19 but this presumably is an error as the meeting was held November 19. The meeting was held in the Department of State. The committee was the working group appointed by the Secretaries of State, War, and Navy at their November 14 meeting; see Document 45.

Document 48: Minutes of the 168th Meeting of the Secretary of State's Staff Committee

Washington, November 20, 1945, 9:30 a.m.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 353, Records of Interdepartmental and Intradepartmental Committees—State Department, Lot File No. 122, Records of the Secretary's Staff Committee 1944-47. Top Secret. Drafted by James H. Lewis. The meeting was held in the Secretary's office.

Document 49: Paper Prepared for the Secretary of State's Staff Committee

Washington, November 26, 1945.

Source: Truman Library, Papers of J. Anthony Panuch, State Department Research and Intelligence #1. Secret.

Document 50: Minutes of the 170th Meeting of the Secretary of State's Staff Committee

Washington, November 27, 1945, 9:30 a.m.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 353, Records of Interdepartmental and Intradepartmental Committees—State Department, Lot File No. 122, Records of the Secretary's Staff Committee 1944-47. Top Secret. Drafted by James H. Lewis. The meeting was held in the Secretary's office.

Document 51: Memorandum From the Director of the Bureau of the Budget (Smith) to President Truman

Washington, November 28, 1945.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 51, Records of the Office of Management and Budget, Director's Files, Series 39.27, Intelligence. No classification marking. Drafted by L.W. Hoelscher on November 28 and cleared by Schwarzwalder and Miles. Hoelscher sent an accompanying memorandum to Smith that concludes that proposals for an intelligence system are still confused with secret intelligence operations and that the Department of State should be the leader in efforts to develop a postwar intelligence program. (Ibid.) See the Supplement. Smith's diary for November 28 gives an account of the meeting with the President at which he handed over the memorandum. (Roosevelt Library, Papers of Harold Smith, Box No. 4, Conferences with President Truman, 1945) See the Supplement.

Document 52: Minutes of the 171st Meeting of the Secretary of State's Staff Committee

Washington, November 29, 1945, 9:30 a.m.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 353, Records of Interdepartmental and Intradepartmental Committees—State Department, Lot File No. 122, Records of the Secretary's Staff Committee, 1944-47, Box 88H. Top Secret. Drafted by Lewis. The meeting was held in the Secretary's office.

Document 53: Memorandum From the Chief of Naval Intelligence (Inglis) to the Chief of Naval Operations (King)

Washington, November 30, 1945.

Source: Central Intelligence Agency Historical Files, HS/HC-135. Top Secret.

Document 54: Memorandum From Secretary of State Byrnes to Secretary of War Patterson and Secretary of the Navy Forrestal

Washington, December 10, 1945.

Source: Truman Library, Papers of Clark M. Clifford, National Intelligence Authority. Confidential. The date is handwritten on another copy of the source text. (Ibid.)

Document 55: Minutes of Meeting

Washington, December 11, 1945.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Records of the Department of State, Diplomatic Branch Reference File, Minutes of the Meetings of the Committee of Three, 1944-47. No classification marking. A copy ibid., Decimal File 1945-49, 101.61/12-1145, indicates that the minutes were classified Top Secret.

Document 56: Memorandum From the Secretary of State's Special Assistant for Research and Intelligence (McCormack) to Secretary of War Patterson and Secretary of the Navy Forrestal

Washington, December 15, 1945.

Source: Truman Library, Papers of J. Anthony Panuch, State Department Research and Intelligence No. 1. No classification marking. Copies were distributed to Staff Committee members under cover of an unsigned, undated note. (National Archives and Records Administration, RG 353, Records of Interdepartmental and Intradepartmental Committees—State Department, Lot File No. 122, Records of the Secretary's Staff Committee 1944-47) Attached to the memorandum is an annex, “Chart A,” of the revised organizational plan. See the Supplement.

Document 57: Memorandum From the Chief of Naval Operations (Nimitz) to Secretary of the Navy Forrestal

Washington, undated.

Source: Central Intelligence Agency Historical Files, HS/HC-135. Top Secret. The handwritten words “Nimitz letter” at the end of the source text identify the author. Nimitz became Chief of Naval Operations on December 15, 1945.

Document 58: Memorandum From the Executive Officer, Office of the Assistant Secretary of War for Air (Brownell) to the Members of the Lovett Committee

Washington, December 17, 1945.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 263, Records of the Central Intelligence Agency, Troy Papers, December 1945. Secret. Addressed to Major Generals Craig (OPD), Quesada (AAF), and Wyman (AGF), Brigadier Generals Clarke (G-2) and Magruder (SSU), and Colonel Roamer (ASF).

Document 59: Memorandum From the Chief of the Operations Division, War Department General Staff (Craig) to the Members of the Lovett Committee

Washington, December 18, 1945.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 263, Records of the Central Intelligence Agency, Troy Papers, December 1945. No classification marking.

Document 60: Memorandum From the Chief of the Operations Division, War Department General Staff (Craig) to Secretary of War Patterson

Washington, December 24, 1945.

Source: Central Intelligence Agency Historical Files, HS/HC-135. Confidential.

Document 61: Minutes of Meeting

Washington, December 26, 1945.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Records of the Department of State, Diplomatic Branch Reference File, Minutes of Meetings of the Committee of Three 1944-1947. Top Secret.

Document 62: Memorandum for the Record

Washington, December 27, 1945.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 263, Records of the Central Intelligence Agency, Troy Papers. No classification marking.

Document 63: Memorandum From the Secretary of the Navy's Special Assistant (Correa) to Secretary of the Navy Forrestal

Washington, December 27, 1945.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 80, General Records of the Department of the Navy, Records of Secretary of the Navy James Forrestal 1940-1947, General Correspondence 1944-1947, Box 129, 80-1-19. No classification marking.

Document 64: Memorandum From the Deputy Director of Naval Intelligence (Souers) to Clark M. Clifford

Washington, December 27, 1945.

Source: Truman Library, Papers of Clark M. Clifford, National Military Establishment: CIA. Top Secret; Personal. Also reproduced in CIA Cold War Records: The CIA under Harry Truman, pp. 17-19. On another copy of this memorandum a marginal notation written by Souers reads: “Comdr. Clifford asked for my recommendation at the request of the President.” (Central Intelligence Agency Historical Files, HS/HC-135) Clifford was appointed Naval Aide to the President in early 1946 and then Special Counsel to the President on June 27, 1946. Apparently he was not formally a Presidential appointee at this time.

Document 65: Memorandum From Arnold Miles to L.W. Hoelscher of the Bureau of the Budget

Washington, January 3, 1946.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 51, Records of the Office of Management and Budget, Series 39.19, OSS Organization and Functions. No classification marking. Apparently drafted by Schwarzwalder, whose name is typed in parentheses after Miles' name on the “from” line.

Document 66: Letter From Acting Secretary of War Royall and Secretary of the Navy Forrestal to Secretary of State Byrnes

Washington, January 6, 1946.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Records of the Department of State, Decimal File 1945-49, 101.5/1-646. Confidential. Apparently given to Byrnes by Royall and Forrestal at their January 6 meeting. There is no record of the meeting by any of the participants. See Truman Library, Papers of Harry S. Truman, Post-Presidential Memoirs, Sidney W. Souers interview with William Hillman and David M. Noyes, December 15, 1954. See also Darling, The Central Intelligence Agency: An Instrument of Government, p. 70, and Troy, Donovan and the CIA, pp. 341-342.

Document 67: Memorandum From the Secretary of State's Special Assistant for Research and Intelligence (McCormack) to Secretary of State Byrnes

Washington, January 7, 1946.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Records of the Department of State, Decimal File 1945-49, 101.5/1-746. No classification marking.

Document 68: Letter From Secretary of State Byrnes, Acting Secretary of War Royall, and Secretary of the Navy Forrestal to President Truman

Washington, January 7, 1946.

Source: Truman Library, Official File, 892. Confidential. An unsigned copy of this letter indicates that McCormack was the drafter. (Ibid., Papers of Clark M. Clifford, National Intelligence Authority)

Document 69: Memorandum by the Director of the Bureau of the Budget (Smith)

Washington, January 9, 1946, 10 a.m.

Source: Roosevelt Library, Papers of Harold Smith, Box 4, Conferences with President Truman, 1946. No classification marking. The time on the source text is 10 p.m., but the “p.m.” has been crossed out and inserted by hand is “a.m.?” Although written in the third person, this is part of the series of memoranda often referred to as the “Smith Diary.” The only other known contemporary account of this meeting by a participant is Admiral Leahy's short diary entry, which simply notes the fact of the meeting and comments: “The Director of the Budget offered many objections that evidently were instigated by the Department of State.” (Library of Congress, Manuscript Division, Leahy Diaries, January 9, 1946) President Truman's brief account, which may refer either to this meeting or to a follow-up session on January 12, is in Memoirs by Harry S. Truman, vol. II, Years of Trial and Hope, p. 57.

Document 70: Memorandum From the Director of the Bureau of the Budget (Smith) to the President's Special Counsel (Rosenman)

Washington, January 10, 1946.

Source: Truman Library, Papers of Samuel I. Rosenman, Subject File—OSS, 1946. Confidential.

Document 71: Presidential Directive on Coordination of Foreign Intelligence Activities

Washington, January 22, 1946.

Source: Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: Harry S. Truman, 1946, pp. 88-89. The directive was also published in the Federal Register of February 5, 1946 (11 Fed. Reg. 1337, 1339). A typewritten copy is reproduced in CIA Cold War Records: The CIA under Harry Truman, pp. 29-31.

IntroductionIntroduction

This volume takes as its starting point the surrender of Japan in August 1945, but it does
so with the realization that the contest over the postwar U.S. intelligence structure had
already begun during the latter stages of World War II. On November 18, 1944, Major General
William J. Donovan, the head of the Office of
Strategic Services, sent President Roosevelt a
proposal—subsequently known as the “Donovan
Plan”—to place peacetime intelligence directly under the
President's supervision rather than under the military, as it was during the war.
Under this proposal, the director of the central intelligence service would have full
authority in intelligence matters, subject only to Presidential control. Although the plan
provided for an advisory board consisting of the Secretaries of State, War, and Navy, and
others the President might choose to appoint, its function was to be consultative only.
Donovan's paper signaled the beginning of the controversy over the national
intelligence system.

During the debate over Donovan's proposals in 1944 and early 1945, the
Department of State was at best a peripheral participant. The protagonists were Donovan and
the OSS on one side and the armed forces on the other. The
Army and Navy opposed Donovan's plan and by late 1944, the Joint Intelligence
Committee of the Joint Chiefs of Staff had developed two schemes for a permanent intelligence
organization, the so-called “military” (or
“services”) and “civilian” plans. The former
provided for a “federal” system of intelligence coordination among the
State, War, and Navy Departments, with a supervising body composed of the Secretaries of
State, War, and Navy; an “intelligence directorate” headed by a
Department of State official (with Army and Navy deputies); and a joint intelligence service
to conduct whatever activities of common concern were agreed upon by the three Departments.
The “services” plan explicitly rejected a “national
intelligence service.”

The “civilian” plan took a number of elements from
Donovan's proposal including a central intelligence agency with an independent
budget, responsible for clandestine intelligence collection and for intelligence
coordination. The Director would be appointed by the President but would be under the
“direction and control” of a board consisting of the Secretaries of
State, War, and Navy.

By late 1944, the Joint Intelligence Committee had instructed its Joint Intelligence Staff
to refine the two plans and by the end of the year they
had become a single proposal—designated as JIC
239/5—which provided for a national intelligence authority composed of the three
Secretaries plus the Chief of Staff to the Commander in Chief; a central intelligence agency
headed by a director appointed by the President on the recommendation of the national
intelligence authority; and an advisory board to the director composed of the intelligence
chiefs of the State, War, and Navy Departments.

In February 1945, the Chicago Tribune and the Washington Times-Herald published the texts
of Donovan's proposal and of JIC 239/5. The
resulting public controversy over the propriety of a permanent intelligence system led the
Joint Chiefs to “withdraw” JIC 239/5.
Thereafter, the official Army and Navy position was that the subject was one to be dealt with
after the war.

President Roosevelt took no action on the
intelligence issue. When he died in April 1945, the future of intelligence was still
uncertain. His successor, Harry S. Truman, was inexperienced in foreign affairs, mistrustful
of secret government agencies, and opposed to the unorthodox operating procedures that
characterized the Roosevelt-Donovan relationship during the war. The evidence of his
thinking about postwar intelligence suggests that foremost in his mind was liquidation of the
wartime intelligence apparatus as soon as possible.

With the end of the war in August 1945, the future intelligence organization became a
pressing issue. The decision to abolish the OSS was taken
before the end of August by a White House committee charged with the liquidation of wartime
agencies. The committee consisted of Presidential Special Counsel Samuel I. Rosenman, Office
of War Mobilization and Reconversion Director John W.
Snyder, and Bureau of the Budget Director Harold
Smith (although Smith apparently waited until September 13 to get the
President's final approval). (Memorandum of conference with the President by
Harold Smith, September 13, 1945; Roosevelt Library, Papers of Harold Smith, Box 4, Conferences with President Truman 1945; see the
Supplement)

Donovan wrote to the President on August 25,
indicating he was moving swiftly on liquidating OSS and
enclosing a “Statement of Principles” to govern a future intelligence
agency. (Document 3) He wrote Harold
Smith on the same date, urging the need for a successor organization. (Attachment
to Document 3) In his letter to Truman, Donovan noted that the President
had earlier indicated a desire to talk to him about the subject, but there is only
second-hand evidence that the two ever had a substantive conversation about intelligence.
(Document 5)

In the meantime, as it became clear that the debate over the postwar system was about to
resume, the armed forces revived JIC 239/5. Under the
redesignation JCS 1181/5 and with only a few changes, it
became the Joint Chiefs of Staff proposal for the
national intelligence system and the model that was ultimately adopted.

The Bureau of the Budget was also advanced in its plans and was about to become a major
contender in the battle over the intelligence system. During the war, the Bureau had provided
organizational and managerial consultation to various armed services intelligence programs
and had worked during 1944-1945 to establish an intelligence office in the Department of
State. By the time of Truman's succession, the Bureau was considering the full
range of postwar intelligence problems. It was beginning to draft guidelines for national
intelligence organization, and in an organizational study of the Department of State prepared
for Secretary James Byrnes had urged greater emphasis
on intelligence.

By September 20, 1945, the Budget Bureau had its package of proposals ready and presented
the President with two documents, both of which he signed immediately. The first was an order
that abolished OSS and transferred its Research and Analysis
Branch to the Department of State and the remainder of the organization (primarily its
clandestine intelligence and covert action elements) to the War Department. As signed by the
President, it became Executive Order 9621. (Document 14) The second
document was Truman's letter to Secretary
of State Byrnes, making him responsible for taking the
lead in establishing an interdepartmental group, headed by the Department of State, to
develop “a comprehensive and coordinated foreign intelligence program”
for his approval. (Document 15)

The third element in the Bureau of the Budget's package was the study on
“Intelligence and Security Activities in the Government,” also dated
September 20 (see the Supplement) but not formally sent to Truman until October 31. (Document 38) It presented a detailed set of guidelines for a national
intelligence organization. In general, the approach was to emphasize the coordination of
existing information resources; to urge the use of existing intelligence components of
cabinet departments as building blocks for a new intelligence system; and to downgrade the
importance of separate, centralized agencies (although the Bureau recognized that some
subjects of common concern might require a separate organization). The Bureau had a strong
conviction that a peacetime intelligence organization should be centered in the Department of
State and to this end encouraged the Department to create an intelligence component and to
establish itself as the “lead agency” in forming the national
intelligence community. In these last two endeavors, the Bureau had to contend with
resistance in the Department of State where, with some notable exceptions (e.g., Under
Secretary of State Dean Acheson), there was little
enthusiasm for either enterprise.

Within hours of the signing of the Executive Order, the Joint Chiefs told the Bureau of the
Budget that their own paper and recommendations on
intelligence had been forwarded to the Secretaries of War and Navy for transmission to the
President. They were informed that the order had already been signed.

The Federal Bureau of Investigation was also involved in the intelligence debate. In 1941,
at President Roosevelt's direction, the
FBI became responsible for clandestine intelligence and
counterintelligence in the Western Hemisphere and for security liaison with Western
Hemisphere governments. This responsibility was reconfirmed by Roosevelt in 1942 and the FBI's
jurisdiction in the Western Hemisphere made exclusive (except for military and naval
intelligence collection by service attaches). Thus, the OSS
was debarred from clandestine intelligence operations in Latin America.

In December 1944, FBI Director J. Edgar Hoover proposed a future “world-wide intelligence
system” to be run by the FBI along the lines of
its Latin American operations. By September 1945, with major decisions on intelligence
impending, Hoover sought to maintain the FBI's
Western Hemisphere activity and, if possible, to win support for the FBI plan. The attitudes
of the Department of State were of particular importance to the FBI, since the Bureau's intelligence work in Latin America was generally
well regarded in the Department. (Document 5)

President Truman and Harold Smith did not agree with this view. Smith discussed the subject with
Truman, who reacted negatively to the wide-ranging
U.S. intelligence activities in Latin America, “and commented that if we continue
our present attitude toward Latin American countries in this respect we will not be in a
position to complain very much when they send their intelligence people into the United
States. He then said with considerable vigor that he was ‘very much against
building up a gestapo.’” (Roosevelt Library, Papers of Harold Smith, Box 4, Conferences with President Truman 1945, May 4, 1945)

Two months later, the subject arose again, and Truman, while approving continued funding for 6 months for the use of the FBI in South America, added “that he, himself, had some
question, from the standpoint of good neighbor relations, about our having the FBI in South America.” (Ibid., July 6, 1945)

In September, Truman told Smith “that he
thought the FBI should be cut back as soon as possible to at
least the prewar level; that he proposed to confine the FBI
to the United States; and that he had in mind a quite different plan for
intelligence.” (Ibid., September 5, 1945; see the Supplement)

Nonetheless, the FBI continued to press its case for the
“World-Wide Intelligence Service.” (Documents 7, 8, 10, 19, and 43)
Because Truman had such strong views on the subject,
Hoover's efforts were ultimately unsuccessful. By the time the struggle between
the Department of State and the military services over the new system had begun in earnest,
the FBI apparently was no longer a serious contender.
There continued, however, to be strong sentiment in parts of the Department of
State—especially the Office of American Republic Affairs—for a
continuation of the FBI's Western Hemisphere role
and this issue was revived the following year when the Director of Central Intelligence
sought to establish exclusive control over all clandestine intelligence.

When Truman told Smith in their September 5
conversation that “he had in mind a quite different plan for
intelligence” he implied that he had his own blueprint. On September 13, in
another conversation with Smith, “The President again commented that he has in
mind a broad intelligence service attached to the President's office.”
(See the Supplement) There is no record, however, that Truman ever conveyed to his advisers his ideas for an intelligence system, and
the debate in the fall of 1945 became a contest between the Department of State and the
Bureau of the Budget on one hand and the Army and Navy on the other.

By early October 1945, Secretary of the Navy James
Forrestal was the government's most energetic advocate of a national
intelligence structure. At least two factors seem to have precipitated his active
involvement. One was the looming issue of armed forces unification; although national
intelligence organization was a distinct problem, many discussions of military unification
raised the question of the future intelligence system. For example, the study that Forrestal
himself commissioned on unification, the Eberstadt report, had argued for centralization of
intelligence.

The second factor that influenced Forrestal was the
speed with which decisions on intelligence were being taken and in particular the dominant
role of the Bureau of the Budget and the Department of State. The impact of these
developments was magnified by the failure of the Joint Chiefs' proposals to reach
the White House before the President signed Executive Order 9621 and the letter to the
Secretary of State.

At the end of September, Forrestal and Secretary of
War Robert B. Patterson had sent the JCS proposal to Byrnes, as
coordinator of intelligence planning, saying they assumed he would send it on to the
President. By October 10, Forrestal was trying to set
up a dinner with the State, War and Navy intelligence chiefs and J. Edgar Hoover, to discuss a national intelligence agency. On October 13,
Forrestal proposed to Patterson that they should push the JCS plan
“vigorously at the White House.” (Document 26)
On the same day, he wrote to Byrnes to underscore the
importance of the intelligence problem, and to suggest that it be taken up in the periodic
meetings of the Secretaries of State, War, and Navy. (Document
27)

The Army was also active. Late in October, on instructions from Patterson, Assistant Secretary of War for Air Robert
A. Lovett organized a study group to consider the future intelligence structure.
The LovettBoard report, November 3, 1945, marked an important step
in the decision-making process on national intelligence. (Document
42) Although the committee prepared its report in little more than a week, it heard
testimony and received written submissions from a number of persons who had had significant
experience in the intelligence field, which may have given added weight and authority to its
recommendations.

The Lovett Board acknowledged that it inclined toward the JCS proposals, but modified them in certain important respects. In part due to
General John Magruder's influence, the
group departed from the Joint Chiefs' plan by recommending that a future central
intelligence agency should have an independent budget rather than be financed by allocations
from the State, War, and Navy Departments, and that it should be the sole agency for
clandestine intelligence collection. Lovett's group also recommended a strengthened role for the
Departmental intelligence agencies on the intelligence advisory board proposed in the JCS plan.

Thomas F. Troy, in his study entitled Donovan and
the CIA: A History of the Establishment of the Central Intelligence Agency, concludes that
the “Lovett report did for Secretary
Patterson what the Eberstadt report had done for
Forrestal: it provided an independent justification
for the Secretary's endorsement of the JCS
plan.” (page 319) Meanwhile, the Department of State had not taken the lead on
intelligence, as directed by Truman. Indeed, Byrnes' two key subordinates in this field,
Alfred McCormack, the Secretary's Special
Assistant for Research and Intelligence, and Donald S.
Russell, Assistant Secretary of State for Administration, “had clearly
come to a parting of the ways on what should be done internally; without internal cohesion
and growth, State could hardly play a strong leader role.” (Ibid.)

Another problem was that the military thought that Colonel McCormack was simply too slow.
McCormack's style was deliberate, and he
made a conscious choice early on to establish the State Department's own
intelligence organization before turning his full attention to the interagency theater. In
part, the decision was dictated by practicality; it would be difficult for the Department of
State to preside over intelligence planning if it had no intelligence component of its own.
Moreover, McCormack faced the deadline set by
Executive Order 9621—the interim arrangements had to be wound up and a successor
unit established in the Department of State by the last day of 1945, a problem compounded by
Congressional difficulties over appropriations.

But by the end of October there was already a rising tide of opposition to McCormack's plan for a centralized Department of
State intelligence component, with Russell organizing
the opposition of the geographic and policy offices. Moreover, Russell and McCormack were at odds on the
interagency organization. Russell had proposed to
Byrnes an interagency structure that was considerably
different from what McCormack was slowly designing and close enough to the
JCS plan to make Forrestal say they were basically the same. Russell had complained to Byrnes when
McCormack did not respond to a memorandum he had sent
McCormack enclosing a copy of his plan. At the
October 30 meeting of the Three Secretaries, Forrestal
was authorized to discuss the JCS plan in detail with
Russell, suggesting that he had become a channel
between Byrnes and Forrestal.

On October 31, 1945, McCormack wrote to Admiral
Leahy, Chief of Staff to the Commander in Chief, expressing his view “that this
Department should formulate its own plans before going ahead with the interdepartmental
group. That position has been acceptable to the Army and, I think, also to the Navy, and the
Army has had a Board functioning for the purpose of determining its position on the post-war
intelligence problem.” (Document 39)

Leahy and McCormack conferred on October 31 and the
letter presumably followed up on their conversation. Leahy's diary for that date
contains the following entry: “By direction of the President, discussed with
Colonel McCormack of the State Department the formation of a Central Intelligence Service.
Colonel McCormack has a very different plan from that proposed by the J.C.S.”
(Library of Congress, Manuscript Division, Papers of William
D. Leahy, Diaries 1945, page 182)

Beyond this brief reference, no record of the discussion between Leahy and McCormack has been found, nor any record of Truman's instruction to Leahy. Moreover, there is no
specific evidence of what prompted Truman's
inquiry about McCormack's efforts. In any
case, the Leahy-McCormack exchange indicates that
Truman had become concerned by the pace of
developments. An even stronger White House intervention occurred a week later, when a
memorandum was put before the President that said that “The only apparently
promising prospect of getting useful action” was for “The President to
call a conference with the Secretaries of State, War and Navy, and direct them to work
together in the preparation of a plan for the establishment of a Central Intelligence
Service,” to be completed not later than December 31. (Document
44)

The memorandum carries no indication of addressee or authorship (although Leahy is clearly
a strong candidate for the latter), but it became a Presidential directive when Truman sent
it to his secretary with the annotation “Set this up.” The minutes of
the Three Secretaries' meeting on November 14 (Document
45) show that Forrestal and Byrnes were aware of the memorandum and understood it as a
directive. Byrnes' comments at his November
27 staff committee meeting (Document 50) suggest that the President
had told him some action should be taken on intelligence and that Leahy had been given
responsibility.

Although there was still some distance to go (and the contemplated meeting of the President
with the Three Secretaries was never held), the November
7 directive broke the impasse over intelligence planning. In effect, it overrode the
President's September 20 letter with a new instruction ordering the Secretaries to
prepare a plan jointly. Admiral Leahy's role also weighed in favor of the Army and
Navy, especially the latter. Moreover, by specifying a plan for a “Central
Intelligence Service” the directive was weighed against the Budget Bureau/State
Department side of the debate.

By mid-November, McCormack had a Department of State
plan ready for consideration. (Document 46) Following closely the
Budget Bureau proposals of 2 months earlier, the plan proposed a dual structure for
coordinating foreign intelligence and security intelligence, based on a complex system of
committees. The plan did not rule out the establishment of centralized agencies to perform
common functions; in fact, it envisaged that certain common services would have to be
performed centrally. But McCormack's plan
tended to regard centralization as a last resort, with the burden of proof on those arguing
for it. This underlying attitude, which saw coordination of existing activity as the
essential problem, separated it fundamentally from the Lovett Board/JCS blueprints. In one other respect, too, they were fundamentally at odds.
McCormack took seriously the injunction in the
President's September 20 letter to Byrnes
to “take the lead in developing a comprehensive and coordinated intelligence
program for all Federal agencies” and proposed arrangements that would put the
Department of State in firm control of the foreign intelligence structure.

At this point, Byrnes was beginning to have second
thoughts about the Budget Bureau guidelines. In his meeting with the Secretaries of War and Navy on November 14, the day before McCormack formally pre-sented his plan, Byrnes had already expressed doubts about the Budget Bureau
approach and appeared to endorse the idea of a central intelligence agency.

By early December, McCormack's plan had
undergone two revisions in an effort to meet objections. On December 3, Byrnes sent Patterson
and Forrestal the second revision of McCormack's “Annex I” which
set forth a proposed basic structure for the national intelligence system. (Supplement) In
many respects the thrust of McCormack's
original proposals was not altered, but there were concessions to Army and Navy concerns.
Even in the first (November 28) revision (see the Supplement) McCormack had replaced the original two coordinating authorities (for foreign
and security intelligence) with a single National Intelligence Authority (NIA) consisting of the Secretary of State as chairman and the
Secretaries of War and Navy.

Other revisions provided that while the Executive Secretary (the chief operating officer of
the Authority) would be named by the Secretary of State, the appointment would be subject to
the approval of the Secretaries of War and Navy. In addition, a new provision spelled out
that the Executive Secretariat would “Act as the executive for the Authority in
carrying out such program and all operating plans approved by the Authority,”
phrasing that emphasized the executive and operational as distinct from the coordination and
deliberative aspects of the plan. There were other changes as well that presumably were
intended to stress the same point—the right to inspect departmental intelligence
operations was added to the NIA's powers and the language about the NIA's power to determine which intelligence functions
should be conducted centrally was strengthened.

More important, perhaps, than these changes was Byrnes' covering memorandum, which defended the basic structural
proposal while suggesting that in practice there would be possibilities for development along
lines presumably attractive to the Army and Navy. Thus, Byrnes noted: “The Plan does not preclude any centralized
intelligence operations…which may prove feasible and desirable as the program of
the Authority is developed.” And he added: “With respect to clandestine
activities (‘secret intelligence’ and
‘counter-espionage’) I understand the prevailing opinion to be that
such operations, if they are to be conducted, might well be under a central agency; and the
Plan sets up machinery for study of that problem in detail and for development of specific
operating plans in those fields.” (Document 54)

However significant these modifications may have been from the Department of State
perspective, it is doubtful that they even began to meet the armed services'
concerns. The elaborate committee structure still remained, as did the explanatory comment
that said that “Such Committees will be the primary means by which the Authority
will carry out its missions.” Moreover, despite the positive references to
centralized operations, Byrnes' memorandum
made a distinction between a single central intelligence agency for the performance of agreed
common functions and the centralization of agreed intelligence activities. The former was
rejected because it was too conspicuous and would compete and overlap with existing
intelligence agencies. The language used in connection with the latter suggests that the
preferred approach was “either (1) by vesting responsibility for a particular
field in a single existing agency or (2) by bringing together the working units of several
agencies on a subject into a joint staff under direction of the Authority.” Both
approaches differed from the ideas underpinning the Joint Chiefs/Lovett Board proposals.

Finally, the revised McCormack proposals and the
covering memorandum still provided for Department of State predominance in the intelligence
field. For the armed services, this remained a major stumbling block.

There was more fine-tuning of the McCormack
proposals and by mid-December the indicators were somewhat mixed. The War Department seemed
to be wavering on some points and to be exploring possibilities of compromise. In so doing,
the Army was perhaps reflecting a greater awareness than the other participants that the
Strategic Services Unit (SSU)—the name under which
the OSS apparatus for foreign secret intelligence had been
lodged in the War Department—was a diminishing asset as time went by and
uncertainty about the future led to a loss of experienced personnel. (See paragraph 2, Document 59.)

There were no indications that the Navy had softened its position. Of the three Cabinet
Secretaries involved, Forrestal seems to have had the
strongest convictions about intelligence. Moreover, the Navy had an ally at the White House
in the person of Admiral Leahy. Byrnes was aware of
this. At his November 27 Staff Committee meeting, he had said “it was necessary to
bear in mind that whatever we propose will have to be ‘sold’ to the
President. It will be turned over by the President to Admiral Leahy, who has strong views on
the matter and…we must, therefore, seek to avoid unnecessary questions of
jurisdictional conflict with the Army and the Navy.” (Document
50)

As 1945 drew to a close, the debate was plainly deadlocked. After the December 26 meeting
of the Three Secretaries, McCormack had spoken to Harold
Smith of “the apparent hopelessness of proceeding without further
direction from the President.” (Document 65) McCormack said as much again after his December 27 meeting with
the War and Navy Department representatives, telling them at the end of the session that
“matters were at an impasse and that he felt the question would have to be decided
by the three Secretaries and by the President.” (Document
65)

The White House in fact had become involved again. The documentation is sketchy and neither
Truman's Memoirs nor Admiral
Leahy's diaries provides any details. But toward the end of December, Truman apparently set in motion the developments that would
break the deadlock, by seeking the advice of Rear Admiral Sidney Souers, Deputy Director of
Naval Intelligence. (Document 64) Additional details are in Troy,
Donovan and the CIA, pages 339-340; and a letter from Souers to Montague, August 13, 1970, in
Central Intelligence Agency Records, No. 206102, Job 84-T00286R, Box 2, Folder 12.

During this period, one element of the problem was Secretary Byrnes' availability in Washington. Byrnes had been away for meetings in Moscow from mid-December until almost the
end of the month and he was due to leave for London on January 7, 1946. This time constraint
was partly responsible for forcing the pace of decisionmaking on the intelligence issue at
the end of 1945 and in the first week of the new year. On Sunday, January 6, 1946, Byrnes met with Forrestal and Under Secretary of War
Kenneth Royall at his apartment in the Shoreham
Hotel. According to Arthur B. Darling's recounting of “the tale still
going the rounds,” Forrestal told Byrnes: “Jimmy, we like you, but we don't
like your plan. Just think what might happen if another William Jennings Bryan were to
succeed you in the State Department.” (Darling, The Central Intelligence Agency:
An Instrument of Government, to 1950 (University Park: The Pennsylvania State University
Press, 1990), page 70)

In an oral history interview almost 9 years after the event, Admiral Souers was less
colorful. He recalled simply that Forrestal and
Royall went to Byrnes' apartment on Sunday afternoon and told him that they were
prepared to submit their own plan for intelligence to the President, whether or not it had
Department of State endorsement. According to Souers' account, Byrnes approved the plan with one or two minor word changes and
it was submitted to the President the next day. (Truman Library, Papers of Harry S. Truman,
Post-Presidential Memoirs, Sidney W. Souers interview with William Hillman and David M.
Noyes, December 15, 1954)

No contemporary record of the January 6 meeting has been found and none of the participants
put down his recollections at a later date. What seems to have been presented to Byrnes was a
letter, dated January 6 and signed by Royall and
Forrestal. (Document 66) The
letter rejected the Department of State plan and proposed two alternatives. The first was a
modification of the Lovett Board proposal, with the central intelligence agency
“at the outset” to “be housed for administrative purposes in
the State Department,” headed by an official who would be or become a State
Department official “unless the President otherwise determines”, and
staffed with personnel detailed from the three Departments, i.e., it would not be an
independent agency with its own budget.

If this were not acceptable, the letter proposed as a “possible
alternative” acceptance of the Department of State plan as modified up to that
point, with certain further modifications: the Executive Secretary would be appointed by the
National Intelligence Authority and would be or become a Department of State official unless
the President decided otherwise; the Executive Secretary would have no other Department of
State duties; a specific provision that “evaluation and synthesis on a national
level, direction of foreign espionage and counterespionage, and appropriate
dissemination” were central functions; elimination of the provision that
committees would be the primary means by which the Authority would operate; and provision for
a single advisory group, to have the membership and functions recommended by the Lovett
Board.

The letter's sparse marginalia suggest that Byrnes worked through the first alternative, making only minor changes. The
proposal thus approved was basically the JCS plan of
September 19, 1945 (Document 13), and thus was closer to the Navy
position, which had always rejected the independent
budget concept, than the Lovett Board proposal. It was also close to the draft directive that
Souers had sent Clark Clifford on December 27. The
only genuinely new elements in the January 6 letter were the ties between the Department of
State and the new intelligence agency: the provision that it would be “housed for
administrative purposes in the State Department” and that its chief executive
would be, or become, a State Department official. But these provisions had disappeared by the
time the proposal was signed by Byrnes, Royall, and Forrestal
and sent to the White House the next day. (Document 68) Presumably
Byrnes dropped them during the Sunday afternoon
discussion.

The letter from the three Secretaries to the President was received at the White House on
January 8. Admiral Souers, and probably Clark
Clifford, immediately started reworking the draft directive. (Library of Congress,
Manuscript Division, Papers of William D. Leahy,
Leahy Diaries, January 8, 1946; see also footnote 2, Document
68)

Budget Director Harold Smith seems to have been
unaware of the Sunday meeting. But on Monday, January 7, he saw Byrnes briefly before the latter's departure for London, probably
about the State Department's internal battle over how to organize its intelligence
component. At their meeting, Smith learned “about a proposed Executive Order
disposing of the matter of the organization of intelligence activities in the
Government.” (Document 69)

On Tuesday, January 8, Smith telephoned the President's secretary, Matthew
Connelly, and asked that Truman not sign the order.
The following morning, Connelly telephoned to tell Smith that the President had called a
meeting on intelligence which was about to convene. Smith hurried across the street to join
the meeting. Besides the President and Smith, the other participants were the
President's advisers, “and several persons from the Navy
Department.” (Document 69; see also Library of Congress,
Manuscript Division, Papers of William D. Leahy,
Diaries, January 8, 1946)

Smith's account (written in the third person) added that “the War
Department and the State Department were not represented. The implication of most of the
statements made at the meeting was that intelligence could not be handled in the State
Department because that Department was too weak.”

Smith by his own account “took the part of the devil's
advocate,” arguing that “when a subject is left to three departments to
divide up among themselves, the worst possible compromise results” and that
“in all that he had heard on the subject there did not seem to be even a clear
understanding of what kind of intelligence was being discussed.” Leahy commented
curtly in his diary that “The Director of the Budget offered many objections that evidently were instigated by the Department
of State.” (Ibid.)

Truman's account of what is probably the
same meeting (although it could possibly be a January 12 White House meeting on the same
subject) is in the second volume of his memoirs. (Memoirs: Years of Trial and Hope, page
57)

On January 12, 1946, there was another White House meeting and a revision of the January 8
version of the draft directive. Leahy records that “The President conferred with
his advisers, including Judge Rosenman and the
Director of the Budget on the establishment of a Central Intelligence Agency.”
(Library of Congress, Manuscript Division, Papers of William
D. Leahy, Diaries 1946, page 4) A copy of the draft directive in the Truman
Library has revisions that are apparently in Souers' hand. The January 12 version
simply established the Central Intelligence Agency rather than leaving the National
Intelligence Authority to do so, as the January 8 draft provided. Consequently, paragraph 4
of the January 8 version, which made the submission of an organizational plan the first
responsibility of the Authority and the Intelligence Advisory Board, was eliminated and the
subsequent paragraphs renumbered. In old paragraph 5(a), an additional sentence was added at
the end: “Full use shall be made of the staff and facilities of the established
departmental intelligence agencies.” Finally, in old paragraph 7, the last
sentence was changed to read: In the conduct of its activities the National Intelligence
Authority will be responsible for fully protecting intelligence sources and
methods.” A note on the revised draft indicated it should be cleared with the
Bureau of the Budget and Attorney General Clark. (See the Supplement)

On January 18, Assistant Solicitor General Harold Judson had a 3-hour session at the White
House with the drafters of the intelligence directive. Whether this was the only such session
is not known but the version considered at the January 18 meeting differs in several respects
from the January 12 text, suggesting that the White House may have worked with the Justice
Department (and others) to develop the new draft. The January 18 version, with handwritten
changes made at the meeting that day, is attached to a memorandum from
“M.E.H.” to Clark Clifford,
January 18, 1946. (See the Supplement)

The January 18 text was no longer an executive order but a Presidential letter of
instruction to the Secretaries of State, War, and the Navy. The language concerning the
NIA's powers seems slightly weaker; the draft no
longer establishes a Central Intelligence Agency but instead authorizes the three Secretaries
to “designate persons from your respective Departments who shall collectively form
a Central Intelligence Group and who shall, under the supervision of a Director of Central
Intelligence, assist the National Intelligence Authority.” (Ibid.)

Judson returned to the Justice Department with a
marked-up version of the January 18 draft which included further changes made during the
meeting. He met immediately with FBI Assistant Director D.M.
Ladd, who was unhappy with the provisions demarcating responsibility between the FBI and the foreign intelligence machinery. (Memorandum from Ladd
to Hoover, January 18, 1946; National Archives and Records Administration, RG 263, Records of
the Central Intelligence Agency, Troy Papers, FBI Documents;
see the Supplement)

Among other problems, Ladd was concerned about paragraph 9. In the January 18 version this
had originally read:

“This directive shall apply to all foreign intelligence activities carried on by
the Federal Government outside the continental limits of the United States and its
possessions. Nothing herein shall be construed to affect the responsibilities of agencies not
within your Departments in relation to their intelligence activities inside the continental
limits of the United States and its possessions, with respect to the national internal
security.”

The White House meeting had dropped the first sentence, leaving the last as the complete
paragraph. (Ibid.)

Ladd protested that this and other changes
“would leave no protection against this new national intelligence authority
expanding into full investigations in the domestic field.” Judson replied that
“the President did not desire to replace or duplicate the FBI and that those
drawing up this directive had no intention of doing so.” Ladd countered that “these men may be gone and others
who take their place are the ones who will be interpreting the phraseology here.”
(Ibid.)

Finally, Judson drafted a new paragraph 9: “Nothing herein shall be construed to
authorize the making of investigations, otherwise than as provided by existing law and
Presidential directives, inside the continental limits of the United States and its
possessions.” (Ibid.)

Ladd was satisfied with this formulation, but when
Judson telephoned Clark to clear it “the
Attorney General suggested milder language in that the President had just this morning
advised members of the Cabinet that because of the strikes, he was so burdened with work he
desired them to avoid conflicts which would necessitate his becoming involved for decisions.
The Attorney General, therefore, thought that this was not a good time to interject such
blunt language as here suggested and he suggested the phraseology, ‘Nothing herein
shall be construed as affecting the present jurisdiction of any United States agencies inside
the continental limits of the United States or its possessions.’”
(Ibid.)

Ladd thought that this was “a negative
statement which merely meant that although the Bureau would not be precluded from conducting
the same investigative work in which it is now engaged, it would not prevent this new outfit from duplicating and coming into the
same field.” (Ibid.)

Ladd's account does not mention any
further exchange with the Attorney General, but notes that Judson concurred in the FBI view. That afternoon, Judson telephoned the text of his
proposed paragraph 9 to Clark Clifford's
office and with a minor variation in word order, it remained in the directive as finally
issued. (Ibid.; Memorandum from M.E.H. to Clark
Clifford, January 18, 1946; see the Supplement)

At this point, the directive was close to its final form. There were more adjustments of
language over the next few days, and on January 22 the Presidential letter of instruction to
the Secretaries of State, War, and the Navy was signed by Truman, bringing a national intelligence system into being. (Document 71)

1. Memorandum From the Assistant to the Counselor (Doyle) to Secretary of State Byrnes1. Memorandum From the Assistant to the Counselor (Doyle) to Secretary of State Byrnes1

Washington, August 21,
1945.

SUBJECT

Preliminary Survey of Legal Problems Involved in Establishing New
Intelligence Agency

1. Future reliance upon the First War Powers Act to support an executive
order transferring functions among agencies is probably illegal. Section
1 of Title I (the reorganization Title) contains the proviso: “That the
authority by this Title granted shall be exercised only in matters
relating to the conduct of the present war.” It is difficult to see how
any reorganization at this time could meet this requirement.

2. Even if this hurdle could be surmounted, a transfer which depended
upon the First War Powers Act for validity would be short-lived. Title I
is to remain in force during the war and “for six months after the
termination of the war, or until such earlier time as the Congress by
concurrent resolution or the President may designate.” And upon
termination of Title I, all
agencies, departments and offices “shall exercise the same functions,
duties, and powers as heretofore or as hereafter by law may be provided,
any authorization of the President under this Title to the contrary
notwithstanding.”

3. OSS can be abolished by the President
at any time. It was established by Presidential letter of July 11, 1941,
under the name of the Office of the Coordinator of Information. On June
13, 1942, by Presidential Military Order it was renamed OSS and
transferred to the jurisdiction of the Joint Chiefs.

4. If OSS were abolished, its functions
would revert to the Joint Chiefs, or to the Army and Navy separately.
The present functions of OSS are (a) to
collect and analyze such strategic information as may be required by the
Joint Chiefs, and (b) to plan and operate such special services as may
be directed by the Joint Chiefs.

Recommendation: The proposed new intelligence agency, answerable to the
Secretaries of State, War and Navy, should be created by executive
order, based upon the Constitutional authority of the President as Chief
Executive and Commander in Chief. No mention of the First War Powers Act
should be made. The general theory underlying the order should be that
State, War, and Navy all possess inherent and traditional authority to
engage in intelligence operations, and that it is no usurpation of
Congressional authority to amalgamate these functions in a single agency
over which the three Departments will continue to exercise an equal
measure of control.

1 Source: National Archives and
Records Administration, RG 59, Records of the Department of State,
Decimal File 1945-49, 101.5/8-2145. Secret.

2. Memorandum From E.R. Baker of the Bureau of the Budget Staff to the Assistant Director for Estimates (Martin)2. Memorandum From E.R. Baker of the
Bureau of the Budget Staff to the Assistant Director for Estimates
(Martin)Source

Washington, August 24,
1945.

SUBJECT

Policy question with respect to Office of Strategic
Services

Mr. Ramsey's attached memorandum points out what appears to be an
ambiguity in instructions with respect to O.S.S.1

It seems to me that the Reconversion Committee's general directive is
sound and that the examiners should use this as a guide in testing the
details of the agency's proposed post V-J Day program. In doing this,
however, and in attempting to reconcile any differences which may exist
between the agency's submission and the examiner's point of view, the
Bureau's policy will be evident to the agency and thus this action might
be construed to be in conflict with the admonition printed at the top of
the “Post V-J Day Supplement to Report of Reconversion Program
Committee”.

Mr. Ramsey has just shown me a copy of a memorandum of this date from
Weldon Cooper to Hoelscher,2
stating that the Director met this morning with Judge Rosenman3 and Mr. Snyder4 and that
they agree to constitute themselves as a reconversion committee to meet
weekly and to move ahead in the disposal of war agency functions under
the War Powers Act. It seems that this committee agreed on transferring
the foreign information activities of OWI to the State Department and an Executive order to
accomplish this is to be ready by Monday. Apparently as a result of the
formulation of this committee, Dave Robinson and Stone have agreed that
research and analysis of OSS should be
transferred to the State Department and the Director has concurred in
this conclusion. We are informed that an Executive order to accomplish
this is to be ready by Monday, August 27. Presumably secret intelligence
and counterintelligence activities would remain with OSS and that agency would continue to
function, at least for the present, in this field as the agent of the
Joint Chiefs of Staff. I have tried to get both Stone and Robinson by
phone but find that they are both away; Dave will probably not be in
until tomorrow and Stone will not be here until Monday. You may wish to
speak to one of them with respect to this.

* Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 51,
Records of the Office of Management and Budget, Series 39.19, OSS Organization and Functions, Box 67.
No classification marking.

1 In the attached memorandum to Baker, August 23 (see
the Supplement), G.E. Ramsey, Jr., referred to “The Post V-J Day
Supplement to Report of Reconversion Program Committee,” which
recommended continuation of the OSS
pending development of a permanent plan for foreign intelligence,
except for “operational” activities which should be transferred to
the War Department.

2 Not found.

3 Samuel I. Rosenman, Special
Counsel to the President.

4 John W. Snyder, Director of
the Office of War Mobilization an Reconversion.4

3. Memorandum From the Director of the Office of Strategic Services (Donovan) to President Truman3. Memorandum From the Director of the Office of Strategic Services
(Donovan) to
President TrumanSource

Washington, August 25,
1945.

I enclose copy of letter I have sent to the Director of the Budget,
advising him that the liquidation of OSS should be complete about
January 1, 1946, and pointing out
the necessity of designating an agency to take over its functions and
its assets.

Also, I enclose a Statement of Principles which I believe should govern
the establishment of a central intelligence agency.

This matter you have stated you wished to explore with me before coming
to a decision. I hope you may find time to discuss it before I leave for
Germany on the War Crimes Case within the next two weeks.

Donovan

Attachment 1

Letter From the Director of the Office of Strategic Services (Donovan) to the Director of the Bureau
of the Budget (Smith)

Washington, August 25, 1945.

MY DEAR MR. SMITH: In answer to your communication of August 23,
19451 in reference
to further reduction of personnel, we are working under what is in
effect a liquidation budget. Within its provisions we have taken steps
to terminate many of our operational (as distinct from intelligence)
activities and to reduce the remaining parts to a size consistent with
present obligations in the Far East, in the occupation of Germany and
Austria, and in the maintenance of missions in the Middle East and on
the Asiatic and European continents.

As our liquidation proceeds it will become increasingly difficult to
exercise our functions so that we have found it necessary to set up a
liquidating committee with procedures and controls to provide for the
gradual elimination of our services in step with the orderly reduction
of personnel.2

It is our estimate, however, with the strictest economy of manpower and
of funds the effectiveness of OSS as a
War Agency will end as of January 1, or at the latest February 1, 1946,
at which time liquidation should be completed. At that point I wish to
return to private life. Therefore, in considering the disposition to be
made of the assets created by OSS, I
speak as a private citizen concerned with the future of his country.

In our Government today there is no permanent agency to take over the
functions which OSS will have then ceased to perform. These functions
while carried on as incident
to the war are in reality essential in the effective discharge by this
nation of its responsibilities in the organization and maintenance of
the peace.

Since last November, I have pointed out the immediate necessity of
setting up such an agency to take over the valuable assets created by
OSS. Among these assets was the
establishment for the first time in our nation's history of a foreign
secret intelligence service which reported information as seen through
American eyes. As an integral and inseparable part of this service there
is a group of specialists to analyze and evaluate the material for
presentation to those who determine national policy.

It is not easy to set up a modern intelligence system. It is more
difficult to do so in time of peace than in time of war.

It is important therefore that it be done before the War Agency has
disappeared so that profit may be made of its experience and “know how”
in deciding how the new agency may best be conducted.

I have already submitted a plan for the establishment of a centralized
system.3 However, the
discussion of that proposal indicated the need of an agreement upon
certain fundamental principles before a detailed plan is formulated. If
those concerned could agree upon the principles within which such a
system should be established, acceptance of a common plan would be more
easily achieved.

Accordingly, I attach a statement of principles, the soundness of which I
believe has been established by study and by practical experience.

Sincerely,

William J. Donovan

Attachment 2

Paper by the Director of the Office of Strategic Services (Donovan)

Principles—The Soundness Of Which It Is Believed Has
Been Established By Our Own Experience And A First-Hand Study Of The
Systems Of Other Nations—Which Should Govern The Establishment Of A
Centralized United States Foreign Intelligence System.

The formulation of national policy both in its political and military
aspects is influenced and determined by knowledge (or ignorance) of the
aims, capabilities, intentions and policies of other nations.

All major powers except the United States have had for a long time past
permanent worldwide intelligence services, reporting directly to the
highest echelons of their Governments. Prior to the present war, the
United States had no foreign secret intelligence service. It never has
had and does not now have a coordinated intelligence system.

The defects and dangers of this situation have been generally recognized.
Adherence to the following would remedy this defect in peace as well as
war so that American policy could be based upon information obtained
through its own sources on foreign intentions, capabilities and
developments as seen and interpreted by Americans.

1. That each Department of Government should have its own intelligence
bureau for the collection and processing of such informational material
as it finds necessary in the actual performance of its functions and
duties. Such a bureau should be under the sole control of the Department
head and should not be encroached upon or impaired by the functions
granted any other Governmental intelligence agency. Because secret
intelligence covers all fields and because of possible embarrassment, no
executive department should be permitted to engage in secret
intelligence but in a proper case call upon the central agency for
service.

2. That in addition to the intelligence unit for each Department there
should be established a national centralized foreign intelligence agency
which should have the authority:

A. To serve all Departments of the Government.

B. To procure and obtain political, economic, psychological,
sociological, military and other information which may bear upon the
national interest and which has been collected by the different
Governmental Departments or agencies.

C. To collect when necessary supplemental information either at its own
instance or at the request of any Governmental Department by open or
secret means from other and various sources.

D. To integrate, analyze, process and disseminate, to authorized
Governmental agencies and officials, intelligence in the form of
strategic interpretive studies.

3. That such an agency should be prohibited from carrying on clandestine
activities within the United States and should be forbidden the exercise
of any police functions either at home or abroad.

4. That since the nature of its work requires it to have status it should
be independent of any Department of the Government (since it is obliged
to serve all and must be free of the natural bias of an operating
Department). It should be under a Director, appointed by the President,
and be administered under Presidential direction, or in the event of a
General Manager being appointed, should be established in the Executive
Office of the President, under his direction.

5. That subject to the approval of the President or the General Manager,
the policy of such a service should be determined by the Director with the advice and assistance of
a Board on which the Secretaries of State, War, Navy and Treasury should
be represented.

6. That this agency, as the sole agency for secret intelligence, should
be authorized, in the foreign field only, to carry on services such as
espionage, counter-espionage and those special operations (including
morale and psychological) designed to anticipate and counter any
attempted penetration and subversion of our national security by enemy
action.

7. That such a service should have an independent budget granted directly
by the Congress.

8. That it should be authorized to have its own system of codes and
should be furnished facilities by Departments of Government proper and
necessary for the performance of its duties.

9. That such a service should include in its staff specialists (within
Governmental Departments, civil and military, and in private life)
professionally trained in analysis of information and possessing a high
degree of linguistic, regional or functional competence, to analyze,
coordinate and evaluate incoming information, to make special
intelligence reports, and to provide guidance for the collecting
branches of the agency.

10. That in time of war or unlimited national emergency, all programs of
such agency in areas of actual and projected military operations shall
be coordinated with military plans, and shall be subject to the approval
of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, or if there be a consolidation of the
armed services, under the supreme commander. Parts of such programs
which are to be executed in the theater of military operations shall be
subject to control of the military commander.

* Source: Truman Library, Miscellaneous
Material Filed by the Administrative Asst. in the President's
Office, Office of Strategic Services. Secret.

1 Not found. There is an August 25
letter on the same subject. (Central Intelligence Agency Historical
Files, HS/HC-801, Item 27) See the Supplement.

2 See also the letter from
Donovan to Smith, August
29, in the Supplement. (National Archives and Records
Administration, RG 51, Records of the Office of Management and
Budget, Series 39.19, OSS
Organization and Function)

3 Apparent reference to Donovan's memorandum to Roosevelt, November 18, 1944 (“The
Donovan Plan”), printed
in Troy, Donovan and the CIA, pp. 445-447.

4. Memorandum From the Assistant Director for Administrative Management of the Bureau of the Budget (Stone) to the Director of the Bureau of the Budget (Smith)4. Memorandum From the Assistant Director for Administrative
Management of the Bureau of the Budget (Stone) to the Director of the Bureau of the Budget
(Smith)Source

Washington, August 27,
1945.

SUBJECT

Termination of the Office of Strategic Services and the Transfer
of its Activities to the State and War Departments

This memorandum is for your use in discussing with Judge Rosenman and Mr. Snyder the question of the disposition
of OSS and its activities.

The Problem

OSS was established by Military Order of
June 13, 1942,1 and was placed under the “jurisdiction” of the
Joint Chiefs of Staff. Under the terms of this Order, OSS was directed to:

a. Collect and analyze such strategic information as may be required by
the United States Joint Chiefs of Staff.

b. Plan and operate such special services as may be directed by the
United States Joint Chiefs of Staff.

With the close of the war, the question arises as to the disposition of
OSS as an agency and the
continuation or termination of its activities.

Discussion

During the war OSS has engaged in two
broad kinds of activities: (1) the production of intelligence,
represented chiefly by the Research and Analysis Branch; and (2)
activities of an operational nature known within OSS as Strategic Service Operation.

If our previous recommendation to the State Department for the
establishment of an Office of Research and Intelligence is accepted,
that Department will require a considerable group of trained analysts in
the field of economic, political, and geographic intelligence. By
general agreement, the Research and Analysis Branch of OSS has performed very creditably in these
intelligence fields during the war and its personnel is available for
transfer to the State Department. There is the advantage also of
obtaining for State a going concern which can continue its work with a minimum of interruption and
confusion. In fact, R& has done a considerable amount of work for
State during the war and many informal relationships now exist.

It is generally admitted that State lacks proper presentation facilities.
This condition will be further aggravated if R& should be
transferred to State to become a part of its Office of Research and
Intelligence. It seems to us that Presentation should also be
transferred to State.

The remaining activities are not easily described but with a few
exceptions are of a nature that will not be needed in peacetime. The
main problems are the presentation of the records and experience gained,
the completion of some of the OSS
assignments overseas, and the orderly liquidation of its overseas
activities. Problems also will arise with respect to the return and
reassignment or separation of the civilian and military personnel
involved. The War Department seems the proper agency to take care of
this job. (This does not resolve the recent intelligence problem which
requires further review.)2

Action Recommended

1. That you present a proposal to the Committee3 to transfer the Research and Analysis
and Presentation Branches to the State Department and the remaining OSS
activities to the War Department for salvage and liquidation. A
tentative draft order for this purpose is attached.4 This order is not in final
form and should be used for discussion purposes only.

2. If the decision of the Committee is favorable, clearances should be
made with Acheson in State and
McCloy in War as the
receivers of the transferred activities. We are prepared to submit to
State the necessary documents in the form of a draft departmental order
and directives which will facilitate the reception of the transferred
activities.

3. Prior to the issuance of the Order, clearances should be made with the
Joint Chiefs of Staff and the Navy as interested parties.

D.C.S.5

* Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 51,
Records of the Office of Management and Budget, Series 39.19, OSS Organization and Functions. No
classification marking.

1 See Troy, Donovan and the CIA
, p. 427.

2 This parenthetical
sentence was added by hand, apparently Stone's.

3 A “Reconversion Committee” consisting of John W. Snyder, Samuel I. Rosenman, and Harold Smith undertook the disposal
of war agency functions. Bureau of the Budget officials, with
Smith's concurrence, had agreed that the research and analysis
function of OSS should be
transferred to the Department of State. See Document 3.

4 See the Supplement.

5 Printed from a copy that bears
these typed initials.

5. Memorandum From the Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation (Hoover) to Attorney General Clark5. Memorandum From the Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation
(Hoover) to Attorney General
ClarkSource

Washington, August 29,
1945.

Apropos of our conversation yesterday,1 I am attaching
hereto a suggested draft of a letter to the Secretary of State relating
to the matter of continuing the Special Intelligence Service operated by
the Federal Bureau of Investigation in the Western Hemisphere.2 In addition, however, there
have been certain developments in this situation in the last twenty-four
hours, about which I wanted to advise you.

I have ascertained that General William
Donovan has recently seen President Truman and is writing him a letter3
with reference to a proposed program for the operation of a World-wide
Intelligence Service. It is reasonable to assume, I believe, that the
plan which General Donovan will
advance to the President will be similar to the one which he has
heretofore advocated and about which I have advised you in detail.

From outside sources I have learned that Colonel Frank McCarthy, new Assistant Secretary of
State, has discussed the FBI's operation
of the Western Hemisphere Intelligence Service with Secretary of State
Byrnes. From the statements
made by Mr. Byrnes to Colonel
McCarthy, it appears obvious that the Secretary of State is not
adequately or fully informed as to the nature, scope or effectiveness of
the Bureau's operations in this field.

Collaterally, I have received information that the State Department is
engaged in the establishment of an intelligence organization to be
operated by and entirely within the State Department's control but on a
world-wide basis. Apparently the planning of this program has reached an
advanced stage.

I think, consequently, in view of these additional developments, that
time is of the very essence in reaching a decision as to the future of
the SIS program. As I have told you
previously, I am not seeking for the Federal Bureau of Investigation the
responsibility for world-wide intelligence system. I am firmly
convinced, however, in light of our experiences during and even before
the current world war, that the future welfare of the United States
necessitates and demands the operation of an efficient, world-wide
intelligence service. It is a fact, as you well know, that the SISprogram operated by the Bureau in
the Western Hemisphere has been completely successful. The program has
produced results which were beyond our hope and expectations when we
went into this field and these results were brought about without the
slightest friction in the countries where we operated. Not a single
incident has arisen in which the Government of the United States was
subject to any unfavorable or unfortunate publicity. I think this is a
rather remarkable achievement when you consider the fact that hundreds
of agents operated both undercover and as open representatives of the
Government of the United States throughout the Western Hemisphere,
conducting thousands of investigations resulting in the acquisition,
assimilation and distribution of great quantities of intelligence
information. It seems to me, therefore, that taking for granted the
recognition of the need for a world-wide intelligence service, it is
most logical that the system which has worked so successfully in the
Western Hemisphere should be extended to a world-wide coverage. As I
have advised you in previous memoranda, such a step can be accomplished
without the necessity for any legislative enactment creating operating
agencies or empowering them to act. The Federal Bureau of Investigation
and the Military and Naval
Intelligence have ample Authority under the present operating statutes
to extend the Western Hemisphere coverage to a world-wide organization.
This, of course, negatives the necessity for seeking through legislative
channels earmarked or otherwise readily identifiable funds for the
carrying on of these operations. If, on the other hand, the General
Donovan plan or even the plan presently under consideration by the State
Department is accepted, it will be necessary to seek Congressional
authority for the program and to obtain funds which will be earmarked
for and otherwise identified as being for the operation of an
international espionage organization. The resulting publicity from such
a step will, of course, materially curtail the effectiveness of the
proposed program. Such publicity will serve to notify other nations of
the program proposed to be carried out by the United States, but other
nations will not similarly publicize their own intelligence operations,
to the point where the United States will be in a position of
advertising its intelligence organization while other nations will
operate on a most secretive basis. As a matter of fact, it is well known
that the British and Russian Governments, while ostensibly discontinuing
their intelligence services or even denying the existence of such
organizations in individual countries, are actually intensifying their
coverage.

I feel very strongly that there is a need for the establishment and
operation of a world-wide intelligence service. While I do not seek this
responsibility for the Federal Bureau of Investigation, I do believe
that upon the basis of our experience of the last five years we are well
qualified to operate such a service in conjunction with parallel
operations of the Military and Naval Intelligence upon the same general
basis as these operations have been carried on in the Western
Hemisphere. I think that time is of the essence in reaching a decision
upon this matter and, consequently, I urge that you personally take the
matter up with Secretary of State Byrnes as soon as possible.

Respectfully,

John Edgar Hoover4

* Source: National Archives and Records
Administration, RG 263, Records of the Central Intelligence Agency,
Troy Papers, FBI Documents. Personal
and Strictly Confidential. Drafted by Tamm.

1 No other
record of this conversation has been found.

2 Not found.

3 See Document 3.

4 Printed from a
copy that bears this typed signature.

6. Letter From the Director of the Office of Strategic Services (Donovan) to the President's Special Counsel (Rosenman)6. Letter From the Director of the Office of Strategic Services
(Donovan) to the
President's Special Counsel (Rosenman)Source

Washington, September 4,
1945.

DEAR SAM: I am enclosing a copy of my letter to the Bureau of the Budget
concerning the liquidation of the Office of Strategic Services.1

Since the above meeting with the Budget Bureau, I have submitted a
liquidation budget for presentation to the Congress.

I understand that there has been talk of attempting to allocate different
segments of the organization to different departments. This would be an
absurd and unsatisfactory thing to do. The organization was set up as an
entity, every function supporting and supplementing the other.

It's time for us to grow up, Sam, and realize that the new
responsibil-ities we have assumed require an adequate intelligence
system.

Increasingly the President will see the need and I hope a new agency will
be set up to take over a very useful legacy.

Sincerely,

William J. Donovan2

* Source: Central
Intelligence Agency Historical Files, HS/HC 801, Item 29. No
classification marking.

1 See Attachment 1 to Document
3.

2 Printed from a copy that bears this typed
signature.

7. Memorandum From the Director's Assistant (Tamm) to the Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation (Hoover)7. Memorandum From the Director's Assistant (Tamm) to the Director of
the Federal Bureau of Investigation (Hoover)Source

Washington, September 6,
1945.

Pursuant to an appointment made through Bob Lynch, Mr. Lynch and I held a
one-hour conference with Colonel Frank
McCarthy, Assistant Secretary of State, on Wednesday
morning, September 5th.

Colonel McCarthy was informed that you had instructed me to call upon him
for the purpose of determining what the State Department position is
with reference to the continuation of the SIS Service since you will shortly have to appear before
the Appropriation Committee, and the Bureau of the Budget and the
Appropriation Committee have indicated a desire to be informed as to the
future course of operation which you contemplate for SIS. I pointed out
to Colonel McCarthy that SIS was a service agency for the State
Department and that your program or its future would depend entirely and
completely upon what the Department of State desired done with this
Unit. I traced the background of the organization of the SIS, pointing out that it was set up upon
Presidential instruction issued by Mr. Roosevelt to Mr. Berle, outlined the functions of the
Bureau, the establishment of the Legal Attaches, training and operation
of undercover personnel, the Bureau's radio stations, the daily
conference with the Military and Naval Attaches and a representative of
the Ambassador, the distribution of the information in Washington to the
State Department and all other aspects of the SIS operation in as brief
and specific form as was possible.

It was rather difficult to make a comprehensive statement to Colonel
McCarthy because of his constant interruptions with questions as to what
the Bureau thought of a “one-man” intelligence set-up reporting directly
to the President, and similar questions which indicated that Colonel
McCarthy was thoroughly familiar with the General Donovan plan. I outlined in detail to
McCarthy the objections to
the so-called “one-man” anonymous director of intelligence, pointing out
that such an organization would be labeled as a Gestapo, that the
President could not directly supervise such an organization, that such
an organization would, despite the descriptive term “one-man” require a
large administrative setup some place in Washington, which would become
readily known, subject it to criticism, publicity, etc. McCarthy was argumentative about this
point indicating that while the identity of the group could be known,
just as the identity of OSS was known,
no information need come out about what it was doing. I pointed out that
under the restrictions of censorship and wartime necessity this might be true in wartime,
but that it would never be true in peacetime and that such a group would
be the target for Congressional criticism, hostile press
representatives, etc. I pointed out that such an organization would be
essentially a political one and that the effectiveness of the
organization would be materially decreased by the probable turnover in
the personnel following a change in administration. McCarthy stated that the OSS had done a most effective job in the
occupied countries and that he had personal knowledge of this. I stated
that I had no doubt but that OSS contained some capable, conscientious
and sincere individuals but that it was one thing to operate on a touch
and go basis during wartime feverish activity and quite another to
operate on a long-term basis a world-wide intelligence service. I
pointed out that such a service could be successful only in professional
hands and that the success of the SIS operation was attested to by its
accomplishments in the Latin American fields in the past five years. I
told Colonel McCarthy that probably the best source of accurate
information concerning the SIS operations would be the Ambassadors, such
as Spurille Braden, Norweb and others, even including Messersmith, who
had first-hand knowledge of the SIS
operation.

I made it clear to Colonel McCarthy that you were not seeking the SIS operations for the Bureau but that you
felt a world-wide intelligence service was an absolute necessity, that
such a service should be in professional hands and that it should not
operate on any basis of a divided jurisdiction upon a hemispheric basis.
McCarthy stated that he
thought the OSS organization could quite
readily be amalgamated into a White House establishment in which the
President would receive reports direct from its director. I pointed out
that this was the so-called British system which had proved so basically
unsuccessful that while the British Secret Service were basking in the
self-generated light of their own brilliance, the German Intelligence
Service was dispatching agents and saboteurs to the Western Hemisphere
on a wholesale basis and that these agents were arriving without the
knowledge or even suspicion of the much-touted British Intelligence
Service. McCarthy indicated that his reports as to the efficiency of the
British Intelligence Service were at considerable variance with the
analysis which I made of the British Intelligence Serv-ice. I told him
that probably the source of his information about British Intelligence
had something to sell and that most certainly the Bureau was not trying
to sell anything.

In the interest of brevity I am not setting forth all of the details of
my conversation with McCarthy,
although I covered the field of advantages of SIS operations, its success, etc. in detail and pointed out
the objections not alone to the so-called “one-man” intelligence service
but also the first General Donovan plan and the Army plan. The advantages of an
extension of the SIS operations to a
world-wide basis with the collaboration of Military and Naval Intelligence were pointed out,
including the lack of necessity of securing enabling legislation, the
fact that no appropriation would have to be specifically identified or
ear-marked and the other advantages which we have heretofore discussed.
I think, frankly, that the logic of our position ultimately crashed
through any prejudices or previously conceived ideas which McCarthy had because after almost an
hour of discussion, he stated that the Bureau's presentation of the
advantages and disadvantages of the various proposals opened up to him a
new concept of the problem and new avenues of approach which had not
theretofore occurred to him.

Colonel McCarthy stated that he had reviewed recently a memorandum on the
SIS operations1 which Mr. Clark had given to Mr. Byrnes and that he had referred this memorandum to the
State Department specialist in intelligence matters, Mr. Fred Lyon, for
review and recommendation as to the position which the State Department
should take in this situation. McCarthy stated that he would be largely influenced by
the position which Fred Lyon would take upon the various proposals and
that he probably would, upon the basis of Lyon's experience in the State Department, see eye to
eye with him. He stated that he was most anxious, therefore, to have me
go over the entire picture with Fred Lyon in order that Fred Lyon might
have the advantage of the Bureau's viewpoint before he submitted his,
Lyon's, statement as to the
position which the State Department should take. McCarthy indicated that he would
probably support Lyon in his
major premises in attempting to reach a decision from Byrnes as to the program to be
followed. I told Colonel McCarthy that the Bureau's experience and
dealings with Lyon had been
always on a satisfactory basis and that I would in accord with his
suggestion be glad to talk to Fred Lyon. McCarthy stated that upon the basis of the statements
and explanations which I made to him it was possible that the views of
the State Department and the FBI might
not be so divergent but that they might be readily reconciled and a
completely satisfactory program worked out.

You will recall that Lyon was out of his office when I attempted to see
him, but he called at my office at five o'clock last evening. I outlined
exactly what had transpired, as set forth above, to Fred Lyon, pointing
out to him that I was discussing the matter with him in accord with
Colonel McCarthy's request. At one point in my discussion with Lyon I told him that I had advised
Colonel McCarthy of the establishment and operation of the Bureau's
radio stations “with or without the knowledge and consent of the various
Latin American Governments” since in an intelligence organization there was a need for a
channel of fast secret communication. I told Lyon that I pointed out that on two occasions, namely in
Ecuador and Paraguay, during revolutions the Bureau's radio system had
been the only channel of communication between the Embassy and the State
Department in Washington. Lyon
expressed considerable surprise that I had told McCarthy of this and stated that in a
discussion on Wednesday afternoon (subsequent to my discussion with
McCarthy) he, Lyon, had told McCarthy of this radio network of the
Bureau's and McCarthy expressed
considerable surprise, indicating that he did not know the Bureau
operated such a radio system.

Fred Lyon stated further that he was very much surprised and a little
confused as to McCarthy
suggesting to me that I discuss this situation with Lyon prior to Lyon submitting his recommendations to
McCarthy because Lyon had prepared a memorandum
containing his views, which as you know were parallel to the Bureau's
views, and submitted it to McCarthy on Tuesday evening, September 4th,2 that is, the afternoon before I
talked to McCarthy. Lyon stated that he understood that
McCarthy had on Tuesday
evening relayed this memorandum on to Secretary of State Byrnes prior to Byrnes' departure for London. Lyon of course did not know whether
McCarthy had submitted to
Byrnes anything in addition
to Lyon's memorandum or whether
he had expressed his own views as being in accord with or contrary to
his views.

Fred Lyon further advised that on Wednesday afternoon McCarthy had sent for him, had referred
to the fact that I had talked to McCarthy and stated that since Lyon was “pro-FBI”, McCarthy
wondered whether Lyon would be
willing to testify in favor of the Bureau's appropriation. Lyon stated that he did not think it
was necessary for anyone other than Bureau representatives to testify
for the Bureau's appropriation, pointing out that all that was normally
necessary was for the State Department to indicate to the Bureau of the
Budget that the State Department approved in general terms the nature
and extent of the Bureau's operations outside the United States.
McCarthy indicated to
Lyon, however, that it might
be necessary for Lyon to testify
with reference to the Bureau's appropriation. Fred Lyon indicated that
he would keep us advised of any additional developments in this
matter.

* Source: National
Archives and Records Administration, RG 263, Records of the Central
Intelligence Agency, Troy Papers, FBI Documents. No classification marking.

1 Reference may be to a copy of a paper entitled
“Accomplishments of the Special Intelligence Service,” September 3,
attached to a memorandum from Tamm to Hoover of the same date. (Ibid.) See the
Supplement.

2 Not found.

8. Memorandum From the Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation (Hoover) to Attorney General Clark8. Memorandum From the Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation
(Hoover) to Attorney General
ClarkSource

Washington, September 6,
1945.

I have received information today from two independent outside sources
relating to General William
Donovan's plans for the perpetration [perpetuation] of
his dynasty within the Office of Strategic Services by the continuation
of his agency under another name in the world-wide intelligence field,
which I thought would be of interest to you. These sources advise that
General Donovan has already
selected his candidate to head up the new organization and that his
selection is Brigadier General John
Magruder. Another and independent source has quoted
Donovan as stating that he
has submitted John Magruder's
name to Bob Hannegan to head up the new world-wide intelligence
organization and that Hannegan has approved Magruder for this post.

John Magruder is an Army
officer who during the course of his Army service was at one time chief
of the intelligence branch of the War Department General Staff, was
Assistant Military Attaché in China and was Chief of a Military mission
to China in 1942. In addition, Magruder served in the Philippine Islands
and was Military Attaché in Bern, Switzerland. Magruder has served for
some time under General Donovan
as Deputy Director of the Office of Strategic Services.

John Magruder married Helen
Schurman, who is the daughter of Jacob Gould Schurman, who has held
various diplomatic posts, including the post of Ambassador to China,
Ambassador to Germany and various other positions intimately associated
with the State Department. In addition, my sources state that Mrs.
John Magruder is reported
to be the niece of Jacob L. Crane, deceased, who held various posts
within the State Department. General Donovan's selection of John Magruder, I have been advised, was prompted in some
degree by the good will and support which are attached to Magruder by a
certain clique in the State Department because of their pleasant
relationships with Mrs. Magruder's father and her uncle. This clique
consequently is reported to be strongly supporting John Magruder for the
new post as head of the World-wide Intelligence Service.

General Donovan's selection of
John Magruder and the
reported approval of his selection by Bob Hannegan is another of
Donovan's deadly
died-in-the-wool secrets which appear, however, to be matters of general
knowledge. Two independent sources have advised me today that Brigadier General John Magruder has confided in
certain persons that he has been selected for the post of head of the
intelligence service and he has allegedly even gone to the extent of
advising a large business enterprise with foreign holdings and
international interests that he would “look out for their interests” in
the foreign field when he takes over his new post of duty.

Although, as I have indicated, this information is allegedly very, very
confidential, I have every reason to assume from the source from which I
received it that ultimately this information will appear in the
press.

Respectfully,

John Edgar Hoover1

* Source: National Archives and Records
Administration, RG 263, Records of the Central Intelligence Agency,
Troy Papers, FBI Documents. Personal
and Strictly Confidential. Drafted by Tamm.

1 Printed from a
copy that bears this typed signature.

9. Memorandum From the Director of the Office of Strategic Services (Donovan) to President Truman9. Memorandum From the Director of the Office of Strategic Services
(Donovan) to
President TrumanSource

Washington, September 13,
1945.

1. I understand that it has been, or will be, suggested to you that
certain of the primary functions of this organization, more
particularly, secret intelligence, counter-espionage, and the evaluation
and synthesis of intelligence—that these functions be severed and
transferred to separate agencies. I hope that in the national interest,
and in your own interest as the Chief Executive, that you will not
permit this to be done.

2. Whatever agency has the duty of intelligence should have it as a
complete whole. To do otherwise would be to add chaos to existing
confusion in the intelligence field. The various functions that have
been integrated are the essential functions in intelligence. One is
dependent upon the other.1

Donovan

* Source: Truman Library, Miscellaneous
Material Filed by the Administrative Asst. in the President's
Office, Office of Strategic Services. No classification marking.
Donovan saw the President
on September 13, but only for a brief ceremonial occasion. (Ibid.,
President's Appointment Book, File of Matthew Connelly) Also
reproduced in CIA Cold War Records: The CIA under
Harry Truman, p. 3.

1 According to
Harold Smith's diary, he
told Truman on September 13
that Donovan “was storming
about our proposal to divide his intelligence service.” Truman told Smith that he had in
mind a “broad intelligence service attached to the President's
Office,” and that the Bureau of the Budget should recommend
“dissolution of Donovan's
outfit even if Donovan did not like it.” Smith agreed with Truman's view but stated that he
had wanted to check with the President before the Bureau of the
Budget went ahead with its work. (Roosevelt Library, Papers of
Harold Smith, Box No. 4, Conferences with President Truman, September 13, 1945) See the
Supplement.

10. Memorandum From the Director's Assistant (Tamm) to the Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation (Hoover)10. Memorandum From the Director's Assistant (Tamm) to the Director of
the Federal Bureau of Investigation (Hoover)Source

Washington, September 17,
1945.

Pursuant to your instructions I called upon Mr. Tom Clark on Thursday evening,
September 13th and advised him that you had received information from a
confidential but thoroughly reliable source indicating that the
President allegedly had expressed the opinion that the FBI should act only as a domestic agency.
Mr. Clark was informed that
according to your source of information, Colonel Frank McCarthy at the State Department had
indicated to Dean Acheson that he,
McCarthy, had received
information from the Bureau of the Budget with reference to the SIS program that the President has
“definitely expressed in positive terms” his views that the FBI should be only a domestic agency. Mr.
Clark was informed that
McCarthy received his
information from the Bureau of the Budget and that he had asked Don
Stone to furnish more details concerning the President's statement. In
view of this fact, McCarthy had
suggested to Acheson that any action on Mr. Clark's letters1 concerning the State Department's
wishes with reference to SIS be held in
abeyance until the first of the week.

While I was talking to Mr. Clark,
Dean Acheson called him from
the State Department and Clark
asked Acheson when he was going to
receive an answer to his letters about SIS and Acheson
stated “in a few days, that Colonel McCarthy was looking into the
matter”.

Mr. Clark stated that he would
personally speak to the President about the SIS situation on Monday.

* Source: National
Archives and Records Administration, RG 263, Records of the Central
Intelligence Agency, Troy Papers, Box 8, Folder 15. No
classification marking.

1 Not found.

11. Memorandum From Arnold Miles of the Bureau of the Budget Staff to the Assistant Director for Administrative Management of the Bureau of the Budget (Stone)11. Memorandum From Arnold Miles of
the Bureau of the Budget Staff to the Assistant Director for
Administrative Management of the Bureau of the Budget (Stone)Source

Washington, September 19,
1945.

Problem

The need to decide what funds should be allotted to the FBI for the continuation of their secret
activities abroad, requires a consideration of the following:

1. Should the Secret Intelligence Service organized by the FBI in the Western Hemisphere be
continued?

2. Should it be extended into Europe?

3. Does the FBI have any foreign role,
or, in a broader sense, what are our needs for the special category of
security or counter intelligence?

Facts Bearing on the Problem

The Secret Intelligence Service in the Western Hemisphere was officially
set up by the FBI as a result of action
by the President immediately following Pearl Harbor, which confirmed
steps already taken (the FBI had begun
to conduct secret activities in South and Central America prior to this). This action had been
recommended to the President by the Interdepartmental Intelligence
Committee composed of G-2, ONI and
FBI. Initial approval by the
Interdepartmental Intelligence Committee followed discussions of the
need to expand coverage in the security intelligence (counter
intelligence) field. Almost from the beginning, however, the minutes of
the Interdepartmental Intelligence Committee reflected discontent on the
part of the G-2 and ONI representatives
toward the expansion of the SIS into
reporting of intelligence on a broad scale.

The SIS, however, has been highly useful
especially in connection with the desire to ferret out Nazi, and to some
extent Japanese, infiltration into the Western Hemisphere. Annually, at
budget time, the program has been strongly endorsed by those officials
in the State Department directly concerned with the use of FBI material (visa and passport control,
safehaven, alien exclusion and internment, etc.).

Other than the initial decision by the President immediately following
Pearl Harbor, however, the broad policy question involved in the
maintenance of an operation of this character in neutral and friendly
territories has never been thoroughly discussed. It should be pointed
out though, that there is no instance known to us, in which the SIS has caused any official embarrassment
with the countries involved.

Discussion

It is important that any decision which will be made in regard to the
FBI be consistent with a program for
the Government as a whole on which the Bureau has been working.

The Bureau has advocated the creation of two separate systems of
operation in the field of intelligence, one dealing with foreign
intelligence in a broad means including economic, political and other
basic forms of intelligence; the other dealing with security
intelligence and security programs to the countering of unfriendly, or
hostile activities of individuals, groups or movements.

These plans for the Government as a whole envision two top authoritative
groups under the leadership of the State Department to coordinate
operations in these two respective fields. One top group concerned with
the coordination of operations in the whole field of basic intelligence
would consist of the Secretaries of War, Navy, State, and Commerce. The
other, concerned with the coordination of internal security and security
intelligence operations would consist of the Secretaries of War, Navy,
State, Treasury and Justice.

A foreign role for the FBI. Such security
intelligence cannot be secured from domestic operations alone.

The postwar period will see a number of security operations which will be
continued, and which should be serviced by the best and most efficient
intelligence available:

1. The desire to include security checks in the process of issuing visas
and passports will continue. This need will be serviced in one way or
another. Similarly other operations such as the investigation of
personnel employed in our important Foreign Service, and the furnishing
of background information on individuals involved in business and
international finance or other matters in which the State Department and
Commerce Department will be involved, will require ready reference to
this type of information. In spite of the obvious advantage of
maintaining all available information of this type to service such needs
in one place, this has been impossible to achieve under the present
divided and competitive pattern.

2. In addition to the continuance of a considerable security intelligence
operation, there is the need to continue security planning. Just as
Byron Price pointed out, in connection with Censorship planning, that a
small group would be needed to continue a nucleus operation, it will be
necessary to maintain a skeleton operation in this whole field.

3. A further need for the continuance of services similar to those
rendered by the FBI is that of assisting
such agencies as the State Department, in insuring the maximum amount of
security with respect to communications, records, personnel, etc. This
last need is quite acute. Our Foreign Service has been notoriously
loose. This has given top officers in the State Department considerable
concern. Some provision to take care of this problem will undoubtedly be
made in the State Department unless it can secure the service
elsewhere.

4. Further a need exists for inclusion in the embassies abroad of such
technicians to represent those Governmental operations which center in
the FBI and to be concerned with normal
police and Surete liaison on such questions as extradition and
international crime in general.

The fulfillment of these operational requirements does not necessarily
involve a decision as to whether secret or clandestine operations will
be permitted. The activities listed above can be, if necessary,
conducted completely in the open, although with greatly diminished
effectiveness. In any event the job will only be properly done if
utilization is made of the skills, records and domestic organization
available in the FBI.

There is thus a need for security attaches abroad. The assignment of a
security attache within a mission should conform to the pattern now in
effect for the assignment of technical personnel from other Government
agencies. Security attaches should be completely coordinated within the
mission abroad. Their channel of communication should be through State
Department facilities.

Secret activities. It is important to distinguish the two types of
questions involved in the problem; one involving the continuance of
secret and clandestine operations, the other involving the role of the
FBI in general in the foreign field.
To lump these questions into one would be to make the same mistake that has been fostered by General
Donovan's insistence on
lumping the question of the need for and role of a central agency with
that of the continuance of secret intelligence.

The question of whether the FBI will
continue a secret intelligence service, particularly one which will
extend into Europe, should be viewed in the same light as we are viewing
the question of a secret intelligence service for the Government as a
whole. In other words, the high policy question as to whether this
country should engage in any clandestine intelligence activities or not
is still an open one.

Until such time as a decision is made on this point, the FBI should not be permitted to extend any
secret activities into Europe. (A few personnel now in Europe on an
individual case-by-case basis can be considered as coming outside this
memo.) Further, it is recommended that should the FBI ever be assigned a role involving the
use of secret or clandestine methods, that;

1. This role should be part of and carefully integrated with a broader
secret intelligence service operating for the Government as a whole.

2. The FBI's operations should be
confined to security intelligence.

The conclusion that continuation of secret intelligence activities in the
postwar period is still an open question does not dispose of the problem
of deciding what to do about the SIS which now actually exists in South
America.

Liquidation or curtailment of this service should be viewed as a special
problem. In a considerable number of instances, personnel involved
cannot be abruptly withdrawn. In addition, it is undoubtedly true that
for the balance of this fiscal year at least, the service will continue
to be useful to programs now underway in the State Department. In South
and Central America will be focused the principal remaining effort of
the Nazis to maintain some cohesion and to conserve whatever they can
for possible future rebirth. Our programs, particularly those under the
general heading of Safehaven are designed to prevent this. Normal, open,
Foreign Service reporting will not be sufficient to ferret out the kind
of intelligence needed by the Safehaven programs under the complex
arrangements that will have been made for cover. The detection and
preventions of this type of planned infiltration will continue to
require covert methods.

Funds should, therefore, be granted to continue the Service on a
curtailing basis for the balance of this fiscal year with the proviso,
however, that it should be subject to such directives as may
subsequently be issued by any interdepartmental machinery created by the
President in this field.

Recommendations

1. That sufficient funds be allotted FBI
to continue the SIS in the Western
Hemisphere on a curtailing basis for the balance of the present fiscal
year.

2. That a proviso be entered that the SIS
in the Western Hemisphere will be subject to continuous review and to
such directives as may subsequently be issued by the State Department or
by any interdepartmental coordinating group organized in the field of
security and security intelligence.

3. That the question of the extension of the SIS into other areas than the Western Hemisphere be
postponed until:

a. A decision is made as a matter of high policy that this country will
engage in secret or clandestine intelligence operations in the postwar
period.

b. Interdepartmental machinery for planning the precise way in which the
FBI in a role limited to security
intelligence can integrate its operations with those of a secret
intelligence operation for the Government as a whole covering the whole
intelligence field.

4. That a plan for the assignment of security attaches as required by the
State Department in areas other than South America be discussed with
State and FBI with the proviso that:

a. The appointment of security attaches under an agreed upon plan
consistent with Governmental policy in the assignment of technical
personnel abroad.

b. The security attaches will not engage in any clandestine or secret
operations except as authorized on a case-by-case basis by the Chief of
Mission pending the development of a Government-wide plan of operation
in this field.

c. That the security attaché be an integral part of the mission and his
channel of communication be to the State Department.

A.M.1

* Source:
National Archives and Records Administration, RG 51, Records of the
Office of Management and Budget, Director's File, Series 39.27,
Intelligence. No classification marking.

1 Printed from a copy that bears
these typed initials.

12. Memorandum From the Secretary of the Navy's Special Assistant (Correa) to Secretary of the Navy Forrestal12. Memorandum From the Secretary of the Navy's Special Assistant
(Correa) to
Secretary of the Navy ForrestalSource

Washington, September 19,
1945.

Annexed hereto JCS Papers 1181/1, 1181/4
and 1181/5.1 These all
relate to the problem of a single central intelligence agency. You have
asked me to give you my views on this. I am not in a position to do that
as yet as I wish to give the matter further consideration and
particularly to obtain the views of people with experience in this field
such as J. Edgar Hoover.

To the extent I have gone in my thinking, however, it seems to me that
the draft directive (red tab) which is a part of JCS 1181/5 most nearly approximates what I would regard as
the optimum organization.

In my own approach of the problem the following propositions seem to me
basic:

1. There is definite need for centralization of intelligence gathered by
all of the various departments and agencies of this Government and for
coordination of the activities of those engaged in gathering this
information.

2. Any central authority or agency set up should have the primary
function of coordination rather than operation in the intelligence
field.

3. It should be recognized that while in time of war action to be taken
upon intelligence obtained by this government is the primary
responsibility of the armed forces, in time of peace the taking of
appropriate action is the primary responsibility of the State Department
and subject to the State Department's direction on national policy of
other civilian arms of the Government, having in mind particularly those
departments and agencies which are charged with responsibility for
economic dealings with other nations.

These thoughts are by no means complete nor do they represent as
exhaustive an analysis of the problem as I should like to present.

MFC

* Source: National Archives and Records
Administration, RG 80, General Records of the Department of the
Navy, Records of Secretary of the Navy James Forrestal 1940-1947, General Correspondence
1944-1947, 80-1-19, Box 129. No classification marking.

1 These JCS papers are not attached. The first two papers,
1181/1 and 1181/4, have not been found. For text of 1181/5, see the
appendix to Document 13.

13. Memorandum From the Joint Chiefs of Staff to Secretary of War Stimson and Secretary of the Navy Forrestal13. Memorandum From the Joint Chiefs of Staff to Secretary of War
Stimson and
Secretary of the Navy ForrestalSource

Washington, September 19,
1945.

SUBJECT

Establishment of a central intelligence service upon liquidation
of OSS

The Joint Chiefs of Staff request that the Secretary of War and the
Secretary of the Navy forward the attached memorandum to the
President.

For the Joint Chiefs of Staff:

William D. Leahy

Fleet Admiral, U.S. Navy

Chief of Staff to the

Commander in Chief of the Army and Navy

Enclosure1

Memorandum From Secretary of War Stimson and Secretary of the Navy
Forrestal to President
Truman

Washington, undated.

A memorandum from the Director of Strategic Services on the establishment
of a central intelligence service was referred to the Joint Chiefs of
Staff on 22 November 19442 for their
comment and recommendation. The matter received careful study and
consideration at that time and the Joint Chiefs of Staff were prepared to recommend, when opportune, the
establishment of such an agency in three steps, namely:

1. An Executive Order setting up a National Intelligence Authority,
(composed of the Secretaries of State, War and the Navy, and a
representative of the Joint Chiefs of Staff), a Director of the Central
Intelligence Agency (appointed by the President), and an Intelligence
Advisory Board (heads of the principal military and civilian
intelligence agencies).

2. Preparation and submission to the President by the above group of a
basic organizational plan for establishing the complete intelligence
system.

3. Establishing of this intelligence system by Presidential directive and
legislative action as appropriate.

Since their first studies, the Joint Chiefs of Staff have had referred to
them a letter from the Director of Strategic Services to the Director,
Bureau of the Budget, dated 25 August 1945, renewing his proposals on
the subject. Meanwhile, the cessation of hostilities, certain undecided
questions regarding the future organization of the military
establishment, and the development of new weapons present new factors
which require consideration.

The end of hostilities has tended to emphasize the importance of
proceeding without further delay to set up a central intelligence
system.

The unsettled question as to post-war military organization does not
materially affect the matter, and certainly warrants no further delay
since a central intelligence agency can be fitted to whatever
organization or establishments are decided upon.

Recent developments in the field of new weapons have advanced the
question of an efficient intelligence service to a position of
importance, vital to the security of the nation in a degree never
attained and never contemplated in the past. It is now entirely possible
that failure to provide such a system might bring national disaster.

The Joint Chiefs of Staff recognize, as does the Director of Strategic
Services, the desirability of:

a. Further coordination of intelligence activities related to the
national security;

b. The unification of such activities of common concern as can be more
efficiently conducted by a common agency; and

c. The synthesis of departmental intelligence on the strategic and
national policy level.

They consider that these three functions may well be more effectively
carried on in a common intelligence agency, provided that suitable
conditions of responsibility to the departments primarily concerned with
national security are maintained. They believe, however, that the
specific proposals made by the Director of Strategic Services are open
to serious objection in that, without adequate compensating advantages,
they would over-centralize
the national intelligence service and place it at such a high level that
it would control the operations of departmental intelligence agencies
without responsibility, either individually or collectively, to the
heads of the departments concerned.

In view of the above, the Joint Chiefs of Staff append hereto an
alternative draft directive, which they believe retains the merits of
General Donovan's proposals,
while obviating the objection thereto.

The success of the proposed organization will depend largely on the
Director of the Central Intelligence Agency. In the opinion of the Joint
Chiefs of Staff, he should have considerable permanence in office, and
to that end should be either a specially qualified civilian or an Army
or Navy officer of appropriate background and experience who can be
assigned for the requisite period of time. It is considered absolutely
essential, particularly in the case of the first director, that he be in
a position to exercise impartial judgment in the many difficult problems
of organization and cooperation which must be solved before an effective
working organization can be established.

Appendix3

Draft Directive Regarding the Coordination of Intelligence Activities

In order to provide for the development and coordination of intelligence
activities related to the national security:

1. A National Intelligence Authority composed of the Secretaries of
State, War and the Navy, and a representative of the Joint Chiefs of
Staff is hereby established and charged with responsibility for such
over-all intelligence planning and development, and such inspection and
coordination of all Federal intelligence activities, as to assure the
most effective accomplishment of the intelligence mission related to the
national security.

2. To assist it in that task the National Intelligence Authority shall
establish a Central Intelligence Agency headed by a Director who shall
be appointed or removed by the President on the recommendation of the
National Intelligence Authority. The Director of the Central
Intelligence Agency shall be
responsible to the National Intelligence Authority and shall sit as a
non-voting member thereof.

3. The Director of the Central Intelligence Agency shall be advised by an
Intelligence Advisory Board consisting of the heads of the principal
military and civilian intelligence agencies having functions related to
the national security, as determined by the National Intelligence
Authority.

4. The first duty of the National Intelligence Authority, assisted by the
Director of the Central Intelligence Agency and the Intelligence
Advisory Board, shall be to prepare and submit to the President for his
approval a basic organizational plan for implementing this directive in
accordance with the concept set forth in the following paragraphs. This
plan should include drafts of all necessary legislation.

5. Subject to the direction and control of the National Intelligence
Authority, the Central Intelligence Agency shall:

a. Accomplish the synthesis of departmental intelligence relating to the
national security and the appropriate dissemination within the
government of the resulting strategic and national policy
intelligence.

b. Plan for the coordination of the activities of all intelligence
agencies of the government having functions related to the national
security, and recommend to the National Intelligence Authority the
establishment of such over-all policies and objectives as will assure
the most effective accomplishment of the national intelligence
mission.

c. Perform, for the benefit of departmental intelligence agencies, such
services of common concern as the National Intelligence Authority
determines can be more efficiently accomplished by a common agency,
including the direct procurement of intelligence.

d. Perform such other functions and duties related to intelligence as the
National Intelligence Authority may from time to time direct.

6. The Central Intelligence Agency shall have no police or law
enforcement functions.

7. Subject to coordination by the National Intelligence Authority, the
existing intelligence agencies of the government shall continue to
collect, evaluate, synthesize, and disseminate departmental operating
intelligence, herein defined as that intelligence required by the
several departments and independent agencies for the performance of
their proper functions. Such departmental operating intelligence as
designated by the National Intelligence Authority shall be freely
available to the Central Intelligence Agency for synthesis. As approved
by the National Intelligence Authority, the operations of the
departmental intelligence agencies shall be open to inspection by the
Central Intelligence Agency in connection with its planning function. In
the interpretation of this paragraph, the National Intelligence
Authority and the Central Intelligence Agency will be responsible for
fully protecting intelligence sources and methods which, due to their nature, have a direct and
highly important bearing on military operations.

8. Funds for the National Intelligence Authority shall be provided by the
departments participating in the National Intelligence Authority in
amount and proportions to be agreed upon by the members of the
Authority. Within the limits of the funds made available to him, the
Director of the Central Intelligence Agency may employ necessary
personnel and make provision for necessary supplies, facilities, and
serv-ices. With the approval of the National Intelligence Authority, he
may call upon departments and independent agencies to furnish such
specialists as may be required for supervisory and functional positions
in the Central Intelligence Agency, including the assignment of military
and naval personnel.

* Source: National Archives and Records
Administration, RG 80, General Records of the Department of the
Navy, SecNav/CNO Top Secret Correspondence File 1945, A8, Box 21,
Folder A8. Top Secret. Also reproduced in CIA
Cold War Records: The CIA under Harry Truman, pp. 8-10.

1 Top Secret.
Despite the Joint Chiefs' request, this memorandum was not
directly transmitted to the President. In a September 29
memorandum (Document 20), Patterson (who had succeeded
Stimson as Secretary
of War) and Forrestal
told Byrnes that in view
of Executive Order 9621 of September 20 (Document 14), they had decided to transmit the JCS recommendations to the
Secretary of State on the assumption that he would send them to
the President. There is no record, however, that the Department
of State did so.

2 A reference to
Donovan's November 18,
1944, memorandum to President Roosevelt; see Troy, Donovan and the CIA, pp. 445-447.

3 Top Secret. This draft is identical
to JCS paper 1181/5. For the
drafting history and the text, see ibid., pp. 297-301 and
459-460.

14. Executive Order 9621962114. Executive Order 96219621Source

Washington, September 20,
1945.

TERMINATION OF THE OFFICE OF STRATEGIC SERVICES

AND DISPOSITION OF ITS FUNCTIONS

By virtue of the authority vested in me by the Constitution and Statutes,
including Title I of the First War Powers Act, 1941, and as President of
the United States and Commander in Chief of the Army and the Navy, it is
hereby ordered as follows:

1. There are transferred to and consolidated in an Interim Research and
Intelligence Service, which is hereby established in the Department of
State, (a) the functions of the Research and Analysis Branch and of the
Presentation Branch of the Office of Strategic Services (provided for by
the Military Order of June 13, 1942), excluding such functions performed
within the countries of Germany and Austria, and (b) those other
functions of the Office of Strategic Services (hereinafter referred to
as the Office) which relate to the functions of the said Branches
transferred by this paragraph.
The functions of the Director of Strategic Services and of the United
States Joint Chiefs of Staff, relating to the functions transferred to
the Service by this paragraph, are transferred to the Secretary of
State. The personnel, property, and records of the said Branches, except
such thereof as is located in Germany and Austria, and so much of the
other personnel, property, and records of the Office and of the funds of
the Office as the Director of the Bureau of the Budget shall determine
to relate primarily to the functions transferred by this paragraph, are
transferred to the said Service. Military personnel now on duty in
connection with the activities transferred by this paragraph may,
subject to applicable law and to the extent mutually agreeable to the
Secretary of State and to the Secretary of War or the Secretary of the
Navy, as the case may be, continue on such duty in the Department of
State.

2. The Interim Research and Intelligence Service shall be abolished as of
the close of business December 31, 1945, and the Secretary of State
shall provide for winding up its affairs. Pending such abolition, (a)
the Secretary of State may transfer from the said Service to such
agencies of the Department of State as he shall designate any function
of the Service, (b) the Secretary may curtail the activities carried on
by the Service, (c) the head of the Service, who shall be designated by
the Secretary, shall be responsible to the Secretary or to such other
officer of the Department of State as the Secretary shall direct, and
(d) the Service shall, except as otherwise provided in this order, be
administered as an organizational entity in the Department of State.

3. All functions of the Office not transferred by paragraph 1 of this
order, together with all personnel, records, property, and funds of the
Office not so transferred, are transferred to the Department of War; and
the Office, including the Office of the Director of Strategic Services,
is terminated. The functions of the Director of Strategic Services and
of the United States Joint Chiefs of Staff, relating to the functions
transferred by this paragraph, are transferred to the Secretary of War.
Naval personnel on duty with the Office in connection with the
activities transferred by this paragraph may, subject to applicable law
and to the extent mutually agreeable to the Secretary of War and the
Secretary of the Navy, continue on such duty in the Department of War.
The Secretary of War shall, whenever he deems it compatible with the
national interest, discontinue any activity transferred by this
paragraph and wind up all affairs relating thereto.

4. Such further measures and dispositions as may be determined by the
Director of the Bureau of the Budget to be necessary to effectuate the
transfer or redistribution of functions provided for in this order shall
be carried out in such manner as the Director may direct and by such
agencies as he may designate.

5. All provisions of prior orders of the President which are in conflict
with this order are amended accordingly.

6. This order shall, except as otherwise specifically provided, be
effective as of the opening of business October 1, 1945.

Harry S. Truman1

* Source:
National Archives and Records Administration, RG 51, Records of the
Office of Management and Budget, Series 39.19, OSS Organization and Function. The
source text is labeled “immediate release.” Also printed in 3 CFR
431-432. Smith's account of the signing by the President is in the
Roosevelt Library, Papers of Harold
Smith, Box 4, Conferences with the President 1945,
September 20, 1945. See the Supplement.

1 Printed from a copy that bears this
typed signature. A signed copy is reproduced in CIA Cold War Records: The CIA under Harry Truman, pp. 11-13.

15. Letter From President Truman to Secretary of State Byrnes15. Letter From President Truman to Secretary of State ByrnesSource

Washington, September 20,
1945.

MY DEAR MR. SECRETARY: I have today signed an Executive order which
provides for the transfer to the State Department of the functions,
personnel, and other resources of the Research and Analysis Branch and
the Presentation Branch of the Office of Strategic Services. The order
also transfers the remaining activities of the Office of Strategic
Services to the War Department and abolishes that Office. These changes
become effective October 1, 1945.

The above transfer to the State Department will provide you with
resources which we have agreed you will need to aid in the development
of our foreign policy, and will assure that pertinent experience
accumulated during the war will be preserved and used in meeting the
problems of the peace. Those readjustments and reductions which are
required in order to gear the transferred activities and resources into
State Department operations should be made as soon as practicable.

I particularly desire that you take the lead in developing a
comprehensive and coordinated foreign intelligence program for all
Federal agencies concerned with that type of activity. This should be
done through the creation of an interdepartmental group, heading up
under the State Department, which would formulate plans for my approval.
This procedure will permit the planning of complete coverage of the
foreign intelligence field and
the assigning and controlling of operations in such manner that the
needs of both the individual agencies and the Government as a whole will
be met with maximum effectiveness.

Sincerely yours,

Harry S. Truman1

* Source: Public Papers of
the Presidents of the United States: Harry S. Truman, 1945, p. 331. On the same
date Truman also sent a
letter to General Donovan
informing him of the signing of Executive Order 9621 and thanking
him for his services. (Ibid., p. 330) see the Supplement.

1 Printed from a copy that bears this
typed signature.

16. Memorandum From the Assistant Director for Administrative Management, Bureau of the Budget (Stone) to the Director of the Bureau of the Budget (Smith)16. Memorandum From the Assistant Director for Administrative
Management, Bureau of the Budget (Stone) to the Director of the Bureau of the Budget
(Smith)Source

Washington, September 20,
1945.

SUBJECT

Attached Letter from Joint Chiefs of Staff Relating to the OSS Executive Order1

On receipt of this letter I asked Arnold Miles to call General McFarland
to tell him that the Order had already been signed. Arnold reminded
McFarland that in their discussion it was made clear that the Order was
not submitted for formal clearance but for information and for comments
if any. Miles also reminded him that the President might sign the order
at any time. McFarland agreed this was the case.

McFarland stated that one of the Joint Chiefs raised the question as to
whether this was the correct time for this action and instituted a study
of the matter for that purpose. McFarland said that the study would be
continued and Miles asked that we be kept informed of any matters which
required action.

It was made clear to McFarland that the signing of the Order does not
freeze the intelligence situation but clears the ground for
consideration of the problem in its entirety.

P.S. Donovan was out of town, so I talked to Louis Ream, his deputy. He
took it very calmly and will cooperate in arrangements.2

Stone

* Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 51,
Records of the Office of Management and Budget, Series 39.19, OSS
Organization and Functions. No classification marking.

1 Not found.

2 The postscript, apparently by Stone, is
handwritten.

17. Memorandum From Attorney General Clark to President Truman17. Memorandum From Attorney General Clark to President TrumanSource

Washington, undated.

A PLAN FOR U.S. SECRET WORLD-WIDE INTELLIGENCE COVERAGE

Secret world-wide intelligence coverage for the benefit of the United
States Government must have as its primary objectives the providing to
the executive branches of the Government basic data on a world-wide
scale upon which plans may be formulated and action taken, and the
insuring of internal security from the threat of infiltrating foreign
agents, ideologies, and military conquest. Intelligence coverage must be
had immediately. There is no time for training and organizing a new
corps.

There is in operation in the Western Hemisphere an intelligence plan
based on simplicity of structure and flexibility of operations which has
functioned efficiently, secretly, and economically since prior to Pearl
Harbor, and has proved its adaptability to world-wide coverage by the
effectiveness of its operation in the Western Hemisphere field.

It is proposed that the time-proved program in operation in the Western
Hemisphere be extended on a world-wide basis with certain
modifications.

The Plan

The plan provides for the joint operation in every country of the world
of a service reporting through State Department channels composed of a
member from each of the Office of Military Intelligence (military
attaché), the Office of Naval Intelligence (naval attache), and the
Federal Bureau of Investigation (legal attaché), each as a specialist in
its own field and able to operate without a duplication of effort but
closely correlating their operations to insure complete coverage.

A committee to control basic policy would be composed of the Secretaries
of State, War and Navy and the Attorney General. There would be an operational committee set up by
the President composed of an Assistant Secretary of State, the Directors
of Military Intelligence, Naval Intelligence and the Federal Bureau of
Investigation.

A unit for evaluation and analysis would be established in the State
Department to which the three operating agencies would furnish
intelligence data and appropriate review, analysis, and utilization in
international matters.

Facility of Operation

The program proposed is somewhat similar in operation as that presently
operating in the Western Hemisphere. It has proved its effectiveness,
requires no elaborate superstructure and the interested agencies have
available trained personnel and operating facilities for recruiting,
training, and dispatching additional personnel. The plan, consequently,
can be placed in operation immediately by the President merely setting
up the policy board, creating the evaluation and analysis section in the
State Department and then extending the authority heretofore given to
the Directors of Military and Naval Intelligence and the Federal Bureau
of Investigation for operation in the Western Hemisphere to operate on a
world-wide basis.

This plan has produced in the Western Hemisphere a maximum amount of
information with a minimum of operating personnel and expense, and has
not resulted in any embarrassment whatsoever to the United States
Government. Its secrecy is assured through the dissemination of the
operations among the already existing Government agencies which have
previously operated successfully for a long period in their respective
fields.

Points for Consideration

Foreign and domestic civil intelligence are inseparable and constitute
one field of operation. The German-American Bund and the Italian Fascist
organizations in the United States originated and were directed from
abroad. The Communist movement originated in Russia but operates in the
United States. To follow these organizations access must be had to their
origin and headquarters in foreign countries as well as to their
activities in the United States. Every major espionage service has
operated on a world-wide basis except that of Britain which has had a
separate organization for domestic and foreign intelligence, but Britain
is in the process at present of consolidating the two services based on
their experiences through the war period. In order to cope with the
activities of various subversive agents in the United States with speed
and dispatch, it is entirely evident that their activities must be
followed throughout the various countries by one intelligence agency of
the United States Government. Valuable time, as well as efficiency and
effectiveness, is lost if one
agency covers their activities in Europe, another in Latin America and
another in the United States.

The theory that police work and intelligence coverage cannot be combined
has been entirely dispelled. Police arrests under modern police practice
is only one of the important functions of a police agency. In fact, all
police work specifically involves the gathering of information in the
nature of intelligence. Extensive intelligence coverage must necessarily
precede the arrest of the enemy agent in the United States and it is not
possible to separate the gathering of intelligence from police functions
in view of the numerous criminal statutes such as those relating to
espionage and sabotage which must be enforced by police action although
directly concerned with intelligence. One of the major factors in the
control of subversive activities in the Western Hemisphere during the
war was the coordination of efforts of the various police organizations
throughout the United States and Latin America through the Federal
Bureau of Investigation.

A hazard in intelligence operation is the possibility of a charge being
made that the organization is a “Gestapo.” Also, a police agency which
engages in intelligence operation may be called a “political police.”
Both charges are obnoxious to American citizens. The set-up operating in
the Western Hemisphere throughout the war has engaged in both police and
intelligence activities and its record of protecting civil liberties has
been highly praised even by the American Civil Liberties Union.

Respectfully,1

* Source: National Archives and Records
Administration, RG 51, Records of the Office of Management and
Budget, Director's Files, Series 39.27, Intelligence. Secret. In a
covering memorandum to a slightly different draft of this
memorandum, September 21, Hoover told Clark that “it is essential to consummate the
Government program upon this subject at the earliest possible date,
and accordingly, I believe that any affirmative action which may be
taken to advance this program should be taken very promptly.”
(Ibid., RG 263, Records of the Central Intelligence Agency, Troy
Papers, FBI Documents) See the
Supplement. The memorandum apparently was not sent to Truman. In October 22 covering
letters, Clark sent Smith and
Appleby of the Bureau of the Budget copies of this plan. See the
Supplement for the October 22 letters. (National Archives and
Records Administration, RG 51, Records of the Office of Management
and Budget, Director's Files, Series 39.27, Intelligence)

1 Printed from an unsigned
copy.

18. Memorandum From G.E. Ramsey, Jr., of the Bureau of the Budget Staff to the Assistant Director for Estimates of the Bureau of the Budget (Martin)18. Memorandum From G.E. Ramsey, Jr.,
of the Bureau of the Budget Staff to the Assistant Director for
Estimates of the Bureau of the Budget (Martin)Source

Washington, September 24,
1945.

SUBJECT

Disposition of OSS

Schwarzwalder, Cooper and I spent the better part of Saturday
morning1 with General
Donovan and his top staff
discussing problems incident to the disposition of OSS.

Donovan and his staff had read
into the executive order2 the
abolishment of all of the positions that were organizationally
associated with the Director's office and had concluded that their
connections with the outfit would terminate October 1. Our assurance
that the order only related to the legal entity of the Office of the
Director and not to individual positions, except that of the Director,
was not too reassuring. We are taking steps to get a further
clarification of this as it would be undesirable for all of the key
people to leave on October 1.

It is entirely possible that Donovan's interpretation of the order was for the
purpose of introducing a confusing issue at the opening of our
discussion as he makes it abundantly clear that, in his opinion, the
order is a mistake and that the Director of the Bureau of the Budget has
made a decision without full knowledge of the facts involved. Although
he says that he has talked to Snyder and Rosenman about the intelligence problem it is evident
that he fixes the responsibility of the recent executive order on the
Bureau.

He states that the termination date of October 1 is evidence of our lack
of understanding of the real problems involved. With respect to the date
he has a point. Aside from the short time allowed for taking care of the
actual mechanics of the switch there is much to be said in giving
Donovan an opportunity to
remove certain individuals who have been working under special “cover”
arranged by Donovan. There appear
to be several other human relation problems incident to demobilization
of some of the units which should be handled with care. Through an
oversight the effective date of the Executive Order was not changed as
the issuance of the order was delayed and instead of allowing from three
to four weeks for the transfer as
the earlier drafts would have done the order as issued allowed only ten
days. Since we still have (at 9 a.m., September 24) to establish or firm
up the points of contact in the State and War Departments for taking
over the parts of OSS to be transferred
our problem is further aggravated. Lawton has suggested that the War
Department might continue Donovan in charge of the part of OSS transferred to it for an interim period
and this seems to be a desirable thing to do notwithstanding the fact
that Donovan will continue to
agitate for a centralized intelligence agency.

Lawton's reaction was passed to Don Stone yesterday and Don expects to
discuss this problem further with McCloy this morning and perhaps suggest that Donovan or General Magruder, Donovan's assist-ant, be continued to
give continuity.

It is equally important to announce the appointment of the person who is
to handle the parts to be transferred to the State Department. Unless
these two areas are clarified promptly it would seem highly desirable to
extend the termination date of OSS to at
least October 15.

* Source: National
Archives and Records Administration, RG 51, Records of the Office of
Management and Budget, Director's Files, Series 39.27, Intelligence.
No classification marking.

1 September 22.

2 E.O. 9621 of
September 20; Document 14.

19. Memorandum From the Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation (Hoover) to Attorney General Clark19. Memorandum From the Director of the Federal Bureau of
Investigation (Hoover) to Attorney
General ClarkSource

Washington, September 27,
1945.

I learned last night that Colonel Alfred
McCormack has been assigned to the State Department for
the purpose of forming a World-wide Intelligence organization. This
information is confirmed by a news story appearing in this morning's Washington Post, a copy of which I am attaching
hereto for your convenience.1 I have reason to believe that the information
contained in this newspaper article is accurate, and, in addition, I am
advised that Colonel McCormack will have the complete determination as
to the nature of the World-wide Intelligence organization to be set up,
the scope of its operations and all other details with reference
thereto. According to my source of information, Colonel McCormack's
views will be approved by the Bureau of the Budget. Colonel McCormack will be released from the Army
in the immediate future and will have a civilian status in the State
Department where he will first set up an interim intelligence
organization, which will be replaced around the first of the year by a
permanent organization. By way of background, it may be noted that
Colonel McCormack was formerly associated in the practice of law with
Assistant Secretary of War J.J. McCloy. I am not at all optimistic as to
the sympathy which Colonel McCormack may have toward our program.

I think that the announcement of Colonel McCormack's appointment clearly
indicates that the World-wide Intelligence Service will be operated by
and as a State Department project. I think, consequently, that it would
be well if you have not already done so, to bring to President Truman's attention in the immediate
future our views as to the most desirable way to establish the
World-wide Intelligence Service.

Respectfully,

J. Edgar Hoover

* Source: National Archives and Records
Administration, RG 263, Records of the Central Intelligence Agency,
Troy Papers, FBI Documents. Personal
and Confidential.

1 Not
printed.

20. Letter From Secretary of War Patterson and Secretary of the Navy Forrestal to Secretary of State Byrnes20. Letter From Secretary of War Patterson and Secretary of the Navy Forrestal to Secretary of
State ByrnesSource

Washington, September 29,
1945.

DEAR MR. SECRETARY: During the war the Army and Navy have given
continuing thought to the problem of how best to serve the national
interests in the field of intelligence in peacetime.

The Joint Chiefs of Staff, after extended consideration, have submitted
their conclusions on the matter to the Secretaries of War and the Navy
for transmission direct to the President. In view of the Executive Order
of 20 September which terminated the Office of Strategic Services, and
the President's letter of the same date which charged the Secretary of
State with taking the lead in developing a comprehensive and coordinated
foreign intelligence program for all Federal agencies concerned with
that type of activity, the Secretaries of War and Navy have decided to
transmit the recommendations of the Joint Chiefs of Staff herewith to
the State Department.1 It is assumed that you will transmit these
recommendations to the President for his information.

Sincerely yours,

Robert P. Patterson
James Forrestal2

* Source: Central Intelligence Agency
Historical Files, HS/HC-802, Item 9. Top Secret.

1 See Document
13.

2 Printed from a copy that bears these
typed signatures.

21. Memorandum From the Director of the Strategic Services Unit of the Department of War (Magruder) to the Assistant Chief of Staff for Military Intelligence, War Department General Staff (Bissell), the Acting Director of Naval Intelligence (Inglis), and the Secretary of State's Special Assistant for Research and Intelligence (McCormack)21. Memorandum From the Director of the Strategic Services Unit of the
Department of War (Magruder) to the Assistant Chief of Staff for Military
Intelligence, War Department General Staff (Bissell), the Acting Director of
Naval Intelligence (Inglis), and the Secretary of State's Special Assistant
for Research and Intelligence (McCormack)Source

Washington, October 1,
1945.

1. I wish to propose the immediate establishment of an informal interim
committee to effect liaison as well as to discuss and prepare
recommendations with respect to cooperation in intelligence matters
within our respective authorities arising from the implementation of the
Executive Order dated 20 September 1945.

2. The purpose of this informal committee is to effect immediate
coordinated working arrangements within the spirit of the Executive
Order and the President's letter to the Secretary of State dated 20
September 1945.

3. I should appreciate an early expression of your views in this letter
and, if you agree, the designation of a representative to meet as soon
as practicable.

John Magruder1
Brigadier General, USA

* Source: Central
Intelligence Agency Historical Files, HS/HC-135. No classification
marking.

1 Printed from a copy that bears this
typed signature.

22. Memorandum From Morton B. Chiles of the Federal Bureau of Investigation to the Director (Hoover)22. Memorandum From Morton B. Chiles
of the Federal Bureau of Investigation to the Director (Hoover)Source

Washington, October 2,
1945.

This morning I visited President Truman for approximately 35 minutes at which time we
discussed thoroughly the Bureau's participation in World Wide
Intelligence in the Western Hemisphere and the advisability of expanding
the Bureau's jurisdiction to world wide coverage.

Mr. Truman requested me, after
World Wide Intelligence was mentioned to familiarize him with the
Bureau's activities in this field and the reasons the Bureau should
continue in these operations on a world wide basis. I had the
opportunity to fully explain to him the Bureau's plan, the Bureau's
method of operation and all of the reasons why the Bureau should expand
to coverage of the world. Mr. Truman during the course of this conversation asked me
questions and appeared to be most interested in gaining a complete
picture of the intelligence operations. He agreed that there could be no
satisfactory separation in the handling of domestic intelligence and
foreign intelligence. He expressed concern regarding the possibility
that a World Wide Intelligence organization would gain the reputation of
a “Gestapo.” Concerning this, the Bureau's reputation and experience in
the handling of intelligence matters during the past several years
without such incident were explained to him.

The President stated that he had been seriously considering a World Wide
Intelligence organization the past few days and that he intended to make
some decision in this matter in the immediate future. He indicated that
he had in mind some type of intelligence agency that would report to and
be responsible directly to the White House. Mr. Truman commented that he was shocked at
the amount of “crookedness” prevalent in public office at the present
time, but did not elaborate on this.

I suggested to the President that prior to the making of a definite
decision that he consider conferring with you. He appeared pleased with
this suggestion and stated that should he desire further information
concerning the organization to handle World Wide Intelligence he would
call upon you.

The President during this interview, which was spent in part in
discussing our families and other matters of mutual interest, displayed
a most congenial attitude toward the Bureau and stated that he felt that
it was the most efficient organization in Government service.

It may be of interest to you to know that I arrived at the White House
approximately 20 minutes early for my appointment, and Mr. Truman came immediately to the
Reception Room and escorted me to his office which afforded us more time
for the interview.

* Source:
National Archives and Records Administration, RG 263, Records of the
Central Intelligence Agency, Troy Papers, FBI Documents. No classification marking.

23. Memorandum From the Secretary of State's Special Assistant for Research and Intelligence (McCormack) to the Director of the Strategic Services Unit, Department of War (Magruder)23. Memorandum From the Secretary of State's Special Assistant for
Research and Intelligence (McCormack) to the Director of the Strategic Services
Unit, Department of War (Magruder)Source

Washington, October 4,
1945.

1. Your memorandum of 1 October, addressed to the A.C. of S., G-2, the
Acting Director of Naval Intelligence and myself,1 is acknowledged. In accordance
with our oral discussions I think that liaison is necessary in order
that the activities and administration of the Interim Research and
Intelligence Service may be coordinated with the activities of the
organizations under you. Such coordination is a temporary problem
relating to the period between now and the end of the year.

2. Your letter, however, appears to contemplate a committee which will
function in lieu of the interdepartmental group provided for in the
President's letter of 20 September 1945 to the Secretary of State. That
does not seem to me to be in order. The President's letter directed the
Secretary of State “to take the lead in developing a comprehensive and
coordinated foreign intelligence program for all Federal agencies
concerned with that type of activity … through the creation of an
inter-departmental group, heading up under the State Department….” It is
my view that the Secretary of State, as a first step in the development
of a government-wide intelligence program, must develop the State
Department's intelligence program. As you know, only the preliminary
moves have been made toward such a program by the Department.

3. In the development of such a program the first problem affecting the
War Department relates to that part of the 20 September 1945 Executive
Order which provides for transfer to the State Department, in addition
to the Research and Analysis
Branch and the Presentation Branch, of those other functions of the
former OSS which, as determined by the
Director of the Bureau of the Budget, relate to the functions of the R
& A Branch and the Presentation Branch. In the ten-day period
between the issuance and the effective date of the Executive Order, the
Bureau of the Budget was unable to make a determination as to what other
functions of the OSS were related to those of the R & A and
Presentation Branches, and therefore the transfer of such other
functions, if any, was postponed and only the two named Branches were
transferred.

4. Investigation may reveal that some activities transferred to the War
Department would more appropriately be performed in the Department of
State. In addition, many problems have been created by the manner in
which the OSS organization was split, notably those growing out of the
transfer to the War Department of the entire Administrative Serv-ice
organization.

5. I agree with you that it would be helpful to appoint liaison officers
to function on such matters and on the matters referred to in paragraph
1 above; and as soon as I get a staff I will appoint a liaison
officer.

6. Offhand, however, I see no reason for a liaison committee. MIS and DNI
should be consulted on all problems which affect them, but most of the
problems between the respective heirs of the former OSS are administrative and of no interest
to the military intelligence units of the services. Unless you have
something in mind that does not appear from your letter, my preference
is to conduct liaison directly with G-2, MIS and DNI.

7. With respect to the creation of a group to function on the problem of
a government-wide intelligence program, I anticipate that the Secretary
of State will initiate action in that direction in due time.

Alfred McCormack2

* Source: Central
Intelligence Agency Historical Files, HS/HC-135. No classification
marking. Copies were sent to Stone, Inglis, and Bissell.

1 Document 21. Replies by General Bissell and
Commodore Inglis both October
4, are ibid. See the Supplement. (Central Intelligence Agency
Historical Files, HS/HC-135)

2 Printed from a copy that bears this
typed signature.

24. Memorandum From the Director's Assistant (Tamm) to the Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation (Hoover)24. Memorandum From the Director's Assistant (Tamm) to the Director of
the Federal Bureau of Investigation (Hoover)Source

Washington, October 4,
1945.

I think that your apprehension about the form the World-wide Intelligence
Service will take is well-founded, in view of the inclination in the
attached memorandum that “Departmental” activity will be continued.1 I think that if
the final die is cast in line with what we recognize as the General
Donovan plan in this program,
we should still try to get out of this mess.2

Respectfully,

Edw

* Source: National
Archives and Records Administration, RG 263, Records of the Central
Intelligence Agency, Troy Papers, FBI Documents. No classification marking.

1 Not further identified.

2 The words “we should still try to get out of this mess” have been
underlined in the source text, and directly below, apparently in
Hoover's hand, is written: “I most certainly agree. H.”

25. Memorandum From the Chief of Naval Operations and Commander in Chief, U.S. Fleet (King) to Secretary of the Navy Forrestal25. Memorandum From the Chief of Naval Operations and Commander in
Chief, U.S. Fleet (King) to Secretary
of the Navy ForrestalSource

Washington, October 9,
1945.

SUBJECT

Intelligence

REFERENCE

(a) Memo from Admiral S.M. Robinson dated 4 October 1945 on the
subject of Intelligence1

1. Admiral Robinson's memorandum is on a subject of great importance to
the United States. It is, as he says, most important that there be
provided a proper intelligence department in this Government.

2. As you know, and as Admiral Robinson probably does not know, the Joint
Chiefs of Staff have recognized the inadequacy of present organizations
in various Governmental departments and have submitted to the
Secretaries of War and Navy their recommendations for the creation of a
central coordinating authority for the operation of an intelligence
service of the United States.

3. It is understood the recommendations of the Joint Chiefs of Staff have
been forwarded by the Secretary of Navy and the Secretary of War to the
Secretary of State for further transmittal to the President for his
information. As you know, this recommendation provides for setting up a
national intelligence authority composed of the Secretaries of State,
War and Navy and a representative of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, with a
Director of a central intelligence agency appointed by the President and
an intelligence advisory board.

4. In my opinion, the present unsettled question concerning the
reorganization of intelligence activities of the Government should be
resolved at the earliest practicable date. I recommend that the Navy
Department press for an early establishment of the central intelligence
agency along the lines recommended by the Joint Chiefs of Staff.

EJ King
Fleet Admiral, U.S. Navy

* Source: National Archives and Records
Administration, RG 80, General Records of the Department of the
Navy, SecNav/CNO Top Secret Correspondence File, 1945, Box 21,
Folder A8. Top Secret.

1  King was
responding to an October 5 note from Forrestal (ibid.), asking for his comments on an
October 4 letter from Admiral Samuel M. Robinson, Chief of the
Navy's Office of Procurement and Material. (Ibid.)

26. Memorandum From Secretary of the Navy Forrestal to Secretary of War Patterson26. Memorandum From Secretary of the Navy Forrestal to Secretary of War PattersonSource

Washington, October 13,
1945.

It occurs to me that these subjects which have common interest to both
Departments might be the basis of a discussion between us some time in
the near future:…

2. Joint Intelligence. The Joint Chiefs of Staff, as you know, made a
recommendation to the President for a national intelligence
organization, the general outline of which provides for intelligence
supervision by the War, State and
Navy Departments, with a director charged with the working
responsibility functioning under these individuals as a group. I think
this is a subject which should have our close attention. The Joint
Chiefs of Staff paper seems to me soundly conceived and, if you agree, I
think we should push it vigorously at the White House….

James Forrestal1

* Source: Central Intelligence Agency
Historical Files, HS/HC-31, Item 22. No classification marking. The
source text is an extract transcribed in July 1952 for the CIA
Historian. The original document has not been found.

1 Printed from a copy that indicates
Forrestal signed the
original.

27. Memorandum From Secretary of the Navy Forrestal to Secretary of State Byrnes27. Memorandum From Secretary of the Navy Forrestal to Secretary of State ByrnesSource

Washington, October 13,
1945.

I am enclosing memoranda as follows:

1. Captain Souers, Assistant Chief of Naval Intelligence, to Mr.
Eberstadt, who dealt with the
question of central intelligence in his report to me on the proposed
unification of the Armed Services;1

2. A memorandum from me to Admiral King;2

3. A response from Admiral King.3

I wish you would regard this as an informal transmission and return these
papers after reading. Subsequently, I would like to suggest4 that you put on the agenda of one of the
meetings with Bob Patterson and myself,5 this question,
which it seems to me is one of the most important, considering the state
of the world, that we have before us as a government.

James Forrestal

Enclosure 16

Memorandum From the Assistant Chief of Naval
Intelligence (Souers) to Ferdinand
Eberstadt

Washington, September 27, 1945.

1. As your program7
envisages the creation of a strong central intelligence agency, I would
like to invite your attention to certain developments which may possibly
facilitate the program but if prompt and adequate action is not taken
may make it difficult if not impossible of accomplishment in a form
satisfactory to the Navy.

2. The President on 20 September 1945 directed the Secretary of State to
take the lead in developing a comprehensive and coordinated foreign
intelligence program for all federal agencies concerned with that type
of activity and suggested it be done through the creation of an
interdepartmental group heading up under the State Department.

3. This morning it was announced in the press that Colonel Alfred C. McCormack, Director of the
Intelligence Group of MIS, has been
selected by the State Department to head up the unit of OSS transferred to State and presumably to
develop the program for the Secretary of State in line with paragraph
2.

4. That part of OSS not awarded to State
has been transferred to the War Department. The Navy was ignored in the
disposition of the functions and assets of OSS.

5. To adequately protect the interests of the Navy during this crucial
period, it would appear that aggressive action is required and the
following recommendations are respectfully submitted:

(a) The Secretary of the Navy attempt to arrange with the Secretary of
State for the early creation of a committee or group which would include
representatives of the Secretaries of War and Navy. This would make
available at the working level the requirements of the services for the
guidance of the Secretary of State.

(b) The Naval officer selected should be thoroughly familiar with the
intelligence requirements of the Navy, should be thoroughly trained in
intelligence and understand the detailed operations of ONI and should understand the manner in
which the departmental intelligence agencies operate and overlap.

S.W. Souers

Captain, USNR

Enclosure 28

Memorandum From the Commander in Chief, U.S. Fleet
(King) to Secretary of the Navy Forrestal

Washington, October 12, 1945.

1. Replying to your memorandum of 4 October,9 it is my
thought that the Navy has four main objectives in the field of
Intelligence.

(a) Maintenance of an adequate and efficient Naval Intelligence Service
with control by the Navy of collection, processing and dissemination of
operational communication intelligence and other functions necessary to
the exercise of naval command.

(b) Elimination of all unnecessary duplication in ONI of those intelligence functions which properly belong
to the State or War Department.

(c) Unification of intelligence activities of common concern to the
State, War and Navy Departments in order to synthesize Departmental
intelligence on the strategic and national policy level.

(d) Improve facilities for the acquisition of secret foreign intelligence
for the use of the U.S. Government.

2. With the reorganization of the Office of the Chief of Naval Operations
all intelligence functions in the Navy will be consolidated under the
Chief of Naval Intelligence.

3. In November 1942, General Marshall and I directed our intelligence
services to explore ways and means of merging their activities in order
to eliminate duplication, reduce overlaps and make headway toward a
unified intelligence agency. Thereafter, a number of joint activities
were established; also each of the services undertook the performance of
certain intelligence functions in behalf of both. These activities have
been successful. It is my desire that those having peacetime application
be continued and that additional joint projects be established.

4. Complete merger of the intelligence services of the State, War and
Navy Departments is not considered feasible or desirable since each of
these departments requires operating intelligence which is of no value
or interest to the others and in the acquisition and processing of which
peculiar abilities and background knowledge are indispensable.

5. I recommend establishment of a central intelligence agency, along the
lines of the proposal recently approved by the Joint Chiefs of Staff, to
coordinate and as far as practicable unify all foreign intelligence
activities, and to synthesize all the intelligence concerning military,
political, economic and
technological developments abroad for the benefit of those responsible
for the determination and execution of governmental policy pertaining to
national security.

6. If a central intelligence agency is created along sound lines, with
the Navy adequately represented on both the policy making and working
levels so that a flow of intelligence required for naval planning will
be assured, many functions now performed by ONI can be transferred to that agency.

7. It has come to my attention that in a letter bearing the same date as
the Executive Order abolishing OSS the
President directed the Secretary of State to take the lead in developing
a comprehensive and coordinated foreign intelligence program for all
federal agencies concerned with that type of activity and suggested it
be done through the creation of an interdepartmental group heading up
under the State Department.

8. It is recommended that the Secretary of State be urged to expedite the
establishment of an interdepartmental group for this purpose which will
include representatives of the Secretaries of War and Navy who know the
intelligence requirements of the services and who are thoroughly
familiar with the organization and operating procedures of the
departmental intelligence agencies.

E.J. King
Fleet Admiral, U.S. Navy

* Source: National Archives and Records
Administration, RG 59, Records of the Department of State, Decimal
File 1945-49, 101.5/10-1345. No classification marking.

1 Printed as
enclosure 1.

2 In
this memorandum, October 4, Forrestal proposed a meeting with Hoover, McCormack, Inglis, and Bissell. (Ibid.)
Attached to the same memorandum Forrestal apparently sent a copy of enclosure 1 and
asked for King's “suggestions as to Navy objectives and recommended
methods of implementation.”

3 Printed as
enclosure 2.

4 At this point Forrestal added by hand in the margin the words “for
your consideration.”

5 A
reference to the periodic meetings of the Secretaries of State, War,
and Navy known as the “Committee of Three.”

6 No classification marking.

7 A reference to the
Eberstadt Report.

8 Secret.

9 See footnote 2 above.

28. Minutes of Meeting28. Minutes of MeetingSource

Washington, October 16,
1945.

PARTICIPANTS

State Department: James F.
Byrnes, Secretary of State

War Department: Robert P.
Patterson, Secretary of War, Col. Charles McCarthy

Navy Department: James V.
Forrestal, Secretary of the Navy, Major Correa

RECORDER

H.F. Matthews

[Here follows discussion unrelated to intelligence.]

Unified Intelligence Service

Mr. Byrnes said that he would like
to make a suggestion which had been brought to him by Mr. Donald Russell with regard to a unified
intelligence service.1 He thought there was
general agreement that there should be a single intelligence service but
the question is to whom should this service report. He suggested that
the group of the three secretaries present should be formalized as a
Council of National Defense. Mr. Forrestal remarked that this was just what the JCS had proposed in a paper on the
subject.2 Mr. Byrnes then read from a draft executive order
establishing a Council of National Defense and a unified intelligence
service. He pointed out that one problem arose with regard to the
digestion and evaluation of intelligence reports; he had seen many of
General Donovan's memoranda but they had become too voluminous and were
not coordinated and what was needed was someone to pull them together.
Mr. Forrestal said that Commander
Inglis had prepared a very intelligent presentation of this
question3 and suggested
appointment of a Director of Intelligence to concentrate all the
material. The fact that such a director would report to the council of
the three secretaries would answer the argument that in effect we were
setting up a “Gestapo.” Mr. Byrnes said that this latter argument was the principal
objection to Donovan's plan and that he agreed that reports should come
to the three secretaries. Mr. Patterson said that he agreed; and that the director
must sift out the reports as well as initiate and direct intelligence
activities. Mr. Byrnes thought it
highly important that ours be made the most efficient intelligence
service in the world. Mr. Forrestal stated that he thought the Army and Navy were
pretty close together on this question with the principal difference
that the Navy wished to keep operational intelligence in ONI. Mr. Byrnes mentioned that a further question is whether such
a unified intelligence service should be set up now or in six months and
indicated that he was not entirely satisfied with the interim
arrangement whereunder certain functions of OSS have been placed in the State Department. Mr. Forrestal said that he had sent a
memorandum to Mr. Byrnes on
Sunday with regard to the intelligence question.4 He said he thought the
general scheme outlined in the proposed executive order was sound. Mr.
Byrnes referred to his talks
in France with General Eisenhower and the high regard which was held
throughout SHAEF of General Strong,
the British Chief of Intelligence. It was felt that the British
Intelligence Service was the best in the business. Mr. Byrnes also heard a number of our Air
Corps Officers complain of a lack of adequate American intelligence and
praise the high quality of British intelligence. One explanation was
that in the past our Congress had had no confidence in our intelligence
service and consequently was not inclined to grant adequate appropriations. This created a vicious
circle where Congress complained that our intelligence service was
deficient and not worthy of funds and our intelligence service
complained that the lack of funds prevented improvement. Mr. Forrestal pointed out that there is a
further contradiction in Congress at present as they are now attempting
to compel the presentation of the exact text of foreign intercepts.
Congress is charging that while we had the intelligence we didn't use it
properly. There followed some discussion between Mr. Forrestal and Mr. Patterson as to whether harm would be
done by making available to Congress official texts of foreign
government communications or whether the fact that we had such
communications was already so well known as to obviate the need for
secrecy.

Mr. Patterson raised the question
of the relationship of the proposed intelligence service and its
director to SWNCC and whether there
would be any overlapping of jurisdiction. It was felt that this question
should be looked into.5 Mr.
Forrestal suggested that Mr.
Donald Russell get in touch
with Commander Inglis on the intelligence question.6 Mr. Byrnes
concluded by stating that the proposed plan should provide for the
coordination of foreign policy with intelligence.

[Here follows discussion unrelated to intelligence.]

* Source: National
Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Records of the
Department of State, Diplomatic Branch, Reference File, Minutes of
the Committee of Three, 1944-1947. Top Secret.

1 This appears to be the enclosure to Document 31.

2 The JCS proposal of September 19; Document 13.

3 Not found.

4 Presumably Document 27,
which was dated Saturday, October 13.

5 The State-War-Navy
Coordinating Committee (SWNCC) was
established in 1944 to serve as a forum and coordinating group on
issues of common concern to the three Departments.

6 On the following day Forrestal sent a memorandum to Inglis asking him to
“get in touch with Don Russell of the State Department and discuss
with him the Joint Chiefs of Staff proposal for a central
intelligence agency.” (Memorandum, Forrestal to Inglis, October 17; National Archives
and Records Administration, RG 80, General Records of the Department
of the Navy, Records of Secretary of the Navy James Forrestal, 1940-47, General
Correspondence 1944-47, 80-1-19, Box 129) No other record of this
contact has been found except for the reference in Document 53. At their October 30 meeting the
three Secretaries touched only briefly on intelligence. The record
notes only that “Mr. Forrestal mentioned this question and the JCS paper on the subject and it was
agreed that he should discuss the question in detail with Mr.
Donald Russell, Assistant
Secretary of State.” (National Archives and Records Administration,
RG 59, Records of the Department of State, Diplomatic Branch,
Reference File, Minutes of Meetings of the Committee of Three,
1944-1947) No record of a meeting or discussion has been
found.

29. Memorandum From the Director of the Strategic Services Unit, Department of War (Magruder) to the Assistant Secretary of War (McCloy)29. Memorandum From the Director of the Strategic Services Unit,
Department of War (Magruder) to the Assistant Secretary of War (McCloy)Source

Washington, October 20,
1945.

SUBJECT

National Foreign Intelligence Agency

Discussion

Reference memorandum, with inclosures, for the undersigned, from the
Assistant Executive, Office of the Assistant Secretary of War, dated 18
October 1945.1

1. The Secretary of the Navy has proposed that the Secretary of War and
the Secretary of the Navy join in vigorous support of a plan for the
establishment of a national foreign intelligence organization under a
Director charged with working responsibilities, who would serve and
report to the Secretaries of State, War and Navy, as a group.2

2. The need for such a foreign intelligence service has long existed and
has been heavily underscored by the national experience during the war
just ended. The implications of the pivotal position which the United
States occupies in world affairs, and the incalculable consequences of
the release of atomic energy, call for the immediate establishment of
such an organization.

3. In the judgment of the undersigned, the essential elements of such a
national foreign intelligence organization are the following:

a. A national foreign intelligence organization must be regarded, and
effectively serve, as the instrument of any and all parts of the
national government concerned with national security or foreign policy.
Since it is the Departments of State, War and Navy which are most
directly and immediately concerned in these matters, it is appropriate
that they should coordinate the foreign intelligence activities of the
federal government and exercise
joint supervision over such a national foreign intelligence
organization.

b. The national foreign intelligence organization should serve as the
central agency within the government for the comprehensive analysis and
synthesis of information concerning foreign nations. All departments and
agencies of the government which collect such information, whatever may
be the manner of collection, should be required promptly to deposit with
the national foreign intelligence organization such part of the
information collected in such form as may be required by the national
foreign intelligence organization. The information thus deposited will
be collated, analyzed and incorporated into comprehensive studies. This
is not intended to interfere with the appropriate activities of the
several agencies now engaged in the collection of such information. It
is designed to accomplish the pooling of their product. Such a pooling
is essential to bring together, for presentation to those charged with
responsibility for the formulation of national security and foreign
policy, the comprehensive picture necessary to the proper discharge of
their responsibilities.

c. The national foreign intelligence organization should also be the
national instrument for the procurement of foreign intelligence by
clandestine means. The collection of foreign information by overt means
by the Foreign Service of the State Department, and by military and
naval attaches and other agencies of the government must, of course,
continue. But there is important information, vital to the security of
the United States, which cannot be obtained except by clandestine means.
Such secret intelligence procurement would include both espionage and
counter espionage.

d. The national foreign intelligence organization should not engage in
the procurement of intelligence by secret means within the United
States. Its clandestine intelligence procurement operations would be
concerned exclusively with areas outside the United States.

e. The national foreign intelligence organization should not have any
police power.

f. The national foreign intelligence organization should have its own
independent budget.

g. The national foreign intelligence agency should be so organized as to
have great flexibility and to be able to maintain complete security of
operations.

Action Recommended

That the Secretary of War join with the Secretary of the Navy in strongly
supporting the proposal for the establishment of a foreign intelligence
agency, organized in accordance with the principles hereinabove set
forth, under a Director who would serve and report to the Secretaries
of State, War and Navy, as a
group. If there should be a merger of the armed forces, the supervisory
group might well consist of the Secretary of State and the secretary for
the armed forces.

John Magruder3
Brig. General

* Source: National Archives and Records
Administration, RG 263, Records of the Central Intelligence Agency,
Troy Papers, Box 10, Folder 73. Secret.

1 In this memorandum, Colonel R.
Ammi Cutter requested Magruder's views on a national intelligence
organization for presentation to the Secretary of War. (Ibid.) See
the Supplement. The report was to parallel one being prepared by the
Army Assistant Chief of Staff, G-2, on the same subject (Document 30). Cutter's request was prompted
by an October 17 instruction (not found) from General Greenbaum for
the preparation of studies on the subjects that Secretary of the
Navy Forrestal had proposed
for discussion with Patterson
(see Document 26). Cutter transmitted
Magruder's memorandum to Patterson under a covering memorandum dated October
23. (National Archives and Records Administration, RG 263, Records
of the Central Intelligence Agency, Troy Papers) See the
Supplement.

2 Document 26.

3 Printed from a copy that bears this
typed signature.

30. Memorandum From the Assistant Chief of Staff for Military Intelligence of the War Department General Staff (Bissell) to Secretary of War Patterson30. Memorandum From the Assistant Chief of Staff for Military
Intelligence of the War Department General Staff (Bissell) to Secretary of War PattersonSource

Washington, October 22,
1945.

SUBJECT

Discussion with Secretary of Navy Regarding Joint
Intelligence

1. Reference paragraph 2 (joint intelligence) of the memorandum of 13
October from the Secretary of Navy,1 the important factors are:

a. By letter of 20 September, the President asked the Secretary of State
to take the lead in developing a comprehensive and coordinated foreign
intelligence program. The letter shows that the President wants a
procedure which will meet the needs of individual agencies and at the
same time serve the Government as a whole.

b. At the time the President sent the letter, a study by the Joint Chiefs
of Staff on the same subject was being considered by the Secretaries of
War and the Navy. In substance, this study proposed a national
intelligence organization under supervision of the Secretaries of State,
War and the Navy. This JCS
recommendation was forwarded to the Secretary of State by the Secretaries of War and the Navy under a
letter which included the statement, “It is assumed that you will
transmit these recommendations to the President for his information.”
(See JCS 1181/7).2 Until the State Department has
acted on the President's instructions, it would be inappropriate for the
War and Navy Departments to approach the President directly with the
JCS recommendations.

c. General Marshall recently wrote to Admiral King, suggesting that all
Army and Navy intelligence activities be combined.

d. The War Department has organized an Intelligence Planning Board under
AC of S, G-2. Its members have made a continuing study of intelligence
organization, including the subject of interdepartmental intelligence
coordination. They have frequently collaborated informally with naval
officers under similar studies under the Director of Naval
Intelligence.

2. a. The outcome of current efforts to merge the armed forces is
unpredictable. Regardless of the outcome, interdepartmental intelligence
coordination must be provided in accordance with the President's
directive. A necessary first step should be preliminary joint study by
the War and Navy Departments, with a view to determining methods of
combination of military and naval intelligence activities.

b. The details of those studies should be worked out by the heads of
military and naval intelligence, under joint authority of the
Secretaries of War and the Navy. The planners who work out these details
should also prepare the details for later coordination with the State
Department pursuant to the President's letter of 20 September. Any
interim procedures developed for a combination of military and naval
intelligence activities will facilitate the ultimate establishment of
joint procedures involving the State Department.

3. It is recommended that the Secretary of War propose to the Secretary
of Navy that the heads of military and naval intelligence be authorized
to work out plans for combining military and naval intelligence
activity, preparatory to subsequent collaboration with the State
Department.

Clayton Bissell3
Major General, GSC

* Source: National Archives and Records
Administration, RG 263, Records of the Central Intelligence Agency,
Troy Papers, Box 10, Folder 73. No classification marking.

1 Document 26. This memorandum was
transmitted to Bissell under a October 22 memorandum from Colonel
L.R. Forney, Acting Chief of the Military Intelligence Division's
Policy Staff. (National Archives and Records Administration, RG 263,
Records of the Central Intelligence Agency, Troy Papers, Box 10,
Folder 73) See the Supplement.

2 Not found.

3 Printed from a copy that bears this
typed signature.

31. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for Administration (Russell) to the Secretary of State's Special Assistant for Research and Intelligence (McCormack)31. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for
Administration (Russell) to the Secretary of State's Special Assistant for
Research and Intelligence (McCormack)Source

Washington, October 22,
1945.

Colonel McCormack:

In view of General Marshall's strong testimony a day or so ago,1 would the attached order2 meet the directive of
the President to the Secretary of September 20 and at the same time
place us in a better position to secure the necessary appropriations to
continue the functions under Title II? It is merely submitted for
discussion purposes because I am not familiar enough with the matter to
have a considered judgment.3

DR

* Source: National
Archives and Records Administration, RG 263, Records of the Central
Intelligence Agency, Troy Papers, Box 10, Folder 73. No
classification marking.

1 Apparently a reference to testimony by General
George C. Marshall,
Army Chief of Staff, before the Senate Military Affairs Committee on
October 18. The subject was armed forces unification and in his
testimony General Marshall urged a unified intelligence
system.

2 The draft Executive order, October 1945, is not printed. Title II
covers Unified Intelligence Service.

3 No record of a
reply by Colonel McCormack
has been found.

32. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of War for Air (Lovett) to the Assistant Chief of Staff for Military Intelligence of the War Department General Staff (Bissell)32. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of War for Air (Lovett) to the Assistant
Chief of Staff for Military Intelligence of the War Department General
Staff (Bissell)Source

Washington, October 23,
1945.

SUBJECT

Report on Intelligence Matters

1. The Secretary of War has appointed the following committee to advise
him on certain intelligence matters, particularly those relating to the subject of the foreign
intelligence activities of the Nation and of the War Department:

Robert A. Lovett, Assistant
Secretary of War for Air—Chairman

Major General H.A. Craig, OPD

Major General E.R. Quesada, AAF

Major General W.G. Wyman, AGF

Colonel J.M. Roamer, ASF

Brigadier General John
Magruder, SSU

Brigadier General C.W. Clarke, G-2

2. The above committee has been directed to make a preliminary report to
the Secretary of War not later than 3 November 1945. It is most anxious
to have the benefit of the views and recommendations of the individuals
to whom this memorandum is addressed at the outset of its consideration
of the various problems involved.

3. Each of the individuals to whom this memorandum is addressed is
therefore requested to furnish to the undersigned not later than 27
October 1945 a report covering the following subjects, as fully as
possible in the time available:

Part I

a. The organization of the individual's particular unit as now
constituted, together with a statement of the functions discharged
thereby based on current directives and practices.

b. A description of the relations that have existed between the
individual's unit and other intelligence units in the government during
the period of the war.

c. A frank appraisal of the operations of the individual's unit during
the war period, with particular reference to the fields in which it is
believed intelligence service could have been improved.

d. A frank appraisal of the over-all operations of all government
intelligence units during the course of the war, with particular
reference to those in the War Department and the Office of Strategic
Services. This part of the report should contain the writer's opinion as
to the existence of unnecessary duplication, and also of lack of
coordination, if any, between the various government intelligence
units.

e. Such other comments as the writer regards as pertinent on the over-all
intelligence organization of the United States Government during the war
period.

Part II

a. The individual's recommendations as to the most desirable organization
and program for the foreign intelligence activities of the United States
Government for the future. There should be included here the writer's views with respect to the
desirability of establishing a central foreign intelligence unit, the
place or department in the Federal Government where this unit should be
located, and the broad functions, responsibilities and composition of
such a central unit. If a central intelligence unit is advocated the
report should contain the writer's views as to whether its functions
should include those of the collection of information, or whether it
should be limited to such matters as research, analysis and evaluation,
and dissemination.

b. A statement of the field that should be covered by the War Department
in the over-all government intelligence program. This part of the report
should indicate the relationship that should exist between the War
Department intelligence agencies and the central agency, if recommended,
and also the relation between the War Department agencies and
intelligence agencies created in other departments.

c. A brief statement as to the scope of the intelligence functions that
should be performed under the recommended plan by the Navy, the State
Department and other individual government departments.

d. A description of the recommended division within the War Department of
the intelligence functions which, under the plan proposed, are to be
assigned to the War Department.

e. Recommendations as to the immediate disposition or assignment that
should be made within the War Department, or elsewhere, of the
personnel, facilities and functions of the various units of the former
OSS organization, which have been
recently transferred to the War Department.

4. The above reports are to set forth the opinions of the individuals to
whom this memorandum is addressed, and need not represent the formal
conclusions of the units to which the individuals belong. However, each
individual is requested to consult freely with the officers in important
positions in his unit, and if views are held by others in the unit which
differ radically from those expressed in the reports, either a statement
to that effect should be appended, or memoranda setting forth the
differing views should be submitted.

5. Reports are to be submitted directly to the undersigned without formal
clearance through channels. Eight copies of each report are desired.

By direction of the Secretary of War:

Robert A. Lovett1

* Source: Central
Intelligence Agency Historical Files, Penrose Document No. 12.
Secret. Also addressed to the Assistant Chief of Staff, Operations
Division; the Assistant Chief of Air Staff-2; the Assistant Chief of
Staff, G-2, Army Ground Forces; the Director of Intelligence, Army
Service Forces; the Director, Strategic Services Unit; and the Chief
of the Special Planning Division, War Department Special
Staff.

1 Printed from a copy that bears this
typed signature.

33. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for Administration (Russell) to Secretary of State Byrnes33. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for
Administration (Russell) to Secretary of State ByrnesSource

Washington, October 24,
1945.

The Secretary:

The directive of September 20, 1945 from the President to you to take the
lead in developing a coordinated foreign intelligence program for all
federal agencies concerned therewith went to Colonel McCormack for action.

A few days ago I set to Colonel McCormack for his consideration, in connection with his
recommendations to be submitted to you in compliance with the
President's directive, a copy of the suggested order that I gave you on
this subject sometime ago.1 I have heard nothing more from Colonel McCormack on this subject.

While the ideas expressed in the memorandum of Admiral King2 would be satisfied by the order I gave you, I
believe that this subject should be discussed by you with Colonel
McCormack. May I request that
if you have such a conference, no reference be made to the fact that I
have heretofore submitted to you this proposed order.

I am returning herewith the file that you sent me.3

Donald Russell

* Source: National Archives and Records
Administration, RG 59, Records of the Department of State, Decimal
File 1945-49, 101.5/10-1345. No classification marking.

1 Document 31 and footnote 2,
thereto.

2 Enclosure 2 to Document
27.

3 The October 13 memorandum from Forrestal and its enclosures, Document 27.

34. Report by the Director, Strategic Services Unit, Department of War (Magruder) to the Assistant Secretary of War for Air (Lovett)34. Report by the Director, Strategic Services Unit, Department of War
(Magruder) to
the Assistant Secretary of War for Air (Lovett)Source

Washington, undated.

INTELLIGENCE MATTERS

[Here follows Part I, an 11-page survey and appraisal of current
intelligence operations and coordination.]

Part II

a. Recommendations as to the Foreign Intelligence
Activities of the United States Government.

1. In general outline, the most desirable organization and program for
the foreign intelligence activities of the United States Government for
the future would involve a continuation of the present department
serv-ices with the addition of a central foreign intelligence unit. To
this unit would be delegated some of those functions now carried on, by
necessity or choice, by the present services but which are not strictly
related to their functions. The present departmental services would be
expected to continue their operations without change, under the sole
limitation that they concern themselves primarily with the overt
collection of foreign intelligence peculiar to their respective
activities, together with the evaluation, analysis and dissemination of
such intelligence. A further discussion of War Department intelligence
service functions appears in paragraph (b) below.

2. Preceding paragraphs have brought out clearly the need which the
American Government has for a central foreign intelligence service as
exemplified by conditions during the recent war. The need for a central
foreign intelligence service has long existed, but it has been heavily
underscored by the national experience during the past four years.
Looking toward the future, the situation becomes even more acute in view
of the implications of the pivotal position which the United States
occupies in foreign affairs and the incalculable consequences of the
release of atomic energy. The Government of the United States cannot
afford to rely, as it has in the past, on information provided by other
governments unless that information is subjected to the keenest scrutiny
for evidence of bias or self service. Nor can it depend entirely upon
the haphazard contributions of
its own departmental intelligence services, whose major functions are to
service the departments to which they belong rather than the needs of
the Government as a whole. It is essential that the product of all
sources of foreign intelligence which are available to the Government
should be coordinated in a central agency through which it may be made
available to the different departments of the Government with the least
possible delay and in the form most likely to be of immediate value in
the formulation of policy.

3. Regarding the broad functions, responsibilities and composition of the
central intelligence unit, the essential elements may be summarized
briefly in the following six major points:

(a) Organization and control. The national foreign intelligence
organization must be regarded, and effectively serve, as the instrument
of any and all parts of the national government concerned with national
security or foreign policy. Since it is the Departments of State, War
and Navy which are most directly and immediately concerned in these
matters, it is appropriate that they should coordinate the foreign
intelligence activities of the Federal Government and exercise joint
supervision over such a national foreign intelligence organization.

The question will undoubtedly be raised as to why such an organization
cannot be ancillary to one or the other of these departments. The major
reasons for the insistence upon the independence of the central
intelligence agency are four in number:

1) Every safeguard is required to prevent the agency from becoming an
instrument of policy of a single government department. The agency is
expected to serve equally and without prejudice all the interested
branches of the Government. It might be able to do so if it were
attached to one department, but experience has shown that those
departments having no part in its control would be most likely to feel
that their interests were not properly represented.

2) The agency itself should be completely denied any policy-making
function, in order that its objectivity may be preserved and that it may
not succumb to the inevitable temptation to tailor its reports to
support a policy in which it has an interest. It should be apparent that
this danger will be more readily avoided if the central intelligence
agency does not find itself a part of a single policy forming
department.

3) Only a separate agency solely concerned with intelligence matters can
successfully be the repository of powers and functions delegated to it
by all interested departments. It should be immediately apparent that
the War Department would be exceedingly hesitant to rely upon a branch
of the State Department to obtain on its behalf clandestine intelligence
of a military nature. It would be almost inevitable, were the central
intelligence agency to be attached to the State Department, that the War
Department would feel the necessity of conducting its own operations in
the clandestine field. If, on the other hand, according to the present
proposal, the intelligence agency should be at least partially
responsible to the War Department (which would contribute to its staff
of experts), the War Department
would be more confident that its needs would be given proper attention
and competent handling.

4) The proper functions of the central intelligence agency include the
provision of foreign intelligence to all branches of the Government and
it must be in a position to serve them all. Granting the lines which
have grown up between the regularly established government departments,
the central intelligence functions, involving receipt of intelligence
from all departments as well as dissemination of it to all departments,
can be successfully fulfilled only where the agency charged with that
function is independent of any one of them.

(b) Provision for the comprehensive analysis and synthesis of information
concerning foreign nations. The present American intelligence system
resembles a costly group of factories, each manufacturing component
parts without a central assembly line for the finished product. This
function of analysis and synthesis by a central intelligence agency
represents the assembly line which has heretofore been lacking.

All departments and agencies of the Government which collect information
concerning foreign nations, whatever may be the manner of collection,
should be required to make freely available to the national foreign
intelligence organization such part of the information collected in such
form as may be required by the central agency. The information thus
centralized will be collated, analyzed and incorporated into
comprehensive studies. This is not intended to interfere with the
appropriate activities of the several agencies now engaged in the
collection of such information. It is designed to accomplish the pooling
of their product. Such a pooling is necessary in order to bring together
for presentation to those charged with responsibility for the national
security and for the formulation of foreign policy the comprehensive
picture essential to the proper discharge of their responsibilities.

Comprehensive studies of the type required can only be successfully
accomplished if all possible material is available from all possible
sources. Recent experience has shown that certain sources of information
within the Government have been unwilling, for real or imagined reasons
of security, pride of ownership, or interdepartmental jealousy, to make
available the products of their intelligence activities to other
departments to which these products were of vital interest. If the
central intelligence agency is vested with sufficient authority in its
establishment to require the cooperation on the part of individual
departments which experience has shown does not occur on a voluntary
level, it can approach an optimum capacity for turning out definite
studies of value to all departments individually or in functional
groups.

Such studies would be made in part at the request of individual
departments of the Government. Within the central intelligence agency
they would be drawn up by a staff of specialists with wide background
and experience drawn from all phases of governmental and civil life and
therefore in balance, without
departmental or political preoccupation. A large proportion of the
studies would deal with fields in which civilians are experts and
military men are laymen, and the staff should therefore contain a
concentration of the best civilian talent available in the country. Such
a staff could not be maintained by any single department of the
Government which would be forced to justify the expense involved in
terms of its own professional activities.

(c) Sole responsibility for the procurement of foreign intelligence by
clandestine means. The collection of foreign information by overt means
by the Foreign Service of the State Department and by military and naval
attaches and other agencies of the Government must, of course, continue,
but there is important information vital to the security of the United
States which cannot be obtained except by clandestine means. Such secret
intelligence procurement would include both espionage and
counter-espionage.

Reference is made to the memorandum hereto attached which discusses in
detail the basic reasoning behind the maintenance of a clandestine
intelligence organization. (See Tab B.) It describes the wide variety of
information, including political, economic, sociological, psychological,
military and counter-espionage aspects, which is obviously essential for
the security and guidance of the Government, but which is available
almost entirely through clandestine means and not through overt
channels. It also outlines the basic requirements for successful
organization of a clandestine intelligence system.

It is not generally recognized in the United States that the operation of
clandestine intelligence is a highly professional pursuit which should
be undertaken only by experts. The problem of placing and maintaining
agents in foreign countries with proper safeguards, both for the agents
themselves and for the information which they secure, is so complex that
it must be centralized in one separate operating unit acting on behalf
of the United States Government. The professional hazards are such that
no country can afford to increase them by permitting uncoordinated
clandestine operations to be indulged in by various departments whose
normal responsibilities are so great that clandestine operations
necessarily constitute a minor interest.

Special facilities in the nature of training, documenting, financing,
equipping, and maintaining communications with clandestine agents are
all required for the successful performance of the clandestine
intelligence function. Few, if any, of these are generally available in
the intelligence agencies of the Armed Forces and few of these are
capable of supporting the experienced staff essential to successful work
along these lines. Adequate clandestine intelligence coverage of the
world for the United States Government is no small undertaking and
requires a concentration of talents and experience on a scale surpassing
the probable estimates of any but professionals in the field. The
Strategic Services Unit of the
War Department possesses the nucleus of such an organization and is in a
position to provide figures concerning its detailed organization and
probable cost.

Clandestine intelligence operations involve a constant breaking of all
the rules of correct procedure according to which the regular government
departments must operate. To put it baldly, such operations are
necessarily extra-legal and sometimes illegal. No regular government
department, be it War, State or Navy, can afford to house such
operations within itself or otherwise identify itself with them.
Independence of association with them is therefore essential.

The clandestine intelligence function should be assigned to the central
intelligence agency rather than to any separate department of the
Government because its service, like that of the analytical branch, will
be for the benefit of all departments and will require in even greater
degree the cooperation of all interested branches. Security requires
that clandestine intelligence operations be handled in an agency whose
security practices are of a special character. Association of these
operations within an agency the functions of which are concentrated upon
the processing of intelligence will increase the security by removing
the operations from departments containing large numbers of personnel
whose activities are in no way related to intelligence. Furthermore, the
more or less overt analytical branch of the central agency will provide,
in a way, cover for the clandestine operations. The cover of one of the
regular departments of the Government might be more satisfactory from
the point of view of its overt dissociation from intelligence
activities, but such a connection would involve hazards considerably in
excess of the advantages to be gained. In particular, it is essential
that those departments of government charged with the handling of
relations with foreign governments, should be in position to deny with
truth that they have a controlling interest in or knowledge of
clandestine intelligence operations.

Such operations to be successful will require the assistance of all
departments of government on request. For example, any or all of them
may, at one time or another, be asked to provide cover for an agent; the
State Department will be required to provide passports, or authority to
issue passports without too close inquiry into identities or reasons for
travel; the War Department may be asked for arms, for faked plans of
operations or materiel for use in double agent operation. Such types of
assistance will be more freely given to a professional agency of
recognized standing in which the departments have a participating
interest than to one which is wholly under the control of a single
department.

(d) Concentration on foreign intelligence. The national foreign
intelligence organization should not engage in the procurement of
intelligence by secret means within the United States. Its clandestine
intelligence procurement operations would be concerned with areas outside the United
States.

The existence of the central intelligence agency would be a matter of
justifiable suspicion if it were subject to the possible criticism that
it could be used as a political tool within the country. Complete
concentration upon foreign intelligence will make it impossible for any
administration to use secret intelligence for its own internal political
ends. Whether or not any administration would choose so to use the
agency is a question of no importance inasmuch as any administration in
power would inevitably be charged by its opponents with so using it.

(e) Denial of police power. For reasons related to those discussed in
paragraph (d) the national foreign intelligence organization should
possess no police power. The alternative would involve the danger of too
great a concentration of power for action in the hands of the director
of the agency and would tend inevitably to affect the objectivity which
is one of the major advantages possessed by a central organization as
opposed to one more closely associated with a policy-forming department.
In addition, the concentration of the central intelligence agency upon
foreign intelligence obviates any practical value to the possession of
police powers which could only be used within the national boundaries.
Any action to be taken as a result of intelligence operations in foreign
countries would of necessity be taken by the departments of the
Government which are properly concerned with foreign relations.

(f) Independent budget. The national foreign intelligence organization
should have its own independent budget for reasons which have been
hinted at in paragraphs (b) and (c) above. These may be more clearly
stated as follows:

1) The cost of maintaining the central intelligence agency will be
considerably in excess of that which could be justified by a government
department charged with more specific functions. No money value can be
assigned to successful intelligence accomplishments. Budgetary standards
of efficiency and economy are not generally applicable.

2) The maintenance of a clandestine intelligence service requires certain
strict controls on the availability of information concerning its
expenditures, which are not in accord with usual government practice.
Publicizing of amounts paid for the purchase of information, or even of
salary lists of foreign operatives, would jeopardize the success and the
safety of the operations, which would immediately lose their clandestine
nature. It is absolutely essential that the identities of agents abroad,
and even in some cases those of operational staff members in the home
office, be kept from public scrutiny and that of the exceedingly capable
intelligence agents of foreign nations.

The independent budget of the national foreign intelligence organization
should therefore be considered by the Congress without detailed or open
inquiry into the specific expenditures involved. Experience has shown that such inquiries divulge
too great a quantity of information for the security of clandestine
intelligence operations.

b. Field to be covered by War Department
intelligence.

Under the over-all Government intelligence program, present functions of
the War Department intelligence services will be maintained with perfect
freedom in their own specific fields. These services will, however, be
relieved of the necessity for carrying on intelligence operations the
results of which are not clearly related to the established functions of
the War Department. Intelligence not of a strictly military character
which is required by the War Department will be immediately available to
it through the central intelligence agency in a form more
comprehensible, comprehensive, and significant than is presently
possible. The superiority of the new system arises from the availability
to the central intelligence agency of the intelligence products of all
agencies, which products will have been subject to searching analysis
and synthesis by experts of the central intelligence agency. Those
experts, incidentally, will in part be contributed or assigned by the
War Department itself to the central intelligence agency, thus assuring
the participation in the staff studies of men indoctrinated in the
requirements of the War Department.

The intelligence services of the War Department itself will thus be able
to concentrate their facilities on functions in which military men are
experts and civilians are laymen, namely, the collection, evaluation,
analysis, and dissemination of foreign intelligence pertinent peculiarly
to the military service. Typical of such subjects are:

Tactics

Strategy

Doctrine

Technique

Composition

Strength and organization

Order of battle

Equipment

Armament

Supply

Installations

Capabilities and intentions of the foreign military services.

c. Scope to be performed by State, Navy and other
Departments.

It is unnecessary to attempt any further statement regarding the scope of
the intelligence functions which should be performed under the
recommended plan by the Navy, State Department, and other individual
Government departments than to say that they in their respective fields
should maintain intelligence activities appropriately serving their
normal operations.

d. Division of War Department intelligence
functions.

Those intelligence functions respecting the subjects indicated in
paragraph b above as being appropriate to the War Department should be
assigned as follows:

1. Information regarding foreign Army Ground Forces—to the Military
Intelligence Division.

2. Information regarding Foreign Air Forces—to the Air Intelligence
Division.

It is recognized that a wide overlap exists in the above intelligence
fields which must be adjusted between the A. C. of S, G-2 and A. C. of
S, A-2.

e. Disposition of SSU.

The assets, facilities, and functions of SSU should be maintained in their present state under the
supervision and direction of the Assistant Secretary of War, until such
time as a definite decision has been reached with respect to a central
intelligence agency.

In the event that no central intelligence agency results from present
deliberations, it is believed that the SSU should revert to the operational control of the A. C.
of S, G-2, War Department, and operate as a unit under his jurisdiction.
However, integration of SSU personnel
and activities into MIS would neutralize
its peculiar assets and minimize its effectiveness.

John Magruder
Brig. Gen., USA

* Source:
Central Intelligence Agency Historical Files, Penrose Papers.
Secret. Attached to the source text is an October 26 memorandum from
Magruder to Lovett. This
memorandum, and Part I of the report, and two appendices are in the
Supplement.

35. Memorandum From the Assistant Director for Administrative Management, Bureau of the Budget (Stone) to the Assistant Director, Bureau of the Budget (Appleby)35. Memorandum From the Assistant Director for Administrative
Management, Bureau of the Budget (Stone) to the Assistant Director, Bureau of the Budget
(Appleby)Source

Washington, October 26,
1945.

SUBJECT

Comments on Proposal “U.S. Secret World-Wide Intelligence
Coverage”1

Attached is a draft of a reply from you to Tom Clark covering his plan for a new intelligence
setup.2 The
plan is analyzed below.3 This
memorandum does not comment upon the question as to whether this country
will or will not engage in any clandestine intelligence operations.
Also, comment is limited to the proposal as presented. This is more
difficult to do than if the plan had been presented in more detail.
Other than stating that the plan is similar to that in operation in
South America and supplying a chart, the document only contains three
paragraphs outlining the plan itself. These three paragraphs provide for
a joint operation in every country of the world without stating how
joint operation is to be achieved; for a top group to determine basic
policy, and for an operational committee, without stating either what
basic policy is or what the operational committee would do; and provides
a unit for evaluation of material supplied by the three agencies. (Later
a reference is made to one agency.)

Certain elements of the proposal and of the arguments in support of it
appear to have validity.

1. There is a need for a “legal” (or perhaps it would be better referred
to as “security”) attaché. I have previously commented on this in a
memorandum of September 19, a copy of which is attached.4

2. Geographic concepts as a basis for delimiting the operations of
several agencies in the security intelligence field are not valid.

3. “Police” functions and the collection of a limited kind of
intelligence relating to the police function can be combined.

The weaknesses of the proposal as presented are largely those of
omission.

1. In using the South American experience as the basis for planning a
world-wide system the proposal fails to consider the vast difference between the two situations. In
South America, our operations were not directed primarily at the
countries in which they were conducted. Our operation there was not
secret in the sense that it would have to be in the big league. It was
aided greatly by Hemisphere defense agreements. Most of the countries
were at war as allies. A whole series of actions resulting from our
intelligence was possible by agreement (the interning of alien suspects,
the Proclaimed List, cooperation of the countries involved in shutting
down radios, effecting travel control, etc.). Even under these most
favorable conditions, the operation in South America could not be
characterized without reserve, as it is in the document, by such phrases
as secret, economical, efficient, proved effectiveness, no elaborate
superstructure, simplicity of structure, flexibility of operations,
assured secrecy, no embarrassment.

2. The plan seems to contemplate the centering under the legal attache of
all undercover agents and liaison with other intelligence agencies. It
also apparently envisions no other secret intelligence operation in the
Government. The memorandum clearly indicates the limited view of
intelligence from which this springs. Security intelligence properly
done requires the use of some secret activity. To center all secret
intelligence, however, in the security agency would be to inhibit the
development of any really basic intelligence and would probably find us
in any future emergency again, as at Pearl Harbor, on alert no. 1 (i.e.,
against sabotage). Daily conferences with the Ambassador under this
system would tend to enshroud him in a picture of “threats to democracy”
and “intrigue” that would warp his over-all view.

3. The same objection arises from centering coordination in the security
agency. The proposal simply adds an Assistant Secretary of State to the
present Interdepartmental Intelligence Committee, calls it an
Operational Committee, and apparently relies on it for
coordination.5 The present IIC has been a device for securing cooperation in
triplication rather for attaining any coordination. Such a committee,
working only under basic policy and relying principally on daily
meetings in the Embassy, is not an adequate coordinating mechanism.
Delimitation by dictionary, i.e., “legal,” “military,” “naval” will not
work. Coordination can only be achieved by the central preparation of
detailed operating plans. Coordinating authority should be centered in
the interdepartmental committee which the President on September 20
directed Secretary Byrnes to set
up. If the current thinking of key persons in this field is any guide to
the possible decision of the interdepartmental committee, secret intelligence will not be centered
in any one department but will be conducted primarily centrally or under
strong central direction. The Justice proposal actually would permit
FBI to have all responsibility for
secret intelligence under only the mildest kind of direction.

Attached is a suggested reply to Mr. Clark. Both this memorandum and the reply to Mr.
Clark have been cleared
informally with Colonel McCormack, Special Assistant to the Secretary of State for
Research and Intelligence.

Stone

* Source: National Archives and Records
Administration, RG 51, Records of the Office of Management and
Budget, Director's Files, Series 39.27, Intelligence.
Confidential.

1 Document 17.

2 The draft is not printed. For the
reply as sent, see Document 37.

3 This and the
preceding sentence are handwritten on the source text.

4 Document 11.

5 A Presidential directive of
June 26, 1939, instructed the FBI
and Army and Navy Intelligence to coordinate their investigations of
espionage and sabotage cases and ordered the heads of the three
services to act as a coordinating group. A Department of State
representative participated informally. For details, see Troy,
Donovan and the CIA, pp.
12-14, 16-21, and 46-51.

36. Memorandum From the Assistant Chief of Staff, Operations Division, Department of War (Hull) to the Assistant Secretary of War for Air (Lovett)36. Memorandum From the Assistant Chief of Staff, Operations Division,
Department of War (Hull) to the
Assistant Secretary of War for Air (Lovett)Source

Washington, October 28,
1945.

SUBJECT

Report on Intelligence Matters

The following report is submitted as requested in your memorandum dated
23 October 1945, subject as above.1 Headings of paragraphs
below correspond to those in your memorandum. Since OPD is not an intelligence agency, no
answers are submitted to questions in paragraphs a, c and e, Part I and
d, Part II.

Part I

b. The following relations existed between OPD and the indicated intelligence agencies during the
period of the war:

(1) G-2

(a) OPD in collaboration with G-2,
maintained current estimate of the situation for use in connection with
the preparation of over-all strategic and operational plans.

(b) OPD reviewed and coordinated all
intelligence matters under consideration by JCS or CCS.

(2) OSS

(a) OSS activities in theaters were under
theater commanders, who in turn were under OPD in the latter's capacity as command post for the Chief
of Staff.

(b) OSS functioned under general policies
and directives issued by JCS, OPD having reviewed and coordinated all
JCS matters within the War
Department.

d. It is believed that in time of peace the military attaché system
serves a definite purpose in obtaining certain military information
limited to that which foreign governments are willing to part with, or
that which is obtainable without arousing the suspicion of such foreign
governments. However, this system both in time of peace and particularly
in time of war is unable to obtain vital military information and vital
economic, political and scientific intelligence both of which are
essential in determining capabilities and intentions of foreign
governments. On the other hand, it is believed that OSS in certain of its fields contributed
considerably to the war effort. Its work in connection with resistance
movements and research and analysis were of inestimable value. Its
sabotage, intelligence and counter-intelligence activities were of
considerable value. It is felt that there was unfortunate rivalry and
duplication of effort between G-2 and OSS during the war. It is believed that a well organized
and thoroughly integrated national intelligence system in peace would
have considerably increased our capabilities to make sound and timely
estimates in the years prior to this war and would have materially
improved our wartime intelligence.

Part II

a, b and c. The Operations Division agrees with the concept contained in
the directive proposed by the JCS in
JCS 1181/5 regarding the
coordination of intelligence activities. This directive sets forth,
particularly in paragraph 5 thereof, in broad outline, the missions and
functions of the Central Intelligence Agency.

It is recognized that the final answer on the difficult problem
pre-sented must be obtained as a result of study of the synthesis of the
views of all the War Department agencies concerned.

(1) The field of intelligence should be considered as a whole. It is
believed dangerous to attempt tight compartmentalization into technical
subdivisions, e.g., air, ground, naval, political, scientific, etc.

(2) While probably broad policies must be evolved on the committee basis
for the Central Intelligence Agency, the administration and operations
undertaken by this Agency should not be subject to the details,
compromises and inefficiencies inherent in discussions by committees and subcommittees, but rather
should be the responsibility of single heads of subdivision responsible
to the Director of the Agency.

(3) One of the first tasks in producing a comprehensive national
intelligence system is the development of a comprehensive intelligence
plan. This plan should begin by setting down intelligence objectives
which probably could be broken down into two categories: (a) routine
objectives such as strengths and dispositions of foreign forces and (b)
special projects, such as present Russian actions with reference to
uranium. The comprehensive plan should go on from the objectives to the
scheme for collecting information thereon and this scheme should include
the way in which the various agencies undertaking intelligence
operations will function in the over-all pattern.

(4) Two functions of the Central Intelligence Agency should include
assuring adequate arrangements so that each item of war intelligence is
made available to every organization possibly having an interest
therein. The exact procedure in accomplishing this objective must be a
subject of further study. There is some question as to whether the
Central Intelligence Agency can support an organization adequate to act
as a “clearing house” for every item of raw intelligence.

(5) The Central Intelligence Agency should be charged with development of
a plan and program as a matter of priority for an adequate foreign
secret intelligence system for the U.S. It is thought that this might be
worked out as a coordinated operation between departmental agencies and
an agency working directly under the Central Intelligence Agency
coordinating the entire project. The operating agency of the Central
Intelligence Agency might also be reasonably charged with the mission of
undertaking special intelligence projects, although not necessarily to
the exclusion of activities by departmental agencies in connection with
the same projects.

(6) The functions of the Central Intelligence Agency should include
coordination of the activities of all agencies to determine omissions
and duplications and to arrange for the necessary action to remedy such
omissions and duplications.

(7) The National Intelligence Authority will of necessity be rather
public in character. It will be well to hide the activation of the
Central Intelligence Agency. An obscure location and name in the State
Department might be a satisfactory method of achieving this
objective.

(8) Radio intercept seems to be a technical activity and from the
operational standpoint, will probably continue to function best with the
departments. As a vital source of information it should be subject to
coordination by the Central Intelligence Agency.

The problems which now face the U.S. and will continue to face this
country in the future dictate that the heads of the State, War and Navy
Departments have knowledge of intentions and capabilities, both
political and military, of the
other countries. The Central Intelligence Agency should be charged with
preparing the required estimates which should be made available to the
State, War and Navy Departments and to the JCS to guide them in their plans and preparations.

On the specific problem of the disposition of the remnants of the Office
of Strategic Services, it is believed that the Central Intelligence
Agency should have a talented analysis and evaluation section. This
section should not attempt to handle those matters which fall within the
sphere of single departments, but should rather devote its talents to
studies which assist the Director and the Authority in determining the
current intelligence objectives and the mechanisms for obtaining them.
In addition the Central Agency's evaluation section should be the
nucleus in preparation of long range over-all intelligence estimates.
Such of the OSS personnel and
organization now assigned to the State Department as are suitable for
the foregoing might well be retained for use in the Central Intelligence
Agency.

As to the OSS unit now attached to the
War Department,2 it is believed that any secret intelligence networks it
possesses plus personnel should be retained for review by the Director
of the Central Intelligence Agency to determine whether he desires to
use any personnel or operating facilities directly under his Agency, the
remaining personnel to be absorbed in existing departmental agencies. In
this connection the appointment of a Director of the Central
Intelligence Agency is a pressing matter.

It is OPD's opinion that the objective of
U.S. intelligence coordinated under the Central Intelligence Agency
is:

“Establishment and maintenance of a world-wide intelligence and
counter-intelligence system capable of furnishing timely information not
only of a purely military but also of a political, economic, industrial
and scientific nature; of preventing the obtaining by foreign powers of
similar information concerning the U.S.; and of deceiving possible
enemies as to the capabilities and intentions of the U.S. when that is
to her interest.” (Quote from para. c, page 10, JCS 1518.)

J. E. Hull3
Lieutenant General, GSC

* Source:
National Archives and Records Administration, RG 263, Records of the
Central Intelligence Agency, Troy Papers, Box 10, Folder 73. Top
Secret.

1 Document 32.

2 The Strategic Services
Unit.

3 Printed from a copy that
bears this typed signature.

37. Letter From the Assistant Director of the Bureau of the Budget (Appleby) to Attorney General Clark37. Letter From the Assistant Director of the Bureau of the Budget
(Appleby) to
Attorney General ClarkSource

Washington, October 31,
1945.

DEAR TOM: Harold and I have given a great deal of thought to the proposal
contained in your memorandum “U.S. Secret World-Wide Intelligence
Coverage.”1

The memorandum emphasizes the similarity of the proposal to the
“time-proved program” as carried on in South America. It seems to us
that the use of the South American experience alone as a basis for a
world-wide operation overlooks the vast difference in the two
situations.

Should we engage in any clandestine intelligence operations in peacetime,
our needs will certainly be far broader than was the case in South
America. They will be less related to operational decisions which can be
taken instantly. They will need to get at more fundamental and
long-range matters in commercial, scientific, and other areas. The
proposal seems to speak in terms of security intelligence alone. This
limited view of intelligence has, I think, been in part responsible for
many of our failures to estimate situations properly in the past, to
find ourselves sometimes on guard against the least of our dangers, and
to see dangers on occasion that were out of proportion to the real
situation.

Some operation such as that described in the memorandum is already being
carried on abroad. It seems to us that before any additional or new
activity in this field is encouraged, a considerable amount of planning
of a Government-wide kind should be accomplished. As you know, the
President directed Secretary Byrnes on September 20 to take the lead in providing for
such planning and coordinating on a continuing basis.

What we should be striving for is a way to build a Government-wide
intelligence operation in which all pertinent facilities or resources in
every department are utilized and in which the extreme compartmentation
and interdepartmental jealousies characteristic of our wartime operation
are done away with. The specific needs of the Government including those
of any agency should be determined and operations planned on that basis.
Then, too, plans in which the specific operating contribution of each
agency is developed, need to be prepared and issued for the guidance of
the departments. Neither the Operational Committee nor the Policy Board in the plan you sent me,
if I understand their duties, supply this need.

I am informed that the State Department will soon be taking the initial
steps to create the interdepartmental committees necessary to begin this
long-range job.

With personal regards, I am,

Sincerely yours,

Paul H. Appleby2

* Source: National Archives and Records
Administration, RG 51, Records of the Office of Management and
Budget, Director's Files, Series 39.27, Intelligence. Secret.
Revised by Appleby on October
30.

1 Document 17.

2 Printed from a copy that indicates
Appleby signed the
original.

38. Memorandum From the Director of the Bureau of the Budget (Smith) to President Truman38. Memorandum From the Director of the Bureau of the Budget
(Smith) to President TrumanSource

Washington, October 31,
1945.

SUBJECT

Organization of Intelligence Activities in the Government

Within the past few months, with your approval, a number of steps have
been taken to readjust the Government's intelligence activities to a
post-war basis and to establish within the normal framework of the
Government an effective intelligence operation. These steps have been
consistent with a plan for the post-war organization of intelligence
which has resulted from several years of study by staff of the Bureau of
the Budget. The basic elements of that plan have been discussed with you
and were set forth briefly in the memoranda transmitting the
recommendations of Mr. Snyder,
Judge Rosenman, and myself on the
disposition of the Office of Strategic Services1 which you
approved through Executive Order No. 9621 of September 20.

Attached is our complete report of recommendations in this field.2 This
memorandum summarizes the recommendations of the report and progress
made to date.

A Basis for the Post-war Organization of Intelligence

It is commonly accepted that, despite a continuous improvement during the
war and some individual instances of successful performance, total
performance in intelligence has not been on a par with that of some
other nations. My staff has endeavored to determine the administrative
reasons for this in order that we might learn from the mistakes of the
past in building for the future.

Attached to this memorandum is a report resulting from our studies. It
reviews the Government's prewar and wartime intelligence activities and
develops conclusions and recommendations. For your convenience, there
follows a summary of the principal findings and conclusions of the
report.

Summary of findings. The principal weakness has been the inadequacy of
the intelligence operations of the departments concerned, indeed the
lack of any intelligence operation in the State Department. Inadequate
operations have resulted in failure to anticipate intelligence needs, in
failure to recognize trends, in lack of perspective, and in inadequate
pooling of intelligence except on the basis of mutual exchange of
individual reports.

Before the war, and to a considerable extent still, there has been an
overemphasis on security intelligence, i.e., intelligence which is
concerned with unfriendly or “dangerous” individuals either at home or
abroad. The overemphasis on this kind of intelligence was largely
responsible for our failure to develop early enough the type of
organization necessary to produce really basic intelligence. Further,
the continued placement of the security intelligence operation within
the same units responsible for more basic intelligence has caused many
of our estimates to be overweighted with security considerations and has
caused us too often to be on guard against the least of our dangers.

Our wartime expansion was not in accord with any prior plan, nor was
there any machinery through which coordination could be achieved. The
freedom of funds enjoyed by the departments during the war has not been
conducive to the development of a Government-wide integrated program nor
has much leadership toward this end been possible during the war because
of the fear of interrupting a vital service. Such attempts as have been
made, including those undertaken by the Joint Chiefs of Staff, have resulted in ad hoc
arrangements to further cooperation rather than to secure real
coordination.

Throughout all of our study the newness of intelligence as an operation
on anything approaching its present scale was apparent. There still is a
widespread misunderstanding of what intelligence is, how it is produced,
and in what way it relates to and serves the action and policy-making
people. For example, many persons whose active participation in
developing an effective post-war operation is essential are still
thinking narrowly in terms of spies and intrigue, in terms of current
developments and the latest news, or in terms, solely, of the
development of new or special sources of information.

Summary of conclusions. The report develops, from an analysis of these
weaknesses, four major conclusions and two of secondary importance which
are in effect the elements of a plan for post-war organization.

1. Our expanded requirements for intelligence will require more
widespread understanding among Government officials and agencies of what
intelligence is and how it is produced, and a more widespread
participation in the development and implementation of plans for
improved operation.

2. The principal intelligence operations of the Government should be
organized at the point where decision is made or action taken, i.e., at
the departmental, or lower, level and not within any single central
agency. Each department (or subdivision of a department) which has
important responsibilities in international matters or which has
responsibilities for providing the public with information about foreign
countries should provide for a competent foreign intelligence
operation.

3. The basic intelligence operation in each department should be
organized apart from the security or “counter” intelligence operation
serving internal security purposes, except for the mutual exchange of
highly summarized and significant intelligence.

4. To ensure optimum results from the departmental intelligence and
security operations, however, integrated Government-wide programs should
be developed under the leadership of the State Department, through the
creation of two interdepartmental committees, one dealing with basic
intelligence in general (political, economic, military, sociological,
geographic, etc.) and the other with security and security
intelligence.

Of a less pressing and longer-range nature are the following two
conclusions:

5. Some high-level intelligence is needed to guide decisions made at a
level above the departments themselves. The State Department should
serve as the principal agency for the development or procurement of such
intelligence. The President, however, may find necessary an independent
research staff to serve his own needs. Should this be found desirable, the research staff
should be small and be concerned primarily with bringing together
intelligence available in all departments to fulfill a particular
need.

6. There may be some need to centralize under the direction of the
interdepartmental groups organized under the leadership of the Secretary
of State certain operations which are common to all agencies or which
for policy reasons may best be performed centrally. The determination of
the kind of central operation which will be needed can await study by
the central coordinating body provided for in 4, above. In general,
however, no operation should be undertaken centrally which can be
performed satisfactorily at the departmental level.

Progress in Readjusting to Post-war
Organization

The principal steps already taken toward achieving a post-war
organization based on the conclusions outlined above are the
following:

1. Of greatest importance in strengthening our intelligence for the
post-war period, and consistent with the conclusions that the principal
intelligence operations of the Government should be conducted within the
departments rather than in a central agency, was the establishment of an
Office of Research and Intelligence in the State Department. The
importance of this step was stressed in the Bureau of the Budget's
report to Secretary Byrnes of
last summer.3 On
September 28 the Department announced the appointment of Colonel
Alfred McCormack as Special
Assistant to the Secretary in charge of Research and Intelligence.

2. On September 20, through Executive Order No. 9621, the Research and
Analysis Branch and related non-clandestine activities of the Office of
Strategic Services were transferred (effective October 1) to an Interim
Research and Intelligence Service reporting to Colonel McCormack in the State Department. The
State Department is currently preparing a supplemental budget for the
absorption of the Interim Serv-ice, after considerable readjustment and
curtailment, into the permanent Department. The Office in the State
Department was thus provided with a going and competent research
staff.

3. A small part of the Foreign Economic Administration will be
transferred to the State Department in accordance with Executive Order
No. 9630 of September 27.4 The Bureau of the Budget is currently working with
the State Department in preparing for absorption of the transferred
activities.

4. On September 20, coincident with the public announcement of the OSS transfer, you directed Secretary
Byrnes to assume the
leadership in developing an integrated Government-wide intelligence
program through the creation of interdepartmental committees to
coordinate the intelligence operations within the various departments.
The immediate problem of building his own facilities and of assembling a
staff have delayed action on this matter. Staff of the Bureau of the
Budget is currently working with the State Department to assist in
organizing these groups and in developing an orderly procedure.

Steps Currently Being Planned

The desirability of effecting a separation of security and security
intelligence from basic intelligence will necessitate the organization
of two committees in the State Department. It is possible that the State
Department will request your approval of an additional directive to the
departments concerned to clarify the exact responsibilities placed on
the Secretary of State in your previous public letter.

The necessity to secure a more widespread understanding of intelligence
and of the principles on which a strong post-war organization should be
based, not only among Government officials but in the Congress, is still
a paramount problem. During the current period of transition from
wartime to post-war operation, it has been difficult to accomplish as
much as is desirable toward this objective because of the variety of
suggestions for post-war organization currently being considered and
advocated. The letters which you made public to Secretary Byrnes and General Donovan have apparently not yet made it
sufficiently clear that we are not going back to our pre-1939 situation
but are moving in accordance with a plan to develop a more effective
program for the future. Within the limitations of available staff, the
Bureau of the Budget has endeavored to keep in constant touch with
planning now under way in the various departments. The interdepartmental
groups which will be brought together under the State Department will
accomplish a great deal. Meanwhile, however, the Bureau of the Budget
will intensify its activities. Among other things, we intend to give
appropriate distribution to the attached report.5

Action Recommended

With your approval, the specific additional proposals which I shall
recommend from time to time relating to the organization of intelligence
and security activities will conform to the general plan outlined in
this memorandum and in the attached report.

Harold D. Smith6

* Source: National Archives and Records
Administration, RG 51, Records of the Office of Management and
Budget, Director's Files, Series 39.27, Intelligence. No
classification marking. Drafted by George F. Schwarzwalder on
October 25.

1 See Document 2 and footnote 3, Document 4.

2 Reference is to the Bureau of the Budget
report “Intelligence and Security Activities of the Government,”
September 20. (National Archives and Records Administration, RG 51,
Records of the Office of Management and Budget, Director's Files,
Series 39.27, Intelligence) See the Supplement.

3 Dated August 15. (National
Archives and Records Administration, RG 51, Records of the Office of
Management and Budget, Director's Files, Series 39.18, State
Department Organization and Functions) See the Supplement.

4 “Redistribution of
Foreign Economic Functions and Functions With Respect to Surplus
Property in Foreign Areas”; for text, see Department of State Bulletin, September 30, 1945, pp.
491-492.

5 Attached to another copy of this report are two
charts entitled “Plan for Organizing and Staffing: Interdepartmental
Coordinating Committees, Intelligence and Security,” and a
“Functional Organization Chart: Interdepartmental Coordinating
Committees Intelligence and Security.” (National Archives and
Records Administration, RG 59, Records of the Department of State,
Records of the Bureau of Intelligence and Research: Lot 58 D 776,
History of the National Intelligence Structure) See the attachments
to Smith's memorandum to the President in the Supplement.

6 Printed from a copy that indicates Smith
signed the original.

39. Letter From the Secretary of State's Special Assistant for Research and Intelligence (McCormack) to the President's Chief of Staff (Leahy)39. Letter From the Secretary of State's Special Assistant for
Research and Intelligence (McCormack) to the President's Chief of Staff (Leahy)Source

Washington, October 31,
1945.

MY DEAR ADMIRAL LEAHY: Enclosed is the President's Executive Order
relating to the OSS, together with his
letters to General Donovan and
the Secretary of State.1 On the last
page of the attached you will find the place where I have marked to show
what the present directive states in respect to machinery for
formulation of plans for post-war intelligence.

It has seemed to us in the State Department that this Department should
formulate its own plans before going ahead with the interdepartmental
group. That position has been acceptable to the Army and, I think, also
to the Navy, and the Army has had a Board functioning for the purpose of
determining its position on the post-war intelligence problem.

Sincerely yours,

Alfred McCormack

* Source: National Archives and Records
Administration, RG 263, Records of the Central Intelligence Agency,
Troy Papers, Box 10, Folder 73. No classification marking. Leahy met with McCormack on this date to discuss
“the formation of a Central Intelligence Service.” (Library of
Congress Manuscript Division, Papers of William D. Leahy, Leahy Diaries
1945, p. 182)

1 See Documents 14 and 15, and the source note to the latter.

40. Memorandum From James S. Lay, Jr., of the Office of the Special Assistant for Research and Intelligence to the Secretary of State's Special Assistant for Research and Intelligence (McCormack)40. Memorandum From James S.
Lay, Jr., of the Office of the Special Assistant for
Research and Intelligence to the Secretary of State's Special Assistant
for Research and Intelligence (McCormack)Source

Washington, November 2,
1945.

SUBJECT

Comparison of Bureau of the Budget and Joint Chiefs of Staff Plans
for Coordination of Intelligence Activities

1. General. Basically, the “Report on the Intelligence and Security
Activities of the Government” by the Bureau of the Budget, dated
September 20, 1945, differs in the following particulars from the
proposed Memorandum for the President in which the Joint Chiefs of Staff
recommend the establishment of a National Intelligence Authority and a
Central Intelligence Agency.

a. Scope of Intelligence. The Budget Plan covers intelligence required
both for protecting our national interests (i.e., national security) and
for furthering those interests. This concept is much broader than that
envisaged by the JCS, which is confined
to the “intelligence mission related to the national security.” The
Budget Plan's distinction between “intelligence” and “security
intelligence” also is lacking in the JCS
Plan. These differences make the Budget Plan broader in scope, more
positive in its concept of the intelligence mission, inclusive of wider
interests and more agencies, and more precise in its consideration of
types of intelligence.

b. Approach to the Problem. The Budget Plan is concerned first and
foremost with improving and coordinating the intelligence activities of
the existing departmental agencies, leaving the need for centralized
production of intelligence and centralized operations for decision if
and when improved departmental facilities are still judged inadequate.
Conversely, the JCS Plan assumes the
need for and authorizes the immediate establishment of such centralized
services, regardless of the eventual adequacy of improved departmental
activities under effective State Department leadership. Therefore, the
Budget Plan, while anticipating the possible need for additional
facilities outside the existing departmental structure, provides a more
orderly, effective and economical approach by concentrating urgently on
overcoming inadequacies at the levels where decisions are being made and
high-level policies formulated.

2. Basic Similarity of Objectives. Subject to the above fundamental
differences, the two plans have a common objective and many similar provisions. Both lodge the
authority for decisions with, rather than separate from the responsible
officials of the departments primarily interested in and affected by
such decisions. Both recognize the immediate need for coordinating
departmental intelligence activities. Both provide that the
interdepartmental authority may and should utilize the skilled personnel
and specialized facilities of all agencies. Both are designed to ensure
that national intelligence requirements are met, while at the same time
departmental requirements are fully and promptly recognized and
fulfilled.

3. Desirable Features. Means and methods of achieving the common
objective, however, differ considerably in the two plans. The features
considered desirable in both plans, additional to those already
identified, are discussed below:

a. Recognition of Responsible Officials. The JCS Plan contains two desirable features. First, authority
for decisions rests directly with the Secretaries of the interested
departments, rather than with Assistant Secretaries. Thus, decisions
carry the full weight of the top official in each department and should
therefore receive more effective implementation. This, however, does not
preclude each Secretary from delegating that authority as he deems fit.
Second, the establishment of an Intelligence Advisory Board provides
definite machinery through which the operating head of the coordinating
body may confer with the heads of the departmental intelligence
agencies, thus encouraging mutual understanding, confidence and
cooperation.

b. Representation of All Interests. The Budget Plan, through its broader
concept, provides for the participation and contribution of all
departments and agencies and thus represents a more comprehensive
mobilization of intelligence resources.

c. Elimination of Unnecessary Duplication. The Budget Plan recognizes
that no single department can possibly or should attempt to secure or
produce the intelligence it needs without utilizing other facilities.
This plan therefore guards against unnecessary duplication that would
inevitably occur under the JCS Plan
which states that existing intelligence agencies, subject to
coordination by the national authority, “shall continue to collect,
evaluate, synthesize and disseminate … that intelligence required by the
several departments and independent agencies for the performance of
their proper functions.”

d. Recognition of State Department Leadership in Foreign Affairs. The
Budget Plan recognizes and provides for the “leading role of the State
Department as a staff agency to the President” by placing
representatives of that department in the leading position at all
levels, especially on the Planning Staff and the Joint Secretariat. This
is considered essential to ensure that intelligence operations are
geared to and consistent with overall foreign policy. The JCS Plan, by separating the operating head
from any department, does not
provide for such direct sensitivity to foreign policy.

e. Effective Administration. The Budget Plan, by providing that the State
Department shall be primarily responsible for all administrative
services, offers more simplified, consistent and effective
administration. Procurement of appropriations will also be facilitated.
Dispersal of the responsibility for such services, as provided in the
JCS Plan, will inevitably result in
bickering, compromise, confusion and lack of continuity. Moreover, such
dispersal places the administrative operations of the coordinating body
at the mercy of three separate masters.

James S. Lay, Jr.1

* Source: Central
Intelligence Agency Historical Files, HS/HC-32. Confidential.

1 Printed from a copy that bears this
typed signature.

41. Memorandum for Information41. Memorandum for InformationSource

Washington, November 2,
1945.

1. On Wednesday 31 October, I was seated next to Alfred McCormack (in charge of State
Department's portion of OSS), at a
formal luncheon. He told me that:

(A) He does not believe in a Central Intelligence Agency.

(B) He believes each department should have its own unfettered
intelligence service.

(C) He is not worried about duplication of effort. Competition is
healthy.

(D) He thinks the fields covered by the various services should be
examined and any gaps in their coverage filled in.

(E) A committee composed of the Secretaries of State, War, and Navy might
well act in a consulting capacity for shaping broad policies and
coordination.

(F) The Army and Navy should retain communication intelligence as at
present.

2. I raised the question of what agency should operate secret agents, but
got no specific answer.

Respectfully,

Thos. B. Inglis1
Commodore, U.S. Navy

* Source:
National Archives and Records Administration, RG 263, Records of the
Central Intelligence Agency, Troy Papers, Nov. 1945. Secret. The
date is handwritten on the source text.

1 Printed from a copy
that indicates Inglis
signed the original.

42. Memorandum From the Lovett Committee to Secretary of War Patterson42. Memorandum From the Lovett Committee to Secretary of War PattersonSource

Washington, November 3,
1945.

SUBJECT

Preliminary Report of Committee Appointed to Study War Department
Intelligence Activities

The undersigned special committee was appointed by order of the Secretary
of War, dated 22 October 1945 (Tab A)1 to
advise the Secretary of War on certain intelligence matters more fully
set forth in said order, including the formulation of a plan for War
Department activities in the field of foreign intelligence, the existing
and proposed organization of G-2, A-2 and the Strategic Services Unit,
now attached to the Office of the Assistant Secretary of War, and the
future use or disposition that should be made of all intelligence
activities within the War Department. The Committee was directed to make
its report not later than 3 November 1945.

In the limited time available since its appointment the committee has
made as intensive a study as practicable of the various subjects covered
in the Secretary's order. It has held nine meetings of the full
committee. By means of a special questionnaire it requested and secured
written reports from the Assistant Chief of Staff, OPD, Assistant Chief of Staff, G-2,
Assistant Chief of Air Staff-2, Assistant Chief of Staff, G-2, AGF Director of Intelligence, ASF,
Director, Strategic Services Unit and Director, Special Planning
Division, War Department Special Staff. Copies of these reports are
available for inspection. In addition, the committee took the formal
testimony of Major General Clayton
Bissell (Assistant Chief of Staff, G-2, War Department
General Staff); Mr. William E.
Jackson (formerly Assistant Military Attaché for Air in
London and Chief of Secret Intelligence Branch of G-2, ETO); Mr. David A. Bruce (formerly Chief,
Planning Group, OSS), Mr. Russell Forgan (formerly Chief, OSS, European Theater) and Lieutenant
Commander Milton Katz (Deputy Chief SI
Branch, SSU); Mr. Lowell Weicker and Mr.
Kingman Douglass (Mr. Weicker served during the War as Acting A-2 of the
Eighth Air Force and Director of Intelligence of USSTAF, and Mr. Douglas as AAF
representative at the Air Ministry in London); Colonel William Quinn
(Executive Officer of SSU); Colonel
Gordon B. Rogers (formerly G-2, AGF); Lt
General Stanley D. Embick (member of the Joint Strategic Survey
Committee); and Mr. Alfred
McCormack (Special Assistant to the Secretary of State
for Intelligence, and formerly Director of Intelligence, MIS). In addition, all members of the
Committee held numerous informal conversations with individuals both
within and without the War Department whose views were believed to be
helpful on the subjects under consideration.

The committee invited the Director of Naval Intelligence and the Director
of the Federal Bureau of Investigation to appear before it as witnesses
and give the committee the benefit of their views and recommendations.
Both of these individuals, however, declined to appear.

The committee has come to the conclusion that it is not desirable to
attempt to cover in this preliminary report all of the subjects
enumerated in the Memorandum of the Secretary of War (Tab A). With the
approval of the Secretary of War it is therefore restricting the
conclusions herein to the two most pressing problems that have been
submitted, viz., the question of the establishment of a Central
Intelligence Agency for the United States Government, and the future of
the Strategic Services Unit now attached to the Office of the Assistant
Secretary of War. It is intended to supplement this preliminary report
at the earliest practicable date with a further report of the other
subjects referred to by the Secretary.

General Observations

Prior to the outbreak of the war, this nation had no foreign intelligence
collection system worthy of the name. It appears to have been contrary
to national policy to engage in clandestine intelligence or to maintain
a foreign espionage system. Partly as a result of this lack of an
adequate foreign intelligence system in peacetime, the majority of Army
Officers who otherwise possessed the capability of top command did not
sufficiently understand the techniques and methods of utilization of
foreign intelligence.

During the course of the war, various uncoordinated efforts were made to
compensate for this deficiency in our system of national defense. As
might have been expected, most of these expedients were unsatisfactory.
Much effective work in the specialized field of foreign espionage and
counter-espionage was accomplished by G-2 and the Office of Strategic
Services, but because of lack of direction, of coordination and of
cooperation among all agencies, as well as for other reasons, even these
organizations were unable to fill the great need that existed for
complete intelligence coverage. However, it is not the purpose of this
report to review in detail either the accomplishments, or lack of
accomplishments, of the units engaged in the foreign intelligence field.
It is sufficient to point out that there was generally a lack of harmony
and cooperation, a state of overlapping functions and confusion and a
failure to cover certain important fields, that in retrospect appear
quite extraordinary. Throughout the war there existed, and to a large
extent there still exists, a feeling of jealousy and mistrust among the
various intelligence organizations of the Government, and between a
surprising number of officers and civilians engaged in the various
intelligence activities.

The lack of trained and experienced intelligence officers in both
military services has been an important contributing factor to the
unsatisfactory situation. It is important to note that there has never
been any serious effort to make intelligence a career activity. Officers
who were undoubtedly competent in the combat arms or services, but who
had had no intelligence training, were from time to time pressed into
service in intelligence roles. The natural tendency was for them to seek
to return to their own basic branch at the first opportunity. Changes
among the top personnel were frequent. During the war there were in
succession four Assistant Chiefs of Staff, G-2, eight Assistant Chiefs
of Air Staff-2 and five heads of the Office of Naval Intelligence.

The committee wishes to stress with all of the emphasis at its command
the vital importance to this nation of the early correction of this
entire situation. In the difficult years that lie ahead the United
States must have a national intelligence organization, competent and
alert to the extreme of possibility. It must be manned with an adequate
number of permanent personnel of the highest caliber, thoroughly trained
in the numerous specialties
that are the necessary components of a modern intelligence system. This
will require a totally different approach to the entire subject of
intelligence than has been had in the United States up to the present.
At this particular time the greatest pains must be taken not only to
create an organization and system that will be adapted to future growth,
but also to retain for the Government the services of the many capable
individuals who are now available in various departments, and who,
although not yet properly organized, have received invaluable training
in the hard school of war-time experience. Haphazard demobilization of
existing intelligence units will result in dangerous delay in reaching
the objective.

As indicated above, the following paragraphs of this report will deal
only with the questions of the establishment of a central intelligence
organization and the immediate disposition to be made of the Strategic
Services Unit. The committee believes that extensive additional study
should be given to the organization and consolidation of other
intelligence functions of concern to the Military Services.

The Establishment of a Central Intelligence
Organization

The committee has unanimously reached the conclusion that this Government
should establish as promptly as possible a National Intelligence
Authority and a Central Intelligence Agency. The committee has
considered a number of recommendations, received from various sources,
as to the composition, functions and the location of such central
organizations, including those contained in the report of the Director
of the Office of Strategic Services and in the Joint Chiefs of Staff
Study of September, 1945 (JCS
1181/5).2 The committee finds
itself more nearly in agreement with the recommendations of the Joint
Chiefs of Staff than with any of the other proposals that have been
advanced. In setting forth below its own recommendations, it will
therefore adopt in a substantial part the language of the Joint Chiefs
of Staff memorandum, modified so as to accord with the committee's views
in certain particulars.

The committee recommends the creation of a National Intelligence
Authority composed of the Secretaries of State, War and Navy, and a
Representative of the Joint Chiefs of Staff. When and if the National
Defense Organization includes a Secretary or Under Secretary of Air, the
Authority should be expanded by the addition of that individual.
Provision should also be made for the addition of other members of the
Authority upon the recommendation of the existing members, with the
approval of the President.

The National Intelligence Authority should have complete authority to
formulate policies which shall be binding upon the Central Intelligence
Agency and all intelligence
activities in other Government departments and agencies. The Authority
should be charged with the responsibility for such overall
intelligence-planning and development, and such coordination of all
federal intelligence activities, as to assure the most effective
accomplishment of the intelligence mission related to the national
security.

There should also be created a Central Intelligence Agency headed by a
Director who should be appointed or removed by the President on the
recommendation of the National Intelligence Authority. The committee
believes that in order to insure continuity the Director should be
appointed for a long term of years, preferably not less than six. The
Director of the Central Intelligence Agency should be responsible to the
National Intelligence Authority and sit as a non-voting member
thereof.

There should be created within the Central Intelligence Agency an
Intelligence Board which should consist of the Assistant Chief of Staff,
G-2, WDGS, the Assistant Chief of Air
Staff-2 and the Director of Naval Intelligence and the Chiefs of the
principal civilian intelligence agencies having functions related to the
national security as determined by the National Intelligence Authority.
The functions of this Board should be to assist the Director, who shall
serve as its Chairman, in the carrying out of all of the activities and
purposes of the Central Intelligence Agency and to facilitate
coordination between the Central Intelligence Agency and the departments
and agencies represented on the Board. The Director shall consult with
and secure the opinion of the Board on all important questions which may
arise in the course of the operations of the Central Intelligence
Agency. In the event of a difference of opinion between the Director and
members of the Intelligence Board, the decision of the Director shall be
controlling, subject, however, to the right of any member of the Board
to have the question submitted for final decision to the National
Intelligence Authority. The Director should also consult with the Board
before delivering any estimates and appreciations to the President or
any member of the Cabinet, and if there shall be a difference of opinion
among the Director and the members of the Board, in any such case the
differing opinions should accompany the Director's report.

Except for its responsibility to the National Intelligence Authority, the
Central Intelligence Agency should be independent. It should be
supported by an independent budget, and its appropriations should be
obtainable without public hearings.

Subject to the direction and control of the National Intelligence
Authority, the Central Intelligence Agency should:

a. Operate as the sole collection agency for all departments of the
Government in the foreign espionage and counter-espionage fields.

b. Perform for the benefit of departmental intelligence agencies such
other intelligence services of common concern as the National
Intelligence Authority
determines can be more efficiently accomplished by a common agency,
including the direct procurement of intelligence.

c. Coordinate the activities of all intelligence agencies of the
Government whose activities relate to the national security and
recommend to the National Intelligence Authority the establishment of
such overall policies and objectives as will assure the most effective
accomplishment of the national intelligence mission.

d. Furnish to any Government department or agency, upon the request of
its representative on the Intelligence Board, any intelligence material
or evaluation, which, in the opinion of that member, is necessary for
his department or agency, provided, however, that in the event that the
Director believes it undesirable for any such material or evaluation to
be so furnished, he may submit the matter to the Intelligence Board for
decision or, in the event of disagreement within the Board, to the
National Intelligence Authority.

e. Accomplish the evaluation and synthesis of intelligence collected or
assembled by it, and the appropriate dissemination within the Government
and among the several departments of the resulting strategic and
national policy intelligence.

f. Perform such other functions and duties related to intelligence as the
National Intelligence Authority may from time to time direct.

The Central Intelligence Agency should not conduct espionage activities
within the United States. It should have no police or law enforcement
functions either within or without the United States.

Subject to coordination by the Central Intelligence Agency, and to the
limitations expressed above, the existing agencies of the Government
should continue to collect, evaluate, synthesize, and disseminate
departmental intelligence, herein defined as that intelligence required
by the several departments and independent agencies for the performance
of their proper functions. Such departmental intelligence as is required
by the Central Intelligence Agency should be made freely available to it
for synthesis. When approved by the National Intelligence Authority, the
operation of the departmental intelligence agencies should be open to
inspection by the Central Intelligence Agency in connection with its
coordinating functions. In the interpretation of this paragraph the
National Intelligence Authority and the Central Intelligence Agency will
be responsible for fully protecting intelligence sources and methods
which, due to their nature, have a direct and highly important bearing
on military operations and national security.

Operating personnel, including specialists, should be furnished to the
Central Intelligence Agency by the various departments and agencies
engaged in intelligence activities. The Director of the Central
Intelligence Agency should have the right, with the approval of the
Intelligence Board, to call upon any such departments and agencies to
furnish the Agency with personnel for advisory and functional
positions.

INTERIM DISPOSITION OF THE STRATEGIC SERVICES UNIT

At the present time the Strategic Services Unit is attached to the Office
of the Assistant Secretary of War. The committee regards this as an
unsatisfactory arrangement, because it seemingly establishes two
separate intelligence units within the War Department. This objection is
increased by the fact that at the present time G-2 is engaged in both
foreign espionage and foreign counter-espionage matters, which
activities constitute an important part of the present functions of the
Strategic Services Unit.

The committee has considered the advisability of transferring the
Strategic Services Unit to G-2 and amalgamating its functions with
similar activities of G-2. However, because of its conclusions that all
foreign espionage and counter-espionage activities of the Government
should be transferred to the Central Intelligence Agency as soon as
possible after the establishment of that body, and in order to avoid
further administrative complications, the committee believes that
continuing the Strategic Services Unit under the supervision of the
Office of the Assistant Secretary of War on a purely interim basis is
justified. Accordingly the committee so recommends.

The committee believes that during this interim period it is important
that two things be done. The first is the proper coordination of the
operations of the Strategic Services Unit with similar operations of
G-2. The second is the elimination from the Strategic Services Unit of
all personnel engaged in activities other than foreign espionage and
counter-espionage activities, and also the reduction of the personnel
engaged in these two activities to a small and efficient group that will
be of maximum value to the Central Intelligence Agency when that body is
constituted.

In order to accomplish the foregoing, the committee recommends that there
forthwith be appointed and placed in the War Department under the
immediate supervision of the Assistant Secretary of War, an Interim
Activities Director, who should be an officer of the rank of Major
General, or higher. In consultation with the Assistant Chief of Staff,
G-2 and the Director of the Strategic Services Unit, this Director
should, during the interim period referred to above, have direct charge
of the operation and administration of the Strategic Services Unit and
should be responsible for coordinating its activities with similar
activities of G-2. He shall also take whatever steps are necessary to
reduce the personnel of the Strategic Services Unit in the manner
indicated in the preceding paragraph, and effect the transfer of such
personnel to the Central Intelligence Agency as soon as it is
organized.

The committee is of the opinion that as soon as the Central Intelligence
Agency is created, there should also be transferred to it appropriate
personnel of G-2 now engaged in foreign espionage and counter-espionage activities. In order
that this may be accomplished without delay, and in order to further
coordinate such activities in the interim period with the similar
activities of the Strategic Services Unit, the Interim Activities
Director should make recommendations to the Secretary of War with
respect to (a) the reduction of personnel controlled by G-2 who are
engaged in foreign espionage and counter-espionage activities, and (b)
the transfer of personnel in G-2 engaged in such activities to the
direct control of the Interim Activities Director pending creation of
the Central Intelligence Agency.

If such a program is successfully carried out, there will be assembled
under the direct control of the Interim Activities Director all
personnel controlled by the War Department who are engaged in foreign
espionage and counter-espionage activities, whom it is desired to
transfer to the Central Intelligence Agency, and it will be possible to
coordinate their various activities until such time as their transfer to
the Central Intelligence Agency can be effected. In the event that
higher authority finally decides not to create a Central Intelligence
Agency, the personnel so controlled by the Interim Activities Director
should be then transferred to the direct control and administration of
the Assistant Chief of Staff, G-2.

Respectfully submitted,

Robert A. Lovett3
Assistant Secretary of War for Air
Chairman
H.A. Craig
Maj. General, OPD
E.R. Quesada
Maj. General, AAF
W.G. Wynan
Maj. General, AGF
C.W. Clarke
Brig. General, G-2
John Magruder
Brig. General, SSU
J.M. Roamer Colonel, ASF

* Source: National Archives and Records
Administration, RG 263, Records of the Central Intelligence Agency,
Troy Papers, Nov. 1945. Top Secret. Brigadier General Carter W.
Clarke sent this report to the members of the Committee on November
6. In his covering memorandum he wrote that Lovett had directed him to inform
the Committee that Secretary Patterson had approved the report. (Ibid.) See the
Supplement.

1 Not
found, but see Document 32.

2 See footnote 3, Document 13.

3 Printed from a copy that bears these
typed signatures.

43. Memorandum From the Assistant Director (Ladd) to the Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation (Hoover)43. Memorandum From the Assistant Director (Ladd) to the Director of the Federal Bureau
of Investigation (Hoover)Source

Washington, November 5, 1945, 10:30 a.m.

SUBJECT

World Wide Intelligence Set-up

I telephonically contacted Mr. Fred Lyon of the State Department and
inquired whether he had seen Colonel McCormack and what Colonel McCormack might have advised him with reference to his
plans for the intelligence set-up in the State Department. Mr. Lyon stated he tried to see McCormack all week and was unable to
get in to see him until Saturday, and that he on that occasion told him
that Mr. Braden had instructed
that he contact McCormack,
inasmuch as Braden was very
greatly concerned over events in Argentina and in other parts of the
western hemisphere. Mr. Lyon
informed him Braden was concerned over the weakening of the structure of
solidarity, and that he was very fearful that the whole set-up might
disintegrate. Mr. Lyon stated he
told Colonel McCormack he had
talked with Mr. Hoover a week ago and had been trying to see him,
McCormack, ever since; that
the whole problem has now reached a point where the FBI is going to call back all of its people
from South America unless something definite is decided, and Lyon told McCormack he wanted to know what his opinion was and
what could be done, inasmuch as he, Lyon, and Mr. Braden were very much concerned over developments.

Mr. Lyon stated Colonel McCormack stated he did not know what
to do or what to say; that the FBI's
continuance in this work outside the United States was something he was
afraid would have to be decided by the Secretary, because (Colonel
McCormack stated) only the
other day Secretary Byrnes told
him it was the President's opinion that the FBI should not be in the international field, but should
confine its efforts to the domestic field.

Mr. Lyon stated he told Colonel
McCormack he was afraid that
was a point that had not been thought through very carefully; that the
State Department's experience had been that the FBI had been working in this field for four years; that he,
Lyon, and Braden knew the work it had done and
knew that the FBI saw things the way the
State Department did. Colonel McCormack then said that, “That is something I am afraid
we will have to take up with the Secretary.”

Fred Lyon then stated that not
being able to obtain any additional information from McCormack he advised McCormack he would again discuss this
matter with Mr. Braden. He has
been endeavoring all this morning to contact Mr. Braden for the purpose of talking with
him about this matter and arranging for Braden to see Secretary Byrnes. He promised he would call me immediately upon
securing a conference with Mr. Braden, in order that the Bureau may be kept up to date
on this matter.

* Source: National Archives and Records
Administration, RG 263, Records of the Central Intelligence Agency,
Troy Papers, FBI Documents. No
classification marking.

44. White House Memorandum44. White House MemorandumSource

Washington, November 5, 1945, 10:30 a.m.

SUBJECT

World Wide Intelligence Set-up

I telephonically contacted Mr. Fred Lyon of the State Department and
inquired whether he had seen Colonel McCormack and what Colonel McCormack might have advised him with reference to his
plans for the intelligence set-up in the State Department. Mr. Lyon stated he tried to see McCormack all week and was unable to
get in to see him until Saturday, and that he on that occasion told him
that Mr. Braden had instructed
that he contact McCormack,
inasmuch as Braden was very
greatly concerned over events in Argentina and in other parts of the
western hemisphere. Mr. Lyon
informed him Braden was concerned over the weakening of the structure of
solidarity, and that he was very fearful that the whole set-up might
disintegrate. Mr. Lyon stated he
told Colonel McCormack he had
talked with Mr. Hoover a week ago and had been trying to see him,
McCormack, ever since; that
the whole problem has now reached a point where the FBI is going to call back all of its people
from South America unless something definite is decided, and Lyon told McCormack he wanted to know what his opinion was and
what could be done, inasmuch as he, Lyon, and Mr. Braden were very much concerned over developments.

Mr. Lyon stated Colonel McCormack stated he did not know what
to do or what to say; that the FBI's
continuance in this work outside the United States was something he was
afraid would have to be decided by the Secretary, because (Colonel
McCormack stated) only the
other day Secretary Byrnes told
him it was the President's opinion that the FBI should not be in the international field, but should
confine its efforts to the domestic field.

Mr. Lyon stated he told Colonel
McCormack he was afraid that
was a point that had not been thought through very carefully; that the
State Department's experience had been that the FBI had been working in this field for four years; that he,
Lyon, and Braden knew the work it had done and
knew that the FBI saw things the way the
State Department did. Colonel McCormack then said that, “That is something I am afraid
we will have to take up with the Secretary.”

Fred Lyon then stated that not being able to obtain any additional
information from McCormack he
advised McCormack he would again
discuss this matter with Mr. Braden. He has been endeavoring all this morning to
contact Mr. Braden for the purpose
of talking with him about this matter and arranging for Braden to see
Secretary Byrnes. He promised he
would call me immediately upon securing a conference with Mr. Braden, in order that the Bureau may be
kept up to date on this matter.

* Source: National
Archives and Records Administration, RG 263, Records of the Central
Intelligence Agency, Troy Papers, FBI Documents. No classification marking.

45. Minutes of Meeting45. Minutes of MeetingSource

Washington, November 14, 1945, 10 a.m.

MEETING OF THE SECRETARIES OF STATE, WAR AND NAVY

PRESENT

The Secretary of State

The Secretary of War accompanied by Robert A. Lovett, Assistant Secretary of War for Air
and Colonel Charles W. McCarthy

The Secretary of the Navy accompanied by Major Correa

Mr. Matthews

Central Intelligence Agency

Mr. Forrestal said that there was
only one matter that he wished to discuss, namely, the question of a
Central Intelligence Agency and referred in this connection to the
President's directive to Admiral Leahy.1 Mr. Byrnes said that Admiral Leahy had not been aware of the
fact that at present no law exists authorizing the establishment of a
central intelligence organization and that, consequently, no definitive
action can be taken until the Government reorganization law is passed.
He expected that this might take place in two or three weeks. He would
be glad, however, to consider the framework of the organization to be
set up and thought we should take the several plans submitted into
consideration and try to integrate and reconcile them. Mr. Patterson said that Mr. Lovett had been devoting a great deal
of time to the study of the problem and he would like to have him give
an account of his conclusions.

Mr. Lovett then circulated a
summary of a report of his committee dated November 3, 1945 (copy
attached as annex 1).2
He said that there are three aspects which his committee had covered:
(1) the general survey; (2) the external problem; and (3) the internal
problem within the War Department. He said his committee had called many
people as witnesses including those who had worked on the British
“ultra” and “Y” systems.3 They had gone into all
phases of espionage and clandestine work and he was convinced that it
must be centralized. His committee reached the conclusion that a National Intelligence Authority
and a Central Intelligence Agency should both be established as soon as
possible. The former should be composed of the Secretaries of State, War
and Navy and a representative of the Joint Chiefs of Staff. It should be
empowered to formulate policies which would be binding upon the Central
Intelligence Agency and all intelligence activities of other Government
departments. The Central Intelligence Agency would be headed by a
Director to be appointed or removed by the President on recommendation
of the National Intelligence Authority. Within the Central Intelligence
Agency, he said, there should be constituted a “reading panel” or
Intelligence Board on which, in addition to the War, Navy and Air
Staffs, the principal civilian intelligence agencies would be
represented. This board would be expected to study and evaluate
intelligence facts and its reports would represent the combined views of
the members. Where a difference of opinion existed, however, the report
would likewise contain the dissident views. This Mr. Lovett thought was an important aspect
and he believed the failure of the German Intelligence Service to permit
a presentation of dissenting views was largely responsible for its
breakdown. The British service, he felt, was greatly superior. In the
first place it possessed continuity and the technical composition of the
British Intelligence Service permitted it to divorce the factual aspects
of their findings from political creed. He pointed out that the four top
German Intelligence Officers had been executed for political reasons.
The result was that German Intelligence authorities were afraid to
interpret facts which might be contrary to Nazi policy. A shining
example of this was the failure of the German Intelligence Service to
anticipate our North Africa landings and led them to express their
conclusion that there was inadequate Allied shipping to support such an
operation. When we send our people out, such as Ambassadors, with the
outlook of our national policy we are bound to get reports which are
colored to a certain extent. He said the Italian Intelligence Service
was better and more factual than the German. At present he believes that
we are in a better situation than the British, having more than a
hundred good contact agents, and mentioned particularly our close
intelligence relationships established during the war with
Czechoslovakia and the Dutch. These contacts are, however, based on
considerations of personal confidence and unless some decision is
promptly reached on our future intelligence set-up, we are in danger of
losing what we have built up.

Mr. Lovett said that an advantage
of the system he proposed lay in the fact that conclusions would be
reached not by one man but by a board thus avoiding the danger of having
a single slanted view guide our policies. As an example of this danger,
he pointed to the error of our intelligence service in predicting that
Russia couldn't last six weeks. Furthermore, overt and special
intelligence under his plan are fitted in with clandestine intelligence. Mr. Byrnes said that the Budget report4 on this question seemed to be very elaborate
and he would not agree with it all through. One difficulty, he said, is
that so much intelligence is accumulated that it cannot be read. Mr.
Lovett said that intelligence
is a very involved subject. It includes: (1) the collection of
information, (2) the accurate interpretation of information, and (3) the
proper dissemination of information. We must first reach the impartial
view on the facts and then get the information where it is needed.
Suspicion, distrust and jealousy seem to be the occupational diseases of
anyone dealing with intelligence. They cancel out a lot that seems to be
apparent. It is important that operations should be centralized. He
cited the case where OSS agents in
Lisbon stole a Japanese code which had long been in the possession of
our G-2 cryptanalysts and thus “gummed up” the situation by causing the
Japanese to change codes. Mr. Forrestal agreed that it is important that the policy
aspect should not be so strong as to prejudice our intelligence
evaluations. He remarked that Colonel Truman Smith5 had “his head cut off” because people here did not wish
to believe that Germany was strong enough to accomplish what she
did.

Referring to the Budget Bureau's plan Mr. Lovett said that it was too loose and had too many
aspects of a town meeting. Mr. Byrnes said that he did not like the joint commission it
provided for which included, for example, the Department of Commerce.
He, furthermore, did not like the emphasis on research and analysis to
the degree it had been given. The Budget report, he said, pointed out
that we had had to improvise during the war in many matters of
industrial intelligence which should have been prepared long before. The
plan was too elaborate, he felt, and too big. While it contemplated a
Central Intelligence Agency it left operations in each separate
Department. The argument against duplication still holds against the
Budget Bureau proposal.

Mr. Lovett said that in his
opinion the Budget project fails in three respects: (1) it provides for
very loose coordination; (2) it provides for multiple collecting
agencies which is bad in clandestine intelligence. Frequently they might
operate against each other. There should, he feels, be only one
operating agency dealing with espionage; (3) it treats the problem as
though the Cabinet members were going to operate it. This in practice is
impossible.

There was some discussion of the role of the FBI and there was general agreement that intelligence
should be divorced from police powers. Mr. Lovett thought that when you put both in the hands of a
single agency the result is a “gestapo.” On the other hand, he felt,
that the FBI should be on the reading
panel because they have the best personality file in the world. Also, the FBI is expert on the production of false documents which we
developed so successfully during the war and at which we became
outstandingly adept.

Mr. Byrnes said that it was
apparent that all were in favor of a central agency. He mentioned that
the Budget report minimized the value of clandestine espionage and
inquired as to the authorship of the report. Mr. Lovett said that he understood that it
had been written by Mr. Donald
Stone and Mr. Schwarzwolder. Mr. Byrnes and Mr. Patterson suggested the appointment of
a working committee to get at the problem as quickly as possible since
the existing organization is rapidly disintegrating and funds for
certain units are available only until January 1. Mr. Byrnes appointed Mr. Russell and Mr. McCormack to represent the State
Department and suggested that each Department have two representatives.
Mr. Patterson appointed Mr.
Lovett. (The second name
given later was General George Brownell and Mr. Forrestal later named Rear Admiral
Souers and Major Correa.)

Mr. Patterson inquired whether
anyone knew of a good man for the important position of Director of
Intelligence. Mr. Lovett said the
only name he had heard mentioned was that of Allen Dulles who was generally regarded as highly
competent in that field. He had organized the best job of the OSS in Switzerland.

* Source: National
Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Records of the
Department of State, Decimal File 1945-49, 101.61/11-1445. Top
Secret. No drafting information appears on the source text. Another
copy is ibid., Diplomatic Branch Reference File, Minutes of the
Committee of Three, 1944-1947.

1 Document 44.

2 The summary of the
Lovett Report, which was
attached to the source text as Annex I, is in the Supplement.

3 A reference to World
War II communications intelligence.

4 See footnote 2, Document
38.

5 U.S. Military Attache in Berlin, February 1935-March
1939.

46. Paper Prepared for the Secretary of State's Staff Committee46. Paper Prepared for the Secretary of State's Staff CommitteeSource

Washington, November 15,
1945.

SC-172

DEVELOPMENT OF A NATIONAL INTELLIGENCE PROGRAM

The Problem

To recommend action pursuant to the letter from the President dated
September 20, 1945 directing the Secretary of State to “take the lead
in developing a
comprehensive and coordinated foreign intelligence program for all
Federal agencies concerned with that type of activity”.

Recommendations

It is recommended that:

(1) The proposed agreement establishing an Interdepartmental Intelligence
Coordinating Authority and an Interdepartmental Security Coordinating
Authority, contained in Annex “I”,1 be approved.

(2) Centralized conduct of espionage and counterespionage activities be
approved in principle, subject to the formulation of detailed
organizational and operating plans.

(3) In lieu of a central agency responsible for producing national
intelligence estimates, the projected Special Estimates Staff of the
Special Assistant for Research and Intelligence be assigned that
responsibility in collaboration with representatives from other
interested agencies as described in the last paragraph of the following
discussion.

Discussion

The President, in a letter to the Secretary of State dated September 20,
1945, issued the following directive:

“I particularly desire that you take the lead in developing a
comprehensive and coordinated foreign intelligence program for all
Federal agencies concerned with that type of activity. This should be
done through the creation of an interdepartmental group, heading up
under the State Department, which would formulate plans for my approval.
This procedure will permit the planning of complete coverage of the
foreign intelligence field and the assigning and controlling of
operations in such manner that the needs of both the individual agencies
and the Government as a whole will be met with maximum
effectiveness.”

The Secretaries of War and the Navy, in a letter to the Secretary of
State dated September 29, 1945, transmitted the recommendations of the
Joint Chiefs of Staff as to how best to “provide for the development and
coordination of Intelligence activities related to the national
security”. Studies on various aspects of intelligence activities in the
post-war period have also been produced by many other individuals and
agencies, such as the Attorney General,2 the Director of the
Bureau of the Budget,3 the Secretary of the Navy,4
the Director of Censorship, the Librarian of Congress,5 and a committee in the War Department.6 All of these studies
and recommendations have been considered in the preparation of this
report.

The President's directive clearly specifies that the coordinating
authority must be an interdepartmental group heading up under the State
Department, but it does not specify the organization, membership, or
method of operation of that group. The directive also establishes the
scope of activity of the group as the entire “foreign intelligence
field”. It does not confine it to “intelligence activities related to
the national security”, security (or counter) intelligence, censorship,
or other specialized fields, but expands it to cover the furtherance of
our national interests as well as the safeguarding of our national
security. It therefore includes the commercial and cultural fields in
addition to the military and national security fields. The directive
further authorizes the “assigning and controlling” of all foreign
intelligence operations, and the formulation of operating plans to
accomplish this for the President's approval, presumably when necessary.
The directive does not specifically indicate the source of the funds,
personnel, and facilities required to perform the coordinating function
and any other centralized operations deemed necessary. The
interdepartmental character of the group, under State Department
leadership, implies, however, that such funds, personnel and facilities
should be provided by the participating agencies, with the principal
responsibility resting upon the State Department. The various factors
which require decision under the President's directive are discussed
below.

Organization of the Interdepartmental Group

The job of coordinating the entire intelligence field will require two
separate interdepartmental coordinating bodies; one with authority in
the broad field of foreign intelligence activities, and the other in the
specialized field of internal security and security intelligence. This
division is necessary because the agencies interested, points of view,
and types of operations vary markedly in those two fields. Some
coordination will be necessary between the activities of the
intelligence and the security coordinating authorities. This
coordination, however, is accomplished through the dual membership of
three agencies (State, War and Navy Departments) on the two authorities
and through the existence of a single secretariat serving both
authorities.

Membership of the Coordinating Authorities

The Interdepartmental Intelligence Coordinating Authority (I.I.C.A.) will
consist of the Secretary of State as Chairman, and of the Secretaries of
War and the Navy. Many other departments and agencies, such as Commerce,
Agriculture, Treasury, Interior, Labor, etc., have an important but
specialized contribution to make to and an interest in the
Government-wide foreign intelligence program. The departments
designated, however, are the principal users and producers of foreign
intelligence. In determining what membership would be most satisfactory,
the relative advantage of including all departments of interest had to
be weighed against the disadvantage of creating too large and unwieldy a
top group. The interests of the departments other than State, War and
Navy are provided for through representation on every Committee in which
they have an interest. Thus, while the omission of many departments puts
a special responsibility on the State Department to represent their
interests adequately, it is suggested that the membership be limited to
the three principal departments.

Membership of the Joint Chiefs of Staff is not considered necessary or
appropriate since their interests and requirements are not distinct from
but can be represented by the Secretaries of War and the Navy.

The Interdepartmental Security Coordinating Authority (I.S.C.A.) will
consist of the Secretary of State as Chairman, and of the Secretary of
the Treasury, the Secretary of War, the Attorney General, and the
Secretary of the Navy. These represent the only departments with major
responsibilities in that field, and other agencies having specialized
interests may be adequately represented on the proposed specialized
subcommittees.

Method of Operation

The functions envisaged for the coordinating Authorities are the
formulation and execution of plans for coordinating all intelligence and
security activities, and the conduct of certain centralized operations
where the need exists. The procedures by which these functions would be
performed are described in Annex II.7

Proposed Types of Centralized Operations

Centralized operations which have already been proposed include (1) the
conduct of espionage and counterespionage activities and (2) the
production of national intelligence estimates. Other types of operations
which might later be given
consideration as suitable to be conducted centrally are the production
of topographic studies of specific areas and the maintenance of a
central file of biographical records of foreign personalities.

The principle of centralized conduct of espionage and counterespionage
activities should be approved, subject to the formulation of detailed
organizational and operating plans by special Committees appointed by
the intelligence and security Authorities respectively immediately upon
their establishment. The difficulties, dangers and expense of such
activities and the imperative need for utmost security regarding such
activities require that they be strictly limited and carefully
controlled by a central Authority. Moreover, their usefulness to all
agencies charged with safeguarding the national security makes it
inappropriate and undesirable for any single agency to undertake such
activities. Apportionment of the responsibility for providing funds,
personnel and facilities will also enhance the possibilities of
maintaining security. Such apportionment of funds not specifically
earmarked for this purpose is understood to be acceptable to the Bureau
of the Budget.

It is further recommended that the Department of State oppose the
establishment of an interdepartmental or independent agency for the
production of national intelligence estimates. Intelligence estimates
are useless if produced in a vacuum. They are useful only when they
assist directly in the formulation of foreign policy, or the conduct of
foreign affairs. Any intelligence agency producing estimates must
therefore be a part of some body performing those functions. Only by
such an integrated relationship can an intelligence agency keep abreast
of our foreign objectives and affairs so that it may assist in their
accomplishment and conduct. It has been suggested that a central agency
producing national intelligence estimates could serve the President, the
Secretaries of State, War and Navy and various interdepartmental groups
dealing in foreign affairs. That suggestion overlooks the fact that the
Secretary of State is principally responsible for advising and assisting
the President in the field of foreign affairs and for coordinating the
activities of all governmental agencies in that field. It is therefore
appropriate that the Department of State assume the responsibility for
the production of any national intelligence estimates, with the advice
and assistance of other governmental agencies. Each Secretary should and
will inevitably continue to look to his own intelligence agency despite
the existence of a central agency.

It is recommended that, in lieu of such a central agency, the projected
Special Estimates Staff of the Special Assistant for Research and
Intelligence undertake the production of any national intelligence
estimates required by the President, the Secretary of State and other
top-level or supra-departmental officials and agencies of the
Government. For that purpose,
the Secretaries of War and Navy should be invited to detail full-time
representatives from air, ground and naval intelligence to each of the
four geographic sections of that staff. Representation from other
agencies, such as Treasury, Commerce, Labor, et cetera, should be
invited as the need arises. In the event of disagreement within that
reinforced staff, the heads of the interested agencies should attempt to
reconcile such differences through consultation. Should that prove
impossible, the nature of the disagreement should be clearly stated in
the final estimate.

It is also proposed that the Special Estimates Staff in the Department of
State, with the assistance of an adequate number of representatives from
the War and Navy Departments, shall assume responsibility for preparing
weekly political reports of the type that are now produced
independently, and with much duplication of effort, by units in the
State Department, the Military Intelligence Service and the Office of
Naval Intelligence. In that manner a central reporting organization can
be achieved and such organization can be given any other reporting
functions of an interdepartmental character which it can perform with
advantage.

* Source: National Archives and Records
Administration, RG 353, Records of Interdepartmental and
Intradepartmental Committees—State Department, Lot File No. 122,
Records of the Secretary's Staff Committee 1944-47. Secret. The
Secretary's Staff Committee, organized in 1944 by Secretary of State
Stettinius to formulate and coordinate Departmental policy, included
as members the Secretary, the Under Secretary, and the Assistant
Secretaries as well as selected other officers. There is no drafting
information on the source text, but it is the “McCormack Plan” for national
intelligence organization as distinct from the “McCormack Plan” for the Department
of State's own internal intelligence organization.

1 Annex I is
in the Supplement.

2 Document 17.

3 See Document 38 and footnote 2
thereto.

4 Apparent reference to the chapter on intelligence in
the Eberstadt Report.

5 The plans by the Director of Censorship and the
Librarian of Congress have
not been found.

6 Document 42.

7 Annex
II, Program of Operations for the Interdepartment Intelligence
Coordinating Authority and the Interdepartmental Security
Coordinating Authority, and Annex III, Comparison of Plans for
Coordinated or Centralized Intelligence, November 19, are in the
Supplement. Annex V is Document 49; Annex
VI is Document 56; regarding Annex IV, See
footnote 6, Document 50.

47. Memorandum of Meeting47. Memorandum of MeetingSource

Washington, November 19, 1945, 3 p.m.

MEMORANDUM COVERING MEETING OF THEINTERDEPARTMENTAL COMMITTEE

PRESENT

Mr. Russell, Col. McCormack, Mr. Lovett, Brig. Gen. Brownell, Major
Correa and the
undersigned

1. After a general discussion it was obvious that representatives of
Secretary of War and Navy on the one hand and representatives of
Secretary of State were unable
to make any progress in their negotiations until several fundamental
differences could be clarified as follows:

(a) Col. McCormack construes the
letter of 20 Sept. 1945 as a directive to the Secretary of State to take
the lead in developing an interdepartmental intelligence program and
putting the program in operation.

(b) Representatives of SecWar and SecNav interpret the letter as a
directive to Sec State to take the lead in creating an interdepartmental
group to formulate plans for the approval of the President.

(c) Col. McCormack favors a plan
providing that the head or Executive Secretary of the coordinating
authority be named by Secretary of State and that he be an employee of
the State Department.

(d) Col. McCormack's plan provides
further that in lieu of a Central agency responsible for producing
national intelligence estimates, the Estimates Staff of the Special
Assistant for Research and Intelligence be assigned the responsibility
in collaboration with other interested agencies.

(e) Representatives of SecWar and Navy feel strongly that the head or
Director of the C.I.A. should be named by the President upon the
nomination of and responsible to the Secretaries of State, War and Navy
and representatives of J.C.S. and that National Intelligence estimates
should be produced by the C.I.A.

2. The meeting adjourned with the understanding that we would ask our
respective Secretaries to instruct their representatives as to which
concept should prevail. After decision is reached on the question of top
control it is believed the committee can reconcile differences in
connection with the formulation of a program for submission to the
President.

S.W. Souers1
Rear Admiral, USNR

* Source: Central
Intelligence Agency Historical Files, HS/HC-135. Top Secret. The
date on the memorandum is October 19 but this presumably is an error
as the meeting was held November 19. The meeting was held in the
Department of State. The committee was the working group appointed
by the Secretaries of State, War, and Navy at their November 14
meeting; see Document 45.

1 Printed from a copy
that bears this typed signature.

48. Minutes of the 168th Meeting of the Secretary of State's Staff Committee48. Minutes of the 168th Meeting of the Secretary of State's Staff
CommitteeSource

Washington, November 20, 1945, 9:30 a.m.

PARTICIPANTS

Present

The Secretary (presiding)

The Under Secretary

The Counselor

Mr. Braden

Mr. Clayton

Mr. Hackworth

Mr. McCormack

Mr. Pasvolsky

Mr. Russell, Donald

Mr. Hiss, SPA

Mr. Kindleberger, GA (part of meeting)

Mr. Gange

Mr. Lewis

Mr. Rothwell

Absent

Mr. Benton

Mr. Dunn

[Here follows discussion of subjects unrelated to intelligence.]

(The Secretary left the meeting at this point.)

Development of a National Intelligence Program
(Document SC-172, Agenda Item 4)

Mr. McCormack discussed document
SC-172,1 making recommendations
regarding the development of an interdepartmental intelligence program.
He called attention to Annex III2 of the
document in which a comparison was made between a plan which had been
proposed by him, and one prepared in the War Department. He said the
principal point of difference between the two plans was with respect to
the position of the Department of State with relation to the proposed
intelligence organization. Mr. McCormack said he understood that at the first
interdepartmental meeting on the subject, it had been understood that
the Department of State would take the lead in developing the
intelligence program.3 He said the Budget Bureau had agreed that whatever
agency was given responsibility
for the program should not have to go to Congress for appropriations and
that the Executive Secretary of the Intelligence Coordinating Authority
should be appointed by the Secretary of State. Mr. McCormack said the armed services were
not too pleased with this latter proposal.

Mr. Braden said that on the basis
of his experience in Latin America, he felt strongly that the Department
should direct and control foreign intelligence operations. He said that
in Latin America the duplication of effort by Army and Navy attaches
(and for a time by FBI representatives)
had been very unfortunate. He said the training of military and naval
people does not fit them for this kind of work and their functions
should be limited to those of advisers in their own fields. The
Counselor said he agreed that the intelligence service should not be
under the control of the armed services. He said, however, that the
criticism was sometimes made of other intelligence services (the British
service during the Chamberlain regime, for example) that intelligence
reporting was often colored to justify previously determined foreign
policy. He asked what the answer was to this argument.

Mr. McCormack said the only
solution was to have a sound research and analysis organization in
Washington which would be able to detect this sort of reporting. The
Counselor asked Mr. McCormack
whether he envisaged a considerable amount of autonomy for the
intelligence agency. In other words, he said, while parts of the agency
would be located in the Department, it would not be part of any
operating branch of the Department. Mr. McCormack said this was correct. He also said the
intelligence service would have to have its own means of
communication.

Mr. Braden said there was an
immediate problem in connection with FBI
personnel in Latin America. He said FBI
representatives were shortly to be withdrawn from all Latin American
countries, leaving us without any organization there for security
intelligence. He said these officers had been very effective and had
established a very valuable organization which should be retained if
possible. Mr. McCormack said he
understood the President had stated flatly that the FBI was not to operate outside the United
States. Mr. McCormack said the
only Department which had the funds to take over the FBI personnel was the War Department. He
asked Mr. Braden to give him full
information regarding the FBI personnel
(including names of persons, locations, etc.) which he might use as a
basis for opening discussions with the War Department regarding the
matter.

Mr. McCormack also referred to the
compilation of strategic estimates which had been prepared during the
war for the President and other high officers. The principal agency for
producing such estimates was the Joint Intelligence Committee on which
were represented the State and
War Departments, the Foreign Economic Administration, and the Office of
Strategic Services. The Committee was related closely to the Joint
Chiefs of Staff. The estimates prepared by the Joint Intelligence
Committee varied greatly in value, depending on the accident of the
choice of the person or agency to prepare them. In the Department of
State, for example, no personnel was available to devote sufficient time
to working on such estimates, and Mr. McCormack said he was now in the position, as Department
of State member of the Joint Intelligence Committee, of having to inform
the Committee, when a request was made for a report to be prepared in
the Department, that personnel was not available for this work. He said
the War Department plan places the responsibility for the preparation of
such estimates in a joint agency and in his plan, the responsibility is
placed in the Department of State. Mr. McCormack asked whether the Committee considered this to
be the right approach. Mr. Braden
said that on the basis of his Latin American experience, he felt that it
was the right approach.

Mr. Pasvolsky said there appeared to be three problems involved: First,
the problem of obtaining the information in the field; second, the
problem of making sure that there is in Washington a place where all
such information is available; and, third, the problem of making it
available to all persons who need it. Mr. McCormack said he would agree with Mr. Pasvolsky if the
second problem were restated to read “the problem of taking all incoming
information and placing it into the proper form for use”.

The Committee agreed that further consideration of the document should be
deferred until the meeting of Tuesday, November 27th.

Next Meeting

The Committee agreed that the next meeting should be on Saturday,
November 24th, for the purpose of disposing of the items remaining on
the Agenda and any other items to be presented.

The meeting adjourned at 10:55.

* Source: National Archives and
Records Administration, RG 353, Records of Interdepartmental and
Intradepartmental Committees—State Department, Lot File No. 122,
Records of the Secretary's Staff Committee 1944-47. Top Secret.
Drafted by James H. Lewis. The meeting was held in the Secretary's
office.

1 Document 46.

2 See footnote 7, Document 46.

3 It is not clear to
which meeting McCormack was
referring.

49. Paper Prepared for the Secretary of State's Staff Committee49. Paper Prepared for the Secretary of State's Staff CommitteeSource

Washington, November 26,
1945.

SC-172

ANNEX V

RECONCILIATION OF PLANS FOR COORDINATIONOF FOREIGN INTELLIGENCE

This is an attempt to define and, if possible, to reduce the area of
disagreement between the State Department and War Department plans for
coordination of foreign intelligence.1 There appear to be three problems:

a. What will be the composition of the top authority;

b. Whether the executive head of the central intelligence agency will be
a State Department employee; and

c. Where the final responsibility for “strategic estimates” will
reside.

Composition of Top Authority

The separation of the top directing organizations into two Authorities,
one for Intelligence and one for Security, permits a clear line of
distinction to be preserved between the two types of functions, and that
is considered by some to be of advantage. However, the double-headed top
organization is primarily a device for centralizing control of positive
intelligence in State, War and Navy. Any other device that accomplished
the same purpose, while bringing in on security matters the other
Departments interested in security, would be equally acceptable.

The other point relates to the inclusion or exclusion of a representative
of the Joint Chiefs of Staff. The State Department does not understand
why such a representative should be included, since the interests of the
Joint Chiefs of Staff can be represented adequately by War and Navy.
Moreover, it is believed that such inclusion weights the Authority too
heavily on the military side.

It is also believed that inclusion of a representative of the JCS changes the character of the Authority
adversely, in that it ceases to be a Board of top policy officers who
can bind their respective departments. Being only a representative, the
JCS man would have to consult his
principals on matters important enough to justify attention at the
Cabinet level; and in practice this would probably mean that papers for
the Authority would have to go
through not only the internal machinery of the several departments but
also the separate machinery of the Joint Chiefs of Staff.

A suggestion for resolving the differences as to the top Authority is
to:

a. Omit the JCS representative;

b. Constitute the Secretaries of State, War and Navy as a single
authority for both Intelligence and Security;

c. Authorize them to call in the heads of other agencies to sit as
members of the Authority on matters of particular interest to those
agencies; and

d. Establish as a “by-law” of the Authority that, on all matters of
Security (as defined), the Treasury and FBI (not the Attorney General) would be called in.

Note: Mr. Benjamin V. Cohen, Counselor of the
State Department, has suggested that it would be desirable to provide
for the inclusion of additional departmental heads in the top Authority
when matters are under consideration which may be of particular interest
to them. Major Correa, Office of
the Secretary of the Navy, has questioned the desirability of including
the Attorney General, the chief law enforcement officer of the
Government, in an Authority which would have to deal with clandestine
activities.

Executive Head of the Central Intelligence
Agency

The first thing that has to be decided on this issue is whether to
organize an independent agency with a Director appointed by the
President and with a separate budget, or to constitute a central agency
from existing departments with an executive who is a departmental
employee. In proposing to set up an independent agency, the War
Department plan is apparently designed to make the Director a neutral
party, with the prestige and authority of the President behind him.
Various people who have studied the problem, including the Director of
the Bureau of the Budget and the undersigned, are of the opinion that a
central agency constituted from the various departments is advantageous
for the following reasons:

a. It dispenses with the necessity of a Presidential appointment and an
independent budget, thus giving the Executive a greater chance of
anonymity.

b. The Executive, backed by the prestige and authority of the Secretary
of State in foreign affairs, would have fewer difficulties in the job of
coordinating the intelligence activities of the numerous government
agencies than would a Director who had no departmental status but had to
refer to the President each time his authority was questioned.

It is suggested that a workable plan could be put into effect promptly,
on the basis that the initial organization would be inter-departmental.
This would permit the coordinating machinery, which is urgently needed
and will be required whatever plan is adopted, to get going without much delay, whereas the
organization of an independent central agency may take a considerable
time. If, six months or a year from now, when the machinery is in
motion, it appears desirable to give independent status to the central
agency, that can be done. The top Authority will always be in a position
to make that kind of a change.

Responsibility for Strategic Estimates

The term “strategic estimates” is used to mean the assumptions of fact
that are taken as the basis for action or policy at the top level of the
Government. At present there are various informal means for arriving at
such estimates on top level matters, and there is also the formal
machinery of the Joint Intelligence Committee. That committee, being an
agency of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, is not assigned under either plan
the responsibility for strategic estimates.

The War Department plan may be construed (though not necessarily) as
entrusting the formulation of strategic estimates to the proposed
central agency. The State Department plan would vest that responsibility
in the State Department, which would discharge it by means of a Special
Estimates Staff, functioning under the Department but including Army and
Navy working representatives.

The matter of strategic estimates is quite urgent, in view of the many
important problems that are involved in the forthcoming peace treaty
negotiations. Those problems fall within the area of responsibility of
the State Department for the conduct of foreign affairs, and for that
reason it seems logical to vest the responsibility for strategic
estimates in the State Department.

Here again is a situation that might be dealt with by taking the easiest
available course and learning by experience whether a transfer of the
function from the Department of State to the central agency might be
desirable.

Conclusion

If the problem of representation of the Joint Chiefs of Staff can be
resolved, the State Department and War Department plans are sufficiently
close together to enable the following to be done:

a. Setting up the National Intelligence Authority;

b. Setting up a State Department representative as Executive Secretary of
the Authority, without prejudice to a decision at some later date to
create an independent agency;

c. Putting the coordinating machinery into immediate operation, in order
to define our national intelligence requirements and lay out a
comprehensive and coordinated program to meet them.

d. Selecting a person to head the secret operations and laying the plans
for them (it is assumed that execution of such plans will require
confidential funds not presently available);

e. Setting up in the State Department a Strategic Estimates Staff, which
can be turned over to the central agency at some later date if that
shall appear desirable.

In the interests of prompt action, a solution along the above lines is
recommended.

Alfred McCormack2
Special Assistant to the Secretary

* Source: Truman Library, Papers of J. Anthony Panuch, State Department
Research and Intelligence #1. Secret.

1 Documents 42 and 46.

2 Printed from a copy that bears this
typed signature.

50. Minutes of the 170th Meeting of the Secretary of State's Staff Committee50. Minutes of the 170th Meeting of the Secretary of State's Staff
CommitteeSource

Washington, November 27, 1945, 9:30 a.m.

PARTICIPANTS

Present

The Secretary (presiding)

The Under Secretary

The Counselor

Mr. Benton

Mr. Braden

Mr. Hackworth

Mr. Labouisse (for Mr. Clayton)

Mr. McCormack

Mr. Pasvolsky

Mr. Russell

Mr. Gange

Mr. Lewis

Mr. Rothwell

Absent

Mr. Clayton

Mr. Dunn

The Committee met at 9:30 a.m.

Agenda Items

Development of a National Intelligence Program
(Document SC-172,1 Agenda Item 1)

Mr. McCormack presented document
SC-172 making recommendations regarding the development of a national
intelligence program. He called
attention in particular to Annex V,2 in which were outlined
the principal differences between the recommendations in the document
and the plans drawn up by the War Department3 for the coordination of
foreign intelligence.

The Secretary said this was a matter in which the President was very much
interested. He had assigned responsibility for it to Admiral Leahy, and about three weeks ago he
had informed the Secretary that he thought some action should be taken
on the matter. The Secretary said he had informed the President that not
much could be done at the present time. He pointed out that the
reorganization bill was being considered and Congress might resent
action prior to passage of the bill. About a week ago, the Secretary
said, the President had asked the Secretaries of War and the Navy, and
himself to meet on November 28 to discuss the subject. On November 26,
the Secretary asked the President to postpone this meeting in order that
the Department might have more time to consider all problems involved.
The Secretary informed the President that the reorganization bill would
probably not be signed for about two weeks, and he thought that by that
time the Department would have its plan ready.4

The Secretary said that in trying to arrive at some compromise, it was
necessary to bear in mind that whatever we propose will have to be
“sold” to the President. It will be turned over by the President to
Admiral Leahy, who has strong
views on the matter and the Secretary said we must, therefore, seek to
avoid unnecessary questions of jurisdictional conflict with the Army and
the Navy. The Secretary said the plan should also be as simple as
possible. He said if the military services present a plan which is not
complicated, while our plan is complicated, the military plan will have
a much better chance of being adopted.

The Secretary said the division at the top, proposed in the paper
(between Interdepartmental Intelligence Coordinating Authority and
Interdepartmental Security Coordinating Authority) had certain
advantages, but he wondered whether considering all factors it would be
desirable particularly in view of the President's desire to concentrate
intelligence service in one
agency. Mr. McCormack informed
the Secretary that his latest proposal called for a single top
organization.

The Secretary said that in his discussion with the President and Admiral
Leahy, a question had
been raised regarding the participation of the Budget Bureau in making
plans for the intelligence organization. Mr. McCormack said that during the war all the intelligence
agencies had had difficulties of various sorts. In the case of the
Office of Naval Intelligence, Admiral King had requested the Budget
Bureau to advise on its reorganization. The Budget Bureau had also
supervised the organization of G2 in the Army and had done much work for
OSS. The Budget Bureau was, in fact,
the only agency familiar with all the intelligence agencies in the
Government, and was, therefore, in a position to offer much helpful
advice.

Mr. McCormack also outlined the
origin of the War Department's plan for coordinating foreign
intelligence. He said that General Donovan had always been a strong advocate of a unified
intelligence service. Late in 1944 word got around that President
Roosevelt was favorably
impressed with the idea, and the Army decided some action should be
taken. An Army-Navy Committee had then been set up under the direction
of General Nichols to prepare a plan for a central agency for use in the
event such a plan was necessary. The plan was prepared and submitted to
the Joint Intelligence Committee and in essence it is the present War
Department plan.

Mr. McCormack said the War
Department plan does not answer a number of serious questions, for
example, how to bring together the many agencies of the Government
working on various problems. As an example, he referred to the problem
of meteorological intelligence which was now divided among the Weather
Bureau, the Navy, the Army, civil airlines, and other bodies. The
Secretary asked how this would be handled under the plan proposed by Mr.
McCormack. Mr. McCormack said an interdepartmental
committee would be established, composed of all agencies concerned,
which would be charged with establishing a program and responsibility
for reviewing its adequacy.

Mr. McCormack said the idea of
establishing one central intelligence agency imposed on all other
agencies was very much over-simplified. He said that such an agency
would have to be a very large one. However, he thought there was no
question of the need for a central coordinating authority.

Mr. McCormack said that in
connection with the establishment of the top organization, the question
arises as to where the State Department fits into the picture. On the
assumption that the President wished the Department to take the lead in
the matter, the plan before the Committee proposed that the Secretary
should be Chairman of the authority; that the executive officer should
be appointed from the State Department; and that the preparation of strategic estimates should
be entrusted to the State Department. Secret intelligence operations
would be the responsibility of the central agency. The main functions of
the agency, Mr. McCormack said,
would be to harness the resources of the Government to get the most
information out of all agencies and to get the best job done in each
case.

The Secretary said he was sure the President had never gone into the
question in much detail. He said he had probably viewed the problem only
as one of centralizing intelligence operations abroad. This was the
aspect of the question which General Donovan had discussed with the President. The Secretary
said that at the time of General Donovan's discussion, he [the Secretary]5 had not liked
the proposal too well but General Donovan had been suggesting that the central agency
should be under the President's direction. The Secretary said he now saw
the wisdom of the plan proposed by the Budget Bureau and Mr. McCormack, but he said there was still
the problem of convincing the President. He also said that when the
Department is ready to make a recommendation with regard to the
appointment of an executive office, its case must be well prepared and
presented. He said he felt that it would be better if the agency were
not made directly responsible to the President.

The Counselor expressed agreement with the Secretary and pointed out that
even if the President took the most active interest in the agency in
peacetime, it would be unlikely that he could do this in wartime. He
also expressed his opinion that a central operating agency, such as that
proposed by the War Department, could not avoid important duties of
coordination, and that if it were an agency of this type doing its own
work, it would be unable to achieve such coordination effectively.

The Secretary raised the question as to how the desired coordination
could best be obtained. He said the War and Navy Departments had had
much more experience with intelligence problems than the State
Department, and he asked whether they would be disposed to cooperate
with the Department as well as they would with an independent central
agency. Mr. McCormack said that
in peacetime the State Department has certain intelligence functions
which Army and Navy recognize, and he thought that the State
Department's primary responsibility in foreign affairs could be so
presented that Army and Navy would recognize it. He emphasized his
opinion that the central agency proposed by the War Department would be
a pretext like the Joint Intelligence Committee, or else it would become
so large that Congress would raise difficulties regarding
appropriations.

The Secretary asked whether the plan was to ask for secret
appropriations. Mr. Russell said
it might as well be recognized at the outset that this would be
impossible. The Secretary agreed and said Congress would want to know
the cost of intelligence operations, and there would probably also be
difficulty in convincing Congress of the necessity for appropriations
for intelligence operations carried on by each of the several
departments concerned. Mr. McCormack said he did not minimize the difficulties
involved in this connection. He said he hoped, however, that much of the
work would be paid for by the individual departments out of regular
appropriations. He suggested that the need for large appropriations
could be avoided by the extensive use of working personnel in the
several departments.

(The Secretary and Mr. Russell
left the meeting at this point.)

Mr. Braden said he agreed with Mr.
McCormack that the War
Department plan was unsatisfactory but he asked whether the plan
proposed by Mr. McCormack was not
getting away from the real function of the State Department and the
Foreign Service. He said that in the field, intelligence was the
function of the Department's Foreign Service, and of the associated
services represented by military, naval, and legal attaches. The
information obtained by these representatives should be calibrated by
the Chief of Mission and should then flow back to the Department to the
people who know how to judge its reliability and usefulness. These
officers should then be able to give the Secretary all the information
that is necessary. He said he thought that under the President's
directive a very simple coordinating set-up could be established with
very little extra personnel.

Mr. Braden also referred to the
proposed withdrawal of FBI personnel
from Latin America as outlined in Annex IV to document SC-172.6 He emphasized again the importance of attempting
to work out some arrangement for retaining the FBI representatives in other American republics.

Mr. McCormack said he was in
general agreement with Mr. Braden's viewpoint, but he thought that everyone's
experience with intelligence services in Washington had not been as
happy as Mr. Braden's. He cited
examples of delays in obtaining information and of the unavailability of
full and up-to-date information needed during the course of the war. He
said it was in his opinion very important to set up an organization
which will ascertain in advance the deficiencies in our information and
take the necessary steps to correct them. Mr. Braden said his idea was that the State Department
should be so organized that it would be able to do this job rather than to have it made
the responsibility of an interdepartmental committee. He said what
coordination was necessary could be effected by meetings of the
Secretaries of State, War, and the Navy.

The Counselor said the plan proposed by Mr. McCormack seemed to him to go farther in the direction
desired by Mr. Braden than the
other plan proposed by the War Department, and he suggested that if the
Secretary should, in accordance with Mr. Braden's suggestion, inform the President that the
Department now sees no need for any new organization, the War and Navy
Departments' viewpoint will be considerably strengthened. The Counselor
and other members indicated they agreed with Mr. Braden that intelligence operations
abroad should be under the control of the Chief of Mission. In this
connection, Mr. McCormack pointed
out that the State Department was not now staffed to do the job as
suggested by Mr. Braden. He also
pointed out that for various reasons the State Department's
representatives abroad frequently do not wish to become involved in the
type of work which is necessary to obtain certain types of intelligence.
He referred, in this connection to a recent request for information
regarding the Belgian Communist Party, which our Embassy in Belgium had
been reluctant to undertake, and which had been turned over to OSS. Mr. Braden said work of this kind had
been done by FBI personnel at his Latin
American posts but he said he had always known what was going on and had
had an opportunity to see all reports before they were transmitted to
Washington. If he then disagreed with those reports, he submitted his
own views regarding them. He thought any conflicting views of this sort
should then be reconciled in Washington. The Counselor asked how this
could be done. Mr. Braden said it
should be done by the working officers of the interested departments as
a routine operation. The Counselor said it seemed to him that in this
connection some machinery such as that proposed by Mr. McCormack would be advantageous.

(The Under Secretary joined the meeting at this point.)

Mr. McCormack said he wished to
emphasize that setting up the organization outlined in the document
would not do the job in itself but would be merely the start. He said
there must be responsible people appointed to see to it that somebody
does each of the jobs involved and does it adequately. He emphasized
that the total amount of information sent in by the Department's Foreign
Service was only a small part of the inflow. Other sources included
foreign broadcasts and private information. He pointed out that at the
outset of the war we had in this country practically all of the
information needed to bomb Japan, but it required 2-1/2 years to
assemble this in usable form. This information was not in the State
Department, he said. The task of making it available was much more than
one of mere coordination.

Mr. Pasvolsky said he would be wary of the appointment of a coordinator
of departments appointed by the President, and that in place of an
executive director, he would rather see a committee secretary. He also
said he would not, at the present time, raise the question of who should
prepare strategic estimates. He said the departments now having
intelligence agencies were not going to give them up, and suggested that
the question of strategic estimates be allowed to work itself out—as it
would in a matter of a few months.

Mr. McCormack said he had no
objection to leaving open the question of strategic estimates. He said
the principal reason for making a recommendation in this connection was
that the matter was included specifically in the War Department
plan.

In discussing a chart of the organization, presented by Mr. McCormack, Mr. Pasvolsky suggested that
the top committee (in the chart consisting of the Secretaries of State,
War, and the Navy) should be broadened to include other cabinet members
in order to avoid jurisdictional conflicts. Mr. Benton and other members expressed
agreement with Mr. Pasvolsky's suggestion, especially if the top
committee were to meet only once or twice a year.

The Committee agreed that the discussion of the document should be
continued at the next meeting.

The meeting adjourned at 11:20 a.m.

* Source: National Archives and
Records Administration, RG 353, Records of Interdepartmental and
Intradepartmental Committees—State Department, Lot File No. 122,
Records of the Secretary's Staff Committee 1944-47. Top Secret.
Drafted by James H. Lewis. The meeting was held in the Secretary's
office.

1 Document 46.

2 Document 49.

3 Document 42.

4 No other records have been found of the
conversations with Truman that Byrnes mentioned. The proposed November 28 meeting
presumably is the one referred to in Document
44. Later on November 27, at a meeting with the
Secretaries of War and Navy, Byrnes asked for a postponement. (National Archives
and Records Administration, RG 59, Records of the Department of
State, Diplomatic Branch Reference File, Minutes of Meetings of the
Committee of Three 1944-47) See the Supplement. There is no
indication the postponed meeting with the President was ever held.
The “reorganization bill” referred to became law as the
Reorganization Act of 1945 (P.L. 263, December 20, 1945), giving the
President certain powers to restructure government agencies.

5  Brackets in the source text.

6 Dated November 22. (National Archives and
Records Administration, RG 353, Records of Interdepartmental and
Intradepartment Committees—State Department, Lot No. 122, Records of
the Secretary's Staff Committee, 1944-49, Box 88F) See the
Supplement.

51. Memorandum From the Director of the Bureau of the Budget (Smith) to President Truman51. Memorandum From the Director of the Bureau of the Budget
(Smith) to President TrumanSource

Washington, November 28,
1945.

SUBJECT

Developments in Intelligence Field

The development of the government-wide intelligence system envisioned in
your letter of September 20 to the Secretary of State needs further
personal assistance from you.

As you recall, there have been some half dozen proposals made by General
Donovan, the Joint Chiefs of
Staff, Mr. Gibson and the Secretary of the Navy (Mr. Eberstadt), in addition to the plan
which you approved. All of these proposals arrived at findings and
conclusions very similar to those which formed the basis of the plan
which you have ordered. Among these plans there is no essential
difference of opinion as to what our weaknesses were before and during
the war, or as to what our objectives should be in the postwar
period.

There is, however, some difference as to the methods for achieving these
objectives. Under the plan which you have approved, first priority is
given to the development of a coordinated government-wide system and
such secret intelligence operations as may be undertaken are operated on
as adjunct. In this way secret operations are placed in their proper
relationship to a general and much more comprehensive system of
intelligence. Further, they would be confined to these activities which
the State, War and Navy Departments mutually agree are needed from time
to time. Under the various other proposals, centralized secret
operations are made the backbone, with other intelligence neglected or
subordinated to it.

The State Department's efforts to proceed along the line of your letter
of September 20 have been hampered by the continued advocacy of the
alternative central agency proposals. In my opinion, it is desirable for
you to discuss with the Secretary of State the progress made in the
creation of suitable permanent interdepartmental machinery, heading up
to the State Department. You might also ask him to propose such
additional action by you as may be necessary at this time to supplement
your letter of September 20.

Harold D. Smith1

* Source: National Archives and Records
Administration, RG 51, Records of the Office of Management and
Budget, Director's Files, Series 39.27, Intelligence. No
classification marking. Drafted by L.W. Hoelscher on November 28 and
cleared by Schwarzwalder and Miles. Hoelscher sent an accompanying
memorandum to Smith that concludes that proposals for an
intelligence system are still confused with secret intelligence
operations and that the Department of State should be the leader in
efforts to develop a postwar intelligence program. (Ibid.) See the
Supplement. Smith's diary for November 28 gives an account of the
meeting with the President at which he handed over the memorandum.
(Roosevelt Library, Papers of Harold Smith, Box No. 4, Conferences
with President Truman, 1945) See the Supplement.

1 Printed from a copy that indicates Smith
signed the original.

52. Minutes of the 171st Meeting of the Secretary of State's Staff Committee52. Minutes of the 171st Meeting of the Secretary of State's Staff
CommitteeSource

Washington, November 29, 1945, 9:30 a.m.

PARTICIPANTS

Present

The Secretary (presiding)

The Under Secretary

The Counselor

Mr. Benton

Mr. Braden

Mr. Hackworth

Mr. McCormack

Mr. Pasvolsky

Mr. Russell

Mr. Thorp (for M. Clayton)

Mr. Gange

Mr. Lewis

Mr. Rothwell

Absent

Mr. Clayton

Mr. Dunn

[Here follows discussion of two agenda items: “North American Regional
Broadcasting Conference” and “Continuance of FBI Program in Other American Republics.]

Development of a National Intelligence Program
(Document SC-172, Agenda Item 1)

Mr. McCormack referred to the
discussion at the previous meeting1 regarding document
SC-172 recommending the establishment of a national intelligence
authority and the development of a national intelligence program. He
called the Committee's attention again to Annex V,2 in which he had defined
the areas of disagreement between the State Department and War
Department plans. Mr. McCormack
said the main issue was the type of organization to be established. He
said he believed his plan for setting up a working group at the top,
directly under the coordinating authority, consisting of the Secretaries
of State, War, and the Navy, with power to plan and carry out an
intelligence coordination program, would best meet the requirements of
the President's letter of September 20, 1945 directing the Secretary of
State to “take the lead in developing a comprehensive and coordinated
foreign intelligence program for all Federal agencies concerned with that type of activity”. Mr.
McCormack said both the War
and Navy Departments have indicated that his plan was generally
acceptable but they also wish the central authority to be from the
outset a producing and disseminating agency. Mr. McCormack's plan proposed that the
central authority should be merely a programming and planning
agency.

Mr. Russell asked how big a staff
would be contemplated. Mr. McCormack said probably 45 or 50 persons would be
required.

In discussing Annex I, Revised,3 in which the plan for
the establishment of the national intelligence authority was outlined,
Mr. Russell suggested a rewording
of numbered paragraph 5 on page 1. He suggested that the provision that
the Secretariat staff would be appointed by the Secretary “either from
personnel of the Department of State or by detail from other
participating agencies” implied that only personnel of the State
Department would be appointed to the staff, and he thought the other
agencies might not be willing to cooperate in furnishing personnel to
the staff on this basis. Mr. McCormack said the only hidden meaning, if any, of this
provision was to give the Executive Secretary a veto over appointments
from other agencies. Mr. Pasvolsky suggested that the provision should
be revised to provide that the Secretariat staff would be “detailed from
participating agencies at the request of the Executive Secretary.” The
Committee approved this suggested change.

Mr. Russell also proposed changes
in paragraphs 11 (a) and (b) on page 4 of Annex I to indicate that the
Authority rather than the Secretariat was responsible for planning the
Authority's program. The Committee agreed these two paragraphs should be
revised.

The Secretary asked Mr. McCormack
whether he had discussed with the Army the question of the type of
organization. Mr. McCormack said
he had discussed the matter with General Brownell, but had not obtained
a definite expression of the Army's viewpoint. However, there were clear
indications that the Army wished the central agency to be an operating
agency. He said he had sent copies of his plan to both Army and Navy.
Mr. Pasvolsky said one of the dangers of making the authority an
operating agency was that there would be a tendency for it to establish
a foreign service of its own. He said that had been the experience with
the Office of Inter-American Affairs and other agencies. The Counselor
agreed with Mr. Pasvolsky, but said he thought the strongest argument
against establishing an operating agency was that the more the central
agency engaged in operations, the less effective it could be in
coordination. The Secretary asked whether the War and Navy Departments
would continue to carry on
their own intelligence activities even if the central operating agencies
were established. Mr. McCormack
said they would, as would other agencies which now carry on intelligence
activities. The Secretary said in that event establishment of the
central agency would merely add another intelligence agency to those
already in operation. He said this would not meet the President's
request that duplication be eliminated.

Mr. McCormack said that under his
plan he thought a considerable amount of combined operations could be
effected, and he thought joint operations in the field of geographic
intelligence should certainly be arranged. Mr. McCormack said the operating personnel
in Army and Navy with whom he had discussed his plan had been favorably
impressed with it and thought that it would work. The Secretary asked
whether if the Army and Navy are unified there would be any need for
this coordinating agency. Mr. McCormack said there would be since the plan went below
department levels. He said such agencies in the War Department as G2
Service Forces and G2 Ground Forces would remain independent from
similar units in the Navy, and there would still be a need to coordinate
the activities of all these units.

Mr. Russell said there appeared to be two questions involved: (1) who
should designate the executive secretary; and (2) whether the central
agency should be a coordinating or operating authority. He said that as
far as the second question was concerned, he did not see that there was
much argument. He said most of the necessary intelligence information
was now available in all the agencies in the Government, and the
principal need was to coordinate this information.

With regard to the question of the appointment of the executive
secretary, Mr. Russell suggested
that this officer be appointed by the Secretary of State with the
approval of the Secretaries of War and the Navy. He said he did not
think the Army and Navy would indicate much opposition to this proposal,
and he pointed out that the Department would in any event not wish to
appoint an executive secretary who was not acceptable to the War and
Navy Departments. The Committee approved this suggestion.

In discussing the chart of the proposed organization (see copy attached
to these Minutes),4 Mr. Hackworth suggested that some of the
Committees shown on the chart might be combined. The Secretary said that
anything which could be done to simplify the structure of the
organization would be desirable, and would make presentation of the
proposal to the President much easier. He agreed, however, that the
present chart would show how extensive the problem is. Mr. McCormackpointed out that all the
structure on the chart below the level of executive secretary was very
tentative. The Secretary suggested that the chart might indicate the
tentative nature of the structure.

Mr. Benton suggested that
consideration be given to the possibility of showing in the chart the
role of the Foreign Service which would in effect be the field
organization of the central authority.

The Committee approved the proposal as outlined in Annex I Revised, with
the changes suggested in the course of the foregoing discussion. The
Secretary undertook to discuss the proposal with the Secretaries of War
and the Navy at his next meeting with them on December 4, and Mr.
McCormack undertook to have
the revised draft plan and chart ready for the Secretary's use at that
time.

The meeting adjourned at 10:45 a.m.

* Source: National Archives and
Records Administration, RG 353, Records of Interdepartmental and
Intradepartmental Committees—State Department, Lot File No. 122,
Records of the Secretary's Staff Committee, 1944-47, Box 88H. Top
Secret. Drafted by Lewis. The meeting was held in the Secretary's
office.

1 See Document 50.

2 Document 49.

3 Not printed.
(National Archives and Records Administration, RG 353, Records of
Interdepartmental and Intradepartmental Committees—State Department,
Lot File No. 122, Records of the Secretary's Staff Committee
1944-47, Box 88F) See the Supplement.

4 Not printed; see the
Supplement.

53. Memorandum From the Chief of Naval Intelligence (Inglis) to the Chief of Naval Operations (King)53. Memorandum From the Chief of Naval Intelligence (Inglis) to the Chief of
Naval Operations (King)Source

Washington, November 30,
1945.

1. There is set out below a summary of the developments in connection
with the proposed Central Intelligence Agency.

2. In a letter dated 20 September, the President directed Secretary
Byrnes to take the lead in
developing a comprehensive and coordinated intelligence program through
the creation of an interdepartmental group headed up under the State
Department to formulate plans for his approval. This task was delegated
by Secretary Byrnes to Mr.
McCormack, formerly a Colonel
in G-2, War Department.

3. Up to 18 October the Navy had not been consulted by the State
Department and became apprehensive that our interests might not be
considered if Mr. McCormack
proceeded unilaterally to develop the plan. Secretary Forrestal arranged a meeting on that
date between me and Mr. Russell,
Asst. SecState, the results of which I reported to you and SecNav.1
Thereafter the Navy continued to press State for action.

4. At a meeting of the Secretaries of State, War and Navy held 14
November,2 Secretary Forrestal brought up the subject of the proposed Central Intelligence Agency.
Secretary Patterson also
presented a report prepared by a special board he had appointed in which
a Central Intelligence Agency was recommended. Mr. Byrnes stated that he thought all were
in favor of a Central Agency and proposed the appointment of a working
committee.

5. The following committee was appointed: Rear Admiral Souers and Major
Correa representing SecNav;
Mr. Lovett and Brigadier General
Brownell representing SecWar; and Mr. Russell and Mr. McCormack representing SecState.

6. The committee immediately became deadlocked.3 The
repre-sentatives of the Navy and Army were in agreement that the plan
recommended by the Joint Chiefs of Staff was sound and should be adopted
in principle. Mr. McCormack, as
spokesman of the State Department, was strongly opposed and maintained
that while there should be coordinating committees the State Department
should control the Agency. He insisted also that all intelligence
estimates should be prepared by the State Department on the theory that
SecState was responsible for national policy.

7. It is understood the President has been pressing Secretary Byrnes to submit his plan. To bring the
matter to a conclusion, the President asked the three Secretaries to
meet with him Thursday, 29 November, to discuss the subject.

8. At the regular meeting of the three Secretaries, held Tuesday, 27
November,4 at which they planned to
unite on a program to submit to the President, Mr. Byrnes explained that he had not had
time to resolve the differences of opinion within the State Department
with respect to the several plans under consideration and could not
discuss the matter for the present. He stated also that he would have to
ask the President to give him a little more time. The meeting with the
President was not held on Thursday, 29 November. I have no information
as to when it will be held.

9. Secretary Forrestal is familiar
with the Joint Chiefs of Staff plan which he is strongly advocating.

Very respectfully,

Thos. B. Inglis5
Rear Admiral, USN

* Source: Central Intelligence Agency Historical
Files, HS/HC-135. Top Secret.

1 No record of the meeting between Inglis and Russell has been found.

2 See Document
45.

3 See Document 47.

4 See footnote 4, Document 50.

5 Printed from a copy
that bears this typed signature.

54. Memorandum From Secretary of State Byrnes to Secretary of War Patterson and Secretary of the Navy Forrestal54. Memorandum From Secretary of State Byrnes to Secretary of War Patterson and Secretary of
the Navy ForrestalSource

Washington, December 10,
1945.

SUBJECT

National Intelligence Authority

By letter of September 20, 1945, the President gave me the following
instructions:

“I particularly desire that you take the lead in developing a
comprehensive and coordinated foreign intelligence program for all
Federal agencies concerned with that type of activity. This should be
done through the creation of an interdepartmental group, heading up
under the State Department, which would formulate plans for my approval.
This procedure will permit the planning of complete coverage of the
foreign intelligence field and the assigning and controlling of
operations in such manner that the needs of both the individual agencies
and the Government as a whole will be met with maximum
effectiveness.”

Attached is a Plan for carrying out the President's directive.1 It has been
recommended to me by my Staff Committee after several weeks of
discussion and study, and I now recommend it for your favorable
consideration.

Attention is invited especially to the following points:

a. The Plan sets up a National Intelligence Authority consisting of the
Secretary of State as Chairman and the Secretaries of War and Navy, but
authorizes the Chairman to call in the heads of other Departments and
agencies on matters of special interest to them.

b. The Plan is designed to make fullest use of the intelligence resources
of all agencies of the Government, by coordinating their efforts under a
comprehensive, Government-wide program. The proposed machinery is an
interdepartmental organization under the Authority, with personnel drawn
from existing agencies, rather than an independent agency with a
separate budget. This is considered advantageous because it tends (1) to
avoid publicity and (2) to reduce competition and duplication between
the central agency and the intelligence organizations of existing
departments and agencies.

c. Executive direction of the central agency is put in the hands of an
official of the Department of State, but it is provided that the
Secretaries of War and Navy
must approve the person selected. In that manner the coordinating
responsibility of the State Department for matters involving foreign
affairs is recognized, but the executive is made a representative of the
Authority as a whole, and not merely of a single Department.

d. The central Secretariat is envisaged as a working staff of personnel
contributed primarily by the State, War and Navy Departments.

e. The Plan does not preclude any centralized intelligence operations
(either under the central agency or outside of it) which may prove
feasible and desirable as the program of the Authority is developed. It
provides planning mechanisms that may well lead to centralization of
intelligence responsibilities in many of the specialized fields, either
(1) by vesting responsibility for a particular field in a single
existing agency or (2) by bringing together the working units of several
agencies on a subject into a joint unit under direction of the
Authority.

f. With respect to clandestine activities (“secret intelligence” and
“counter-espionage”) I understand the prevailing opinion to be that such
operations, if they are to be conducted, might well be under a central
agency; and the Plan sets up machinery for study of that problem in
detail and for development of specific operating plans in those
fields.

The central agency is conceived in the first instance as a coordinating
and planning mechanism, whose mission is to develop the comprehensive
program envisaged by the President; to determine foreign intelligence
requirements on a Government-wide basis, and to recommend means and
methods for meeting those requirements, making use of all the
intelligence resources of the Government. Many agencies, in addition to
the State, War and Navy Departments, are engaged in collection and
analysis of foreign information, including the Treasury, the Departments
of Agriculture, Commerce and Labor, the Tariff and Maritime Commissions,
the Federal Reserve Board and numerous others. Such agencies can make
important contributions to foreign intelligence if they work under a
coordinated program, so that, within their special fields, they may
serve the needs of other Government agencies as well as their own.

Under the Plan as proposed, the primary coordinating mechanism is a group
of interdepartmental Committees for the various fields of intelligence,
which, in addition to their planning functions, will “Serve as a
continuing group responsible for maintaining a coordinated program and
for reviewing the adequacy and efficiency of all operations involved in
the carrying out of such a program.” Tentative suggestions for the
principal Committees to be formed are shown on the chart annexed
hereto.2

Foreign intelligence is a vast and complicated subject, touching upon
almost all fields of human knowledge. The problems that it involves do
not lend themselves to quick and easy solutions. They must be attacked
in detail, and from a long-range standpoint, and on a comprehensive
basis. It is believed that the annexed Plan permits that kind of an
approach to the subject and gives promise of good results if the
execution of the Plan is put in competent hands.

James F. Byrnes3

* Source: Truman Library, Papers of Clark M. Clifford, National
Intelligence Authority. Confidential. The date is handwritten on
another copy of the source text. (Ibid.)

1 Entitled Establishment of a National Intelligence
Authority, December 3, 1945. See the Supplement.

2 Not printed; see the
Supplement.

3 Printed from a copy that indicates
Byrnes signed the original.

55. Minutes of Meeting55. Minutes of MeetingSource

Washington, December 11,
1945.

PARTICIPANTS

State Department: James F.
Byrnes, Secretary of State

War Department: Robert P.
Patterson, Secretary of War, Brigadier General
George A. Brownell,
Colonel Charles W. McCarthy

Navy Department: James V.
Forrestal, Secretary of the Navy, Major Mathias F. Correa

RECORDER

John Hickerson

[Here follows a brief discussion unrelated to intelligence.]

Central Intelligence Agency

Mr. Patterson said that he felt it
would be desirable to carry forward the discussions on the Central
Intelligence Agency. He asked General Brownell to review the present
status of the matter. General Brownell referred to the discussions which
had been taking place in the Committee representing the three Departments.1 At this
point, Mr. Byrnes sent word to
Colonel McCormack to join the
meeting and he did so. General Brownell said that the War Department
favored a draft worked out in that Department based on an earlier draft
prepared by the Joint Chiefs of Staff. The Navy Department, he went on
to say, is in substantial agreement with the War Department draft. The
State Department is not in agreement with the War Department draft but
has proposed an alternative draft which Secretary Brynes sent to the War
and Navy Departments some days ago. The Committee representing the three
Departments has discussed this matter at considerable length but is
still not in agreement. General Brownell compared the two drafts
briefly. He said that there is agreement on the part of all three
Departments on two highly important points:

(1) That there should be a Central Intelligence Agency.

(2) That there should be an Intelligence Authority at the top controlling
the work of the Agency, consisting of the Secretaries of State, War and
Navy and perhaps others.

Beyond that, General Brownell went on to say, there are differences in
opinion on organization.

There was a general discussion of the two plans. Colonel McCormack described briefly the
proposed State Department plan and General Brownell reviewed the points
of difference between the War Department plan and that of the State
Department. There was an extended discussion between the three
Secretaries as to whether the Director should be appointed by the
President on the recommendation of the three Secretaries or whether he
should be appointed by the Secretary of State with the approval of the
Secretaries of War and the Navy. After an extensive discussion, there
appeared to be agreement among the three Secretaries that the Director
should not be appointed by the President but his appointment should be a
matter of agreement between the Secretaries of State, War, and Navy.

The next question which was considered was whether the Director should be
an official of the Department of State as proposed in the State
Department plan or outside all three Departments as proposed in the War
Department plan. This matter was discussed at some length, but no
decision on the point was reached. There was also discussion of the
Advisory Board as visualized in the two plans. Mr. Patterson stated that the War
Department wishes to have the top official from G-2 personally sitting on the Advisory Board,
whereas the State Department plan envisages that a representative of the
head of G-2 will devote his full time to sitting on the Board. Mr.
Forrestal expressed similar
views on behalf of the Navy Department. Colonel McCormack set forth his view in favor
of the advantages of the State Department proposal in this regard.

After considerable discussion, the three Secretaries agreed that it would
be desirable for the Committee representing the three Departments to
endeavor to resolve the differences between the three Departments over
this whole question while Mr. Byrnes is out of town on his trip to Moscow. It was
agreed that the three Secretaries would consider this matter further
upon Mr. Byrnes' return.

[Here follows discussion unrelated to intelligence.]

* Source: National
Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Records of the
Department of State, Diplomatic Branch Reference File, Minutes of
the Meetings of the Committee of Three, 1944-47. No classification
marking. A copy ibid., Decimal File 1945-49, 101.61/12-1145,
indicates that the minutes were classified Top Secret.

1 The “Committee representing the three Departments”
was appointed by the Secretaries at their meeting on November 14.
See Document 45. The only records of this
group's meetings that have been found are those for November 19 and
December 27. The latter is printed as Document
63. A record of the November 19 meeting is in National
Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Records of the
Department of State, Diplomatic Branch Reference File, Minutes of
the Meetings of the Committee of Three, 1944-47.

56. Memorandum From the Secretary of State's Special Assistant for Research and Intelligence (McCormack) to Secretary of War Patterson and Secretary of the Navy Forrestal56. Memorandum From the Secretary of State's Special Assistant for
Research and Intelligence (McCormack) to Secretary of War Patterson and Secretary of
the Navy ForrestalSource

Washington, December 15,
1945.

Annex VI (SC-172)

DEVELOPMENT OF A NATIONAL INTELLIGENCE PROGRAM

SUBJECT

National Intelligence Authority

After the meeting of the Secretaries of State, War and Navy on Tuesday,
December 11th1 two questions were left
for discussion:

a. Whether the Executive Secretary of the Authority should be, as
proposed, a State Department official;

b. What should be the role and composition of the Advisory Groups or
Boards who are to assist the Executive Secretary in discharging his
functions.

Before leaving for Moscow, the Secretary of State instructed me to make
every effort to resolve these issues with the Secretaries of War and
Navy at an early date. This memorandum suggests modifications of the
State Department's plan to meet the views of the War and Navy
Departments.

It is proposed:

a. To provide specifically that the Executive Secretary will represent
the Authority as a whole, and not any one Department, and to make the
provision enforceable by giving a majority of the Authority (e.g., the
Secretaries of War and Navy) the power to remove the Executive
Secretary; and

b. To amend the provisions with respect to the Advisory Groups or Boards
so that (1) the War and Navy Departments, if they wish, may appoint
their Intelligence Chiefs as the Board members and (2) the Executive
Secretary will be required to submit to the proper Advisory Board, for
concurrence of comment, all recommendations for the intelligence program
or for any operating plan designed to carry it out.

The proposed modifications of the Plan are listed in Tab A hereto.2 The considerations
on which they are based are discussed below.

Status of the Executive Secretary

If there is to be an interdepartmental organization, rather than a
separate entity outside the Departments, all personnel in the central
agency, including the Executive Secretary, must hold office in one of
the interested Departments. The State Department strongly believes, and
it seemed to be the consensus at the meeting of the three Secretaries,
that an independent budget for the central agency should be avoided for
security reasons. Since passage of the Independent Offices Appropriation
Act, 1945 (Public Law 358, 78th Congress), a non-departmental agency
without an independent budget appears to be impossible. A copy of the
relevant provision of the statute is attached as Tab B.3

If the interdepartmental type of organization is approved, and the
Executive Secretary must hold office in one of the Departments, it is
suggested that the State Department is the logical one because of the
responsibility of the Secretary of State in foreign affairs. In existing
interdepartmental coordinating mechanisms for matters involving foreign
policy it appears to be
customary for the Director or Executive Secretary, as well as the
Chairman, to be a State Department officer. That is so in each of the
following cases:

Interdepartmental Committee on Cultural and Scientific Cooperation

Liberated Areas Committee

Executive Committee on Economic Foreign Policy

Petroleum Facilities Coordinating Committee

Interdepartmental Committee on Rubber

Committee on Trade Agreements

Interdepartmental Committee on Resumption of Communications with
Liberated Areas

Special Committee on Communications.

Concern has been expressed by the War and Navy Departments that the
Executive Secretary would regard himself as responsible to the State
Department rather than to the Authority. The suggestion for meeting that
point is to insert the following provision in the plan:

“The Executive Secretary, in his capacity as such, will be responsible to
the Authority as a whole and may be removed by a majority vote of the
Authority.”

Advisory Groups or Boards

The State Department has proposed two “Advisory Groups.” “Intelligence,”
composed of full-time representatives of the G-2, the DNI and the AC/AS-2, and the other for
“Security,” composed of full-time representatives of the Chief
Coordinator, Treasury Enforcement Agencies, the AC of S, G-2, the DNI and the Director of the FBI. The War Department has expressed the
view that these arrangements do not insure that the G-2, DNI and AC/AS-2 will be brought in as
members of the team.

It was not the State Department's intention to minimize the role of the
Service Intelligence Chiefs. It was thought that, since they would be
represented in the central organization at every level, they would
participate fully in the development of the national intelligence
program and of all operating plans designed to carry it out.

Further, it was the State Department view, and it still is, that through
a board of officers assigned full-time to the job of assisting the
Executive Secretary, the G-2, DNI and
A-2 would have a fuller and more effective participation in the central agency than if they sat
merely as a “board of directors” holding occasional meetings and passing
on finished papers. A full-time Advisory Group or Board would be part of
the office of the Executive Secretary, would be familiar with the
thinking of that office, would have time to study all plans and programs
in detail and could do much to bring the Secretariat and the
departmental intelligence agencies to a common point of view.

However, it is recognized that the War and Navy Departments have a right
to specify who their representatives on the Advisory Boards will be, and
it is therefore proposed to amend the plan so as to leave the War and
Navy Departments and the Army Air Forces free to appoint their
Intelligence Chiefs as part-time members or to appoint some other
representatives as either full-time or part-time members, whichever may
prove to be best.

It is also proposed, in order to relieve the Executive Secretary of the
necessity of representing the State Department in discussions with the
Advisory Boards, to add a State Department representative to each of the
Boards.

Finally, it is proposed to make the role of the Advisory Boards explicit
by means of the following provision:

“Before submitting to the Authority any recommendation for the
intelligence program or any operating plan designed to carry out that
program, the Executive Secretary shall submit such recommendations to
the appropriate Advisory Board for concurrence or comment. If any member
of the Advisory Board shall not concur in the recommendations, he shall
have the right to submit a statement of his views to the Authority to be
considered in connection with the recommendations.”

Conclusion

It is hoped that the above-suggested modifications will meet the views of
the War and Navy Departments, so that the modified plan can be submitted
to the President as the agreed recommendations of the three
Secretaries.

For the Secretary of State

Alfred McCormack4

* Source: Truman Library, Papers of J. Anthony Panuch, State Department
Research and Intelligence No. 1. No classification marking. Copies
were distributed to Staff Committee members under cover of an
unsigned, undated note. (National Archives and Records
Administration, RG 353, Records of Interdepartmental and
Intradepartmental Committees—State Department, Lot File No. 122,
Records of the Secretary's Staff Committee 1944-47) Attached to the
memorandum is an annex, “Chart A,” of the revised organizational
plan. See the Supplement.

1 Document 55.

2 See the Supplement.

3 See the Supplement. Enacted June 27, 1944; 58 Stat.
361. The Act provided that the Executive Branch could not use
appropriated funds to support any agency that had been in existence
for more than 1 year and for which Congress had not specifically
appropriated funds.

4 Printed from a copy that bears this
typed signature.

57. Memorandum From the Chief of Naval Operations (Nimitz) to Secretary of the Navy Forrestal57. Memorandum From the Chief of Naval Operations (Nimitz) to Secretary of
the Navy ForrestalSource

Washington, undated.

SUBJECT

National Intelligence Authority

1. After careful analysis of the State Department Plan, it is my opinion
that it is unsatisfactory in many respects and that the proposed plan of
the Joint Chiefs of Staff is more likely to assure sound national
intelligence and should prove more satisfactory to the Navy.

2. The strength of the JCS plan is the
proposed Central Intelligence Agency. Such an agency is needed and when
functioning properly should eliminate much unnecessary duplication
through the pooling of personnel from the participating departments. It
should provide the same intelligence estimates directly to the President
and the three Secretaries to enable them to be uniformly informed. It
should also supply the participating departments with intelligence of
common interest which they require. The product of this agency would
reflect the best judgment of the experts from all participating
departments and would not be dominated by any one department.

3. I think it desirable that the N.I.A. nominate and the President
appoint the Director of the Central Intelligence Agency. It is
recommended, however, that the Director be an Army, Naval or Marine
officer for the following reasons:

(a) This will assure a non-political administration of the intelligence
effort with unbiased and objective intelligence estimates.

(b) He will be subject to military discipline, continuing after
retirement. He can be required to avoid publicity which is undesirable
in the conduct of an intelligence activity.

The term of office should be for four years to assure continuity.

4. The State Department plan is objectionable for the following
reasons:

(a) The national intelligence estimates would be made by the State
Department. The Secretaries of War and the Navy might not be informed
with respect to the intelligence furnished the President by the State
Department.

(b) It does not provide a real central intelligence agency and therefore
duplication can not be reduced without impairment of departmental
intelligence agencies. No economy of effort will result.

(c) The complex committee structure will actually result in wasted effort
of key personnel.

5. In a spirit of compromise it may be necessary to confine the
membership of the N.I.A. to the three Secretaries as provided in the
State Department Plan. I see no serious objection to the elimination of
the representative of the Joint Chiefs of Staff on the Authority. It may
be necessary to agree on a few committees. This would be satisfactory if
the number of committees is held to a minimum.

6. I recommend you continue to support the J.C.S. Plan subject only to
the concessions indicated above.1

* Source: Central Intelligence Agency
Historical Files, HS/HC-135. Top Secret. The handwritten words
“Nimitz letter” at the end of the source text identify the author.
Nimitz became Chief of Naval Operations on December 15, 1945.

1 Printed from
an unsigned copy.

58. Memorandum From the Executive Officer, Office of the Assistant Secretary of War for Air (Brownell) to the Members of the Lovett Committee58. Memorandum From the Executive Officer, Office of the Assistant
Secretary of War for Air (Brownell) to the Members of the Lovett CommitteeSource

Washington, December 17,
1945.

SUBJECT

Proposals for Central Intelligence Agency

1. The Secretary of War has directed that the special committee appointed
by him by directive dated 22 October 19451 to
consider intelligence matters be reconvened under the chairmanship of
the senior officer, with the addition of representatives of the Office
of the Assistant Secretary of War and the Office of the Assistant
Secretary of War for Air, to advise him further on certain matters in
connection with the establishment of a Central Intelligence Agency.

2. The recommendations of the above Committee on the subject of a Central
Intelligence Agency, after receiving the approval of the Secretary of War, were submitted to the
State Department and Navy Department.2 Those recommendations
were in general concurred in by the Navy Department. The State
Department proposed a counterplan, copies of which are attached as Tab
A.3

3. Both programs were discussed at a meeting of the Secretaries of State,
War and Navy.4 No final decision
was reached, and it was decided that the matter should be further
considered with a view to perhaps arriving at a compromise decision. The
State Department has now prepared certain amendments to their original
plan, attached as Tab B.5

4. The Secretary of War requests that the above Committee meet to
consider the entire subject, including the revised State Department
plan, as soon as possible. The Secretary states that he does not wish to
delay matters for a further written report from the Committee, but that
he would like to meet with them after they have had an opportunity to
consider the revised plan. Notice of a meeting of the Committee to be
held on Tuesday or Wednesday6 will be sent out by the Recorder.

By direction of the Secretary of War:

George A. Brownell
Brigadier General, U.S.A.

* Source: National Archives and Records
Administration, RG 263, Records of the Central Intelligence Agency,
Troy Papers, December 1945. Secret. Addressed to Major Generals
Craig (OPD), Quesada (AAF), and
Wyman (AGF), Brigadier Generals
Clarke (G-2) and Magruder (SSU), and
Colonel Roamer (ASF).

1 Not
found, but see Document 32.

2 Document 42.

3 Document 46.

4 Presumably the meeting reported
on in Document 55.

5 Document 56.

6 December 18 and
19.

59. Memorandum From the Chief of the Operations Division, War Department General Staff (Craig) to the Members of the Lovett Committee59. Memorandum From the Chief of the Operations Division, War
Department General Staff (Craig) to the Members of the Lovett CommitteeSource

Washington, December 18,
1945.

SUBJECT

Reconvening of Special Committee on Central Intelligence Agency to
advise the Secretary of War on the State Department proposals

1. There are basic differences of approach between the Central
Intelligence Organization recommended by the Special Committee in its
report to the Secretary of
War and the State Department proposal. The fact that the State
Department proposal is worked out in considerable detail, with many
features that are not acceptable to the War Department, has tended to
delay a decision on the basic differences. If the important points can
be solved now, these details can be dealt with by negotiation or by the
Agency itself after its creation.

2. The Special Committee's recommendations to the Secretary of War should
therefore confine themselves to the basic differences between the two
plans. In considering these, and the extent to which they are eliminated
by the concessions in Mr. McCormack's modifications, the Special Committee should
bear in mind the advantage of reaching an early agreement with the State
Department to permit some form of organization to come into being
promptly. If there is long delay, there is a real danger that the
personnel and going-concern value of the OSS group will be lost. In this sense, nearly any form of
organization will be better than none.1

5. Although Mr. McCormack's
memorandum of December 15, 1945,2 indicated that there
are only two open questions, the status of the Executive Secretary and
the nature of the Advisory groups, (the latter of which has lost its
importance in view of Mr. McCormack's concessions), there are in reality at least
three other important issues. Each of these, together with the first
point mentioned by Mr. McCormack,
is discussed below:

a. Independent Status of the Agency. The War Department plan calls for a
centralized, independent agency, separate from the State, War and Navy
Departments, and with its own personnel. The State Department plan calls
for a mere committee of representatives of the three departments,
operating through personnel detailed from the three departments.
Although the War Department plan is preferable in this respect, it will
require legislative authorization at the expiration of the First War
Powers Act and, under the Independent Office's Appropriation Act, 1945,
will in any event require specific appropriations within one year of its
creation by Executive Order.

Recommendation: That the Special Committee advise the Secretary of War to
accept the State Department proposal in this respect, on the conditions
that the State Department agree to the action recommended in
subparagraph c below and that the State Department agree to the action
to insert a provision to the effect that the Authority shall consider
the advisability of legislation establishing an independent central
intelligence agency under the direction of the Authority.

b. Status of the Executive Secretary. The War Department plan calls for
an independent Director. Under the State Department plan, the Executive
Secretary, although appointed with the approval of the Secretaries of
War and Navy, is named by the Secretary of State and must be a State
Department official. Mr. McCormack's concession that the Executive Secretary must
be responsible to the Authority and may be removed by a majority of the
Authority, goes a long way to meet the War Department's objections, but
does not do so entirely. The implication that this is primarily a State
Department show still remains. It should be eliminated in the interest
of achieving maximum cooperation as well as to make provision for a
possible future period in which the military interest in intelligence
may be predominant.

Recommendation: That the Special Committee advise the Secretary of War to
accept the State Department proposal as amended in this respect, subject
to amending the first and second sentences of paragraph 5,3 and inserting an additional
sentence after the second sentence of paragraph 5, as follows:

“The Executive Secretary will be appointed by the Chairman with the
approval of the Secretaries of War and Navy Authority. If any person
appointed as Executive Secretary shall not be, at the time of his
appointment, an official of the Department of State, War or Navy
Department, he will be appointed as such an official of one of such
departments, as recommended by the Authority, before assuming his duties
as Executive Secretary. The first Executive Secretary shall be, or shall
be appointed, an official of the Department of State.”

This recommendation requires the deletion of the phrase “and may be
officers of the Army or Navy” from the sentence beginning “Deputy
Secretaries will be” in paragraph 5.

c. Functions of the Agency. The War Department plan envisages the agency
as an operating group, in addition to its coordinating functions. This
appears in the provisions that it shall, “a. Operate as the sole
collection agency…in the foreign espionage and counter-espionage
fields”, and “e. Accomplish the evaluation and synthesis of
intelligence…”. The State Department plan assigns the agency primarily
coordinating and policy-making functions, although it permits the
establishment of centralized operations when the Authority so
determines. This point is of importance to the War Department for the
following reasons:

(1) It is felt that there is a definite need, in the field of high-level,
long-range politico-military intelligence, for an expert research and
analysis unit relatively independent of any of the Departments.

(2) It is believed that clandestine operations must be centrally
controlled.

(3) It is fraud [feared?] that the value of the OSS organization will be lost if allowed to continue in its
present dispersed condition and equally if assigned entirely to the
State Department.

Recommendation: That the Special Committee advise the Secretary of War to
insist that synthesis and evaluation and foreign espionage and
counter-espionage be recognized as primary functions of the agency and
that the appropriate OSS personnel,
particularly the research and analysis group, be made available in the
first instance to the agency, subject in all cases to the right of the
Authority to determine that any such functions and personnel should be
decentralized to one or more of the existing intelligence agencies.

d. Management by Committees. The State Department plan calls for the
creation of numerous committees to deal with each major phase of the
agency's functions. The plan states that “such committees will be the
primary means by which the Authority will carry out its mission” (par.
7). The War Department does not believe that committee management is
suited for all phases of the agency's functions, perhaps because it sees
the agency as having more operating functions than are called for by the
State Department plan. In any case, this is a matter that can best be
left to the agency to work out for itself in the light of
experience.

Recommendation: That the Special Committee advise the Secretary of War to
approve paragraph 7 of the State Department plan, subject to the
following:

(1) Amendment of the first sentence as follows: “The Authority, upon
recommendation of the Executive Secretary, will may establish committees
each of which will cover a major subject, area or kind of operation to
deal with any of the subjects, areas or kinds of operations within the
purview of the authority.”

(2) Deletion of the second sentence of paragraph 7.

(3) Deletion of paragraph 13 and consequent renumbering of subsequent
paragraphs.

6. If the above recommendations are approved by the Secretary of War and
accepted to by the Secretary of State, the major obstacles to agreement
will have been removed. Although a number of details of the State
Department proposal will remain to be worked out, they can be solved
either by negotiation or by leaving them to solution by the agency
itself. The following are examples of such matters:

a. Advisory Groups. Mr. McCormack's concessions have narrowed the differences to a
point at which they should prove readily adjustable by negotiation. They
have chiefly to do with nomenclature and minor revisions in the
description of functions.

b. Definition of Intelligence and Security Intelligence. The State
Department proposal should be made more precise to eliminate any
indication that the agency may conduct espionage or counter-espionage in
the United States and to exclude any police functions. This can be
accomplished in negotiations.

c. Control over Other Agencies. It may be necessary to limit the
Authority's right to control and direct agencies other than the State,
War and Navy Departments. This can also be left to negotiations.

d. Independent Budget. This question, as part of the larger question of
the independent status of the agency, can be left to the determination
of the agency itself.

Recommendation: That the Special Committee make no recommendation to the
Secretary of War on these matters and other relatively minor points of
difference.

H.A. Craig4

Major General, U.S.A.

Attachment5

Rider “A”

3. In view of the fact that the Secretary of State is apparently
supporting Mr. McCormack's
proposals, the War Department must choose between two courses of action.
It must determine either to make the maximum concessions to meet the
State Department views, refusing to concede only on vital matters, or to
adhere to the original War Department plan and rely on its being forced
upon the State Department by the President. This memorandum is written
on the assumption that the first course is to be adopted, which seems to
be implicit in the Secretary's instructions to War Department
representatives that they should attempt to reconcile the differences
with the State Department.

4. In this connection, the question of personalities becomes important.
If the War Department is committed to acceptance of Mr. McCormack as the first director or
executive secretary of the agency, it would appear advisable to let him
have the kind of organization that he wants, at least at the outset,
rather than to force him to operate with a type of organization of which he disapproves.
On the other hand, if the War Department intends to oppose Mr. McCormack's candidacy, it would seem
very advisable that the War Department immediately attempt to select a
candidate of its own. Otherwise there is a good prospect that Mr.
McCormack will soon be
entrenched in a position from which it will be difficult to dislodge
him.

* Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 263,
Records of the Central Intelligence Agency, Troy Papers, December
1945. No classification marking.

1 At
this point Craig indicated by hand that “Rider A,” which is printed
as an attachment, should be inserted.

2 Document 56.

3 References to this and to other numbered and
lettered paragraphs and subparagraphs of the Department of State
proposal are to the attachment to Document
54; see the Supplement.

4 Printed from a copy that bears
this typed signature.

5 No classification marking.

60. Memorandum From the Chief of the Operations Division, War Department General Staff (Craig) to Secretary of War Patterson60. Memorandum From the Chief of the Operations Division, War
Department General Staff (Craig) to Secretary of War PattersonSource

Washington, December 24,
1945.

SUBJECT

Central Intelligence Agency

It is proposed that the War Department accept the State Department
proposal subject to the following amendments:

a. The statements of functions of the National Intelligence Authority to
provide that synthesis and evaluation on a national level and direct
procurement of intelligence are recognized as functions of the National
Intelligence Authority, subject to the right of the Authority to direct
that any of such operations be decentralized when and if that course
appears more appropriate at any time.

b. A provision to be inserted that the Executive Secretary shall consider
and explore the advisability of legislation establishing an independent
Central Intelligence Agency under the direction of the Authority, with
an independent budget, and shall make recommendations thereon to the
Authority prior to June 30, 1946.

c. That paragraph 12 of the McCormack proposal, dealing with Advisory Groups, be
changed to provide only one such group having generally the composition
and functions of the National Intelligence Board outlined in the War
Department plan. This modification is thought necessary to insure that
the Chiefs of the intelligence agencies of the service departments will
actively support the Authority.

H.A. Craig1
Major General, USA

* Source: Central Intelligence Agency
Historical Files, HS/HC-135. Confidential.

1 Printed from a copy that
indicates Craig signed the original.

61. Minutes of Meeting61. Minutes of MeetingSource

Washington, December 26,
1945.

PARTICIPANTS

State Department: Dean
Acheson, Acting Secretary of State

War Department: Robert P.
Patterson, Secretary of War, Howard Petersen, Col. Charles W.
McCarthy

Navy Department: John
Sullivan, Acting Secretary of the Navy, Lt. Col.
Mathias F. Correa

RECORDER

John Hickerson

[Here follows material unrelated to intelligence.]

Central Intelligence Agency

Mr. Patterson brought up the
question of the proposed Central Intelligence Agency. He said that he
did not wish to discuss this matter in any detail because of the absence
of Mr. Forrestal who has a keen
personal interest in the whole subject. He did wish to point out,
however, that it is urgently necessary to reach an early decision on the
whole subject. The President's directive to the three Secretaries was
“getting stale.”1 Mr. Patterson said that some progress has
been made in the subcommittee2 but there remained for decision
really only one major question; that is, should there be a separate
agency under the direction of the three Departments or should the
intelligence agency be geared into the State Department. Mr. Patterson went on to say he favors a
separate agency but he added that his own attitude on the subject would
be influenced somewhat by the nature of the State Department's
intelligence organization. Mr. Patterson said that one of the principal reasons why he
favors a separate central intelligence agency, outside all three
Departments, is that he feels strongly that the collection of
intelligence must be divorced from policy making. He added that a
decentralization of intelligence activities in the State Department
would make it more difficult for him to agree to having the Central
Intelligence Agency meshed into the State Department. There was a
general discussion of this point including the thesis that the State Department is
itself primarily an intelligence agency. There was general agreement
that it would be desirable that the whole question of the Central
Intelligence Agency be settled, if possible, upon Secretary Byrnes' return from Moscow and prior to
his departure for the United Nations meeting in London.

[Here follows material unrelated to intelligence.]

* Source: National
Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Records of the
Department of State, Diplomatic Branch Reference File, Minutes of
Meetings of the Committee of Three 1944-1947. Top Secret.

1 Document 44.

2 The working
group appointed by the three Secretaries at their November 14
meeting, see Document 45. For minutes of
the November 19 meeting of the working group, see Document 47.

62. Memorandum for the Record62. Memorandum for the RecordSource

Washington, December 27,
1945.

Judge Patterson called me this
afternoon following the meeting of the Committee of Three,1 with reference to the State
Department proposal for a National Intelligence Unit. He said that the
State Department was not united behind the McCormack plan and there was a strong feeling on the
part of many people in the State Department that this intelligence
activity should be integrated or scattered through the different
divisions of that Department. He stated that any such proposal was
totally unacceptable to him and that while he did not object to a State
Department official heading the organization that he would insist on a
straight line separate organization. While he recognized that the State
Department was engaged in widespread intelligence activities, he felt
that it was wrong to parcel out this new organization among the various
desks, divisions and committees of the State Department or to get it
involved in the State Department system in any way. Nor would he favor,
he said, the multiplicity of committees which are proposed in the State
Department plan. He felt that this method of working would not produce
the results desired.

If Colonel McCormack is to be the
man to head up the new organization, he did not believe he should be the
head of the State Department intelligence activity although he had no
objection to him being employed as an official of the State Department.
The head of the new agency should work with the State Department
intelligence organization in the same manner as he works with War and
Navy Department organizations. He also objected to any Board which would have members
from Treasury, FBI, etc.

He instructed me to get together with Colonel McCormack and Mr. Correa of the Navy Department to see if we could produce
an agreed plan by the time Mr. Byrnes returns from Moscow.

H.A.C.2

* Source:
National Archives and Records Administration, RG 263, Records of the
Central Intelligence Agency, Troy Papers. No classification
marking.

1 See the first paragraph to Document 65.

2 Printed from a copy that
bears these typed initials.

63. Memorandum From the Secretary of the Navy's Special Assistant (Correa) to Secretary of the Navy Forrestal63. Memorandum From the Secretary of the Navy's Special Assistant
(Correa) to
Secretary of the Navy ForrestalSource

Washington, December 27,
1945.

Today with Admiral Souers I attended a meeting at the War Department to
discuss the subject of a Central Intelligence Agency. Present were
Generals Craig, Fortier, Brownell and Irwin representing the War
Department and Messrs. Alfred
McCormack and L.L. Montagne representing the State
Department.

General Fortier introduced in the meeting the annexed papers headed
respectively, “Proposed Functions” and “Organization.”1 There was
considerable discussion as to the proposed functions of the central
intelligence body. The discussion was in the main general. Insofar as it
can be summarized in specific terms, it may be said that Mr. McCormack placed particular emphasis
upon the planning functions of the proposed agency and, while he
conceded that it might ultimately be found desirable as a result of the
agency planning to give it certain operating functions, he did not feel
that the initial charter of the agency should specify any operating
functions for it. The War Department representatives, on the other hand,
with the concurrence of the Navy representatives, felt that the agency
should be given an operating mission as well as a planning and
coordinating mission ab initio.

There was some discussion of the organization of the proposed agency
although the discussion was not had with reference to the annexed War
Department outline. The War Department representatives made the point
that while they preferred a plan under which the Central Intelligence
Agency would be independent of any of the Executive Departments, they
would be inclined to compromise on a plan that would place the agency
under the State Department, provided that the Executive Secretary who
would direct the agency would have no other functions within the State
Department, and particularly would not be the executive head of the
State Department's own intelligence agency. Mr. McCormack indicated that such a
provision would be unacceptable to him. On behalf of the Navy it was
stated that the Navy favored an independent Central Intelligence Agency
whose director would not be identified with any of the departments
concerned. It was pointed out that the Navy recognizes the
undesirability of an independent appropriation for such an agency, but
felt that this would not overcome the disadvantage of having the
coordinating agency identified with one of the interested departments.
It was further pointed out by the Navy representatives that under the
applicable law an independent agency could be set up for a year without
being required to receive its operating funds from an independent
appropriation fund.

Mr. McCormack indicated that he
was not prepared to accept either the Navy's suggestion that an
independent central agency be set up or the Army's proposal that the
agency be set up within the State Department but that its director have
no other duties. Mr. McCormack
further indicated that he felt matters were at an impasse, and that he
felt the question would have to be decided by the three Secretaries and
by the President.

Respectfully,

M.F. Correa2

* Source: National Archives and Records
Administration, RG 80, General Records of the Department of the
Navy, Records of Secretary of the Navy James Forrestal 1940-1947, General Correspondence
1944-1947, Box 129, 80-1-19. No classification marking.

1 Not attached and not found.

2 Printed from a copy
that bears this typed signature.

64. Memorandum From the Deputy Director of Naval Intelligence (Souers) to Clark M. Clifford64. Memorandum From the Deputy Director of Naval Intelligence
(Souers) to Clark M. CliffordSource

Washington, December 27,
1945.

SUBJECT

Central Intelligence Agency

1. As you have requested, I am attaching:

(a) Copy of the State Department Plan.1

(b) Copy of draft of directive proposed by the Joint Chiefs of
Staff.2

(c) Detailed comparison of Plans (a) and (b).3

2. Differences between the two plans are far greater, and more
fundamental, than they appear to be on the surface.

3. Mr. McCormack, author of the
State Department plan, advocates that the Secretary of State should
control America's intelligence effort. The Secretary of State or his
representative, Mr. McCormack
feels, should determine the character of the intelligence furnished the
President. He made this point clear not only in his published plan, but
also in his talk to the public over the radio,4 and in various addresses to Army
and Naval officers intended to sell the State Department plan.

4. There are three serious objections to Mr. McCormack's proposal:

(a) Recent experience has shown all too clearly that as long as the Army
and Navy may be called upon in the last analysis to support the nation's
foreign policy, the Services should have a voice reaching the President
as unmistakable as that of the State Department.

(b) The evaluation of information is not an exact science and every
safeguard should be imposed to prevent any one department from having
the opportunity to interpret information in such a way as to make it
seem to support previously accepted policies or preconceived
opinions.

(c) Should the McCormack plan be
adopted, it is inevitable that it would be looked upon in time as a
State Department intelligence system, not an inter-governmental system.
The Army and Navy meanwhile would be maintaining their own complete
intelligence systems.

5. The plan of the Joint Chiefs of Staff seems more likely to provide the
President with unbiased intelligence, derived from all available
sources, and approved by all three departments of the Government
primarily concerned with foreign policy—State, War and Navy. Under the
JCS Plan, the interest of the
President would seem to be better protected than under the McCormack plan for the following
reasons:

(a) The Authority would be set up under the President, and therefore on a
level higher than that of any single department. As a result, no one
department could influence unduly the type of intelligence produced.
Furthermore, more balanced control could be expected, as no single
department would be dominant.

(b) The President would appoint the Director, making it possible to
procure a man of outstanding ability and integrity.

(c) Through the pooling of expert personnel in the Central Intelligence
Agency, many functions now performed by various intelligence agencies
could be carried out more efficiently, expeditiously, and economically
than could be expected under the McCormack plan. (Mr. McCormack has indicated in interviews that he is not in
favor of a central intelligence agency.)

(d) The JCS Plan provides for the
preparation of summaries and estimates approved by the participating
agencies for the use of those who need them most: the President, those
on a Cabinet level responsible for advising the President, and the Joint
Planners.

(e) The JCS Plan contemplates a full
partnership between the three departments, created and operated in the
spirit of free consideration, and with a feeling of a full share of
responsibility for its success. The whole-hearted cooperation of
participating agencies would be assured inasmuch as the Central
Intelligence Agency is designed to operate on a reciprocal basis.

6. The JCS Plan has the further advantage
of having been under consideration for many months. It was prepared
after long consideration by the technical staff of the J.I.C. and
unanimously approved by the members of the Joint Intelligence Committee,
which included the heads of the intelligence agencies of the State, War
and Navy Departments. It was then approved, with minor changes, by the
Joint Chiefs of Staff comprising Fleet Admirals Leahy and King, Generals of the
Army Marshall and Arnold. The recommendations of the JCS were concurred in at that time by the
Secretaries of War and the Navy.

7. I recommend that a directive substantially in line with the draft
attached (JCS Plan) be issued by the
President as I believe it will provide a program which will best serve
him and the national interest.

8. As you know, my interest in this subject is wholly objective as I am
not a candidate for the job of Director and couldn't accept even if it
were offered me.

Sidney W. Souers

* Source: Truman Library, Papers of Clark M. Clifford, National
Military Establishment: CIA. Top Secret; Personal. Also reproduced
in CIA Cold War Records: The CIA under Harry Truman, pp. 17-19. On another copy of this
memorandum a marginal notation written by Souers reads: “Comdr.
Clifford asked for my
recommendation at the request of the President.” (Central
Intelligence Agency Historical Files, HS/HC-135) Clifford was
appointed Naval Aide to the President in early 1946 and then Special
Counsel to the President on June 27, 1946. Apparently he was not
formally a Presidential appointee at this time.

1 Document 56.

2 The undated draft directive was a
slight modification of the appendix to Document
13. It included in paragraph 1 a representative of the
JCS as a member of the proposed
National Intelligence Authority. A handwritten revision, apparently
by Clifford, changed the
language of the JCS to read “and an
additional representative of the President of the United States.”
(Truman Library, Papers of Clark M.
Clifford) See the Supplement.

3 See the Supplement.

4 For McCormack's remarks in a December 22 radio talk, see
Department of State Bulletin, December 23,
1945, pp. 987-993 and 1006.

65. Memorandum From Arnold Miles to L.W. Hoelscher of the Bureau of the Budget65. Memorandum From Arnold Miles to
L.W. Hoelscher of the Bureau of the
BudgetSource

Washington, January 3,
1946.

SUBJECT

Recent developments in effort to set up interdepartmental
intelligence coordinating machinery

Another meeting in the long series was held on December 271 to secure agreement
among War, Navy and State on the form of central organization to be set
up in intelligence. At the conclusion of the meeting, Patterson indicated his acceptance of
the State Department's plan provided the State Department was actually
going to proceed to set up a central intelligence organization to carry
out the responsibilities it was assuming under its plan. An officer of
the State Department from one of the geographic offices was present
acting as a secretary of the meeting, and he interpolated at that point
that the question of whether State would have any central intelligence
operation was still unsettled. That broke up the meeting.

Following that meeting, McCormack
met with Smith to report on the apparent hopelessness of proceeding
without further direction from the President.

Subsequently, however, Patterson
turned over the whole matter to Howard
Peterson, the new Assistant Secretary of War, in a
memo2 in which he said
that he was willing to go along with State provided State,

(1) Actually created central-machinery comparable to the responsibilities
it was undertaking.

(2) Included in its plans a Deputy to McCormack to head the State Department operation, in
order that McCormack would be as
free as possible to devote his time to interdepartmental problems.

The effort (in which we have been so concerned) to create an effective
past-war government-wide intelligence program is thus seen even more
clearly than before to depend upon the creation of an adequate and
professional intelligence operation in the State Department.

The past gives the military little assurance that sometime in the future
they will not be caught short again with a Secretary of State “washing
his hands of it” unless they take steps to keep informed independently.
Further, the reception now being given to the creation of central
intelligence facilities in State by some of the old line people there
does not give the War and Navy Departments much encouragement to believe
that the State Department can grow up fast enough to assume its new
role. They hesitate to pin their faith on State Department leadership in
this field which they have come to see as one of the most vital in our
peacetime Government. Their advocacy of a central agency (which would be
largely staffed and influenced by the military) revolves around the
belief that adequate Government intelligence must depend on the military
agencies.

The people in State who are talking about dismembering the Research and
Analysis operation inherited from OSS by
“decentralizing” it to the various offices should understand that the
alternative is a central agency under military domination with a full
blown research and analysis operation reporting directly to the
President.

* Source: National Archives and
Records Administration, RG 51, Records of the Office of Management
and Budget, Series 39.19, OSS
Organization and Functions. No classification marking. Apparently
drafted by Schwarzwalder, whose name is typed in parentheses after
Miles' name on the “from” line.

1 Presumably a reference to the December 26 meeting of
the Secretaries of State, War, and the Navy, see Document 61, or to a follow-up meeting on December 27,
which can be inferred from Document 62,
although no formal record has been found.

2 Not found.

66. Letter From Acting Secretary of War Royall and Secretary of the Navy Forrestal to Secretary of State Byrnes66. Letter From Acting Secretary of War Royall and Secretary of the Navy Forrestal to Secretary of
State ByrnesSource

Washington, January 6,
1946.

DEAR MR. SECRETARY: We have carefully considered your memorandum to us
enclosing a Plan dated December 3, 1945,1 for the establishment of a National Intelligence
Authority. Representatives of the War and Navy Departments have
discussed the proposed Plan with your Special Assistant, Mr. McCormack, and have examined certain
modifications to the original Plan suggested by him in a memorandum
dated December 15, 1945.2

We regret that we are unable to accept the Plan proposed by your
memorandum, even with the modifications subsequently suggested. In our
opinion, it is inadequate in two respects, both of which we consider
essential. It fails to provide for a centralized executive organization
responsible only to the National Intelligence Authority and actively
assisted by the chief intelligence officials of the three departments.
It also fails to provide for centralized performance of two important
operating functions, evaluation on a national level and direction of
foreign secret intelligence and counterintelligence, with appropriate
dissemination in each case.

As you no doubt know, this subject had previously been thoroughly studied
by the two services. The Joint Chiefs of Staff, in JCS 1181 series, considered the problem at
length and in September 1945 approved a proposal (JCS 1181/5) for a central intelligence
organization. In the War Department, a special committee, appointed to
consider the subject, recommended the establishment of a central
intelligence organization which closely resembled that proposed by the
Joint Chiefs of Staff. A copy of this committee's recommendations, which
were approved by the Secretary of War and previously furnished to the
State Department, is enclosed for reference (Tab A).3 The Navy Department
examined the War Department plan and agreed with it in substance,
although expressing some reservations on the question of an independent
budget for the centralized agency.

We understand that you are of the opinion that the War Department plan is
inadvisable in that it proposes the establishment of an independent
agency, separate from the three departments. We recognize the force of
the considerations that have led you to this opinion and are quite
prepared to agree that, at the outset, the organization may be housed
for administrative purposes in the State Department, and may consist of
personnel detailed from the three departments. Under that arrangement,
the State Department would furnish necessary administrative services and
the chief executive would be, or would become, an official of the State
Department. It is possible that the President, in view of his known and
acute interest in this subject, may wish himself to select the chief
executive. In that case, if the person selected should be an Army or
Navy officer, he would be made available by appropriate assignment or
detail.

We do not believe, however, that this course requires abandonment of the
concept of a central organization with certain operating, as well as
coordinating, functions. On the contrary, we propose, as the best
solution of this problem, that the enclosed War Department plan be
accepted for submission to the President, with such modifications as are
necessary to provide that the central intelligence agency shall not be
an independent agency, but shall be an organization consisting of
personnel contributed by the three departments. This will involve the
following principal modifications:

1. The Director should be, or should become, an official of the
Department of State, unless the President otherwise determines. He
should be appointed by the President, be responsible to the Authority
and be removable by majority vote of the Authority's members.4 He should have no other duties
or functions in his own department. He should be assisted by deputies
from the two other departments.

2. Other full-time personnel should be detailed to the central
intelligence agency by the three departments. They should be responsible
to the Director, except for personal administrative matters, and should
have no other duties in their departments.5

3. Administrative services should be provided by the Department of
State.

4. The provisions relating to the independence of the central
intelligence agency, and its budget, should be deleted.

In addition, to conform to your proposal, we would delete the provision
that a representative of the Joint Chiefs of Staff be a member of the
National Intelligence Authority and would include the following
provisions relating to the Intelligence Board:

(a) that the members of the Intelligence Board may be represented by
deputies;

(b) that each member should have the functions assigned by paragraph 12
of your Plan in addition to the functions of the Intelligence Board
under the enclosed War Department plan; and

(c) that the chiefs of the intelligence agencies of other departments may
sit as members of the Intelligence Board, by invitation, on matters of
particular interest to their agencies.

We believe that this suggestion will meet your views as to the nature of
the proposed organization, while at the same time preserving the
centralized executive control and the centralized operating functions
which the War and Navy Departments, as well as the Joint Chiefs of
Staff, have considered essential.

We hope that you will agree with us that the foregoing proposal should be
the one submitted to the President by the three departments in response
to his request for our recommendations.

As a possible alternative we are prepared, in the interest of reaching an
agreement and getting some form of organization started, to advise the
President that we can accept your Plan with the modifications already
proposed by Mr. McCormack and
certain further modifications referred to below. In this event, however,
we shall feel obliged to advise the President that this alternative is
in our opinion much less desirable than the one outlined above. The
further modifications of your Plan which we consider essential are as
follows:

1. Inclusion of provisions that the Executive Secretary will be appointed
by the Authority and will be or become an official of the State
Department, unless otherwise determined by the President; that the
Executive Secretary will have no other duties in his own department, in
connection with intelligence activities or otherwise; and that all
personnel detailed for full-time duty with the National Intelligence
Authority, whether as members of the Secretariat or as operating
personnel, will be under the supervision of, and responsible to, the
Executive Secretary.

2. Inclusion of a provision that evaluation and synthesis on a national
level, direction of foreign espionage and counterespionage, and
appropriate dissemination are functions of the National Intelligence
Authority, to be conducted under the supervision of the Executive
Secretary or an executive responsible to him. This will undoubtedly
require elimination of the provision that committees will be the primary
means by which the Authority will carry out its mission and modification
of the provision making the
establishment of such committees mandatory for all subjects.

3. Modification of the provisions dealing with Advisory Groups to provide
that there shall be only one such group which shall have generally the
composition and functions of the Intelligence Board as outlined in the
War Department plan. In connection with such modification, there would
be no objection by us to including provisions (a) that members may be
represented by deputies; (b) that each member should have the functions
assigned by paragraph 12 of the State Department proposal; and (c) that
representatives of other intelligence agencies sit as ad hoc members, by
invitation, on matters of concern to their agencies.

You will recognize that these modifications are designed to correct the
features of your Plan that we mentioned at the outset as being, in our
opinion, fundamental deficiencies.

We earnestly trust that one or the other of these alternative proposals,
preferably the first, will prove acceptable to you and that we may
accordingly proceed in agreement toward the establishment of the new
organization. In view of the importance of this subject, we hope to be
able to discuss it with you, and reach an agreement, before you leave on
your forthcoming trip.

Sincerely yours,

Kenneth C. Royal
James Forrestal

* Source: National Archives and Records
Administration, RG 59, Records of the Department of State, Decimal
File 1945-49, 101.5/1-646. Confidential. Apparently given to
Byrnes by Royall and Forrestal at their January 6
meeting. There is no record of the meeting by any of the
participants. See Truman Library, Papers of Harry S. Truman, Post-Presidential
Memoirs, Sidney W. Souers interview with William Hillman and David
M. Noyes, December 15, 1954. See also Darling, The Central
Intelligence Agency: An Instrument of Government, p. 70, and Troy,
Donovan and the CIA, pp.
341-342.

1 Not
found.

2 Document 56.

3 Document 42.

4 This sentence originally read: “He should be
appointed by the Authority (unless the President desires to select
him), be responsible to the Authority and be removable by majority
vote of the Authority's members.” The deletions on the source text
were made by an unknown hand.

5 A
handwritten “OK” appears in the left margin of paragraphs 2, 3, and
4, and subparagraphs (a), (b), and (c) below.

67. Memorandum From the Secretary of State's Special Assistant for Research and Intelligence (McCormack) to Secretary of State Byrnes67. Memorandum From the Secretary of State's Special Assistant for
Research and Intelligence (McCormack) to Secretary of State ByrnesSource

Washington, January 7,
1946.

The following five further modifications of the War Department plan are
suggested:

(1) Secret intelligence and counter-intelligence. The War Department is
in a hurry to unload the 2500 people that it has in these activities. A
central agency would be greatly
handicapped by having to take over these units immediately. Also there
are a number of knotty problems to be solved, such as the future of the
FBI in South America. It is
recommended that the function be not taken over until a complete
operating plan has been worked out and approved by the Authority. Such a
plan would involve basic decisions as to the extent to which, and the
limitations under which, this Government proposes to engage in
clandestine operations in foreign countries, including matters which may
require Presidential approval.

(2) “Evaluation of intelligence on a national level.” This broad function
is given to the central agency without any definition of its
meaning.1
Insofar as it pertains to the submission of information to the
President, the function is now performed by the State Department, by the
Joint Intelligence Committee and by other departments. Before the
central intelligence agency actually begins to act under this sweeping
grant of authority the meaning of “evaluation on a national level”
should be carefully defined and the scope of the agency's duties
approved by the Authority.

(3) Functions of National Intelligence Authority. The War Department plan
contains a wholly inadequate statement of the missions of the Authority.
The statement of missions as set forth in the State Department plan (to
which no objection has been made) should be adopted.

(4) Committees. The Director should be authorized to form
interdepartmental committees (including members outside State, War and
Navy) as provided in the State Department plan, eliminating, however,
the statement that these committees will be the “primary means by which
the Authority will carry out its missions.”

(5) Bringing additional Department and Agency heads into the Authority.
The War Department plan requires approval of the President to the
bringing in of additional Department and Agency heads as members of the
Authority on matters of interest to them. The provision of the State
Department plan in this respect should be adopted, namely that the
Authority itself may bring such additional members.

Comment

With the above modifications the plan would still be, in my opinion,
unworkable because of the impossible position in which it puts the
Director. He will be circumscribed on all sides by the Intelligence
Board, consisting primarily of the intelligence heads of the armed
services. He can take no “important action” without consulting them; he
cannot even entertain a request for an estimate except through a Board
member; he can make no estimate
for a departmental head without passing it formally through the Board
members; he can get no personnel except by their favor; and therefore he
would be virtually impotent in discharging his “coordinating”
functions.

The one thing that might save him—control of the intelligence machinery
and resources of the State Department—is also taken from him by
insistence of the War and Navy Departments.

A. McCormack

* Source: National Archives and Records
Administration, RG 59, Records of the Department of State, Decimal
File 1945-49, 101.5/1-746. No classification marking.

1 A question mark has been
inserted by hand in the left margin next to this sentence.

68. Letter From Secretary of State Byrnes, Acting Secretary of War Royall, and Secretary of the Navy Forrestal to President Truman68. Letter From Secretary of State Byrnes, Acting Secretary of War Royall, and Secretary of
the Navy Forrestal to
President TrumanSource

Washington, January 7,
1946.

MY DEAR MR. PRESIDENT: Pursuant to your letter of September 20, 1945,
addressed to the Secretary of State,1 we have constituted
ourselves an interdepartmental group to formulate a plan for your
approval for a comprehensive and coordinated foreign intelligence
program for all federal agencies concerned with that type of
activity.

After extensive study, we have unanimously agreed to recommend to you the
plan which is attached hereto.2

This plan takes the form of a directive establishing a National
Intelligence Authority, composed of the Secretaries of State, War and
the Navy, which is charged with the responsibility for such overall
intelligence planning and development and such inspection and
coordination of all Federal intelligence agencies as to assure the most
effective accomplishment of the intelligence mission related to the
national security. The directive further provides that the National
Intelligence Authority shall establish a Central Intelligence Agency, headed by a Director to be
appointed by the President on the recommendation of the National
Intelligence Authority. The Director is to be advised by an Intelligence
Advisory Board, consisting of the heads of the principal military and
civilian intelligence agencies having functions related to the national
security.

You will note that the plan set forth in the directive contemplates that
the Authority, assisted by the Director and the Intelligence Advisory
Board, will prepare and submit to you for your approval a basic
organizational plan in accordance with the principles set forth in the
directive. It is believed to be desirable that the details of the
organization should be worked out in the first instance by the officials
who will be responsible for its performance.

Accordingly, we recommend that you sign the attached directive.

Faithfully yours,

James F. Byrnes

Kenneth C. Royall

James Forrestal

Attachment3

Directive Regarding the Coordination of Intelligence Activities

In order to provide for the development and coordination of intelligence
activities related to the national security:4

1. A National Intelligence Authority composed of the Secretaries of
State, War and the Navy5 is hereby established and
charged with responsibility for such overall intelligence planning and
development, and such inspection and coordination of all Federal6
intelligence activities, as to assure the most effective accomplishment
of the intelligence mission related to the national security.

2. To assist it in that task the National Intelligence Authority shall
establish a Central Intelligence Agency headed by a Director who shall
be appointed or removed by the President on the recommendation of the
National Intelligence Authority.7 The Director of
the Central Intelligence Agency shall be responsible to the National
Intelligence Authority and shall sit as a non-voting member thereof.

3. The Director of the Central Intelligence Agency shall be advised by an
Intelligence Advisory Board consisting of the heads of the principal
military and civilian intelligence agencies having functions related to
the national security, as determined by the National Intelligence
Authority.

4. The first duty of the National Intelligence Authority, assisted by the
Director of the Central Intelligence Agency and the Intelligence
Advisory Board, shall be to prepare and submit to the President for his
approval a basic organizational plan for implementing this
directive8 in accordance with the
concept set forth in the following paragraphs. This plan should include
drafts of all necessary legislation.

5. Subject to the direction and control of the National Intelligence
Authority, the Central Intelligence Agency shall:

(a) Accomplish the synthesis and evaluation of departmental intelligence
relating to the national security and other information collected by it
and the appropriate dissemination within the government of the resulting
strategic and national policy intelligence.

(b) Plan for the coordination of the activities of all intelligence
agencies of the government having functions related to the national
security and recommend to the National Intelligence Authority the
establishment of such overall policies and objectives as will assure the
most effective accomplishment of the national intelligence mission.

(c) Perform, for the benefit of departmental intelligence agencies, such
services of common concern as the National Intelligence Authority
determines can be more efficiently accomplished by a common agency,
including the direct procurement of intelligence.

(d) Perform such other functions and duties related to intelligence as
the President and the National Intelligence Authority may from time to
time direct.

6. The Central Intelligence Agency shall have no police or law
enforcement functions.

7. Subject to coordination by the National Intelligence Authority, the
existing intelligence agencies of the government shall continue to
collect, evaluate, synthesize and disseminate departmental operating
intelligence, herein defined as that intelligence required by the
several departments and
independent agencies for the performance of their proper functions. Such
departmental operating intelligence as designated by the National
Intelligence Authority shall be freely available to the Central
Intelligence Agency for synthesis. As approved by the National
Intelligence Authority, the operations of the departmental intelligence
agencies shall be open to inspection by the Central Intelligence Agency
in connection with its planning functions. In the interpretation of this
paragraph the National Intelligence Authority and the Central
Intelligence Agency will be responsible for fully protecting
intelligence sources and methods which, due to their nature, have a
direct and highly important bearing on military operations.

8. Funds and personnel for the National Intelligence Authority shall be
provided by the departments participating in the National Intelligence
Authority in amount and proportions to be agreed upon by the members of
the Authority. Within the limits of the funds made available to him, the
Director of the Central Intelligence Agency may employ9
necessary personnel and make provisions for necessary supplies,
facilities and services. With the approval of the National Intelligence
Authority, he may call upon departments and independent agencies to
furnish such specialists as may be required for supervisory and
functional positions in the Central Intelligence Agency, including the
assignment of military and naval personnel.10

* Source: Truman Library, Official File, 892.
Confidential. An unsigned copy of this letter indicates that
McCormack was the
drafter. (Ibid., Papers of Clark M.
Clifford, National Intelligence Authority)

1 Document 15.

2 The plan was
not found attached to the source text but was attached to a copy in
the Clifford Papers and is
printed here as an attachment. It is virtually identical to the
Joint Chiefs of Staff proposal of September 19; see Document 13.

3 Source: Truman Library, Papers of Clark M. Clifford, National
Intelligence Authority. Confidential. At the top of the first page
is a note (apparently in Souers' handwriting) which reads “Draft of
1/8/45” [sic]. Subsequent revisions, all by hand, are apparently
also by Souers.

4 The opening sentence is crossed out by hand.

5 At this point the
phrase “and an additional representative of the President of the
United States” is handwritten.

6 At this point “foreign” has been added.

7 The phrase
“on the recommendation of the National Intelligence Authority” has
been crossed out at the end of this sentence.

8 At this point “directive” was
replaced with “executive order.”

9 At this point “additional” was added.

10 An attached organizational chart of the proposed National
Intelligence Authority and Central Intelligence Agency is in the
Supplement.

69. Memorandum by the Director of the Bureau of the Budget (Smith)69. Memorandum by the Director of the Bureau of the Budget
(Smith)Source

Washington, January 9, 1946, 10 a.m.

White House conference on intelligence activities
(10:00 am)

(Summary statement)

On Friday, January 4, 1946, Colonel Alfred
McCormack, Special Assistant to the Secretary of State,
in Charge of Research and Intelligence, telephoned the Director and
indicated that he was making progress with the Navy on intelligence
matters, but not with the Army, and he asked if the Director had gotten
in touch with Secretary of State Byrnes on “our local problem.” The Director had not had
an opportunity to see Byrnes, but
said that he would try to do so.

On Monday, January 7, 1946, the Director had a brief appointment with
Secretary Byrnes just before
Byrnes left for London. The
Secretary apparently told the Director about a proposed Executive Order
disposing of the matter of the organization of intelligence activities
in the Government. Upon returning to the office, the Director talked to
Hoelscher and Schwarzwalder (Administrative Management), who gave him a
copy of the proposed Order.

On Tuesday, January 8, 1946, the Director telephoned Matt Connelly
(Secretary to the President) and asked him to tell the President not to
sign the Executive Order.

On Wednesday morning, January 9, 1946, Connelly telephoned the Director
to say that a meeting on intelligence, called by the President, was
about to be held, so the Director immediately left the office for the
White House. In addition to the President and the Director, participants
in the meeting were Admiral William D.
Leahy, Chief of Staff to the Commander in Chief of the
United States Army and Navy; Judge Samuel I.
Rosenman; Brig. General Vaughan, Military Aide to the
President; James K. Vardaman, Naval Aide to the President; and several
persons from the Navy
Department. The War Department and the State Department were not
represented. The implication of most of the statements made at the
meeting was that intelligence could not be handled in the State
Department because that department was too weak.

The Director, who took the part of the devil's advocate, said that when
he had added together the figures on Army and Navy intelligence
officers, plus the F.B.I. in South America during the war, he found that
we had people falling all over themselves in the field of intelligence.
He pointed out that while we might put up with this kind of situation
during a war, we could not do so as a practical matter while carrying on
a continuing basis a 25-billion-dollar budget during peacetime. When
Leahy made some comment
about the Director's thinking in terms of the budget, Mr. Smith replied
that he was not thinking in terms of dollars but rather in terms of
organization. Leahy admitted
that intelligence had been handled in a disgraceful way, and he said
that he could not get any intelligence out of the Army, the Navy or the
State Department during the war.

The Director made two points with the President. First, he stated that it
is easy to ignore a thing as being only a “little matter of
administration” and therefore not too important; but often that “little
matter of administration” is the key to the problem in question, and
whether or not it is properly handled makes the difference between
success and failure in solving the problem. Second, the Director stated
that when a subject is left to three departments to divide up among
themselves, the worst possible compromise results, and that the
President himself must decide how he wants intelligence activities
organized.

The Director commented further that he had listened to a good many
discussions on the organization of intelligence activities and that
personally he was much interested in the subject because he feels that
it has a great bearing on our enlarged role in international affairs. He
pointed out, however, that he was concerned about the fact that in all
that he had heard on the subject there did not seem to be even a clear
understanding of what kind of intelligence was being discussed, and he
declared that there was certainly need for some definitions. He
remarked, “I am not so sure that we are not approaching the subject of
intelligence in the most unintelligent fashion.”

* Source: Roosevelt Library, Papers of
Harold Smith, Box 4,
Conferences with President Truman, 1946. No classification marking. The time on
the source text is 10 p.m., but the “p.m.” has been crossed out and
inserted by hand is “a.m.?” Although written in the third person,
this is part of the series of memoranda often referred to as the
“Smith Diary.” The only other known contemporary account of this
meeting by a participant is Admiral Leahy's short diary entry, which simply notes the
fact of the meeting and comments: “The Director of the Budget
offered many objections that evidently were instigated by the
Department of State.” (Library of Congress, Manuscript Division,
Leahy Diaries,
January 9, 1946) President Truman's brief account, which may refer either to
this meeting or to a follow-up session on January 12, is in Memoirs by Harry S.
Truman, vol. II, Years of Trial and Hope, p.
57.

70. Memorandum From the Director of the Bureau of the Budget (Smith) to the President's Special Counsel (Rosenman)70. Memorandum From the Director of the Bureau of the Budget
(Smith) to the President's Special
Counsel (Rosenman)Source

Washington, January 10,
1946.

Some time ago I asked Colonel McCormack, who used to be in Army Intelligence and who
is now working on the intelligence problem for the State Department, to
give me a memorandum concerning the subject. My staff regards him very
highly.

The memorandum just came in today, and I have not at this moment read it.
However, I am passing it on to you thinking that you might like to read
it before the Saturday morning meeting.1 Actually it was not written for this purpose,
and because State is not to be represented I think it would not be wise
for you to use it other than as background information.

I consider this whole subject of intelligence to be one of the most
far-reaching problems of interdepartmental coordination that we
currently face. My own gloomy opinion is that it will not be solved in
an orderly fashion and that we will go through the usual two, three or
more reorganization stages—God bless bureaucracy!

HDS

Attachment2

Memorandum From the Secretary of State's Special
Assistant for Research and Intelligence (McCormack) to the Director of the Bureau of the
Budget (Smith)

Washington, January 10, 1946.

As I am going away for a few days I should like to leave this memorandum
with you as expressing my thoughts on the pending problem of organizing
government intelligence. It has been written in a hurry but I hope that
it covers the main points.

There are several concepts of the “Central Intelligence Agency”:

(1) The “Central Evaluating Agency”: This is the conception of General
Clarke of MIS, who thinks of a single
place into which every paper of possible intelligence value comes and is
read, circulated to those interested and “evaluated.” The nearest to
such an organization that has ever existed is the Japanese intelligence
unit of the Military Intelligence Service during the war. It consisted
of almost a thousand people, and it served largely as an operating
intelligence agency for the field commands. Almost literally it
received, read, cataloged and filed every paper pertaining to the
Japanese. Its work was supplemented by specialized work done by other
agencies (e.g., the technical air intelligence done by the Navy at
Anacostia; the work of the OSS on the
long-term “JANIS” studies, etc.). Such an organization, working in
peace-time, covering the whole world and serving the needs of the whole
government, would be so large in size as to be wholly impracticable,
even if desirable.

(2) The “Coordinator of Information”: This is the original concept of
General Donovan—an agency that
would receive the “processed” information and intelligence reports
produced by all other agencies of the government and would put them
together, coming out with a finished product called “strategic
intelligence.” General Donovan
found that it was almost impossible to fill such a role, partly because
it was difficult to get the information from other agencies, partly
because it was impossible to judge how good the information was without
having a separate research organization to check it and a field
organization to verify it, and to get additional information.

(3) The “Coordinator of Information Plus”: This is the role that the
OSS attempted to fill during the
war—a Coordinator of Information with his own intelligence collecting
organization, plus a research staff to do the evaluating and produce the
final studies. While the OSS
accomplished a great deal during the war, it came nowhere near to
filling the role that it desired, chiefly because of its remoteness from
the operating units. Where, as with certain of the political divisions
of the State Department, the OSS
research organization found a good customer and got very close to the
operating problems, the results were excellent. Where that condition did
not prevail, the reports tended to be academic and unrelated to the real
problems of the Government. Reports were frequently based upon less than
all the available information, not because the information was withheld
but because OSS tried to cover so large
a field of intelligence that it could not maintain adequate machinery
for getting all the available information.

(4) Interdepartmental Coordinating and Planning Mechanism: This is the
underlying concept of the State Department's proposed plan for
coordination of intelligence, and I believe accords in general with the
views of the Bureau of the
Budget. It is based upon the following main premises:

a. This Government, in its numerous departments and agencies, has vast
resources for the collection of information and the production of
intelligence. In a period when there is strong pressure to reduce
government expenditures, it is most important that all these resources
be harnessed and used.

b. The way to use them is to distribute the intelligence function widely
through the Government, giving to each specialized unit the job that it
is best qualified to do, providing for cooperative undertakings on
subjects of inter-departmental interest and setting up machinery that
will insure the flow of intelligence to all those who need to have
it.

c. While the importance of collecting more information is not
under-estimated (including the importance of using unconventional
methods where necessary), the critical process in intelligence is
performed at the research desk. It consists of compiling the
information, appraising it, putting it into usable form, checking its
validity and informing the collecting units of what further information
is needed. Adequate performance of the research function requires the
use of experts, and they are to be found in those departments and
agencies which have the operating or policy responsibilities in the
particular field.

d. The great need in the Government today is not a super-intelligence
agency but is the development of a Government-wide intelligence program
that can be translated into specific operating plans, under which
responsibilities will be clearly defined and allocated. Development of
such a program and operating plans is not something that can be done at
one fell swoop. It is a permanent job, because of changing needs and
changing capabilities of Government agencies; and even without those
factors it is a 2-year job.

e. A permanent programming and planning agency is needed for still
another reason—to follow up the plans and insure that they are carried
out.

Foreign intelligence is needed for two paramount purposes:

a. Conduct of foreign relations; and

b. Preparation for war.

One is the function of the State Department, the other of the Armed
Serv-ices. Since 1940, when this Government began to do intelligence
work on a major scale, the emphasis has been largely on the military
side. The emphasis will continue to be on the military side in any
agency that is dominated by the Armed Forces. The State Department plan
imposes no obstacles to the development of military intelligence, but it
is oriented toward expanding the non-military side of intelligence
work.

My objections to the War Department plan may be summarized as
follows:

a. The War Department wants a new, separate and “independent” agency
(though their “independent” director would be subject to so many
controls by the military that his independence would be nonexistent). I
feel that a new, separate agency will have difficulty getting money from
Congress, or by means of departmental contributions of funds; and it
will be in competition with existing intelligence agencies for funds,
personnel and assignments. I favor a scheme that will reduce competition
to a minimum.

b. If we are going to do secret intelligence, we should not advertise the
fact, nor should we set up an agency with pretentious titles. I think
the term “Central Intelligence Agency” is both misleading and dangerous.
That is why I favor a “Secretariat” functioning under the proposed
Authority, instead of a Central Intelligence Agency, and an
unpretentious title for the executive head of it.

c. The War Department plan conceives of a single solution to the
intelligence problem. It is not that simple, and many different
solutions are necessary in a well conceived Government-wide program. The
point is further discussed below.

d. The War Department conceives that there is some virtue in a central
agency as such. To my mind, a sound program would attempt to build up
the existing intelligence units to maximum efficiency and would allocate
to the central agency only those functions which clearly can be
performed better by a central organization.

It is my conception that if a planning agency is set up it will find
three possible solutions for each intelligence responsibility:

a. To transfer it to the central agency;

b. To create an interdepartmental unit, outside of the central agency, to
do the job (e.g., a joint Army and Navy unit to do air intelligence);
and

c. Allocation of the responsibility, on behalf of the whole Government,
to a single intelligence agency.

There are certain responsibilities that can be discharged best by one
agency, on behalf of the whole Government, because of the expertness of
that agency in the particular field. The following are random
illustrations:

a. Foreign pictures to Navy, which now does the main job;

b. Map coverage; other than topographic, to State Department (Army Map
Service does only topographic maps);

c. Polar meteorology to Air Forces;

d. Foreign population statistics to Bureau of Census;

e. Financial statistics to Federal Reserve Board;

f. World trade statistics to Department of Commerce;

g. Foreign labor developments to Labor;

h. Foreign mineral resources to Bureau of Mines;

i. Supervision of public opinion testing (possibly) to Department of
Agriculture.

There are various joint operations which, in my opinion would gain
nothing from being under a central agency, but which might well be put
into joint units directed by one department. (We had many of these in
the war, with personnel from two or more agencies, physically located
in, and supervised by, one of the agencies). The weekly reporting of
foreign events (largely political events) now done by State, G-2 and
ONI, might well be put into an
interdepartmental unit, with personnel drawn from the three departments,
but under the supervision of the department of primary interest, vis.,
State.

The various aspects of geographical intelligence call for
interdepartmental units. Topographic intelligence, now supervised by the
Joint Topographical Subcommittee of the JIC, is in effect directed by G-2 and the work is mainly
done by G-2. Ports and harbors should be a joint enterprise of the Navy,
the Maritime Commission and the Army Engineers. I cannot see that
anything would be gained by putting it under the operating direction of
a central agency.

In all these cases a central planning and programming organization would
be of great benefit. It could do the job of “selling” intelligence. It
could perform the kind of coordination that is required in a situation
such as the foreign census figures. When the Bureau of Census is queried
as to why it cannot recast its population figures to meet the Army's
needs for computations of military manpower, it could no longer say that
the Bureau of the Budget had refused to allow it the necessary
positions. The planner in the central agency would go to Mr. Harold Smith and say: “Do you want this
job done well by 6 people in the Census Bureau or done badly by 50
people in the Armed Services?”; and the answer would be obvious.

The Army makes two points very strongly, vis., (a) that a central agency
is necessary to conduct secret intelligence and (b) that there must be
some organization to do the “final strategic and national policy
intelligence.”

I doubt the validity of either of these arguments. I agree that “secret”
intelligence, in the sense in which it is done by the British Secret
Intelligence Service, should be done by a single agency. But in no
Government, including the British Government, is there the kind of
exclusive franchise that the War Department is talking about. In fact,
the most important “secret” intelligence is done so secretly that nobody
knows who does it. In this respect I think that the War Department's
thinking is stereotyped and unimaginative.

The State Department has not opposed putting secret intelligence under a
central agency, but it would oppose it if the central agency were
directly under the President, because such operations might compromise
the President.

On the matter of the “strategic” intelligence which the Service
Departments think of as something that is dished up to the President,
there are obvious dangers in putting such a responsibility in a
non-Departmental person. It is my view that, apart from the strictly
military aspects for which it is necessary to rely on the Armed Forces,
“strategic intelligence” is by definition a function of the Department
of Government which is responsible for foreign affairs.

It may be that the State Department is not now equipped to discharge the
function. It may also be that the unit which discharges it should be
interdepartmental, with adequate Army and Navy representation. But the
State Department's weaknesses are not a good reason for refusing to
strengthen it by giving it its appropriate functions in foreign
intelligence and the means with which to discharge them.

One further point as to the collection of intelligence in the field.
There the chief coordinating responsibility is now vested in the
representatives of the State Department abroad, who have administrative
supervision of the Service Attaches and of the various civilian attaches
(Commercial, Agricultural, Labor, Petroleum, etc.). The
counter-espionage organization of OSS
(now under the War Department) operates outside of the theaters under
State Department cover. That is, the X-2 personnel are carried (openly)
as members of the Ambassador's staff. The same is increasingly true of
the SI personnel in countries not under
military occupation.

That coordinating role calls for somewhat the same type of coordination
at the seat of Government.

Alfred McCormack3

* Source: Truman Library, Papers of Samuel I. Rosenman, Subject
File—OSS, 1946.
Confidential.

1 January 12.

2 Confidential.

3 Printed from a copy that bears this
typed signature.

71. Presidential Directive on Coordination of Foreign Intelligence Activities71. Presidential Directive on Coordination of Foreign Intelligence
ActivitiesSource

Washington, January 22,
1946.

To the Secretary of State, the Secretary of War, and the Secretary of the
Navy:

1. It is my desire, and I hereby direct, that all Federal foreign
intelligence activities be planned, developed and coordinated so as to
assure the most effective accomplishment of the intelligence mission
related to the national security. I hereby designate you, together with
another person to be named by me as my personal representative, as the
National Intelligence Authority to accomplish this purpose.

2. Within the limits of available appropriations, you shall each from
time to time assign persons and facilities from your respective
Departments, which persons shall collectively form a Central
Intelligence Group and shall, under the direction of a Director of
Central Intelligence, assist the National Intelligence Authority. The
Director of Central Intelligence shall be designated by me, shall be
responsible to the National Intelligence Authority, and shall sit as a
non-voting member thereof.

3. Subject to the existing law, and to the direction and control of the
National Intelligence Authority, the Director of Central Intelligence
shall:

a. Accomplish the correlation and evaluation of intelligence relating to
the national security, and the appropriate dissemination within the
Government of the resulting strategic and national policy intelligence.
In so doing, full use shall be made of the staff and facilities of the
intelligence agencies of your Departments.

b. Plan for the coordination of such of the activities of the
intelligence agencies of your Departments as relate to the national
security and recommend to the National Intelligence Authority the
establishment of such over-all policies and objectives as will assure
the most effective accomplishment of the national intelligence
mission.

c. Perform, for the benefit of said intelligence agencies, such serv-ices
of common concern as the National Intelligence Authority determines can
be more efficiently accomplished centrally.

d. Perform such other functions and duties related to intelligence
affecting the national security as the President and the National
Intelligence Authority may from time to time direct.

4. No police, law enforcement or internal security functions shall be
exercised under this directive.

5. Such intelligence received by the intelligence agencies of your
Departments as may be designated by the National Intelligence Authority
shall be freely available to the Director of Central Intelligence for
correlation, evaluation or dissemination. To the extent approved by the
National Intelligence Authority, the operations of said intelligence
agencies shall be open to inspection by the Director of Central
Intelligence in connection with planning functions.

6. The existing intelligence agencies of your Departments shall continue
to collect, evaluate, correlate and disseminate departmental
intelligence.

7. The Director of Central Intelligence shall be advised by an
Intelligence Advisory Board consisting of the heads (or their
representatives) of the principal military and civilian intelligence
agencies of the Government having functions related to national
security, as determined by the National Intelligence Authority.

8. Within the scope of existing law and Presidential directives, other
departments and agencies of the executive branch of the Federal
Government shall furnish such intelligence information relating to the
national security as is in their possession, and as the Director of
Central Intelligence may from time to time request pursuant to
regulations of the National Intelligence Authority.

9. Nothing herein shall be construed to authorize the making of
investigations inside the continental limits of the United States and
its possessions, except as provided by law and Presidential
directives.

10. In the conduct of their activities the National Intelligence
Authority and the Director of Central Intelligence shall be responsible
for fully protecting intelligence sources and methods.

Sincerely yours,

Harry S. Truman

* Source: Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: Harry S. Truman, 1946, pp.
88-89. The directive was also published in the Federal Register of February 5, 1946 (11 Fed. Reg. 1337,
1339). A typewritten copy is reproduced in CIA
Cold War Records: The CIA under Harry Truman, pp. 29-31.

Department of State IntelligenceDepartment of State Intelligence: Document List

Introduction

Document 72: Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for Administration (McCarthy) to the Under Secretary of State (Acheson)

Washington, September 5, 1945.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Records of the Department of State, Records of the Office of the Assistant Secretary for Administration—Subject Files, 1944-47: Lot 53 D 28, Box 15, Folder Nelson, Otto L. No classification marking.

Document 73: Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom

Washington, September 12, 1945, 5 p.m.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Records of the Department of State, Decimal File 1945-49, 111.111/9-1245. Confidential; No Distribution; U.S. Urgent. Drafted by McCarthy. An incoming copy of this telegram bears the classification Secret. (Ibid., Records of the Bureau of Intelligence and Research: Lot 58 D 776) Byrnes was in London to attend the Council of Foreign Ministers meeting.

Document 74: Memorandum From Acting Secretary of State Acheson to the Secretary of State's Special Assistant for Research and Intelligence (McCormack)

Washington, October 1, 1945.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Records of the Department of State, Records of the Bureau of Intelligence and Research: Lot 58 D 776, Birth of the Intelligence Organization in the Department of State. No classification marking. On September 27 Acheson announced the appointment of McCormack as Special Assistant to the Secretary of State in charge of research and intelligence. (Department of State Bulletin, September 30, 1945, p. 499)

Document 75: Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for Administration (McCarthy) to the Secretary of State's Special Assistant for Research and Intelligence (McCormack)

Washington, October 4, 1945.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Records of the Department of State, Decimal File 1945-49, 101.5/10-445. No classification marking.

Document 76: Circular Telegram From the Department of State to Certain Diplomatic Missions

Washington, October 22, 1945, 4 p.m.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Records of the Department of State, Decimal File 1945-49, 103.918/10-2245. Secret. Drafted by McCormack and cleared in OFS, NEA, EUR, and ARA, and by Donald Russell. Sent to Ankara, Athens, Brussels, Bucharest, Budapest, Cairo, Chunking, London, New Delhi, Paris, Rome, Sofia, The Hague, Tirana, and Colombo for Yost. The time of transmission is handwritten on the source text.

Document 77: Memorandum From Secretary of State Byrnes to the Secretary of State's Special Assistant for Research and Intelligence (McCormack)

Washington, October 23, 1945.

Source: Truman Library, Papers of J. Anthony Panuch. Top Secret.

Document 78: Memorandum From the Secretary of State's Special Assistant for Research and Intelligence (McCormack) to the Assistant Secretary of State for Public and Cultural Relations (Benton)

Washington, October 23, 1945.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Records of the Department of State, Decimal File 1945-49, 101.5/10-2445. No classification marking.

Document 79: Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for Public and Cultural Relations (Benton) to the Secretary of State's Special Assistant for Research and Intelligence (McCormack)

Washington, October 24, 1945.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Records of the Department of State, Decimal File 1945-49, 101.5/10-2445. No classification marking.

Document 80: Memorandum From the Secretary of State's Special Assistant for Research and Intelligence (McCormack) to the Under Secretary of State (Acheson)

Washington, October 27, 1945.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Records of the Department of State, Records of the Bureau of Intelligence and Research: Lot 58 D 776, Birth of the Intelligence Organization in the Department of State. No classification marking. The memorandum bears the handwritten annotation, “I shall be glad to help in any way. DA.”

Document 81: Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for Administration (Russell) to Secretary of State Byrnes

Washington, November 3, 1945.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Records of the Department of State, Decimal File 1945-49, 101.5/11-345. No classification marking.

Document 82: Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for Administration (Russell) to Secretary of State Byrnes

Washington, December 29, 1945.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Records of the Department of State, Records of the Bureau of Intelligence and Research: Lot 58 D 776, Birth of the Intelligence Organization in the Department of State. No classification marking. Also sent to Under Secretary Acheson.

Document 83: Memorandum From the Secretary of State's Special Assistant for Research and Intelligence (McCormack) to Secretary of State Byrnes

Washington, December 31, 1945.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Records of the Department of State, Records of the Bureau of Intelligence and Research: Lot 58 D 776, Birth of the Intelligence Organization in the Department of State. No classification marking. Also sent to Under Secretary Acheson.

Document 84: Memorandum From Secretary of State Byrnes to the Assistant Secretary of State for Administration (Russell)

Washington, January 5, 1946.

Source: Truman Library, Papers of J. Anthony Panuch, State Department, Research and Intelligence, #1. No classification marking. A handwritten notation on the source text reads: “To General Nelson—For implementation and action. D.R.”

Document 85: Report From the Assistant Secretary of State for Administration (Russell) to Secretary of State Byrnes

Washington, undated.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Records of the Department of State, Records of the Bureau of Intelligence and Research: Lot 58 D 776, Birth of the Intelligence Organization in the Department of State. No classification marking. Attached to a February 25 covering memorandum in which Russell noted that it was in response to SC-185 and reminded Byrnes that according to his directive of January 5 (Document 84) the issue was to be determined by Byrnes before March 1. The covering memorandum and the full text of the report are in the Supplement. SC-185, February 12, is not printed. (National Archives and Records Administration, RG 353, Records of Interdepartmental and Intradepartmental Committees—State Department, Lot File No. 122, Records of the Secretary's Staff Committee 1944-47) See the Supplement. This report, also known as the “Russell Plan,” is printed in Senate Committee on the Judiciary, Subcommittee To Investigate the Administration of the Internal Security Laws, 83d Congress, 1st Session, Hearings on Interlocking Subversion in Government Departments, part 13, pp. 865-867.

Document 86: Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for American Republic Affairs (Braden) to Secretary of State Byrnes

Washington, February 25, 1946.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Records of the Department of State, Records of the Bureau of Intelligence and Research: Lot 58 D 776, Birth of the Intelligence Organization in the Department of State. No classification marking.

Document 87: Memorandum From the Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Administration (Panuch) to the Assistant Secretary of State for Administration (Russell)

Washington, April 16, 1946.

Source: Truman Library, Papers of J. Anthony Panuch, State Department, Research and Intelligence #2. Secret.

Document 88: Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for Administration (Russell) to Secretary of State Byrnes

Washington, April 18, 1946.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Records of the Department of State, Records of the Bureau of Intelligence and Research: Lot 58 D 776, Birth of the Intelligence Organization in the Department of State. No classification marking. Also sent to Under Secretary Acheson. For a copy of Panuch's handwritten note to McCormack enclosing a copy of Russell's memorandum (ibid.), see the Supplement.

Document 89: Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for Administration (Russell) to Secretary of State Byrnes

Washington, April 20, 1946.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Records of the Department of State, Records of the Bureau of Intelligence and Research: Lot 58 D 776, Birth of the Intelligence Organization in the Department of State. No classification marking. Also sent to Under Secretary Acheson.

Document 90: Letter From the Secretary of State's Special Assistant for Research and Intelligence (McCormack) to Secretary of State Byrnes

Washington, April 23, 1946.

Source: Department of State Bulletin, May 5, 1946, pp. 778-779.

Document 91: Minutes of the Eighth Meeting, Advisory Committee on Intelligence

Washington, December 3, 1946, 4:30-5:30 p.m.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 353, Records of Interdepartmental and Intradepartmental Committees—State Department, Lot File No. 122, Records of the Secretary's Staff Committee 1944-47, Box 94. Secret.

Document 92: Memorandum From the Secretary of State's Special Assistant for Research and Intelligence (Eddy) to the Acting Assistant Secretary of State for Administration (Peurifoy)

Washington, January 27, 1947.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 353, Records of Interdepartmental and Intradepartmental Committees—State Department, Lot File No. 122, Records of the Secretary's Staff Committee 1944-47, Box 94. Confidential.

Document 93: Memorandum From the Secretary of State's Special Assistant for Research and Intelligence (Eddy) to the Under Secretary of State (Acheson)

Washington, January 30, 1947.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Records of the Department of State, Records of the Bureau of Intelligence and Research: Lot 58 D 776, Birth of the Intelligence Organization in the Department of State. Secret.

Document 94: Memorandum From the Acting Assistant Secretary of State for Administration (Peurifoy) to the Under Secretary of State (Acheson) and Secretary of State Marshall

Washington, January 31, 1947.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Records of the Department of State, Records of the Office of the Assistant Secretary of State for Administration, Subject Files 1944-1947: Lot 53 D 28, Box 11. Secret. A handwritten note on the source text by Acheson reads: “I strongly recommend approval of the attached proposal. D.A.” At the bottom of the source text Marshall wrote: “O.K. G.C.M.”

IntroductionIntroduction

Coinciding roughly in time with the controversy over the creation of a
national intelligence structure, a heated and at times bitter struggle
in the Department of State took place over whether the Department should
have its own intelligence organization, and, if so, how it should be
organized and to whom it should answer. Within the Department of State,
the two issues of national and Department intelligence organization were
in fact closely linked.

Under the pressures of wartime, the Department had developed a few
rudimentary intelligence operations. A Division of Foreign Activity
Correlation handled liaison with the FBI
and OSS, provided such Departmental and
Foreign Service support as they required, and disseminated their reports
in the Department. For matters that required scrutiny at a higher level,
beginning with Assistant Secretary Adolf A. Berle, Jr., an officer of
that rank seems to have had, as part of his portfolio, a general
watching brief over intelligence matters. The Department also had a
representative on the Joint Intelligence Committee of the Joint Chiefs
of Staff, an arrangement that at least gave it some voice in what was
then the only part of the U.S. Government where something resembling
national intelligence assessments were being prepared. But there appears
to have been no real Departmental backup for this process other than
whatever backstopping the Department's representative might elicit from
the policy offices.

By 1943-1944, there were stirrings about the future of the U.S.
intelligence system in the postwar world. In 1944, an officer of the
Division of World Trade Intelligence proposed the establishment of an
office of intelligence analysis and for a period of a year or so a
somewhat desultory discussion of the proposal went on in the Department.
The Bureau of the Budget encouraged the plan and worked with its
proponents, but the initiative seems to have produced nothing except
exchanges of memoranda and draft Departmental orders.

Secretary of State Edward R. Stettinius, Jr., showed some interest in
intelligence during his brief tenure. At the time of President Roosevelt's death in April 1945,
Stettinius was meeting with Secretary of the Navy Forrestal and Attorney
General Francis Biddle on a plan for postwar intelligence organization,
but it is not clear whether he was involved in efforts to create a
Departmental intelligence capability. By June he had been replaced by
Secretary Byrnes.

Thus at the end of World War II, the Department of State still had no
intelligence organization in the modern sense of the term. The Foreign
Service was, of course, the major source of foreign information and
intelligence available to the
U.S. Government, but the analysis and interpretation of the information
was the responsibility of the Department's policy offices. There was no
independent mechanism within the Department for assessing and
correlating information.

At the time of his appointment, Byrnes asked the Bureau of the Budget for a study on the
State Department's organization and management. Chapter VII of the
report, entitled “Intelligence and Research,” described the Department's
operations, both foreign and domestic, devoted to the collection and
analysis of information and concluded that “the Department has not fixed
the responsibility in any office to determine what information is needed
and to ensure that it is brought together in a form that is reliable,
adequate and available for use.” (Report by the Director of the Bureau
of the Budget, August 15, 1945; see the Supplement)

To meet this problem, the report recommended that “The Department should
establish, as an adjunct to the Office of the Secretary, an Office of
Intelligence and Research to plan a coordinated program of foreign
intelligence and research and maintain a central intelligence service.”

Byrnes apparently discussed this
report with Dean Acheson at the
time he persuaded him to return to the Department as Under Secretary.
Acheson, who believed that
Byrnes was committed to the
report, was convinced of the need for an intelligence system in the
Department and was to become one of its strongest advocates.

By this point, events were beginning to move quickly. On September 5,
1945, Assistant Secretary for Administration Frank McCarthy recommended to Acheson that the Department act on the Budget Bureau's
proposal by appointing a special assistant to the Secretary to handle
intelligence. (Document 72) But other
developments overtook this recommendation and, indeed, the original
Budget Bureau proposal. By late August, the decision had been made to
break up OSS and transfer its Research and Analysis Branch to the
Department of State.

When the President signed Executive Order 9621 on September 20, making
the transfer effective on October 1, the Department of State thereby
inherited its first intelligence organization. (Document 14) A week later, Acheson announced the appointment of Colonel Alfred McCormack, a New York lawyer
with a distinguished wartime record in the Military Intelligence
Division, as the first Special Assistant to the Secretary of State for
Research and Intelligence.

The Executive order was somewhat more complicated than a simple transfer.
It established within the Department of State an Interim Research and
Intelligence Service (IRIS), which was
to remain in existence until December 31, 1945. The Secretary of State
was required to wind up the affairs of IRIS by that date, but in the process he was authorized to transfer any of its
functions to any agency within the Department that he might designate.
In other words, he was authorized to dismantle the Research and Analysis
Branch but to reassemble it by the end of the year as a new organization
within the Department.

The September 20 Executive order was accompanied by a Presidential letter
of the same date which conferred on the Secretary of State the
responsibility to “take the lead in developing a comprehensive and
coordinated foreign intelligence program for all Federal agencies
concerned with that type of activity.” (Document
15) The Department of State thus had acquired a second
responsibility that was closely linked to the establishment of its own
intelligence organization.

Inevitably, the two aspects of McCormack's responsibilities became entangled. He was
inclined to hold back on plans for an interagency structure until he
launched the Department's own organization, but the pressures from the
other agencies involved compelled him to move on both fronts. The chief
critic of McCormack's plan for a
Departmental intelligence organization, Assistant Secretary of State for
Administration Donald Russell,
also became a player in the interagency maneuvering over the future
intelligence community by proposing his own plan and engaging in certain
contacts with Secretary of the Navy Forrestal which, although sanctioned
by Byrnes, worked against
McCormack's position.
Finally, the strong resistance within the Department to a centralized
“in-house” intelligence organization became a factor in the interagency
debate, with Secretary of War Patterson in particular opposing any State Department
leadership of the national intelligence structure if the Department's
own intelligence system were decentralized to the policy offices.

When McCormack took office, he
already had a functioning intelligence research and analysis
organization, although it had to be slimmed down and many of its staff
were anxious to return to private pursuits. He had to find a way to
integrate it into the Department's structure.

McCormack's plan was for a
centralized intelligence component, a set of geographic and functional
research offices that would roughly parallel the policy offices, working
closely with them but remaining independent of their control and
steering clear of involvement in policy. By late October 1945, this
concept was running into opposition within the Department and in
Congress where funding for the intelligence program was being
drastically reduced.

On October 27, 1945, Under Secretary Acheson called a meeting of senior Department of State
officers to discuss the future of the intelligence question. As
Acheson recalled, it was his
and McCormack's intention to head
off opposition to the intelligence plan, which would create a unit of
slightly over 1,000 people from the former Research and Analysis Branch.
(Present at the Creation: My Years in the State
Department (New York:
W.W. Norton, 1969), pages 159-160) Acheson regarded the geographic policy offices,
conservative elements in the Department, and Assistant Secretary
Russell as the main
opponents. They were promoting a decentralized intelligence system in
which responsibility for intelligence analysis (and some but not all of
the 1,000 or so intelligence personnel) would be assigned to the policy
offices. According to Acheson's
account, Spruille Braden and Loy
Henderson, Chiefs of the Latin American and Near Eastern Divisions,
respectively, combined with Russell and his deputy, Anthony Panuch, at the October 27 meeting to argue that
the plan for creating an intelligence office was a duplication of effort
and a waste of money. (Ibid., page 160)

Spruille Braden charges that
Acheson and McCormack were clearly trying to force
acceptance of an Office of Research and Intelligence without adequate
consultation with the policy offices. (Diplomats and
Demagogues: The Memoirs of Spruille
Braden (New Rochelle, NY: Arlington House, 1971), pages 346-348)
Braden also raised the
question of the loyalty and political sympathies of some of the
employees the Department had inherited from OSS (an allegation that was to reappear in the debate). In
Braden's view, the October 27
meeting was a successful revolt against Acheson and McCormack. Both Acheson and Braden
agree that the immediate result of the meeting was to delay a final
decision on issue.

Within a week of the October 27 meeting, Russell laid the issue before Secretary Byrnes. In a November 3 memorandum to
Byrnes (Document 81), Russell
quoted the following language from the Bureau of the Budget's recent
report on Intelligence and Security Activities in the government:
“Extreme centralization of the intelligence operation is no more
workable than would be the centralizing in one agency of the job of
producing all statistics for the Government.” (Report, September 20,
1945; see the Supplement)

Russell went on to argue: “If a
centralized over-all governmental intelligence unit is not workable—the
Budget's conclusion—then it follows that the proposed plan of extreme
centralization in the Department itself is not workable.”

The President's directive of November 7 (Document
44) required McCormack
and Byrnes to consider plans for
an interagency intelligence organization, but the internal controversy
in the Department of State broke out again in December. On November 29,
Russell appointed a working
group to “conduct a survey within the Department of State to determine
where in the Department there should be intelligence activities.”
(Memorandum from Nelson to McKay and Simmes, November 29, 1945; see the
Supplement) The working group proceeded to draw up a report and
recommendations for an “Intelligence Advisory Board.” The Board (not to
be confused with the Intelligence Advisory Board established under the
Presidential Directive of January 22, 1946) apparently had been established before Acheson's October 27 meeting on
intelligence but had held only one previous meeting when it convened on
December 19, 1945, to consider the working group's report. The report
contained a majority recommendation for a centralized intelligence
organization and an alternative proposal, submitted on behalf of the
geographic policy offices, under which intelligence analysis would be
decentralized to them while other intelligence functions (e.g.,
acquisition and dissemination) would be centralized. No copy of the
report has been found, but it is summarized in the draft minutes of the
Advisory Board's December 19 meeting. (See the Supplement)

The Advisory Board, on which the policy offices had substantial
representation, split evenly. The chairman, Sherman Kent of IRIS,
cast the deciding vote in favor of an interim, centralized Office of
Research and Intelligence to meet the problem of the imminent
disestablishment of IRIS while leaving
open for further study “the method by which research and intelligence
should be organized in the Department.” To this end, the Board also
recommended that its own existence be extended. The only record found of
the Board's December 19 meeting is a set of draft minutes which was
circulated for corrections under cover of a note dated December 26,
1945. (See the Supplement)

Although the Intelligence Advisory Board had thus answered the immediate
question of what to do when the December 31 deadline arrived, it was
obviously aware that it had not solved the problem. On the contrary, its
proceedings had underscored the depth of the division over the issue and
especially the strong resistance of the policy offices to an independent
analysis function in the Department of State.

On December 29, 1945, Russell
reminded Byrnes and Acheson by memorandum that the order
establishing a successor to IRIS had to
be issued by January 1, at the same time commenting that “an
irreconcilable difference of opinion exists.” Russell went on to argue “that research
at the geographic level must be under the immediate direction of those
who are to use it. In my judgment, the divorce of research from the
policy action taken after the evaluation of information will … breed
confusion and disorganize the operations of the Department.” (Document 82) Assistant Secretaries Braden and Dunn followed up with memoranda of their own on December
31, in which they argued for immediate transfer of the intelligence
analysis function. (See the Supplement)

McCormack, returning the fire on
December 31, asserted that decentralization “would end all possibility
of organized State Department intelligence, and the President's idea of
State Department leadership in government-wide intelligence could not be
attained.” (Document 83)

At this point, Byrnes was planning
to leave for London and was under pressure to reach a consensus on the
national intelligence structure. On January 5, 1946, he informed
Russell that he wanted
McCormack's plan for a centralized organization
adopted temporarily but on the express understanding that a final
decision on “the ultimate location” of the Office of Research and
Intelligence would be made by March 1, 1946. (Document 84)

Russell prodded Byrnes again on February 25 and
Byrnes again postponed a
decision. (See Document 85 and the source note
thereto.) By mid-April the issue was still unsettled. The dispute had
spilled into the press. The Secretary had given the principals a
deadline of April 16 to reach agreement; a “mediator” acting at
McCormack's behest was trying
to resolve differences (and was criticized for acting as an advocate of
McCormack's views rather than
as a negotiator); and Russell, or
one of his associates, had polled the heads of the political offices,
asking them to indicate their preference for McCormack's or Russell's plan (all of the signatures were in the
Russell column). (Document 87) On April 18, Russell reported to Byrnes that “the discussions now in
process hold no substantial promise of reaching a settlement.” (Document 88) Finally, after further fruitless
“mediation” efforts and one more memorandum from Russell to Byrnes, the Secretary issued an order on April 22, 1946,
adopting Russell's plan for a
decentralized organization. On April 23, McCormack resigned. (Document
90)

The operation of the Department's intelligence analysis organization
under the Russell plan was
short-lived and it is not clear how wholeheartedly it was applied in
practice. For one thing, the decentralized unit continued to be
colocated rather than physically dispersed to their respective policy
offices. Nor is it clear how enthusiastic McCormack's successors were about the system they had
inherited. His immediate successor, Professor William Langer, was an interim
replacement who served only a few months, and Langer's successor, Colonel William Eddy, was quick to recommend
abandonment of the plan as soon as Russell was no longer on the scene.

In any case, Russell resigned as
Assistant Secretary for Administration effective January 20, 1947, one
day before Byrnes left office.
According to Acheson's account,
immediately following General George C.
Marshall's swearing-in as Secretary of State, Marshall
requested that Acheson stay on as
Under Secretary for a time and then asked him if there were any urgent
matters requiring decision. Acheson mentioned two, one of them the need “to reverse
Mr. Byrnes' deplorable decision
to split up the intelligence work among the geographic divisions.”
Marshall, Acheson wrote, “needed
no long explanation of what should be done” and directed that the
necessary paperwork be undertaken immediately. (Acheson, Present at
the Creation, pages 213-214) The Departmental instructions
recentralizing the intelligence offices were issued on February 6, 1947,
and, in Acheson's words, “Thus a
year too late my recommendation to Secretary Byrnes was put into effect and his own unhappy action of the preceding
April undone.” (Ibid.; and Department of State Bulletin, February 23, 1947, page 366, and March 23, 1947,
pages 556-559)

After Marshall's decision, the documentary materials on the internal
history of the Department's intelligence organization are far less
focused than the 1945-1946 documents on the contest over the nature of
the organization. In part, this suggests that with the end (or
suppression) of the controversy, the Special Assistant for Intelligence
and his staff were freer from distractions and able to concentrate on
their job of analyzing intelligence.

Secretary Marshall's decision did not obliterate either the controversy
or the attendant uncertainty over the future of intelligence, but it did
create a different context for these issues within the Department. The
persistence of some of the old attitudes was reflected in the Dulles
Report of January 1949 (Document 358) which
suggested that the Special Assist-ant for Research and Intelligence and
his organization did not enjoy the confidence of the Department's policy
offices. To deal with this problem the report proposed that a separate
system be created within the Department for the handling of intelligence
estimates, a proposal that was never acted on.

With the settlement of the internal controversy, a principal concern for
the Department's intelligence organization was the delimitation of
Department of State and CIG/CIA
responsibilities in the area of intelligence research and analysis. This
issue and the related one of designing a national mechanism for
intelligence estimates are treated in sections on the history of the
Vandenberg and Hillenkoetter directorships of the Central Intelligence
Agency.

72. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for Administration (McCarthy) to the Under Secretary of State (Acheson)72. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for
Administration (McCarthy) to the Under Secretary of State (Acheson)Source

Washington, September 5,
1945.

Mr. Acheson:

I am at present faced with innumerable problems, some of them of very
great magnitude, for which I cannot recommend solutions until I have
some information on the subject of organizational lines. For example:

Mr. Hoover wants our advice as to what he shall tell the Appropriations
Committee about the disposition of his special intelligence organization
covering South America. This costs about 3-1/2 million dollars a year,
and Mr. Hoover will probably have to give testimony on the subject
within the next ten days. If we are to have a Special Assistant for
Intelligence, the recommendation on this should be his.

I am also receiving numerous applications, either oral or written, from
the highest type of personnel who are available anywhere, but whom we
must pick up now if we are actually to secure their services. With our
present divided personnel system, however, it is difficult to convince
these people that we really have something good for them.

Our estimates must go to the Budget very shortly, but I have no way of
knowing how to set up the requirements of the Offices of the Secretary,
the Under Secretary and others until we determine upon some
organizational plan.

Most confidentially, I understand that Mr. Kurth, who is our budget man
and who is virtually irreplaceable, will offer his resignation shortly
in order that he may accept a better job with the Treasury. Under our
present organization I have nothing better to offer him; under a new
arrangement, I believe I could move him up and thus save his services
for the Department.

It seems to me that it will be highly desirable to secure the Secretary's
approval for taking the following steps immediately, in order that we
may know at least in what direction we are proceeding. I, therefore,
recommend:

1. That there be appointed a Deputy Under Secretary, who would not be a
policy officer but who would be responsible for the coordination of
business within the Department and general overall relations with other Departments. His office
should be adjacent to yours, preferably between yours and the
Secretary's. Under him would be the Central Secretariat. In addition,
the Offices of Near Eastern and African Affairs, Far Eastern Affairs,
European Affairs, and Controls would report through him to the Under
Secretary, but he would not be in a position to overrule any of these on
matters of policy as they proceeded to the Under Secretary.

2. That the organizational units under the Assistant Secretary for
Administration be regrouped in such a way as to form four offices:
Personnel, Administrative Management, Budget and Finance, and Central
Services, and that each of these offices be charged with both
Departmental and Foreign Service activities within its field.

3. That there be appointed an Assistant Secretary for Transportation and
Communication, and that the Office of Transportation and Communications
now under the Assistant Secretary for Economic Affairs be transferred to
this new Assistant Secretary.

4. That Mr. Russell be assigned as
Assistant Secretary for Congressional Relations and that his office be
combined with that of the Legal Adviser.

5. That there be appointed a Special Assistant for Research and
Intelligence, and that he proceed to build an organization as conceived
by the Bureau of the Budget, and, I believe, all others concerned.

Unless we are to get a quick determination on some or all of these
matters, I shall have to proceed on the assumption that the old
organizational chart and Departmental Orders will continue to apply, and
make budgetary and other arrangements accordingly.

McCarthy1

* Source: National Archives and Records
Administration, RG 59, Records of the Department of State, Records
of the Office of the Assistant Secretary for Administration—Subject
Files, 1944-47: Lot 53 D 28, Box 15, Folder Nelson, Otto L. No
classification marking.

1 Printed from a copy that bears this
typed signature.

73. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom73. Telegram From the Department of State
to the Embassy in the United KingdomSource

Washington, September 12, 1945, 5 p.m.

7860. For Secretary Byrnes.
McCarthy has been
investigating the proposition of setting up in the Department a Special
Assistant for Research and Intelligence. The plan which follows has the
concurrence in principle of Stone, Lyon, Matthews,
Thorpe, Warren, and Kurth. Speedy action on the matter is urgent for the
reasons explained later in this cable.

The Special Assistant and his organization would be responsible for the
collection, evaluation and dissemination of all information regarding
foreign nations. These functions are now spread throughout the
Department. To unite them in one organization, which would become the
Department's encyclopedia, would free the operating offices of the
intelligence function and thus relieve them of a very considerable
burden. Intelligence would furnish the date upon which the operating
offices would determine our policy and our actions. Sources of
information would be our own field installations and those of other
departments as well as all Washington agencies and other domestic
sources.

Under the Special Assistant there would be two offices, one for
counterintelligence and one for intelligence. The former would be
constituted by shifting to it those divisions now engaged in
counterintelligence work but scattered throughout other offices of the
Department. There is a pressing need for the consolidation of these
divisions along with their personnel, files, and equipment for proper
exercise of the counterintelligence function.

We do not have even the nucleus of an Office of Intelligence in the
Department at present. During the past few years we have depended
heavily upon OSS for intelligence research and analysis. This agency has
two highly effective branches around which we could build the Office.
The personnel of these branches are experienced and they have done and
are doing invaluable work for us. Their complete abolition would be
disastrous and would impose a new and heavy load upon the Department,
one which we could bear only with great difficulty, if at all.

OSS is dissolving rapidly and its best
people are departing daily. Seven hundred employees will be dropped
before October 1. The remaining
one thousand will be dropped before January 1. The Bureau of the Budget
is preparing a draft of an executive order which would transfer to the
State Department two OSS units, the
Research and Analysis Branch and the Presentation Branch, with their
functions, personnel, property, records, and funds. I propose that you
authorize me to concur in this executive order. If it is signed, we
should immediately place the two branches in an interim office, under
our Special Assistant for Research and Intelligence. Before the first of
the year we should absorb into our permanent intelligence structure such
functions, personnel, property, and records of the two branches as we
desire to retain. The remainder would pass out of existence at that
time. This transaction would not prove embarrassing to us, since the
same executive order would transfer all secret and operational
intelligence activities of OSS to the
War Department.

McCarthy believes that the man
for the Special Assistant's job is Colonel Alfred McCormack, now in G-2 of the War Department, who
was made Special Assistant to the Secretary of War in 1942 but was
subsequently commissioned. He is described as a brilliant organizer and
intelligence man who could attract highest caliber personnel as he has
done in the War Department. That Department considers his work most
outstanding. He was graduated from Princeton in 1921 and from Columbia
Law, where he stood sixth, in 1922. He was Phi Beta Kappa and editor of
The Law Review. After serving as chief clerk to Justice Harlan Stone, he
joined the firm of Gravath, de Gersdorf, Swaine and Wood at $3,300 in
1926, and had progressed to $75,000 per year in 1942. He is forty-four.
Apparently McCormack has been
active in politics only in connection with Dewey's campaign for the
district attorneyship of New York City. He advised the Republican
National Committee in 1940 on the application of the Hatch Act. He
classes himself as an independent voter. McCarthy does not know whether McCormack would accept. The matter has
not been discussed with him.

I concur in McCarthy's
recommendations that (1) we set up a Special Assistant for Research and
Intelligence, (2) we concur in the proposed executive order, (3)
McCormack be offered the
Special Assistantship, and (4) I be authorized to proceed immediately in
all these measures.1

Acheson

* Source: National Archives and Records
Administration, RG 59, Records of the Department of State, Decimal
File 1945-49, 111.111/9-1245. Confidential; No Distribution; U.S.
Urgent. Drafted by McCarthy.
An incoming copy of this telegram bears the classification Secret.
(Ibid., Records of the Bureau of Intelligence and Research: Lot 58 D
776) Byrnes was in London to
attend the Council of Foreign Ministers meeting.

1 Secretary Byrnes replied in telegram 9513
from London, September 15: “I approve your four recommendations as
to research and intelligence.” (Ibid.)

74. Memorandum From Acting Secretary of State Acheson to the Secretary of State's Special Assistant for Research and Intelligence (McCormack)74. Memorandum From Acting Secretary of State Acheson to the Secretary of
State's Special Assistant for Research and Intelligence (McCormack)Source

Washington, October 1,
1945.

At a time when we were communicating with the Secretary of State in
London regarding the establishment of an intelligence agency within the
State Department, I sent him a message from which the following is an
excerpt:1

“The Special Assistant and his organization would be responsible for the
collection, evaluation and dissemination of all information regarding
foreign nations. These functions are now spread throughout the
Department. To unite them in one organization, which would become the
Department's encyclopedia, would free the operating offices of the
intelligence function and thus relieve them of a very considerable
burden. Intelligence would furnish the data upon which the operating
offices would determine our policy and our actions. Sources of
information would be our own field installations and those of other
departments as well as all Washington agencies and other domestic
sources.

“Under the Special Assistant there would be two offices, one for
counterintelligence and one for intelligence. The former would be
constituted by shifting to it those divisions now engaged in
counterintelligence work but scattered throughout other offices of the
Department. There is a pressing need for the consolidation of these
divisions, along with their personnel, files, and equipment for proper
exercise of the counterintelligence function….

“…The Bureau of the Budget is preparing a draft of an executive order
which would transfer to the State Department two OSS units, the Research and Analysis Branch and the
Presentation Branch, with their functions, personnel, property, records
and funds. I propose that you authorize me to concur in this executive
order. If it is signed, we should immediately place the two branches in
an interim office, under our Special Assistant for Research and
Intelligence. Before the first of the year we should absorb into our
permanent intelligence structure such functions, personnel, property,
and records of the two branches as we desire to retain. The remainder
would pass out of existence at that time.”

Since the Secretary concurred in these general principles, and since the
President has signed the Executive Order, the excerpts which I have
quoted can well serve as the general basis of a directive for you as
Special Assistant to the Secretary for Research and Intelligence.

It is desired that you take the following steps towards the creation of
your intelligence unit:

1. Participate in such future discussions as may take place regarding the
disposition of those parts of OSS as are
not specifically disposed of in the Executive Order, but which may be
disposed of administratively. You will represent the Department of State
in these discussions, at which I understand representatives of the War
Department and OSS will also be present.

2. Establish a board consisting of Mr. Lyon, and such other representatives of the Department
of State and OSS as you consider
appropriate, for the purpose of surveying those parts of OSS which have been, or will be,
transferred to the Department of State for the purpose of advising you
which parts of OSS we wish to retain
beyond January 1 and which parts we wish to dissolve at that time.

3. Have the board conduct simultaneously a survey of those organizations
within the present structure of the Department of State which are
presently engaging in intelligence activities, for the purpose of
advising you which of these organizations should be transferred to your
own intelligence agency between now and January 1.

4. Consolidate the units within OSS which
we wish to retain and the units of the Department of State now
participating in intelligence activities so that, by January 1, all
intelligence activities within the Department will be under your own
control.

I attach hereto a copy of a memorandum signed by the President on
September 20, 1945.2 It directs
the Secretary of State to “take the lead in developing a comprehensive
and coordinated foreign intelligence program for all Federal agencies
concerned with that type of activity. This should be done through the
creation of an interdepartmental group, heading up under the State
Department, which would formulate plans for my approval. This procedure
will permit the planning of complete coverage of the foreign
intelligence field and the assigning and controlling of operations in
such manner that the needs of both the individual agencies and the
Government as a whole will be met with maximum effectiveness.”

I understand that this memorandum was signed by the President before he
received a memorandum, also attached, which was drafted by the Joint
Chiefs of Staff.3 The JCS memorandum differs in some respects from the President's memorandum
to the Secretary of State. In addition, it is a more detailed document.

The steps which I have directed in this memorandum will have the effect
of uniting and consolidating the intelligence activities of this
Department. As regards the next step—that of “developing a comprehensive
and coordinated foreign intelligence program for all Federal agencies
concerned with that type of activity”—please make a careful and
immediate study of the President's memorandum and the JCS memorandum and advise the Secretary of
State as to what measures he should take.

I am directing Mr. Lyon to serve
temporarily as your deputy in effecting the matters which I have
outlined. He will also help you get established in the Department and
deal with the appropriate offices under the Assistant Secretary for
Administration in securing space, funds, et cetera.

Dean Acheson

* Source: National Archives and Records
Administration, RG 59, Records of the Department of State, Records
of the Bureau of Intelligence and Research: Lot 58 D 776, Birth of
the Intelligence Organization in the Department of State. No
classification marking. On September 27 Acheson announced the appointment of McCormack as Special Assistant to
the Secretary of State in charge of research and intelligence.
(Department of State Bulletin, September 30, 1945, p. 499)

1 For the full text, see Document 73.

2 An undated draft of Document 15 is attached.

3 Not attached but presumably
the same as Document 13.

75. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for Administration (McCarthy) to the Secretary of State's Special Assistant for Research and Intelligence (McCormack)75. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for
Administration (McCarthy) to the Secretary of State's Special Assistant
for Research and Intelligence (McCormack)Source

Washington, October 4,
1945.

Mr. J . Franklin Carter1 and Mr. Henry Field have been engaged,
during the period of the war, in some special intelligence activities
directly under the President. Before the conclusion of the war,
President Truman told them that he wished them to continue the projects
which they initiated under orders from President Roosevelt and to
continue their work at least until June 30, 1946.

In the meantime, with the conclusion of the war, the Bureau of the Budget
has been called upon by the Congress to review the war connected
activities in the various agencies and to discontinue, or at least to
cut down to a minimum, such
activities. We are concerned with Mr. Carter's project because he and
his associates have been administratively attached to the State
Department. Actually this has meant only that the State Department has
been the channel through which funds flowed to Mr. Carter from the
President's fund.

In connection with a consideration as to whether these special activities
should be continued, the Bureau of the Budget, speaking as the
President's agent, believes that the Secretary of State should take a
look at the activities and make a recommendation to the President as to
whether they should be continued; if so, what unit within the State
Department they could best be affiliated with.

I talked to Mr. Carter and Mr. Field today and they told me they were
going to speak with the Secretary about this shortly after his return.
It will not be possible, of course, for the Secretary to give an
immediate decision on this and someone will have to advise the Secretary
as to such details as he may need before he gets in touch with the
President.

Since these are essentially intelligence activities, I suggest that you
see Mr. Carter and Mr. Field early next week and be prepared to advise
Mr. Byrnes on the subject. Mr.
Carter and Mr. Field will not see Mr. Byrnes until after they have talked to you.

I suggested to Mr. Carter that he call you on Monday2 in order to arrange for an
appointment very shortly after that.

Frank

I understand that Mr. Lyon has
some very interesting information on this and suggest strongly that you
see Lyon first.3

Frank

* Source: National
Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Records of the
Department of State, Decimal File 1945-49, 101.5/10-445. No
classification marking.

1  Carter was a
newspaper columnist who had run a small, informal intelligence
organization for President Roosevelt during World War II. See Troy, Donovan and the CIA, pp. 142, 226-227,
266-267, 275, and 276.

2 October 8.

3 The postscript is handwritten.

76. Circular Telegram From the Department of State to Certain Diplomatic Missions76. Circular Telegram From the Department of
State to Certain Diplomatic
MissionsSource

Washington, October 22, 1945, 4 p.m.

By Executive Order of the President, full text of which appeared in Radio
Bulletin No. 225, the Office of Strategic Services was terminated as of
October 1, 1945, and the various branches of that organization were
divided between the War Department and the Department of State. The
Research and Analysis Branch, excepting for its staffs now in Germany
and Austria, was transferred to the Department of State where it now
functions as part of the Interim Research and Intelligence Service set
up by the same Order and under Mr. Alfred
McCormack, Special Assistant to the Secretary of State.

The Research and Analysis Branch has for some time maintained outpost
staffs in various foreign stations. These staffs have engaged in the
procurement of intelligence materials, including maps of all kinds and
printed as well as documentary sources. In certain places the R and A
staffs have also done political and economic reporting, in cooperation
with the State Department missions.

It is desired that the work hitherto performed by the R and A staffs
should be continued for the present and that State Department missions
should aid and guide these staffs as far as possible.

For administrative purposes the R and A staffs abroad will continue,
until further notice, to be serviced by that part of the former Office
of Strategic Services which is now under the War Department and which is
now known as the Strategic Services Unit. In like manner the R and A
staffs will continue to use SSU codes
and communications and will receive direction from the R and A office in
Washington. However, where difficulties may arise regarding the status
of R and A staffs abroad, the State Department representative should, if
necessary, attach such staffs to his mission, pending further
instructions from Washington.

Byrnes

* Source: National Archives and Records
Administration, RG 59, Records of the Department of State, Decimal
File 1945-49, 103.918/10-2245. Secret. Drafted by McCormack and cleared in OFS, NEA, EUR, and ARA, and by Donald
Russell. Sent to Ankara, Athens, Brussels, Bucharest,
Budapest, Cairo, Chunking, London, New Delhi, Paris, Rome, Sofia,
The Hague, Tirana, and Colombo for Yost. The time of transmission is
handwritten on the source text.

77. Memorandum From Secretary of State Byrnes to the Secretary of State's Special Assistant for Research and Intelligence (McCormack)77. Memorandum From Secretary of State Byrnes to the Secretary of State's Special
Assistant for Research and Intelligence (McCormack)Source

Washington, October 23,
1945.

As Special Assistant to the Secretary of State, in charge of research and
intelligence, you are designated as the representative of the Secretary
in all matters relating to communications intelligence activities,
including the collection, analysis, decryption and translation of
communications and the derivation of intelligence from those and related
activities.

As such representative you are authorized:

a. To maintain liaison with such Army and Navy organizations as may be
engaged in those activities and with any other organizations of the
Federal Government whose operations may be related to those activities;

b. To acquaint such organizations with the intelligence requirements of
the Department and to establish priorities for interception, decryption
and translation of such communications and related material as may be of
interest to the Department, and to assist such organizations by
furnishing to them information in possession of the Department which may
be of aid in their operations and which can be furnished with due regard
to security;

c. To keep the Secretary of State informed of all agreements and
arrangements made by any organization of the Federal Government with
friendly powers for the exchange of information related to
communications intelligence activities or of intelligence derived
therefrom, and to establish or maintain, in cooperation with Army, Navy
or other Federal Government communications intelligence organizations,
liaison with organizations in the Governments of friendly powers for the
exchange of information related to such activities and intelligence
derived therefrom.

d. Upon organization of an Office of Intelligence within the Department,
to receive on behalf of the Department and to disseminate within the
Department and to appropriate diplomatic representatives of the United
States, under due safeguards as to security, information and
intelligence derived in whole or in part from communications
intelligence activities.

James F. Byrnes1

* Source:
Truman Library, Papers of J. Anthony
Panuch. Top Secret.

1 Printed from a copy that bears this
typed signature.

78. Memorandum From the Secretary of State's Special Assistant for Research and Intelligence (McCormack) to the Assistant Secretary of State for Public and Cultural Relations (Benton)78. Memorandum From the Secretary of State's Special Assistant for
Research and Intelligence (McCormack) to the Assistant Secretary of State for
Public and Cultural Relations (Benton)Source

Washington, October 23,
1945.

Since receiving your attached memorandum of September 26 to Frank McCarthy,1 I have talked with Lt. Colonel
Little, Chief of the Morale Operations Branch, of the Strategic Service
Unit. Col. Little, if I understand him correctly, thinks that his unit
should continue its activities in the post-war era along the following
lines:

(1) Propaganda in foreign countries by means of covert sources, i.e.,
“black” propaganda;

(2) Collection of information relating to foreign propaganda, by means of
field agents; and

(3) Analysis of foreign propaganda, the emphasis under (2) and (3) being
on “black” propaganda and on propaganda which is disseminated through
other than the usual public media.

As to (1), it is my view that the United States should not maintain
clandestine operators in a foreign country against which we are not at
war, and through such operators to attempt so-called “black” propaganda
operations; that to do so would be contrary to the fundamental premises
of our own Governmental system and would be honoring the totalitarians
by imitating them.

As to the collection of information concerning foreign propaganda, by use
of agents abroad, that is no doubt desirable, but I think that it is
neither desirable nor feasible to maintain the Morale Operations Branch
as a separate collecting organization, apart from the other intelligence
collecting operations.

As to the third point, I believe that a rounded intelligence research
organization should include among its operations the systematic and
careful analysis of the propaganda of foreign countries, including the
types of propaganda that the MOB has
concentrated on.

Do you agree? If so, do you think that the State Department should take
over that part of the Morale Operations Branch, SSU, which is engaged in the analysis of foreign
propaganda?

I should like to get your views as to the need of such a service to your
organization.

* Source: National
Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Records of the
Department of State, Decimal File 1945-49, 101.5/10-2445. No
classification marking.

1 Not found.

79. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for Public and Cultural Relations (Benton) to the Secretary of State's Special Assistant for Research and Intelligence (McCormack)79. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for Public and
Cultural Relations (Benton) to the Secretary of State's Special Assistant
for Research and Intelligence (McCormack)Source

Washington, October 24,
1945.

On your memorandum of the 23rd,1 dealing with your talk
with Colonel Little of General Donovan's staff:

1. I agree with you emphatically that the United States should not
maintain any kind of clandestine or under-cover propaganda operation.

2. I agree that we should have full information on foreign propaganda,
not only in this country, but in other major countries, and I hope, with
you, that such information can be adequately collected without the
maintenance of any “separate collecting organization” such as the Morale
Operations Branch.

3. I emphatically agree that this foreign propaganda must be
systematically and carefully analyzed, and if the best way to proceed to
collect it and to analyze it is through taking over that part of the
Morale Operations Branch, which has been trained in this work, then the
State Department should certainly proceed and take over—with the
responsibility for operations centered under you.

If Congress agrees that we are, through the State Department, to operate
an overseas information service, this service seems to me to be
essential to its intelligent direction and operation.

WB

* Source: National
Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Records of the
Department of State, Decimal File 1945-49, 101.5/10-2445. No
classification marking.

1 Document 78.

80. Memorandum From the Secretary of State's Special Assistant for Research and Intelligence (McCormack) to the Under Secretary of State (Acheson)80. Memorandum From the Secretary of State's Special Assistant for
Research and Intelligence (McCormack) to the Under Secretary of State (Acheson)Source

Washington, October 27,
1945.

After listening to your statement this morning on the intelligence needs
of the Department,1 I feel strongly that
you ought, if you possibly can, to be a witness before the House
Appropriations Committee and also before the Senate Committee, if a full
development of our plans is necessary before that Committee.

I suspect that we will have a hard time convincing either Committee that
we should add a thousand people to the State Department's rolls.
However, I do not think our estimate is padded or that the intelligence
requirements can be met by a substantially smaller staff, especially in
view of the certainty that G-2, A-2 and ONI will be doing less and less
in intelligence analysis and research as their demobilization proceeds
and budget problems catch up with them.

Your appearance before the Committees might be decisive in persuading
them of the importance of accurate foreign information under present
conditions and, still more important, of the Department's lack of
facilities for that purpose at the present time. I cannot do a good job
on the latter point nor nearly as good a job as you can do on the
former.

* Source: National Archives and Records
Administration, RG 59, Records of the Department of State, Records
of the Bureau of Intelligence and Research: Lot 58 D 776, Birth of
the Intelligence Organization in the Department of State. No
classification marking. The memorandum bears the handwritten
annotation, “I shall be glad to help in any way. DA.”

1 Probably a reference to
Acheson's October 27
meeting with senior officers of the Department to discuss the newly
established intelligence organization. See Acheson, Present
at the Creation, pp. 159-160.

81. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for Administration (Russell) to Secretary of State Byrnes81. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for
Administration (Russell) to Secretary of State ByrnesSource

Washington, November 3,
1945.

I have reviewed with considerable interest the Report submitted by the
Bureau of the Budget to the President on the Organization of
Intelligence Activities in the Government.1 I find myself in general agreement with
the conclusions reached in the Report.

It should be noted at the outset that this Report primarily directs
itself to the creation of a general over-all intelligence set-up,
combining and coordinating the intelligence activities of all interested
departments. Its conclusions, though, can be applied with equal logic to
the intelligence operations of a single department. The principles of
organization are sound and should be applied by the Departments
themselves in their own set-ups.

In my judgment, the fundamental point made by the Budget and reiterated
time and again throughout its Report is incorporated in #2, Summary of
Conclusions, appearing at the bottom of page 2 and at the top of page 3,
of the letter of transmittal to the President.2 It is as follows:

“The principal intelligence operations of the Government should be
organized at the point where decision is made or action taken, i.e., at
the departmental, or lower, level and not within any single central
agency. Each department (or subdivision of a department) which has
important responsibilities in international matters or which has
responsibilities for providing the public with information about foreign
countries should provide for a competent foreign intelligence
operation.”

Again, on page 9, the Report itself puts it:

“The intelligence needed to assist wise decisions and support informed
action must produce a knowledge and understanding of all the factors
involved. Further, it must be at hand. Extreme centralization of the
intelligence operation is no more workable than would be the
centralizing in one agency of the job of producing all statistics for
the Government. The intelligence operation is handmaiden to the
action-taking and policy-determining groups. It must be sensitive to
their needs. …A department which will be held responsible for its
decisions and actions must in turn be able to hold accountable to it the
operation which produces intelligence on which those decisions and
actions will, in part, be based.

“The principal foreign intelligence operations of the Government
therefore should be viewed as being organized at all places where
decisions are made and action taken, namely at the departmental, or
lower, level.”

Speaking particularly to the continuance of a large central organization
such as OSS, the Report on page 12
deprecates the tendency “to conclude that what is needed is the
continuation on a permanent basis of some such large scale central
operation as exists now in the Office of Strategic Services. Such a
conclusion fails to take into account the fact that the principal
intelligence operations of the Government must be organized at the point
where decision is made.”

Translating these principles, the validity of which can hardly be
questioned, into the organizational set-up of the State Department, the
decision must be made as to where the level of operations is in the
Department or, to use the language of the Budget, “the point when
decision is made or action taken, i.e., at the departmental, or lower,
level and not within any single central agency.” This obviously does not
mean the Secretary or Under Secretary. So to conclude would mean that
these officials would be completely immersed under a blanket of
operating decisions, many of a comparatively trivial character. To
paraphrase the Budget Report, there might be some justification for such
extreme centralization if “all policy and action affecting our foreign
relations” were centered at the level of the Secretary and Under
Secretary. But that isn't the fact and can never be the fact. The point
of centralization, it would seem, would be the geographic desks, which
should function, in my opinion, directly under the Secretary and Under
Secretary. These desks represent the level of operations. They must take
certainly the initial responsibility for suggesting decisions and
actions to the Secretary and Under Secretary. If that be true, they must
“in turn be able to hold accountable to it the operation which produces
intelligence in which those decisions and actions will, in part, be
based.” It accordingly follows that, except as hereinafter stated,
intelligence should be attached to and made the “handmaiden” of the
geographic desks.

The creation within the Department of a centralized, over-all
intelligence group in the Department is as illogical as the
centralization of governmental intelligence operations in a single
agency. The language of the Budget Report may be as well applied to the
Department as a whole as it can be to the entire Government: “Extreme
centralization of the intelligence operation is no more workable than
would be the centralizing in one agency of the job of producing all
statistics for the Government.”

Indeed, the plan submitted by Colonel McCormack is completely at variance with the principles
stated in the Budget Report. It contemplates a centralized intelligence
unit, not accountable to the operating levels. If a centralized over-all
government intelligence unit is not workable—the Budget's conclusion—then it follows
that the proposed plan of extreme centralization in the Department
itself is not workable.

It does not follow, however, as the Budget Report so cogently emphasizes,
that there is not need for a top level intelligence unit in the
Department as the Budget envisages for the Government as a whole in its
conclusion #5, stated on page 3 of its memorandum of transmittal. There
is, of course, need for some high-grade group “organized to analyze
reports from the point of view of a department as a whole”, to provide
coordination with other agencies, and to furnish general over-all
direction to intelligence operations. This in itself is a heavy and
highly important responsibility. But, to quote again from the Budget
Report, this “research staff should be small and concerned primarily
with bringing together intelligence available” throughout the Department
“to fulfill a particular need.”

In conclusion, I feel that the Budget Report amply supports the grave
misgivings that I have about the proposed organization for Colonel
McCormack's unit, which, if
adopted, would mean that the Department would “continue a complete
structure superimposed on top of” the existing structure of the
Department and would expose the Department to the charge that it was
incorporating the parts of OSS transferred to it without any
“considerable readjustment and curtailment.”3

D.R.

A final thought: Intelligence is only as good as it is translated into
action. Where is that? The geographic desks.4

* Source: National Archives and Records
Administration, RG 59, Records of the Department of State, Decimal
File 1945-49, 101.5/11-345. No classification marking.

1 Dated September 20. (Ibid., RG 51, Records of the Office of
Management and Budget, Director's Files, Series 39.27, Intelligence)
See the Supplement.

2 Document 38.

3 Russell canvassed at least
some of the geographic divisions on their use of OSS reports during the war. (Memorandum
from Braden to Russell, November 3; Truman
Library, Papers of J. Anthony
Panuch; and memorandum from Durbrow to Russell, November 2; National
Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Records of the
Department of State, Records of the Bureau of Intelligence and
Research: Lot 58 D 776, Birth of the Intelligence Organization in
the Department of State) Both are in the Supplement.

4 The postscript is handwritten.

82. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for Administration (Russell) to Secretary of State Byrnes82. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for
Administration (Russell) to Secretary of State ByrnesSource

Washington, December 29,
1945.

A Departmental Order prescribing the future organization of the Office of
the Special Assistant for Research and Intelligence must be issued by
January 1, 1946, at which time the interim organization must terminate.

The Special Assistant for Research and Intelligence proposes the
following organization:

Personnel
(authorized by FY 1946 budget)

The Office of the Special Assistant for Research and
Intelligence (immediate office of Special Assistant, executive
office, programming group and special estimates staff).67

The Office of Research and Intelligence and 7
divisions:

The Office of the Director of R and I
35

Division of American Republics Intelligence
35

Division of British Commonwealth Intelligence
17

Division of Europe, Near East and Africa Intelligence
118

Division of Far East Intelligence
117

Division of USSR Intelligence
74

Division of International and Functional Intelligence
47

Division of Map Intelligence and Cartography
105

Sub-Total for R and I

548

The Office of Intelligence Collection
Dissemination consisting of 5 divisions:

Office of the Director of I C and D0

Intelligence Reference Division

Division of Intelligence Acquisition & Distribution

Division of Biographic Intelligence
173

Presentation Division
74

Outpost Division (4 in U.S./ 70 overseas)74

Sub-Total for I C and D

321

TOTAL

936

The organization proposed by the Special Assistant for Research and
Intelligence for his immediate office and for the Office of Intelligence
Collection and Dissemination is generally acceptable to all Offices of
the Department.

An irreconcilable difference of opinion exists with respect to the
organization of the Office of Research and Intelligence with its five
geographic divisions.

The position of the geographic Offices as stated by both Mr. Dunn and Mr. Braden and shared by their subordinates is that the
geographic intelligence divisions of the Office of Research and
Intelligence should be integrated into the geographic and functional
Offices. Their view is:

“Research activities in the Department of State, except for a relatively
small general research group, must be tied organizationally with
operations in order to be of real value. The work of nearly one thousand
persons now proposed for research and intelligence work of the
Department can be made useful, and barren efforts avoided, if a good
part of the personnel is integrated closely with the operating offices
of the Department.

“Moreover, if the research personnel is retained in a central
organization, a difficulty more serious than wasted talent is likely to
result. To retain able research men, they must be given a voice in
recommending policy. Those now being brought into the Department should
be given such a voice. But the policy recommendations of a research unit
which is not organizationally integrated with operations are very likely
to be theoretical judgments with little basis in reality. Policy, to be
sound, must be based on the closest contact between day-to-day
operations and good basic research.

“It will hardly be argued that policy recommendations from two points of
view, operations and research, would be useful to the executive offices
of the Department in making their policy decisions. Not only do the executive offices have no
time to devote to selection, but more important, recommendations based
either on operations or research exclusively are bad, and two bad policy
recommendations are not useful material from which to make a good
selection. What is needed is a linking of operations and research in the
closest feasible manner. We are convinced, through experience and
judgment, that this can never be done as long as the two branches are
organizationally separate.”1

The economic Offices, although sharing in part the views of the
geographic Offices, suggest that the proposed organization of the Office
of Research and Intelligence with its geographic intelligence divisions
be temporarily approved subject to a future review of the basic
difference between the geographic Offices and the advocates of the
highly centralized organization.

The position of the Special Assistant for Research and Intelligence may
be summarized as follows:

“The intelligence organization should work as one central block. There
should be no thought of breaking it down into geographical and
functional units and distributing these among parallel operating units
in the Department. The chief argument against such a fragmentation of
forces is that maintenance of present research standards would be
difficult if not impossible. Today the major part of the staff in
question has had some four and one-half years of common experience; the
work of one unit has been continuously compared to that of others;
recognized standards of performance have emerged with standard editing
and styling practices. Above all, the stimulus and cross-fertilization
of minds working on a variety of problems has been of general benefit
and has broadened and deepened the treatment of subject matter all
around. With a destruction of staff unity these standards and practices
would be hard to reestablish and the loss of them would be irreparable.
The centralization of intelligence research in offices which have the
entire responsibility for the research and intelligence field, and which
have no responsibility for operating decisions, makes it possible to
attain an independence and integrity of judgment which would not be
possible if research were the responsibility of the operating offices.
Research subordinated to offices whose primary responsibility is
operating decisions would inevitably tend to reflect policy views.”2

In addition, the Special Assistant stated that Judge Patterson will accept this Department's
proposal for a unified intelligence authority only on the condition that
the State Department establish an integrated and independent
departmental intelligence organization. The Special Assistant believes that if the proposal
of Mr. Dunn and Mr. Braden is adopted, the Department of
State will not have an integrated and independent intelligence service
which will meet Judge Patterson's
demand.

There are four alternative solutions to the controversy:

(1) The organization proposed by the Special Assistant may be adopted.

(2) The organization proposed by the Special Assistant may be established
for a period of three months, at the end of which period the geographic
and functional intelligence divisions of the Office of Research and
Intelligence shall be transferred to the geographic and functional
offices of the Department.

(3) The organization proposed by the Special Assistant may be adopted
temporarily upon the express understanding that a final decision on the
ultimate location of the Office of Research and Intelligence will be
made on or before March 31, 1946.

(4) The proposed Office of Research and Intelligence may be transferred
immediately to the geographic and functional Offices.

The arguments in favor of alternatives 2 and 3 are that:

a) The changes and moves in the physical location of Offices necessary
for effective integration of the geographic and functional intelligence
divisions of the Office of Research and Intelligence with the geographic
and functional Offices can not be accomplished in less than three
months, and

b) The suggested delay of three months would enable the Special Assistant
to recruit, train and organize research personnel so that the geographic
and functional Offices would receive trained intelligence staffs with
common standards and techniques.

Personally, I recommend the approval of alternative 2 (i.e., the
organization proposed by the Special Assistant will be established for a
period of three months, at the end of which period the geographic and
functional intelligence divisions of the Office of Research and
Intelligence shall be transferred to the geographic and functional
Offices of the Department).

I believe that research at the geographic level must be under the
immediate direction of those who are to use it. In my judgment, the
divorce of research from the policy action taken after the evaluation of
information will lead inevitably to wasteful duplication and to
competing evaluations of information which will breed confusion and
disorganize the operations of the Department. If this reasoning be sound
it would be unwise to adopt an improper departmental organization in
order to secure Judge Patterson's
approval of the Department's proposal for a united intelligence
authority. I believe that the Special Assistant will continue to have
under my proposal (alternative 2) a sufficient central intelligence
organization to meet Judge Patterson's stipulations.

The immediate integration of the proposed Office of Research and
Intelligence into the geographic and functional Offices as required
under alternative 4 would be impractical because of the lack of office
space in the State Department building which would be required
immediately. It would also deny the Special Assistant the reasonable
opportunity to recruit and train the intelligence personnel along the
line of uniform standards of performance.

Whatever alternative may be approved, the divisions of the Office of
Research and Intelligence should be changed to conform to the geographic
pattern established for the other Offices of the Department. No
justification can possibly exist for different geographic breakdowns. It
would place the Department in a ridiculously inconsistent position to
approve a geographic division for a new Office of the Department wholly
different from that established and approved for the traditional Offices
of the Department.3

The Department order to implement alternative 2 is attached.4

D.R.

* Source: National Archives and Records
Administration, RG 59, Records of the Department of State, Records
of the Bureau of Intelligence and Research: Lot 58 D 776, Birth of
the Intelligence Organization in the Department of State. No
classification marking. Also sent to Under Secretary Acheson.

1 The document from
which this quotation is taken has not been identified.

2 McCormack criticized this
quotation as an inadequate statement of his views in Document 83.

3 See also the endorsements
of Russell's position by
Assistant Secretaries Braden
and Dunn in memoranda to
Secretary Byrnes, both
December 31. (National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59,
Records of the Department of State, Records of the Bureau of
Intelligence and Research: Lot 58 D 776, Birth of the Intelligence
Organization in the Department of State) Both are in the
Supplement.

4 Not found.

83. Memorandum From the Secretary of State's Special Assistant for Research and Intelligence (McCormack) to Secretary of State Byrnes83. Memorandum From the Secretary of State's Special Assistant for
Research and Intelligence (McCormack) to Secretary of State ByrnesSource

Washington, December 31,
1945.

Mr. Russell's proposal for the
intelligence organization1 modifies the one
recommended by the Intelligence Advisory Board in four particulars, of
which two are not important enough for the attention of the Secretary.
The two important points are:

a) It provides for dismemberment of the Office of Research and
Intelligence after three months (March 31, 1946); and

b) Of the proposed geographical divisions of that Office, it leaves only
the American Republics unit in the status of a Division and lumps all
the rest in a single Division of European, Near Eastern, African, and
Far Eastern Intelligence.

With respect to the latter point, Mr. Russell's memorandum says:

“Whatever alternative may be approved, the divisions of the Office of
Research and Intelligence should be changed to conform to the geographic
pattern established for the other Offices of the Department. No
justification can possibly exist for different geographic breakdowns. It
would place the Department in a ridiculously inconsistent position to
approve a geographic division for a new Office of the Department wholly
different from that established and approved for the traditional Offices
of the Department.”

It is difficult to see anything “ridiculously inconsistent” in an
intelligence agency geographically subdivided into (1) American
Republics, (2) British Commonwealth, (3) Europe, Near East, and Africa,
(4) Far East, and (5) USSR. Those are the main politico-geographic
subdivisions of the world. It is believed, on the other hand, that the
alternative proposal is quite illogical in setting up the Latin American
unit as a Division, with 35 people, and then lumping all the rest of the
world, with 326 people, into another Division. The political
considerations that require an Assistant Secretary for Latin American
Affairs have no bearing on an intelligence organization. Therefore that
unit should have the same status as all the others. All should be
Divisions of the proposed Office, or all should be reduced to the next
lower status (at the expense of adequate Civil Service grades and the
certain loss of key personnel). To do otherwise will lift the Latin
American unit to a status that it is not entitled to have.

As proposed by me, the geographical Divisions conform generally to the
Political Offices, but not exactly, because the present organization
does not lend itself to precise conformity. Mr. Clayton's and Mr. Benton's geographical breakdowns
likewise do not conform precisely to those of the Political Offices. In
each case the problem is different. The Political Offices can hardly
claim that their geographical breakdowns are either immutable or
completely logical, when, for example, they put New Caledonia under
Europe and Greece under Middle East and Africa.

It is strongly recommended that the organization as proposed by the
Intelligence Advisory Board be approved.

As to whether the research operation should be decentralized to the
geographical and functional offices, the argument for decentralization
is made as follows:

“I believe that research at the geographical level must be under the
immediate direction of those who are to use it. In my judgment, the divorce of research from the
policy action taken after the evaluation of information will lead
inevitably to wasteful duplication and to competing evaluations of
information that will breed confusion and disorganize the operations of
the Department.”

There is also a quotation (at page two) of the views of the Geographic
Offices. My views to the contrary are represented by a quote from a
draft prepared by a member of the Working Committee of the Intelligence
Advisory Board, which was not in the Committee's report and is not an
adequate statement of either my views or theirs. A full statement of the
Committee's views appears in its report.

My own view is, briefly, that the chances of keeping the R&A Branch
together, strengthening it with new personnel, depend on its maintenance
as a unit. It is an integrated organization with common management,
procedures and files. It is flexible, in that personnel from one
geographic unit can be shifted to meet peak demands in others. It does a
whole job of processing incoming information and collating it for
everybody's needs. It is independent of policy makers and adheres to the
standard of intelligence offices, that they must keep out of policy and
maintain objectivity, since their mission is fact-finding.

That an intelligence organization must be free of operations or policy
involvements is fundamental. That such freedom could exist in the 20-odd
Divisions of the Geographic Offices is unthinkable.

In my opinion, decentralization would destroy the R&A Branch. It
would give the Geographic Offices some additional personnel, but it
would end all possibility of organized State Department intelligence,
and the President's idea of State Department leadership in
government-wide intelligence could not be attained.

A centralized intelligence operation within the Department can serve the
needs, not only of the geographical desks, but of the economic
organization, the Office of Public Affairs, the Office of Special
Political Affairs, the various Committees which play such an important
role in the Department, and such quasi-Departmental committees as the
Far East Advisory Commission and the Interdepartmental Committees. A
Research and Intelligence unit decentralized to the geographical
divisions can serve only those divisions.

The centralized operation can look at the national intelligence problem
as a whole, coordinating the work of its component parts and gearing
itself into the other intelligence organizations of the government.
Within each of its component units, the problems of any area can be
looked at in all aspects, since the political scientists, the
economists, the geographers and other specialists belong to a single
unit, working closely together and having common files and a common flow
of information.

The interests of an intelligence office, in its regional divisions, go
far beyond the interests of the geographical desks, which are concerned
with current problems arising in the conduct of our foreign affairs. The
geographical desks have neither the time nor the training to engage in a
systematic compilation of basic information for future intelligence
purposes. Even if they had, they still could not do it, because
different habits of thought and a different frame of mind are required
for research work than for the daily operating job.

Decentralization of the research and intelligence operation is not going
to eliminate the need for centralized activity. It is only going to make
more difficult the attainment of the President's objective of a
coordinated government-wide intelligence program.

The proposal would destroy the effectiveness of the R&A Branch,
assuming that all the personnel would continue to perform the functions
that they now perform. That, however, would not happen. To state the
problem in terms of numbers, in the regional divisions of IRIS there are 272 professional employees,
half of whom are strictly economists or geographers, leaving about 136
who could be decentralized to the 19 geographic divisions of the
Department, as follows:

Far East41

Europe-Africa59

Latin America16

British Empire3

USSR17

136

This is an average of less than 7 persons per Geographic division.
Included in the 136 there are perhaps 15 key people who have kept the
organization together. These 15 people are scholars who perform or
supervise research and who well know that the decentralization of the
R&A Branch would destroy its usefulness. I doubt if any one of those
people would stay in the operation if it were decentralized. Practically
all those who have discussed the problem with me have stated that they
would resign at the first opportunity if such a step were taken.

If the operation is decentralized, the personnel who go to the
geographical desks will have find their futures in those divisions. The
problems of promotion and advancement in the geographical units will be
quite different from those in a unified research organization. The good
opportunities will come, not in research but in operating and policy
jobs; and there will be an absorption into such jobs of such good
personnel as will remain. That is what happened when the Territorial
Studies unit was decentralized. No vestige of it, I am informed, now
remains in the Department.

It is strongly recommended that the Office of Research and Intelligence
be set up, as proposed, as a definitive organization. If, during the
fiscal year 1947, changes in the direction of decentralization appear
desirable in the light of experience, they can then be made. To set up
the organization in a particular way does not mean that it can never be
changed. It does, however, give assurance that those responsible for
creating a State Department intelligence organization will have control
of their personnel and the opportunity to work out their relations with
other departmental units within a definite framework of responsibility.

* Source: National Archives and Records
Administration, RG 59, Records of the Department of State, Records
of the Bureau of Intelligence and Research: Lot 58 D 776, Birth of
the Intelligence Organization in the Department of State. No
classification marking. Also sent to Under Secretary Acheson.

1 Document 82.

84. Memorandum From Secretary of State Byrnes to the Assistant Secretary of State for Administration (Russell)84. Memorandum From Secretary of State Byrnes to the Assistant Secretary of State
for Administration (Russell)Source

Washington, January 5,
1946.

Referring to your memorandum of December 29,1 the proposal of the
Special Assistant for Research and Intelligence involves fundamental
changes in the organization of the Department.

Your memorandum states that the interim organization must terminate
immediately. Because it is necessary for me to leave on Monday2 to attend the UNO meeting in London it is impossible for
me to give to the subject the consideration it should receive before
reaching a decision making permanent the proposed change in
organization.

Therefore I am adopting the third solution suggested by you, with one
slight change.

I wish the organization proposed by the Special Assistant to be adopted
temporarily upon the express understanding that a final decision on the
ultimate location of the Office of Research and Intelligence will be
made on or before March 1st.

James F. Byrnes

* Source: Truman
Library, Papers of J. Anthony
Panuch, State Department, Research and Intelligence,
#1. No classification marking. A handwritten notation on the source
text reads: “To General Nelson—For implementation and action.
D.R.”

1 Document 82.

2 January 7.

85. Report From the Assistant Secretary of State for Administration (Russell) to Secretary of State Byrnes85. Report From the Assistant Secretary of State for Administration
(Russell) to
Secretary of State ByrnesSource

Washington, undated.

On February 25 Byrnes sent
McCormack a note
acknowledging one from McCormack
and transmitting SC-185. Byrnes
said: “I cannot make a decision in this matter by the 1st, and I will
not do anything about it while you are away.” (National Archives and
Records Administration, RG 59, Records of the Department of State,
Records of the Bureau of Intelligence and Research: Lot 58 D 776, Birth
of the Intelligence Organization in the Department of State)

[Here follows a table of contents.]

I

Introductory

On 12 February 1946 the Special Assistant for Research and Intelligence
submitted to the Secretary's Staff Committee Document SC-185 entitled
“Permanent Location and Organization of the Office of Research and
Intelligence” (ORI). By direction of the Secretary, this document was
referred to the Assistant Secretary for Administration for consideration
and clearance, in accordance with Departmental Order No. 1356 (Tab
A).1

This paper involves an issue on which there is an irreconcilable
difference of opinion in the Department. The issue is whether, as the
Special Assistant contends, the intelligence activities of the
Department shall be centralized—that is, organized outside of, and not
accountable to, the policy offices of the Department, or whether, as
held by Assistant Secretaries Dunn and Braden,
such activities, to the extent necessary, shall be integrated with, and
made responsible to, the Offices of the Department charged with policy
development and formulation.

[Here follow sections II-V, Prior History of Controversy, Basic Elements
of the Problem, Analysis of Argument in Support of Centralized
Intelligence Organization, and Conclusion.]

VI

Recommendations

It is recommended that:

1. The functions of the geographic intelligence divisions of the Office
of Research and Intelligence (ORI) be transferred to the geographic
offices of the Department and that ORI be renamed as the Office of
Intelligence Coordination and Liaison.

2. Subject to appropriate policy control by, and the instructions of, the
Standing Committee on Intelligence hereafter proposed, the Office of
Intelligence Coordination and Liaison, in collaboration with the Office
of Intelligence Collection and Dissemination, should perform the
following functions:

(a) Represent all interested elements of the Department on the staff of
the National Intelligence Authority.

(b) In cooperation with the geographic and economic offices, prepare
special intelligence estimates for the Secretary and the Under
Secretary, the Assistant Secretaries, and for the National Intelligence
Authority.

(c) To establish and maintain standards of research and analysis
throughout the Department.

(d) To formulate, in consultation with geographic and economic offices, a
Departmental program for basic research, and to coordinate and stimulate
its execution.

(e) To organize and supervise cooperative projects in research cutting
across the lines of the geographic and economic offices.

(f) To maintain a central clearing house of information regarding
research studies prepared or planned anywhere in the Department.

(g) To maintain liaison with other agencies of the Government, and with
private institutions, for the purpose of utilizing all possible research
resources to meet the Department's needs.

(h) To conduct specialized research on economic or other technical
subjects.

4. The Secretary should appoint a Standing Committee on Intelligence
consisting of the two Assistant Secretaries for Political Affairs, the
Assistant Secretary for Administration and the Special Assistant for
Research and Intelligence to:

(a) Supervise the establishment and coordination of Departmental
intelligence objectives and policies.

(b) Subject to the direction and control of the Secretary, to formulate
and supervise the implementation of Departmental policy with respect to
the National Intelligence Authority.

(c) To approve participation by the Department in any centralized
operations or projects which the Director of the Authority may propose.

4. The transfer of functions, personnel and facilities envisaged in
recommendation (1) above should be executed in such manner as to leave
the Special Assistant with adequate resources to carry out his mission
as redefined in recommendation (2).

5. The phasing of the transfer and the disposition of the personnel,
functions and resources of ORI should be left to the determination of
the Assistant Secretary for Administration, with due regard to the
recommendations submitted by the Special Assistant for Research and
Intelligence.

6. Each geographic office shall organize and maintain a Division of
Research, set up with geographic sections corresponding to the other
divisions of the office. The establishment of such offices and the
timing thereof shall be under the supervision and direction of the
Assistant Secretary for Administration.

* Source: National Archives and Records
Administration, RG 59, Records of the Department of State, Records
of the Bureau of Intelligence and Research: Lot 58 D 776, Birth of
the Intelligence Organization in the Department of State. No
classification marking. Attached to a February 25 covering
memorandum in which Russell
noted that it was in response to SC-185 and reminded Byrnes that according to his
directive of January 5 (Document 84) the
issue was to be determined by Byrnes before March 1. The covering memorandum and
the full text of the report are in the Supplement. SC-185, February
12, is not printed. (National Archives and Records Administration,
RG 353, Records of Interdepartmental and Intradepartmental
Committees—State Department, Lot File No. 122, Records of the
Secretary's Staff Committee 1944-47) See the Supplement. This
report, also known as the “Russell Plan,” is printed in Senate Committee on the Judiciary, Subcommittee To Investigate
the Administration of the Internal Security Laws, 83d Congress,
1st Session, Hearings on Interlocking Subversion in Government
Departments, part 13, pp. 865-867.

1 Not printed.

86. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for American Republic Affairs (Braden) to Secretary of State Byrnes86. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for American
Republic Affairs (Braden) to Secretary of State Byrnes1

Washington, February 25,
1946.

After my February 6, 1946, conversation with you1 when I expressed my opposition to the idea of making
permanent the Office of Research and Intelligence, Staff Committee
memorandum SC-185 treating this same subject was received by me. Because
of the vital issues raised in this document, I respectfully submit to
you my views in the premises.

I believe in doing first things first. In order that the Department of
State and Foreign Service may competently perform the functions assigned
to them by law, it has long been apparent to those of us who have been
operating in our foreign diplomatic missions that the first things are:
(a) to rebuild the morale which has suffered serious damage during recent years; (b) to support the
Department and Foreign Service with adequate personnel, funds, and
facilities; and (c) to make such changes in organization and
administration as may be clearly indicated as the result of careful
analysis and study.

“Intelligence” as used in SC-185, is just another name for “Information”
which the Department and the Foreign Service have been gathering,
reporting and analyzing, and on the basis of which foreign policy has
been formulated for 150 years. These activities are at the core of the
Department's functions. If its performance is to be improved, we must
build on, strengthen and support our existing organization.

SC-185 advocates adoption of a new, preconceived plan developed outside
of the Department by people obviously unfamiliar with the Department and
Foreign Service and their needs and work. Its net result would be not to
strengthen the existing organization of the Department, but to implant
upon the Department another already established organization, cutting
across and dividing the basic responsibilities of the Department's
geographical offices. In effect it attaches a “booster” without first
diagnosing what is wrong and then repairing the motor.

The plan in SC-185 is based upon the false premise that in the
formulation of foreign policy there are two separate and distinct
processes—(1) the analysis, evaluation and interpretation of facts
bearing on problem; and (2) the decision as to what should be done. The
fact is that in diplomacy the decisions which make policy must at every
step be intimately related to the most thorough knowledge and analysis
of conditions, problems, personalities and national characteristics. The
geographical offices cannot be relieved, as this plan proposes, of the
“burden” of gathering the fullest possible information on the problems
with which they deal, and be expected to operate efficiently.

To make permanent the plan now proposed, far from clarifying the
Department's operations, as is claimed in SC-185, would produce
duplication, divided responsibility and unwarranted expense, with
resulting inefficiency and confusion.

The staff which, under SC-185, would take on this vital responsibility is
unproven and without diplomatic training. It has been qualified by no
stiff examinations as has our Foreign Service. It has scant experience
in the rough and tumble of the field.

I will not encroach upon your valuable time by answering in detail the
many arguments presented in SC-185, but do respectfully call your
attention to the following points:

(1) The statement that only the ORI can provide the right kind of
professionally trained personnel disregards completely the far higher
professional training, qualifications and experience of the Foreign
Service and Department, whose loyalty and integrity have been proven not
merely over a few years but for decades. Moreover, the geographical divisions are staffed with men
thoroughly familiar with the problems to be studied, and therefore far
more able to make analytical studies fit the practical needs of our
foreign relations.

(2) The argument that fact finding must be separated from policy decision
may hold true in ascertaining facts about a military situation, but is
completely invalid for the purpose of evaluating and interpreting
political situations.

(3) The analogies to juridical practices are not pertinent.

(4) The paper complains that the morale of the ORI has deteriorated in
the last few months because of the uncertainties surrounding its
continuance. The Foreign Service morale has gone down also, but only
after years of neglect and worse. The morale of the Department and
Foreign Service organizations would suffer disastrously if a totally new
organization were given responsibility for this essential aspect of
their work. The reporting of our Foreign Service would certainly suffer
if the officers in the field knew their reports were no longer to go
directly to those responsible for policy decisions, but merely into a
mechanical research operation. If their reports are to go to both, there
would result the costly duplication to which I have already referred.

(5) The criticism of ARA's analysis section is unjustified and
uninformed. Admittedly lacking in personnel and space, this section has
been of great service precisely because it operates as an integral part
of the geographical office and is in constant contact with the problems
which that office faces.

(6) It is not surprising that SC-185 evidences such a complete lack of
knowledge of the operations of the geographical divisions and of the
Foreign Service, since ORI has no one experienced in this work. Nor have
my principal assistants and I ever been consulted by the ORI as to our
operations and organization. That no difference of opinion on this
subject was evidenced until October 27, 1945, is due to the fact that
neither my assistants nor I ever heard of the proposed plan until
October 31, 1945.

There is a relatively small job of correlation for a central intelligence
office to do. Among the first things to be done would be to establish an
efficient filing unit in the Department. A small staff could be set up
to bring together in one place the information received from the various
geographical areas, to maintain liaison with the interdepartmental
intelligence organization and other agencies. To direct and supervise
work of this kind I recommend the establishment of a small committee,
consisting of the two political assistant secretaries and the Assistant
Secretary for Administration who would be the chairman.

I am, however, emphatically opposed to superimposing on the geographical
offices and the Foreign Service another organization which would
duplicate their basic responsibility for analyzing and interpreting the situations on which they
must everyday—and frequently with the utmost speed—recommend decisions
of policy. Rather than create this duplication, we must first strengthen
the geographical offices and Foreign Service with the personnel, space,
and administrative services that are so badly needed and for which we
have been pleading for years.

SB

1 Source: National Archives and
Records Administration, RG 59, Records of the Department of State,
Records of the Bureau of Intelligence and Research: Lot 58 D 776,
Birth of the Intelligence Organization in the Department of State.
No classification marking.

1 No record of this conversation has been
found.

87. Memorandum From the Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Administration (Panuch) to the Assistant Secretary of State for Administration (Russell)87. Memorandum From the Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for
Administration (Panuch) to the Assistant Secretary of State for
Administration (Russell)Source

Washington, April 16,
1946.

SUBJECT

Progress of attempt to settle L'affaire McCormack

Things are not going so good in the “settlement” of the above matter.
Indeed, I am afraid we, i.e., the Secretary and in a lesser degree you
and I are going to end up “in the middle” again despite our noble
intentions. Here is why.

1. McCormack's Gethsemane Hour

On Thursday, Al McCormack came to see me to seek my advice as to how he
should quit. He said that on the preceding day he had had an unpleasant
session with the Secretary (who was quite unfriendly) at the conclusion
of which he (McCormack) advised
the Secretary of his intention to resign immediately. The Secretary
(according to McCormack) told Al
that in his own interest he should quit after the Congress restored the
Intelligence cutback. I advised McCormack strongly to accept the Secretary's suggestion
in this regard, and he said he would think it over and let me know.

2. Reprieve

On Friday, I reported the above to you to be passed on to the Secretary.
You asked me whether there was any chance of securing McCormack's concurrence to our compromise plan of Intelligence
organization filed with the Secretary on 25 February 1946, and it was
decided to summon McCormack to
discuss this possibility with him. You told the Secretary of your
intention to do this. He said “OK” but that he had to have a decision on
the matter by Tuesday, 16 April. Accordingly, we met with McCormack on Friday forenoon and urged
him to relax his intransigence. He said he would consult Tyler Wood, a
fellow Princetonian, and let us know. That afternoon Tyler Wood phoned
you, stating that he was authorized to negotiate a settlement on behalf
of McCormack. You authorized me
to represent A-R in these negotiations. On Saturday, I sent Wood a copy
of McCormack's brief of 12
February and our report of 25 February (i.e., the Russell plan) for study before
undertaking his efforts at conciliation.

3. The Old School Tie

On Monday, 15 April, Wood conferred with me, and I outlined to him the
basic issues involved in the controversy. It became clearly evident very
quickly that poor old Ty did not “know the score.” Furthermore, it was
apparent that he had no intention of attempting to negotiate an
acceptance of the Russell plan or
even some formula based thereon. Indeed, he expressed confidence that he
could “sell” the political divisions the McCormack plan. I pointed out that what he hoped to sell
in 48 hours had been the subject of an irreconcilable difference of
opinion since 1 October. Nevertheless, he stated he was certain that
this could be done in that “Doc” Matthews, a classmate of McCormack's at Princeton, was “for” McCormack's plan, and, with the Doc's
backing, he (Wood) felt the other political divisions would be a
pushover—except maybe Braden, who
could be dealt with after everyone else was “lined up.”

4. Briefing The Conciliator

I told Wood that in my opinion this was a naive estimate of the
situation—but that I did not wish to discourage any method that would
bring about a settlement of the present wrangle and that he was free to
proceed in any way he saw fit. I pointed out to him, however, that A-R
occupied a judicial position in the dispute and could not become a part
of any plan to “gang up” on Braden; that we expected him to negotiate
with all of the Geographic Divisions with his cards on the table “face
up.” He allowed that this was his intention and that he would “talk
turkey” with Braden despite
McCormack's hatred of him. I
left him with this thought as a guide to his negotiations:

(a) That, in my opinion, the Russell plan was the ticket; but that we did not object
to some other formula provided;

(b) It was workable and acceptable to all of the Geographic Divisions;
that harmony was the sine qua non of any formula;

(c) That under any plan (whether (a) or (b)) McCormack had to confine
himself to overt intelligence and that secret intelligence must remain
as at present.

5. Violation of Truce

While I was under the impression that everyone was interested in pouring
oil over the controversial waters, McCormack's side launched a psychological press blitz
over the week-end, to wit:

Sunday— N.Y. Herald Tribune

Article by William Attwood, laudatory of McCormack and derogatory of Congress, career diplomats
and Braden.

Monday—Washington Post

Savage editorial written apparently by Schwarzwalder of the Bureau of the
Budget (via Wayne Coy) condemning political and foreign service officers
for opposing McCormack.

The two editorials above-referred to offset Drew Pearson's patriotic
effort in his Sunday broadcast to break the impasse by appealing to
McCormack to accept the
Russell compromise plan.

6. Who's Who on Intelligence (As of 6:00 P.M., 15
April)

In terms of key personalities, a round-up of key personalities and their
current positions on intelligence is as follows:

The Secretary—A settlement must be reached by Tuesday, April 16th.

Acheson—Originally for the
McCormack plan. However, is
now sick of the whole business and will have nothing more to do with the
controversy.

Dunn—Standing pat on the
Russell plan.

Braden—Standing pat on the
Russell plan.

Matthews—While embarrassed by the
fact that he is a Princeton classmate of McCormack's, is for the Russell plan. He needs research
people but does not want any of McCormack's intelligence characters in his organization.

Loy Henderson—Standing pat with Jimmy Dunn and unalterably opposed to
McCormack's plan.

John Carter Vincent—Views unknown at the present poll. However, in
Dunn's absence he will
probably be influenced by Ben Cohen's views. These, on past performance,
would be against the Political Divisions.

Bob Reams—100% for the Russell
plan and unalterably opposed to McCormack plan.

Fred Lyon—100% for the Russell
plan and unalterably opposed to the McCormack plan.

Fred Searls—For the Russell plan.

Franz Schneider—For the Russell
plan.

Private Views of Officials of War, Navy, NIA, FBI and Congress:

Outside of the Department, in the other agencies concerned with
intelligence, i.e., War, NIA and FBI, there is increasing impatience with
the endless intelligence
row which has been raging in State. The view has been repeatedly
expressed by Admiral Souers and Colonel Douglas of NIA and by J.
Edgar Hoover of FBI that
the Secretary should take prompt action to determine the dispute so that
these agencies can begin to cooperate with State in the intelligence
field on an effective basis.

The views of Congressman Rabaut and Congressman May are well-known to
you.

Supporters of the McCormack Plan

Support for the McCormack plan is
concentrated chiefly in the Bureau of the Budget (Schwarzwalder), the
Washington Post (Wayne Coy) and the New York Herald Tribune (Joe
Barnes).

Conclusion and Recommendation

Conclusion

There is only one recommendation that can be made. The row must be
immediately settled, i.e., by the close of business 16 April on a
mutually livable formula or it must be determined immediately and
finally on the merits.

The best interests of the Department, indeed the best personal interests
of the Secretary, make such action imperative.

Recommendation

If A-R does not report to S by the close of business 16 April that a
satisfactory settlement has been negotiated, the Secretary should
immediately sign the orders (now before him), putting into effect the
recommendations of the Russell
plan of 25 February 1946.

J. Anthony Panuch

* Source: Truman
Library, Papers of J. Anthony
Panuch, State Department, Research and Intelligence
#2. Secret.

88. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for Administration (Russell) to Secretary of State Byrnes88. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for
Administration (Russell) to Secretary of State ByrnesSource

Washington, April 18,
1946.

I am satisfied that no compromise of existing Departmental differences
with respect to the organization of the Office of Research and
Intelligence is possible at the working levels. The discussions now in
process hold no substantial promise of reaching a settlement of the
basic issues involved and will in all probability result in the
reopening of the controversy with renewed bitterness.

I believe that in the best interests of the Department this issue must be
promptly and finally determined. On February 25, 1946, I submitted to
you my report on this matter, together with my recommendations as to its
final disposition.1 I reaffirm the
conclusion and recommendations of that report.

Donald Russell

* Source: National Archives and Records
Administration, RG 59, Records of the Department of State, Records
of the Bureau of Intelligence and Research: Lot 58 D 776, Birth of
the Intelligence Organization in the Department of State. No
classification marking. Also sent to Under Secretary Acheson. For a copy of Panuch's handwritten note to
McCormack enclosing a
copy of Russell's memorandum
(ibid.), see the Supplement.

1 Document 85.

89. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for Administration (Russell) to Secretary of State Byrnes89. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for
Administration (Russell) to Secretary of State ByrnesSource

Washington, April 20,
1946.

I attach Colonel McCormack's
proposed order on Intelligence.1 It represents
no real change in his position with one exception: upon “mutual
agreement” the area intelligence groups may be detailed to the geographic offices. This
provision, which has been previously understood orally, was added
because Colonel Ty Wood states that inevitably the result of this policy
of “mutual agreement” will be an organization such as that I recommend,
which incidentally Colonel Wood personally recognizes as “theoretically
sound”. If the result is to be the administrative set-up I have
recommended, why not issue my proposed order and end the Departmental
bickering and indecision? Let's get to the right result now and end the
backbiting.

To follow Colonel McCormack's
plan, knowing that ultimately we will reach the result I propose, will
bring continued Departmental strife. I believe the adoption of my
proposal is the only way to tie the organization together. This is not a
question of Intelligence—it is a question of sound Departmental
organization.

I am also attaching the proposal submitted by me.2

DR

* Source: National Archives and Records
Administration, RG 59, Records of the Department of State, Records
of the Bureau of Intelligence and Research: Lot 58 D 776, Birth of
the Intelligence Organization in the Department of State. No
classification marking. Also sent to Under Secretary Acheson.

1 The proposed
order 133.20 was sent by Tyler Wood to Matthews, Henderson, and Vincent under cover of a
note of April 19. (Ibid.) See the Supplement.

2 Document 85.

90. Letter From the Secretary of State's Special Assistant for Research and Intelligence (McCormack) to Secretary of State Byrnes90. Letter From the Secretary of State's Special Assistant for
Research and Intelligence (McCormack) to Secretary of State ByrnesSource

Washington, April 23,
1946.

Dear Mr. Secretary: The series of Departmental Orders issued
yesterday,1 relating to the intelligence
organization within the Department, provide for dismembering the Office
of Research and Intelligence and transferring its functions to a group
of separate research divisions under the Political Offices, and they
contain other organizational provisions that I regard as unworkable and
unsound. I had hoped that the compromise proposal worked out by Colonel
Tyler Wood, which appeared to meet all points of substance raised by the
Political Offices, would be found acceptable, and I was therefore disappointed to find that the
orders as issued conformed almost exactly to the so-called “Russell Plan,” proposed by the
Assistant Secretary for Administration last December.

I realize how difficult it has been for the Secretary to decide an issue
on which the Department has been so divided in opinion, in view of the
enormous burden that the Secretary has been carrying. I am convinced,
however, that while the plan adopted will give needed reinforcements to
the Political Offices, and in that respect will be beneficial, it will
make impossible the establishment of a real intelligence unit within the
Department; that it will weaken the Department vis-a-vis the military
components of the National Intelligence Authority, who already have the
advantage of a three to one representation in the Central Intelligence
Group, as compared with that of the State Department; and that it will
prevent the carrying out of the long-range plans for post-war
intelligence which you and I had in mind when you asked me to come into
the Department.

The Department must go before the Senate Appropriations Committee within
two or three weeks to present its case for restoration of the
appropriations cut made by the House of Representatives, affecting the
intelligence organization. Feeling as I do that the organization as now
to be set up is unsound and not in the best interests of the Government,
I cannot conscientiously present the case to the Senate, and I believe
that the best interests of the Department and the Government will be
served by my immediate resignation.

I therefore submit my resignation, with the request that you release me
at once.2 It is my hope that, by
replacing me with a man who has not been a party to the internal
differences of the past six months, the Department may contrive in some
way to salvage the intelligence organization which it took over from the
Office of Strategic Services. In spite of serious losses of personnel
and many other difficulties that it has encountered since October 1,
1945, it is still an effective intelligence unit. In my opinion, because
of demobilization of other intelligence units that were functioning in
war time, it is the best remaining asset of the Government in the
foreign intelligence field.

I am grateful to you for the efforts that you have made to work out an
organizational arrangement that would meet the views of all parties
concerned and for the personal
support and good advice that you have given me since I have been in the
Department.

With all good wishes,

Sincerely yours,

Alfred McCormack3

* Source: Department of State Bulletin, May 5, 1946, pp. 778-779.

1 For texts, see ibid., May 12,
1946, pp. 826-828. Other than the orders themselves, no record of
Byrnes' decisionmaking on
the matter has been found.

2 Acting Secretary Acheson accepted McCormack's resignation on behalf
of Byrnes, who was away from
Washington. The text of Acheson's letter to McCormack is ibid., May 5, 1946, p. 779. See the
Supplement. For Acheson's
views on the controversy, see his memoirs, Present
at the Creation, chapter 18.

3 Printed from a copy that bears this
typed signature.

91. Minutes of the Eighth Meeting, Advisory Committee on Intelligence91. Minutes of the Eighth Meeting, Advisory Committee on
IntelligenceSource

Washington, December 3,
1946, 4:30-5:30
p.m.

PRESENT

Mr. Eddy, SA-E
(Chairman)

Mr. Braden, A-Br

Mr. Russell, A-R

Mr. Hickerson, (for A-D)

Mr. Evans, OCL (Executive Secretary)

[Here follow agenda items 1-3 on unrelated matters.]

4. Allocation of Space in the New War Department
Building

Mr. Hickerson raised the question of the proper disposition of the
geographic research divisions should the geographic offices move to the
New War Department Building. He felt that many advantages would result
if the research divisions could be located with their geographic offices
so as to facilitate close integration of work and plans. Mr. Braden felt that such an arrangement
would greatly assist in tieing DRA into
the operation of ARA. The Chairman indicated that the intelligence
organization appreciated the force of these arguments and had already
reported to the Administration that its first priority choice for a new
location would be the placing of a major part of the whole organization
in the same building with the geographical offices. He pointed out,
however, that there were other considerations which must be kept in
mind: first, a balance must be
preserved between the advantages of closely associating the geographical
research divisions with their offices and the necessity for the
geographical research divisions to be closely associated with one
another and with the coordinating and servicing elements of the
intelligence organization. It would seriously diminish the effectiveness
of the research divisions if they were to be widely separated from one
another, from their reference and collection services, and from the
coordinating functions; secondly, current developments were proving
beyond dispute that a major effort was in view outside the Department to
force the transfer of the intelligence research organization back to
CIG. This effort would be greatly
helped by any arrangement of the organization which weakened its
effectiveness. For these reasons, the organization had proposed that the
proper balance be maintained by moving the organization pretty much as a
whole into the same building with the geographical offices.

It was AGREED that this matter was of serious importance; that the plans
for moving required careful consideration; and that A-R should be
requested to call together representatives of the geographic offices and
the intelligence organization to explore the best available solution to
the problem.

* Source: National Archives
and Records Administration, RG 353, Records of Interdepartmental and
Intradepartmental Committees—State Department, Lot File No. 122,
Records of the Secretary's Staff Committee 1944-47, Box 94.
Secret.

92. Memorandum From the Secretary of State's Special Assistant for Research and Intelligence (Eddy) to the Acting Assistant Secretary of State for Administration (Peurifoy)92. Memorandum From the Secretary of State's Special Assistant for
Research and Intelligence (Eddy) to the Acting Assistant Secretary of State for
Administration (Peurifoy)Source

Washington, January 27,
1947.

SUBJECT

Functions of the Advisory Committee on Intelligence (ACI)

As is set forth in Departmental Regulation 183.5,1 effective July 1, 1946, the Special Assistant, with the
advice of the ACI, is charged with the
responsibility of implementing the Department's intelligence objectives
and policies. Under the “Russell
Plan” the ACI is the bridge between the
Special Assistant and the four Geographic Research Divisions, but since the resignation of
Mr. Russell,2
as well as during preceding weeks, a series of incidents has made me
question whether the ACI can continue to
perform that function. The next regular monthly meeting of the Committee
will fall on Tuesday, February 4, and I should like at your early
convenience to talk with you about the issues involved since you will be
taking Mr. Russell's place on
that Committee.

In brief, the authority and representative character of ACI has been questioned by ARA and NEA, and
instructions regarding security, approved by the ACI, have been rejected by their two Research Division
Chiefs. Furthermore, in the case of one Office Director, negotiations
have been initiated directly by him with the Director of Military
Intelligence of the War Department with regard to an NIA Directive, which would seem to me to
certainly be covered by DR 183.5-I(c).

It would not seem to me useful to reconvene ACI nor to go through the motions of securing its
concurrence unless it is understood throughout the Department that the
ACI has competent jurisdiction on at
least three points:

(1) Supervision of the research and intelligence projects on the
technical side.

(2) Common security measures applicable to all operations and personnel
in Research and Intelligence, including the Research Divisions, to
insure confidence of the intelligence services of other departments who
will otherwise decline to distribute to us their secret materials. (In
certain intelligence centers there is already a segregation of material
which is kept from the State Department members on the grounds that we
cannot maintain security precautions necessary to an intelligence
organization.) Special security measures have been approved by ACI, but they have been rejected or ignored
by certain units of our research organization. I have had no reply to
the enclosed memorandum to Mr. Braden.3

(3) Liaison with the National Intelligence Authority and with its member
intelligence agencies on matters of positive intelligence.

Since I was appointed with the approval of Mr. Acheson to serve during the pleasure of the preceding
Secretary of State, it would seem to me essential that I should make
this situation known to Mr. Acheson at an early date if this office is to function
at all, no matter who may replace me. In view of the intimate
association of the present Department Intelligence plan with Mr.
Russell's office, I would
prefer to consult with you before reporting to Mr. Acheson or calling another meeting of
the ACI.

William A. Eddy4

* Source: National
Archives and Records Administration, RG 353, Records of
Interdepartmental and Intradepartmental Committees—State Department,
Lot File No. 122, Records of the Secretary's Staff Committee
1944-47, Box 94. Confidential.

1 Department of State Bulletin, September 8, 1946, p.
471.

2 Russell resigned as Assistant
Secretary of State for Administration effective January 20.

3 Not attached and not
found. At the end of the source text the attachment is identified as
a memorandum from the Office of the Special Assistant to the
Secretary of State for Research and Intelligence, October 18.

4 Printed from a copy that bears this
typed signature.

93. Memorandum From the Secretary of State's Special Assistant for Research and Intelligence (Eddy) to the Under Secretary of State (Acheson)93. Memorandum From the Secretary of State's Special Assistant for
Research and Intelligence (Eddy) to the Under Secretary of State (Acheson)Source

Washington, January 30,
1947.

SUBJECT

Organization for Research and Intelligence in the Department of
State

I. The Problem

To realign the organization under the Special Assistant to the Secretary
for Research and Intelligence so that he may more effectively discharge
his responsibilities.

II. Conclusions (See Appendix I for
discussion)1

1. The Research and Intelligence organization has operated since July 1,
1946,2 under the “Russell Plan.” The principal feature of that plan is the
division between the Special Assistant and the Geographic Offices of
authority over the basic research activities of the organization. The
effective operation of an intelligence organization under such
conditions has proved unworkable and impracticable.

2. The Special Assistant is charged with the responsibility to the
Secretary for planning and implementing a positive foreign intelligence
program and for maintaining all interdepartmental liaison in that field
with other intelligence services. In order to accomplish that mission,
he should have specific responsibility for:

(a) The control and direction of intelligence research and the collection
and dissemination of intelligence materials. The Office of the Special
Assistant should receive all intelligence materials coming into the
Department which, in his opinion, are necessary for the preparation of
the most complete, accurate and timely intelligence.

(b) The preparation and dissemination of daily or periodic intelligence
summaries, as required.

3. The Special Assistant should also have the authority to adopt such
security measures within the intelligence organization, in addition to
departmental security regulations, as may be required by the nature of
the work and to assure
effective cooperation from other intelligence services.

4. The Advisory Committee on Intelligence, established to assist the
Special Assistant, should be reconstituted so as to be more
represent-ative. It should be composed of the Special Assistant, as
Chairman; the Directors of the two Offices subordinate to him; the
Office Directors or their representatives from the Geographic Offices;
the Director of SPA or his representative; and a representative
designated by each of the following: A-B, A-T, and A-P.

5. The Subcommittee on Programs and Priorities of the Advisory Committee
on Intelligence should be dissolved, since its concept derived from the
theory of the “Russell Plan” and its important functions should more
properly be performed within the intelligence organization.

III. Recommendations

It is recommended that:

1. The geographic research divisions (DRA, DRE, DRF, and DRN) be transferred from the Geographic
Offices to the organization under the Special Assistant.

2. Departmental regulations be amended and appropriate orders issued to
implement the conclusions stated above and to provide the organization
indicated on the following chart.3

William A. Eddy

* Source: National Archives and Records
Administration, RG 59, Records of the Department of State, Records
of the Bureau of Intelligence and Research: Lot 58 D 776, Birth of
the Intelligence Organization in the Department of State.
Secret.

1 Not printed. See the
Supplement.

2 For the regulations giving effect
to the Russell Plan, see
Department of State Bulletin, September 8, 1946, pp. 465-471. These
regulations revised and amplified an earlier set of orders that had
entered into force on May 1, 1946; see ibid., May 12, 1946, pp.
826-828.

3 Not
printed. See the Supplement.

94. Memorandum From the Acting Assistant Secretary of State for Administration (Peurifoy) to the Under Secretary of State (Acheson) and Secretary of State Marshall94. Memorandum From the Acting Assistant Secretary of State for
Administration (Peurifoy) to the Under Secretary of State (Acheson) and Secretary of
State MarshallSource

Washington, January 31,
1947.

At my request, Colonel Eddy
prepared the attached plan1 for the reorganization of the intelligence activities
in the Department. I assigned a man from my staff to work with Colonel
Eddy.

I recommend the approval of this plan by you and the Secretary. If this
is approved, it might be desirable to call the members of the Staff
Committee to meet in your office and inform them of the Secretary's
decision as you did on the budget situation.2

JEP

* Source: National Archives and Records
Administration, RG 59, Records of the Department of State, Records
of the Office of the Assistant Secretary of State for
Administration, Subject Files 1944-1947: Lot 53 D 28, Box 11.
Secret. A handwritten note on the source text by Acheson reads: “I strongly recommend
approval of the attached proposal. D.A.” At the bottom of the source
text Marshall wrote: “O.K. G.C.M.”

1 Not found, but
presumably the same as or similar to Document
93 or the implementing memorandum cited in footnote 2
below.

2 See the February 5 memorandum from Marshall to Peurifoy on Organization for
Research and Intelligence in the Supplement. (National Archives and
Records Administration, RG 59, Records of the Department of State,
Records of the Bureau of Intelligence and Research: Lot 58 D 776,
Birth of the Intelligence Organization in the Department of
State)

From the Strategic Services Unit to the Office of Special OperationsFrom the Strategic Services Unit to the Office of Special Operations: Document List

Introduction

Document 95: Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of War (McCloy) to the Director of the Strategic Services Unit of the Department of War (Magruder)

Washington, September 26, 1945.

Source: Central Intelligence Agency Historical Files, HS/CSG-117. No classification marking.

Document 96: Memorandum From the Director of the Strategic Services Unit, Department of War (Magruder) to the Assistant Secretary of War (McCloy)

Washington, October 9, 1945.

Source: Central Intelligence Agency Historical Files, HS/HC-265. No classification marking.

Document 97: Memorandum From the Director of the Strategic Services Unit, Department of War (Magruder) to the Assistant Secretary of War (McCloy)

Washington, October 25, 1945.

Source: Central Intelligence Agency Records, Job 83-00036, Box 3, Folder 16. Secret; American Eyes.

Document 98: Memorandum From the Acting Director of the Office of Controls, Department of State (Lyon) to the Secretary of State's Special Assistant for Research and Intelligence (McCormack)

Washington, November 13, 1945.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Records of the Department of State, Intelligence Files, Bureau of Administration, 1942-51: Lot 79 D 137, Office of Strategic Services, Box 1. No classification marking.

Document 99: Memorandum From the Director of the Strategic Services Unit, Department of War (Magruder) to the Assistant Secretary of War (McCloy)

Washington, November 15, 1945.

Source: Central Intelligence Agency Historical Files, HS/CSG-579, Job 83-00036, Box 4, Folder 7. Secret; American Eyes.

Document 100: Minutes of the 171st Meeting of the Secretary of State's Staff Committee

Washington, November 29, 1945, 9:30 a.m.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 353, Records of Interdepartmental and Intradepartmental Committees—State Department, Lot File No. 122, Records of the Secretary's Staff Committee 1944-47. Top Secret. No drafting information appears on the source text. The meeting was held in the Secretary's office.

Document 101: Memorandum From the Interim Activities Director of the Strategic Services Unit, Department of War (Irwin) to the Assistant Secretary of War (McCloy)

Washington, January 28, 1946.

Source: Central Intelligence Agency Historical Files, HS/CSG-1807, Job 83-00036, Box 12, Folder 11. No classification marking. The source text is a copy transcribed for the CIA Historian, presumably in the early 1950s.

Document 102: Memorandum From the Director of the Strategic Services Unit, Department of War (Magruder) to Secretary of War Patterson

Washington, February 4, 1946.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 263, Records of the Central Intelligence Agency, Troy Papers, SSU 1945. Secret. Sent through Assistant Secretary of War McCloy and Major General S. LeRoy Irwin, the Interim Director. Handwritten at the top of the source text is: “Magruder asks for survey.”

Document 103: Memorandum by the Director of the Strategic Services Unit, Department of War (Magruder)

Washington, February 14, 1946.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 263, Records of the Central Intelligence Agency, Troy Papers, Box 11, Folder 78. Secret. On the source text the address line is blank. At the top of the source text is handwritten “CIG should take over SSU.”

Document 104: Central Intelligence Group Directive No. 1

Washington, February 19, 1946.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 218, Records of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, Leahy Papers, No. 130. Top Secret.

Document 105: Memorandum From the Fortier Committee to the Director of Central Intelligence (Souers)

Washington, March 14, 1946.

Source: Central Intelligence Agency Historical Files, HS/CSG-1808, Job 83-00036, Box 12, Folder 11. Top Secret. The source text is undated; the date used is from Darling, The Central Intelligence Agency, p. 448, note 50. The report contains references to Tabs A-F, none of which was found with the source text.

Document 106: National Intelligence Directive No. 4

Washington, April 2, 1946.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 218, Records of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, Leahy Papers, No. 132. Confidential. The draft version of the directive was discussed at the IAB meeting on March 26 (see Document 144) and at the NIA meeting on April 2 (see Document 145).

Document 107: Memorandum From Acting Secretary of War Petersen to the Director of the Strategic Services Unit, Department of War (Quinn)

Washington, April 3, 1946.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 218, Records of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, Leahy Papers, No. 130. Confidential. The version printed was distributed as Enclosure A to CIG Directive No. 6 of April 8. See the Supplement. Colonel William W. Quinn had just succeeded Magruder as Director of the SSU. (SSU General Orders No. 11, April 4; Central Intelligence Agency Historical Files, HS/HC-601, Job 83-00036, Box 4, Folder 9) See the Supplement.

Document 108: Memorandum From the Director of Central Intelligence (Souers) to the Director of the Strategic Services Unit, Department of War (Quinn)

Washington, April 4, 1946.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 218, Records of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, Leahy Papers, No. 130. Top Secret. The version printed was distributed as Enclosure B to CIG Directive No. 6, April 8. See the Supplement.

Document 109: Memorandum From the Director of Central Intelligence (Souers) to President Truman

Washington, April 17, 1946.

Source: Central Intelligence Agency Historical Files, HS/CSG-2227, Job 83-00739R, Box 2, Folder 3. No classification marking.

Document 110: Letter From the Director of Central Intelligence (Souers) to the Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation (Hoover)

Washington, April 19, 1946.

Source: Central Intelligence Agency Historical Files, HS/CSG-2227, Job 83-00739R, Box 2, Folder 3. Secret; Personal.

Document 111: Memorandum From the Assistant Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation (Ladd) to the Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation (Hoover)

Washington, May 14, 1946.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 263, Records of the Central Intelligence Agency, Troy Papers, FBI Documents. No classification marking.

Document 112: Memorandum From the Director of the Office of Controls (Lyon) to the Chief of the Division of Foreign Activity Correlation (Neal)

Washington, July 1, 1946.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Records of the Department of State, Intelligence Files, Bureau of Administration, 1942-51: Lot 79 D 137, Folder SSU, Box 2. Secret.

Document 113: Letter From the Director of Central Intelligence (Vandenberg) to the Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation (Hoover)

Washington, July 3, 1946.

Source: Central Intelligence Agency Historical Files, HS/CSG-2227, Job 83-00739R, Box 2, Folder 3. Top Secret.

Document 114: Memorandum by the Director of Central Intelligence's Executive (Wright)

Washington, July 11, 1946.

Source: Central Intelligence Agency Historical Files, HS/CSG-2154, Job 83-00739R, Box 3, Folder 19. Secret. The memorandum is addressed to “All C.I.G. Personnel Concerned.”

Document 115: Letter From the Director of Central Intelligence (Vandenberg) to the Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation (Hoover)

Washington, July 19, 1946.

Source: Central Intelligence Agency Historical Files, HS/CSG-2227, Job 83-00739R, Box 2, Folder 3. Top Secret. The letter is dated July 19, 1946, which has been changed by hand to July 22. The latter date, in turn, has been annotated by hand, “must be [July] 19.”

Document 116: Letter From the Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation (Hoover) to the Assistant Secretary of State for American Republic Affairs (Braden)

Washington, July 22, 1946.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Records of the Department of State, Decimal File 1945-49, 101.5/7-2246. Personal and Confidential.

Document 117: Memorandum From Acting Secretary of State Acheson to the Members of the National Intelligence Authority

Washington, August 5, 1946.

Source: Central Intelligence Agency Historical Files, HS/CSG-2227, Job 83-00739R, Box 2, Folder 3. Top Secret. Drafted by E.O. Briggs. Covered by an August 5 note signed with Acheson's typed initials, addressed to Secretaries Forrestal and Patterson and Admiral Leahy, asking that the memorandum be discussed at the NIA meeting on August 7. The covering note also contains a footnote stating that a copy of the memorandum was given to the CIG Assistant Director for Special Operations by Assistant Secretary Braden on August 6.

Document 118: Minutes of the Fifth Meeting of the National Intelligence Authority

Washington, August 7, 1946, 10:30 a.m.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 218, Records of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, Leahy Papers, No. 132. Top Secret. The meeting was held at the Department of State.

Document 119: Draft Letter From President Truman to Attorney General Clark

Washington, August 7, 1946.

Source: Central Intelligence Agency Records, Job 83-00764R, Box 1, Folder 5. No classification marking. According to Document 122, the letter was drafted by Secretary to the National Intelligence Authority Lay and approved by all members on the understanding that it would be sent if necessary. It appears that the draft was never used.

Document 120: Letter From the National Intelligence Authority to Attorney General Clark

Washington, August 8, 1946.

Source: Central Intelligence Agency Records, Job 83-00764R, Box 1, Folder 5. Secret. According to Wright's August 8 memorandum (Document 122) the letter was drafted by the Central Intelligence Group.

Document 121: Memorandum From the Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation (Hoover) to Attorney General Clark

Washington, August 8, 1946.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 263, Records of the Central Intelligence Agency, Troy Papers, FBI Documents, Box 8, Folder 18. No classification marking.

Document 122: Memorandum for the Record

Washington, August 8, 1946.

Source: Central Intelligence Agency Historical Files, HS/CSG-2227, Job 83-00739R, Box 2, Folder 3. Top Secret. Although the memorandum is dated August 8, it was obviously amended later, since the postscript refers to developments on August 10.

Document 123: Memorandum From the Director's Assistant (Tamm) to the Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation (Hoover)

Washington, August 10, 1946.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 263, Records of the Central Intelligence Agency, Troy Papers, FBI Documents. No classification marking.

Document 124: Memorandum From the Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation (Hoover) to Attorney General Clark

Washington, August 12, 1946.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 263, Records of the Central Intelligence Agency, Troy Papers, FBI Documents. No classification marking. A typed note on the source text indicates that it was sent at 5 p.m. on August 12. This memorandum from Hoover is based on a longer August 12 memorandum from Tamm to Hoover. (Ibid.) See the Supplement.

Document 125: Memorandum From the President's Chief of Staff (Leahy) to the Director of Central Intelligence (Vandenberg)

Washington, August 12, 1946.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 218, Records of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, Leahy Papers, No. 131. Secret.

Document 126: Memorandum for Record

Washington, August 19, 1946.

Source: Central Intelligence Agency Historical Files, HS/CSG-2227, Job 83-00739R, Box 2, Folder 3. Secret.

Document 127: Letter From the Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation (Hoover) to the Director of Central Intelligence (Vandenberg)

Washington, August 19, 1946.

Source: Central Intelligence Agency Historical Files, HS/CSG-2227, Job 83-00739R, Box 2, Folder 3. Strictly Confidential.

Document 128: Memorandum From the Director of Central Intelligence (Vandenberg) to Secretary of State Byrnes

Washington, September 12, 1946.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Records of the Department of State, Decimal File 1945-49, 101.5/9-1246. Top Secret. Similar memoranda were sent to the other NIA principals.

Document 129: Letter From the Director of Central Intelligence (Vandenberg) to the Assistant Secretary of State for American Republic Affairs (Braden)

Washington, October 9, 1946.

Source: Central Intelligence Agency Historical Files, HS/CSG-2461, Job 83-00764R, Box 4, Folder 7. Secret. The date is handwritten on the source text. No drafting information appears on the source text but the tone of the letter suggests that it was written by Vandenberg.

Document 130: Strategic Services Unit General Orders No. 16

Washington, October 19, 1946.

Source: Central Intelligence Agency Historical Files, HS/CSG-601, Job 83-00036, Box 4, Folder 9. Restricted. Draft copies (dated September 5) of SSU Headquarters' message to its field stations closing down operations and Vandenberg's parallel message are ibid. Colonel Quinn's October 16 memorandum to Penrose and others outlines administrative arrangements concerning the transfer. (Ibid.)

Document 131: Instruction From the Assistant Secretary of State for Administration (Russell) to the Minister in Tangier (Alling)

Washington, January 3, 1947.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Records of the Department of State, Decimal File 1945-49, 101.5/1-347. Top Secret. More or less identical instructions presumably were sent to other posts, but no other instructions or list of other addresses has been found.

Document 132: Letter From the Director of Central Intelligence (Vandenberg) to Secretary of State Byrnes

Washington, January 3, 1947.

Source: Central Intelligence Agency Historical Files, HS/CSG-2227, Job 83-00739R, Box 2, Folder 3. No classification marking.

Document 133: Letter From Secretary of State Byrnes to the Director of Central Intelligence (Vandenberg)

Washington, January 8, 1947.

Source: Central Intelligence Agency Historical Files, HS/CSG-2227, Job 83-00739R, Box 2, Folder 3. Secret.

Document 134: Memorandum From the Director of the Strategic Services Unit, Department of War (Quinn) to the Assistant Secretary of War (Petersen)

Washington, April 11, 1947.

Source: Central Intelligence Agency Historical Files, HS/HC-804, Item 7. Confidential. The source text may be a transcript prepared for the CIA Historian in the early 1950s.

Document 135: Letter From the National Intelligence Authority to Representative Clare E. Hoffman

Washington, June 26, 1947.

Source: Central Intelligence Agency Records, Job 90-00610R, Box 1, Folder 3. Top Secret. Representative Hoffman (Republican, Michigan) was Chairman of the House Committee on Expenditures in the Executive Departments. At the time the letter was written, the committee was considering the legislation on armed forces unification, which included provisions establishing the Central Intelligence Agency on a statutory basis. The question of clandestine operations arose in the committee as a result of press stories and press criticism about the efforts to centralize all clandestine intelligence operations in CIG. See Document 319, which records the NIA's discussion of the letter, which was proposed to the Authority by Hillenkoetter.

Document 136: Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, April 16, 1948.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Records of the Department of State, Records of the Office of the Assistant Secretary for Administration— Subject Files, 1944-47: Lot 53 D 28, Special Assistant for Research and Intelligence, Box 19. Secret. Drafted by Humelsine and Armstrong.

IntroductionIntroduction

As might be expected, records on foreign secret intelligence and
clandestine intelligence collection are sparse. The small collection of
documents printed in this section is concerned almost exclusively with
two subjects: the transition from the Strategic Services Unit (SSU), the designation for the secret
intelligence components of OSS after
they were transferred to the War Department in the fall of 1945, to the
Central Intelligence Group's Office of Special Operations, and the
controversy between the Central Intelligence Group and the Federal
Bureau of Investigation over the latter's handover of its intelligence
functions in Latin America.

The period covered is roughly one year, from the fall of 1945 to the fall
of 1946. There are only a few documents of later dates. By its very
nature, secret intelligence collection probably generated relatively
little paper (other than the resulting intelligence reports themselves),
and much of this limited body of records was probably destroyed.

Because of the short deadline set in Executive Order 9621 (Document 14), both the State and War Departments
had to move without much time for preparations to take over the OSS functions and resources allocated to
them. In the case of the War Department, which inherited OSS's
operational (as distinct from research and analytical) functions, there
were certain special problems. Before going out of existence, the OSS had begun liquidating the special
operations and paramilitary functions that had been an integral part of
its wartime mission, but some residual parts of the job remained to be
completed by the SSU. Secret
intelligence was a complex and more difficult problem. In this instance,
the War Department had taken on a function that had an uncertain future,
despite the importance many attached to it. At the time the Executive
order was issued, the shape of the postwar national intelligence system
was undecided, as the President's September 20 letter to Secretary of
State Byrnes (Document 15) made clear. It was
to remain so well beyond that.

Among the many unresolved issues was whether and, if so, under what kind
of organizational arrangements, the United States would undertake
clandestine intelligence gathering in peacetime. Although General
Donovan's plan envisaged a
continuation of clandestine intelligence collection by an OSS successor agency, there was no
unanimity on the point. The Bureau of the Budget report of September 20,
1945, on intelligence (see the Supplement) regarded the continuation of
secret intelligence collection
in peacetime as a policy decision yet to be made. The Bureau was not
necessarily opposed to secret intelligence but tended to regard it as
far less important than research and analysis. Colonel McCormack's position appears to have
been much the same. The armed services seem to have been strongly in
favor, although they were not necessarily in favor of the centralization
of clandestine intelligence in a single agency. The FBI envisaged a worldwide intelligence
gathering system modeled on its operations in Latin America during World
War II.

The Strategic Services Unit (SSU)
therefore was a holding operation intended to preserve, as far as
possible, the clandestine intelligence capabilities developed in wartime
until a decision could be reached on national intelligence policy in
peacetime. Assistant Secretary of War John
J. McCloy's initial instructions to the SSU director, Brigadier General John Magruder (who had been
Donovan's deputy director of
intelligence), directed him “to insure that the facilities and assets of
OSS are preserved for any possible
future use.” (Document 95)

Magruder said essentially the same to Assistant Secretary of War Lovett
in a report on the future of U.S. intelligence activities. (Document 34) The Lovett Board in turn pressed
the case for SSU as a trimmed-down
nucleus for a future U.S. clandestine intelligence organization.

By January 1946, with the impasse over national intelligence organization
broken, Magruder renewed and intensified his efforts. On January 15, he
gave his immediate superior, Major General S. LeRoy Irwin, a summary of
SSU's assets, commenting that “at
present the primary objective of SSU is
to convert its unique assets into the foundation for clandestine
peace-time intelligence procurement.” (See the Supplement) On February
4, he gave the same message, at greater length and in stronger terms, to
Secretary of War Patterson and urged him to seek the appointment of a
committee of the newly established National Intelligence Authority to
study how best to use SSU's resources in
the new intelligence structure. (Document
102)

Again, in a memorandum of February 14, 1946, Magruder warned that in the
absence “of specific directive permitting long-range plans and
commitments” the SSU faced heavy
attrition among key personnel and an impending budgetary crisis.
Magruder also offered the SSU to the
newly formed Central Intelligence Group in the hope that its
operational, specialized, and administrative functions “could profitably
be employed by the CIG until replaced
by, or incorporated into, a permanent organization.” (Document 103)

There is no firm documentary evidence on the question, but it seems
highly likely that Magruder's urgings strongly influenced Admiral
Souers' decisions on dealing with the clandestine intelligence problem.
On February 19, 1946, Souers signed CIG
Directive No. 1, which appointed a committee to make a detailed study of
the resources, facilities, and operating functions of the SSU
that should be continued after its liquidation and their disposition.
(Document 104) The committee, known as the
Fortier Committee after its chairman, Colonel Louis J. Fortier, recommended
essentially what Magruder had proposed: that the CIG take over the SSU,
incorporate whatever parts would be useful in the new intelligence
structure, and discard the rest. (Document
105)

By late March, a draft NIA directive
embodying this basic approach had been discussed by the Intelligence
Advisory Board, and on April 2, the National Intelligence Authority
approved what became known as NIA
Directive No. 4, “Policy on Liquidation of the Strategic Services Unit.”
(Document 106) NIA Directive No. 4 was a major step toward the allocation
of responsibility for foreign secret intelligence to the Central
Intelligence Group. The formal charter and the grant of exclusive
jurisdiction were still in the future; they would not come until the
NIA approved National Intelligence
Directive No. 5 on July 8, 1946 (Document
160). While leaving open the question of whether the functions and
activities of the SSU should “be
transferred to the Central Intelligence Group or other agencies in order
that its useful assets may not be lost,” it authorized the Director of
Central Intelligence to supervise the SSU's liquidation, to make recommendations to the NIA on “the intelligence activities
permanently required in the peace-time effort,” and to oversee the
SSU's interim operations until it
was liquidated. Finally, the directive instructed the Director of SSU to “make available to the Director of
Central Intelligence, upon his request, any facilities and services of
SSU which may be useful” to the
CIG.

For the comments of the Central Intelligence Agency's first historian,
who interviewed many of the participants in the formation of the
national intelligence system, on the process of SSU liquidation, see Arthur P. Darling, The Central Intelligence Agency, page 99.

Under the arrangements thus established, the CIG and SSU organizations
were partly merged, with some SSU
personnel simultaneously holding assignments in the CIG while the process of selecting who and
what were to be transferred to the CIG
went on. By early June 1946, General Vandenberg had taken over as
Director of Central Intelligence and the process seems to have been
accelerated. Vandenberg quickly established an Office of Special
Operations to run the new clandestine service and named a director
brought over from the Army. By mid-September, the process had advanced
far enough that Vandenberg formally notified the Secretary of State that
the SSU would cease operations the
following month and that “the Special Operations Office of the Central
Intelligence Group will assume responsibility for the conduct of espionage and counter-espionage
operations in the field.” (Document 128)

In the meantime, NIA Directive No. 5 of
July 8, 1946, gave the Director of Central Intelligence a mandate to
conduct “all organized Federal espionage and counter-espionage
operations outside the United States and its possessions for the
collection of foreign intelligence information required for the national
security.” NIA Directive No. 5 was a
milestone for the CIG and was
particularly important to Vandenberg, because it marked out an area of
common concern that at least on paper was exclusively within the
province of the Director of Central Intelligence. In practice, it was
not an uncontested monopoly. The quarrel with the Army over its
insistence that it be allowed to conduct clandestine intelligence
operations (an issue on which very few documents were found) was to drag
on for at least another year and even figured in the debate over the
National Security Act of 1947.

The CIG's only other rival in the
clandestine intelligence area was the Federal Bureau of Investigation,
although the FBI appears never to have
challenged the CIG for authority in the
foreign intelligence field. In 1945, the FBI had been an active participant in the debate on the
postwar national intelligence structure, and had actively pressed its
plan for a “world-wide intelligence system.” The FBI appears to have been sidelined early in the
competition, however, in part because the Bureau of the Budget was not
sympathetic to Hoover's overseas intelligence plan but more importantly,
because President Truman was
strongly opposed to any overseas intelligence responsibility for the
FBI.

The FBI had some strong defenders in the
Department of State, however. Spruille Braden, Assistant Secretary of
State for Inter-American Affairs, was one of them. He interjected the
issue into the Department of State's debate over Colonel McCormack's plan for a national
intelligence organization, urging that the Department support the FBI's continued presence in Latin
America.

In mid-1946, when Vandenberg was in the midst of setting up the Office of
Special Operations, dissolving the SSU,
and getting the IAB and NIA to approve NIA Directive No. 5, the FBI was still responsible for clandestine intelligence
collection in Latin America (since the SSU had inherited no capability in this area from the
OSS). The subsequent difficulties
between the CIG and the FBI, however, were concerned not so much
with the latter's presence in Latin America as with how and when it
would depart from the region.

In May 1946, Hoover wrote in the margins of a report by one of his
subordinates, describing a planning meeting at CIG to discuss clandestine intelligence: “The most I will
agree to now is to stay in the Western Hem. for one year. I am more
& more certain that this is a project we must get out of.” (Document 111)

By the following month, Hoover was planning to close down his Western
Hemisphere operations even more quickly than that. On June 25, 1946,
Hoover wrote to Vandenberg, commenting on the draft of what was to
become National Intelligence Authority Directive No. 5 and concluding
that “If this Directive is
approved, it would appear to me that there would be no reason why the
Federal Bureau of Investigation should not withdraw as rapidly as
possible from Central and South America. I would appreciate it very much
if you would advise me as to whether or not you concur in this
interpretation by me.” (Text quoted in a memorandum from Ladd to Hoover,
July 22, 1946; see the Supplement. The letter itself has not been found
but the text as given in the memorandum appears to be complete.) Hoover
repeated the statement in a second letter to Vandenberg a week later.
(Letter from Hoover to Vandenberg, July 2, 1946; see the Supplement)

In the ensuing exchange of correspondence, Hoover and Vandenberg quickly
found themselves at odds over the withdrawal issue, with Vandenberg
arguing that an orderly changeover required the FBI to remain in Latin America for most of the fiscal year
(then just begun) and Hoover continuing to insist on a quick departure,
and making preparations to carry it out. (Document
113 and letters in the Supplement)

In response to growing Department of State concerns about the FBI's plans for a rapid withdrawal from
Latin America, Acting Secretary Acheson requested a special meeting of the National
Intelligence Authority to try to slow down the process. At an August 7
meeting, the NIA agreed to send a letter
to the Attorney General, asking him to direct the FBI to keep its intelligence personnel in
Latin America until the CIG could arrange for an orderly replacement.
(Documents 118 and 120) As a precaution, the NIA
principals also instructed their executive secretary to prepare a
standby letter for the President's signature, addressed to the Attorney
General and in effect directing him to order Hoover to negotiate a
timetable acceptable to the CIG. The
second letter was to be used, presumably, if the NIA's own request failed. (Documents
119 and 122) Apparently it was never
sent.

Within a few days, the Attorney General had spent almost 2 hours
discussing the issue with the President, and Admiral Leahy had become the middle man in
the negotiation between the FBI and the
CIG. (Documents
123 and 124) The upshot was that
Leahy informed Vandenberg
on August 12 that the Attorney General and the President wished the
changeover expedited and expressed his own belief that this “can be
accomplished at a much earlier date than as at present scheduled and
that it should be done.” (Document 125) This
appears to have closed the book on the controversy and within a few
months the FBI's intelligence gathering
role in the Western Hemisphere had come to an end.

95. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of War (McCloy) to the Director of the Strategic Services Unit of the Department of War (Magruder)95. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of War (McCloy) to the Director of
the Strategic Services Unit of the Department of War (Magruder)Source

Washington, September 26,
1945.

SUBJECT

Transfer of OSS Personnel and
Activities to the War Department and Creation of Strategic Services
Unit

By letter from the Deputy Chief of Staff dated today,1 you have been designated to represent the War
Department in the transfer of those OSS
activities which will come to the War Department and in their continued
operation. I shall recommend that the Secretary of War confirm this
designation as requested by you.

These activities will become for the time being, as a matter of War
Department organization, subject to the authority of my office and for
convenience will be referred to as the Strategic Services Unit. This
assignment of the OSS activities, so to
be transferred to the War Department, is a method of carrying out the
desire of the President, as indicated by representatives of the Bureau
of the Budget, that these facilities of the OSS be examined over the next three months with a view to
determining their appropriate disposition. Obviously this will demand
close liaison with the Bureau of the Budget, the State Department and
other agencies of the War Department, to insure that the facilities and
assets of OSS are preserved for any
possible future use, so far as not presently to be liquidated in any
event by reason of the termination of hostilities. The situation is one
in which the facilities of an organization, normally shrinking in size
as a result of the end of fighting, must be preserved so far as
potentially of future usefulness to the country. However, any
integration of its activities with those of other agencies of the War
Department should proceed only after consultation with the Bureau of the
Budget and the State Department, in view of the desire of the President
(expressed in his letter of 20 September to the Secretary of State) that
the Secretary of State take the
lead in surveying the whole field of intelligence operations during the
next few months. Obviously the whole subject is one for careful and
cooperative study and analysis of the various functions now being
performed by OSS.

In the meantime, the continuing operations of OSS must be performed in order to preserve them as a going
operation. As you know the staff of my office is too small to exercise
detailed supervision over an enterprise the size of the OSS activities to be subject to your
control. It is not desirable to increase that staff. Accordingly on
matters of administration, I expect that you will conform, as fully as
it is practicable, with applicable War Department policies and
regulations and will consult and coordinate your actions with the
appropriate War Department agencies.

I am particularly anxious that you keep the Budget, Fiscal and Accounting
officers of the War Department fully advised of the activities of the
Unit and arrange to obtain their assistance and guidance to the fullest
practicable extent. In general, I expect you to keep not only my office,
but also the deputy Chief of Staff, advised of your plans and activities
so that he may be in a position to furnish to the Secretary of War and
to me advice and recommendations.

Major questions of policy should be discussed with my office. I am
particularly anxious that my office be kept informed as to proposals for
the disposition of particular substantial operations, facilities or
assets of the present OSS organization.
I think you should inaugurate a system of periodic written reports of
progress and outlines of future plans, of which copies should be
furnished to the Deputy Chief of Staff.

I desire that the status of the assets to be taken over by the War
Department as of 1 October 1945 be carefully checked by the proper
Budget and Fiscal officers of the War Department, to the extent that
they deem necessary, and as you know, instructions for such check, by
inventory and otherwise, have been given.

If you require additional assignment of staff from the War Department, I
expect that you will ask for the assignment of the necessary personnel
and make direct arrangements with the Deputy Chief of Staff for such
assignment.

This memorandum is furnished for your information and guidance as an
expression of my general views as to policy and procedure.

John J. McCloy2

* Source: Central Intelligence Agency Historical
Files, HS/CSG-117. No classification marking.

1 Not found. A September 27 memorandum from Secretary
of War Patterson to Magruder designated the latter the administrator
of the Strategic Services Unit. (Ibid., HS/CSG-601) See the
Supplement. Magruder assumed command of the SSU on October 1. (SSU
General Orders No. 1, October 1; Central Intelligence Agency
Historical Files, HS/CSG-601) See the Supplement. Additional details
are in a September 29 memorandum from Cheston to Branch and Office
Chiefs, and a September 29 memorandum from Cutter to Lincoln. (Both,
Central Intelligence Agency Historical Files, HS/CSG-1400, Job
83-00036, Box 10, Folder 4) A complete set of SSU General Orders (October 1,
1945-October 19, 1946) is ibid., HS/CSG-601, Job 83-00036, Box 4,
Folder 9.

2 Printed from a copy that indicates
McCloy signed the
original.

96. Memorandum From the Director of the Strategic Services Unit, Department of War (Magruder) to the Assistant Secretary of War (McCloy)96. Memorandum From the Director of the Strategic Services Unit,
Department of War (Magruder) to the Assistant Secretary of War (McCloy)Source

Washington, October 9,
1945.

SUBJECT

Strategic Services Unit as of 1 October 1945

1. Introduction. At the time of issuance of the Executive Order of 20
September providing for the “Termination of the Office of Strategic
Services and Disposition of its Functions” (attached as Exhibit 1),1 OSS was proceeding with a program of
orderly liquidation. This program was in operation to carry out the
terms of a letter from the Director of Strategic Services to the Bureau
of the Budget dated 25 August 1945 (attached as Exhibit 2).2 In this letter the Director, Major General William J. Donovan, stated that he was
proceeding with the liquidation of the agency (which he estimated would
be completed by 1 January or 1 February 1946). He recited that he had
reiterated on many occasions since November 1944 the necessity of
setting up a permanent agency to take over the functions of OSS, and he attached a statement of
principles governing the establishment of a centralized United States
foreign intelligence service.

2. Organization of OSS. Attached as
Exhibit 33
is a chart of the organization of the Office of Strategic Services as it
existed in general on 30 September 1945 and a copy of General Order No.
9, outlining the functions of the offices shown on the organization
chart. A copy of OSS 155/11/D which
designates OSS as an agency of the Joint
Chiefs of Staff is attached as Exhibit 4.

3. Personnel. As of 30 September 1945, total personnel on duty with the
Office of Strategic Services was 10, 390. Of these, 5,713 were overseas
and 4,677 in this country. Personnel were distributed as follows:

Army
6,964

Navy
734

Civilian
2,692

Total10,390

Exhibit 5 lists total personnel as of 30 September by Branch or office
and by country. With the transfer to the Department of State of the Research and Analysis Branch
(with which the Foreign Nationalities Branch had previously been
merged), consisting of 1250 persons, the Presentation Branch, consisting
of 82 persons, personnel remaining with the Strategic Services Unit of
the War Department was 9,058 on 1 October 1945.

4. Finance. A 1945-46 budget of $20,000,000 had been approved by
Congress. With the surrender of Japan the President recommended that
this be reduced to a liquidation budget of $10,500,000 to last until 1
January 1946. In view of the Executive Order of 20 September, meetings
have been held with officials of the Departments of State and War, and
the Bureau of the Budget, and agreement reached by all to the following
allotment of funds:

LIQUIDATING BUDGET

Unvouchered. 003Vouchered .002Vouchered .001Total

Liquidation Budget, 19462,750,000250,0007,500,00010,500,000

Less, Estimated Obligation 9/30/451,350,000215,0004,435,0006,000,000

Bal. Remaining for Obligation1,400,00035,0003,065,0004,500,000

Recommended Reserve460,000—1,000,0001,460,000

Balance940,00035,0002,065,0003,040,000

Recommended Transfer to State Department15,000
*28,00035,000311,000389,000

Recommended Transfer to War Department897,000—1,754,0002,651,000

940,00035,0002,065,0003,040,000

* To be transferred to State Dept. as .022 Funds.

5. Equipment and Supplies. Instructions have been issued to every Branch,
Office and Mission of the Strategic Services Unit to prepare a physical
inventory of all non-expendable property as of 1 October 1945, including
property belonging to those Branches of OSS transferred to the Department of State. A copy of the
cables sent to each mission of OSS is
attached as Exhibit 6.
These inventories are now in preparation, and will be completed by 30
October 1945.

6. Schools and Training Establishments. Liquidation of the OSS schools and training activities was
well advanced prior to their transfer to the War Department. All schools
overseas have been closed and the personnel have either been returned to
this country or are en route home. Except for those below listed, all
schools and training areas in the United States have either been closed
or the properties are being processed for return to their owners by 1
November 1945.

a) “Area N” (Congressional Country Club), which is being used as the
reallocation and rehabilitation center for personnel returning from
overseas.

b) “Area W” (1917 Eye Street, Washington), which now houses the staff
used for psychological assessment of personnel and the staff of the
Advanced Intelligence School. Both staffs are engaged in completing
studies based on their work.

In addition, a few students are completing Oriental language courses at
the University of Pennsylvania under contract arrangements between the
University and OSS.

7. Missions Outside Continental USA. As of 30 September 1945 OSS had the following missions abroad:

a) Great Britain: Headquarters are in London. Attached for purposes of
administration to USFET. Included
within the mission are sub-missions for Norway and Denmark.

In addition to its direct intelligence functions, an important function
of SI is to maintain close relations with
British SIS. A principal concern of X-2
is the interrogation of SS, Abwehr and
PSNA personnel. R&A is supplying dossiers containing integrated
files of evidence collected in London to the Office of U.S. Chief of
Counsel for the Prosecution of Axis Criminality (OSS).

b) France: Headquarters are in Paris. Attached for purposes of
administration to USFET. Included
within the mission are sub-missions for Holland and Belgium.

Intelligence is collected by the Nice Mission, by personal contacts, by
liaison with the Basque refugee groups, and through other sources. In
addition, SI maintains a productive
exchange of information with DGER for all types of intelligence,
including Safe Haven intelligence. X-2 activities have been materially
curtailed by reductions in personnel, but field units continue operating
in Bordeaux, Metz, Marseille, Nice, and Brussels; close contact is
maintained with the Embassy in Paris and the US Consulates in Brussels
and Marseille. R&A was engaged in servicing USFET, US Group CC, the CCC, and maintained liaison with the Army
Engineers at Versailles. Weekly meetings are held with representatives
of the Embassy, the Military and Naval Attaches, and USIS.

c) MedTO: Headquarters are in Rome. The mission is responsible to the
Commanding General AFHQ. One X-2 and two R&A men are attached to the
American Group of ACC in Bucharest.
Also, two members of R&A are attached to the US Embassy in Belgrade,
and one to the US Legation in Sofia.

Preparatory to establishing new clandestine networks, OSS terminated the activities of its SI Branch in Italy prior to 30 September. On
that date there remained a counter-espionage program, a medical
intelligence program, an intelligence Photographic Documentation
Project, and an active R&S research
program with offices at Milan and Rome.

d) Germany: Headquarters are in Biebrich in the American Zone. This is an
autonomous mission responsible to Lt. General Clay through the
Intelligence Officer of the US Group CC. Included within the mission is
a sub-mission for Czechoslovakia, with headquarters in Prague.

Major activities are carried out by SI,
X-2, R&A. SI is occupied principally with production units located in
Berlin, Bremen, Heidelberg, Kassel, Munich, and Nuremberg. Units also
operated in the British Zone and in Eastern Germany. X-2 has as its primary objective the
penetration of German society and economy. R&A furnished information
and material to US Group CC, CCC, and
the Finance Branch, G-5, USFET.

e) Austria: Headquarters are in Vienna. Responsible through C-2 to the
Commanding General, USFA. Detachments
are maintained at Salzburg and Zell-am-See, and a small intelligence
team in the Trieste area.

This mission provides secret, economic and political intelligence and
counter-intelligence to the US Command. Intelligence coverage includes
the French and Russian Zones. A number of special studies and analyses
of industrial and economic conditions to aid USFA in determining occupational policies in Four Power
Council have been prepared. The Commanding Officer of the mission has
devoted a part of his time to acting as interpreter to the CG, USFA,
in the Four Power Conference.

f) METO: Headquarters are in Cairo. Responsible to the Commanding
General, AMET. Included within the
mission are sub-missions in Istanbul and Athens. In addition, there is
maintained an open office in Casablanca, and operatives in Addis Ababa,
Tunis, Tangier, and Algiers, who report directly to Washington. Although
the unit in Greece is technically under the jurisdiction of AFHQ, by
informal arrangement it is serviced from Cairo.

This mission serves the AMET military
commander by aiding and cooperating with OIC in supplying intelligence
for the protection of ATC. It also
supplies secret political and economic and counter-espionage
intelligence to the State Department representatives, R&A, and the
Army and Navy Liquidation Commission. It provides C-2, AMET, and the Military and Naval Attaches
with military intelligence as well as economic and political
material.

g) China: Headquarters are in Chungking and Kinming, with field house at
Hsian and Chihkiang. It is expected that headquarters will be moved to
Shanghai in the near future.

China Theater Headquarters directed on 22 August that the OSS intelligence organization and network
continue at full strength for an estimated 90 to 120 days to gather
intelligence of value to that Headquarters during the reoccupation
period. A [illegible text—secondary?] objective of the program in China
is to lay the groundwork for a long-term post-war intelligence net. A
special unit has been set up, under the strictest possible security, to
draw up a plan for the reorganization of this net.

Intelligence reported as of 30 September covered the China Theater from
Manchuria to French Indo-China. Intelligence missions were located at
Mukden, Chenhsien, Peiping, Suchang, Tientsin, Changsha, Hongyang,
Kuezui, Tsingtao, Hsian, Taiyuan, Shanghai, Taihoku in Formosa, Hankow,
Canton, Nanking, Kien, Nanchang, Hongkong, Hangchow, Fort Bayard, Hanoi,
and Vientiane.

Intelligence was disseminated to G-2 of
the Army Commands in China Theater, the Navy Group and the State
Department representative.

h) India-Burma: Major installations are maintained at Kandy, Calcutta,
Rangoon, and New Delhi, with supply and training sub-bases at Comanbo,
Trincomalee and Galle on Ceylon. Small missions are located in
Singapore, Bangkok, Saigon and Batavia. These teams were established for
the purpose of gathering current and long range strategic intelligence.
Administrative and supply functions are centered at Kandy and
Calcutta.

Information gathered in the Theater is furnished directly to the Ceylon
and New Delhi headquarters of the US Theater Commander and to the State
Department representative who serves as the US Theater Commander's
political advisor. Counter-intelligence is coordinated with the British
CICB, and R&A at New Delhi maintains contact with FEA and the American Mission.

i) Hawaii: This office was established as an outpost of R&A and for
liaison purposes. It has now ceased operation and is in the process of
liquidation.

8. Activities in Connection with War Crimes. In his capacity as “Chief of
US Counsel for the Prosecution of Axis Criminality”, Mr. Justice Jackson
enlisted the aid of several branches of OSS; namely, Office of the General Counsel, and the
R&A, SI, X-2, Presentation, Field Photographic, and Reproduction
Branches (Exhibit 7). The Office of the General Counsel was designated
as a central office to coordinate and correlate these activities, to
analyze and screen evidentiary material, including that received from other agencies such as
MIS and OID and to recruit
prosecution lawyers.

Since the initiation of this project, a great volume of evidentiary
documents and studies, including films, movies, graphic and pictorial
exhibits, briefs, interrogations and affidavits have been collected from
many sources and sent overseas to London, Paris and Nuremburg, where
they are further processed for the trials. The personnel now actively
engaged in War Crimes work in Washington and in ETO are numerically as follows:

Office of General Counsel,
Washington
ETO10
37

Research & Analysis, ETOETO8

Presentation
ETO8

Field Photographic,
Washington
ETO21
26

Reproduction
ETO4

SI
ETO12

X-2Washington
ETO1
7

Total138

The above does not include the large number of SSU personnel devoting
part time to War Crime work or related activities, nor does it include
the group of British nationals employed full time on this project by
SSU.

9. A report showing the reorganization of the Strategic Services Unit and
objectives with respect to partial liquidation and future activities
will follow.

John Magruder4
Brig. Gen.

* Source: Central Intelligence Agency Historical
Files, HS/HC-265. No classification marking.

1 Document 14.

2 Enclosure 1 to Document
3.

3 Exhibits 3-7 were not found.

4 Printed from a copy that bears this
typed signature.

97. Memorandum From the Director of the Strategic Services Unit, Department of War (Magruder) to the Assistant Secretary of War (McCloy)97. Memorandum From the Director of the Strategic Services Unit,
Department of War (Magruder) to the Assistant Secretary of War (McCloy)Source

Washington, October 25,
1945.

SUBJECT

Strategic Services Unit as of mid-October, 1945

1. This report is submitted pursuant to your letter of 26 September
1945.1 It covers significant
changes during the first half of October in the situation described in
letter to you dated 9 October 1945,2 subject: Strategic
Services Unit as of 1 October. Reference should be made to that letter
for a more complete description of SSU's
organization in the field and its continuing activities.

2. The total personnel strength of SSU
has been reduced from 9,058 as of 1 October to 7,640 as of 19 October.
Of the latter figure, nearly 3,000 persons—either in this country or en
route home or awaiting transportation from abroad—are in process of
separation. By 1 December it is estimated that overall SSU personnel strength will be reduced to
1,913. Details of present and contemplated future deployment are set
forth in the table attached hereto as Exhibit 1.3

3. A provisional organization of SSU has
been prescribed by General Order No. 2 dated 12 October 1945, attached
hereto as Exhibit 2.

4. In addition to secret intelligence, counter-espionage and
administrative services units, the portions of OSS transferred to SSU included related para-military
activities. To reduce these related activities and at the same time
create an efficient peacetime clandestine intelligence agency has
required great care so that necessary elements and assets of the
para-military branches will not be lost. In order to assure maximum
effectiveness of the peacetime unit, steps have been taken to
incorporate personnel with experience in the specialized training given
by OSS (Schools and Training Branch)
techniques of photographic intelligence (Field Photographic Branch) and
the production of personal documents and identity papers (CD and
Reproduction Branches) required for clandestine operations. In addition,
so that the United States may in the event of future wars be prepared to
use effectively and to develop doctrines and techniques used by OSS in this war for sabotage, support of
underground forces (SO Branch) and clandestine subversion of
enemy morale (MO Branch), personnel have
been incorporated in the reduced organization equipped to collect and
process intelligence on future foreign developments in these techniques.
While in all cases the number of people to be retained is very small,
outgoing personnel must be screened with care to select the best fitted
persons.

5. The SSU budget for the current fiscal
year has been reduced by the House to $8,500,000. (H.R. 4407) Of this
sum $2,846,176 remains unobligated. (See Exhibit 3) This balance will
not cover SSU operations beyond 1
January. Thereafter an additional appropriation of $625,000 per month
will be required if the assets of SSU
are to be preserved until the effectuation of plans for peacetime
intelligence. The above unobligated sum, which must be available if
SSU is to continue in operation
until 1 January, makes no allowances for contingencies and depends upon
adherence by the State Department to a previously projected plan of
reduction in force. In addition if this sum is to be sufficient it is
necessary to have Congress alter the form of the appropriation in the
House Bill to shift approximately $600,000 from the vouchered to the
unvouchered funds category. (See Exhibit 3) Steps are being taken to do
this.

6. Overseas Missions

a. Great Britain. Activities continued along the lines described in the
above-mentioned letter of 9 October. Intelligence was made available on
a regular basis to the American Delegation, Council of Foreign
Ministers.

b. France. An interesting aspect of continuing operations was X-2's control of certain enemy agents—with
the knowledge of the French—so as to uncover any revival of enemy
intelligence.

c. Germany. Clandestine activity was stepped up in areas [8 lines of source text not declassified].

[1 paragraph (7-1/2 lines of source text) not
declassified]

e. MedTO. X-2 conducted penetrations
designed to uncover subversive activities against Allied interests and
continued its work relevant to the complete liquidation of the former
German Intelligence Service in Italy and the Balkans. In addition, it
performed general security services for all American agencies. Work on
the Intelligence Photographic Documentation Project (IPDP) was being brought to a close by
SSU, but an effort was being made to
have this project continued by other branches of the service.

[4 paragraphs (1 page of source text) not
declassified]

j. Hawaii. This mission closed on 15 October.

7. Action has been initiated to transfer from the SSU rolls personnel engaged in the following
activities:

a. War Crimes. Request has been made of Mr. Justice Jackson that he
review SSU personnel engaged in this
work (see letter of 9 October) to determine whether they might not be
transferred to the Office of Counsel under the Assistant Secretary of
War.

b. Strategic Bombing Survey. Negotiations are under way with the U.S.
Strategic Bombing Survey (USSBS) to
secure agreement for the transfer to USSBS of 51 persons now furnished by SSU on 120 days' temporary duty for
employment in the strategic bombing survey of Japan. All but one of
these are at present under orders to proceed to Japan.

c. Intelligence Photographic Documentation Project. Recommendation has
been made that this project be transferred to the jurisdiction of the
Joint Topographic Subcommittee of the JIC of JCS. If adopted,
this recommendation would permit a reduction of 132 members of the Field
Photographic Branch now engaged in this work.

John Magruder4
Brig. Gen., USA

* Source: Central Intelligence Agency Records, Job
83-00036, Box 3, Folder 16. Secret; American Eyes.

1 Document 95.

2 Document 96.

3 Exhibits 1-3 are in the Supplement.

4 Printed from a copy that bears this
typed signature.

98. Memorandum From the Acting Director of the Office of Controls, Department of State (Lyon) to the Secretary of State's Special Assistant for Research and Intelligence (McCormack)98. Memorandum From the Acting Director of the Office of Controls,
Department of State (Lyon) to the Secretary of State's Special Assistant for
Research and Intelligence (McCormack)Source

Washington, November 13,
1945.

Reference is made to the Executive Order which President Truman signed on September 20, 1945,
terminating the Office of Strategic Services and disposing of its
functions.

The Department continues to receive from the Strategic Services Unit
requests for State Department designations at the various diplomatic
missions. Many of the requests are for replacements; others are for new
assignments. Too, there is some indication that personnel in one branch
of the former OSS organization, not
transferred to the State Department, are transferring or attempting to transfer to branches of
the organization now connected with the Department of State.

In view of the forementioned Executive Order and President Truman's letter of September 20, 1945
to Secretary Byrnes on the
subject of OSS, FC has been hesitant to approve requested designations by
SSU until such time as the future
activities of the Unit have been determined.

I believe you will agree that during the interim period of the
organization increases in personnel as well as replacements and
transfers which are not absolutely necessary, should be kept at a
minimum. To send SSU employees to our
European missions at this time—when the work may be terminated within a
matter of weeks—appears to be an unnecessary expenditure of government
funds as well as an imposition on the time and effort of our already
over-occupied offices.

In order that I may discuss the matter with the proper SSU officials, I would appreciate your
advising me whether the requests for State Department designations
should be held pending a decision regarding the future activities of the
SSU—particularly the organization's
relationship with this Department.

Frederick B. Lyon1

* Source: National
Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Records of the
Department of State, Intelligence Files, Bureau of Administration,
1942-51: Lot 79 D 137, Office of Strategic Services, Box 1. No
classification marking.

1 Printed from a copy that bears this
typed signature.

99. Memorandum From the Director of the Strategic Services Unit, Department of War (Magruder) to the Assistant Secretary of War (McCloy)99. Memorandum From the Director of the Strategic Services Unit,
Department of War (Magruder) to the Assistant Secretary of War (McCloy)Source

Washington, November 15,
1945.

SUBJECT

The Strategic Services Unit at the Beginning of November

1. This letter covers developments during the last half of October in the
situation of SSU as described in
previous reports dated 9 and 25 October 1945.1

2. The total personnel strength of SSU
has been reduced from 7,640 to 6,447 in the fortnight from 19 October to
2 November. Of the latter figure more than 2,350 persons are in process of separation, either in this
country, en route here or awaiting transportation from overseas. Details
of SSU deployment are set forth in the
table attached as Exhibit 1.2

3. For details of liquidation of seven OSS operational branches see Exhibit 2. Of these branches,
nuclei of no more than nine persons from the Morale Operations Branch
and three persons from the Special Operations Branch will be transferred
to the Secret Intelligence Branch to process and study information on
foreign developments in clandestine propaganda and sabotage and to
preserve the techniques evolved by OSS
in the past war. The other five branches, viz. Operational Groups
Command, Field Photographic Special Projects, Field Experimental Unit,
and Research & Development, are being liquidated completely. Their
records and reports will be maintained by SSU.

4. The following progress has been made in arranging transfer from SSU rolls of personnel engaged in War
Crimes, Strategic Bombing Survey and Intelligence Photographic
Documentation work. (Initial steps were reported on 25 October.)3

a. The Strategic Bombing Survey personnel has all been transferred to
USSBS.

b. Mr. Justice Jackson has agreed that SSU War Crimes personnel be transferred to another agency
of the War Department for attachment to his office on temporary duty.
When necessary data has been received from Mr. Justice Jackson
discussion will be had with representatives of the Office of the Judge
Advocate General to effect this transfer.

c. G-2, A-2 and ONI have indicated approval of a plan to place the
Intelligence Photographic Documentation Project under the direction of
the Joint Topographic Subcommittee of the JIC of JCS. Under this plan
132 members of the Field Photographic Branch would be transferred out of
SSU and detailed to IPDP. This proposal has already been
submitted to you for approval.

5. The following are the major developments in the missions overseas:

a. Europe-Africa-Near East. In France, MTO, and the Near East, reorientation of activities
continues along the lines indicated in the previous reports. The
missions in Germany and Austria are now concentrating on strategic
intelligence, with an acceleration of clandestine activities in Germany.
SI and X-2 operations will be closely coordinated and under cover.
[20 lines of source text not
declassified]

[2 paragraphs (19 lines of source text) not
declassified]

John Magruder4
Brig. Gen., USA

* Source: Central Intelligence Agency Historical
Files, HS/CSG-579, Job 83-00036, Box 4, Folder 7. Secret; American
Eyes.

1 Documents 96 and 97.

2 Exhibits 1 and 2
are in the Supplement.

3 Not further identified.

4 Printed from a copy that bears this
typed signature.

100. Minutes of the 171st Meeting of the Secretary of State's Staff Committee100. Minutes of the 171st Meeting of the Secretary of State's Staff
CommitteeSource

Washington, November 29, 1945, 9:30 a.m.

PRESENT

The Secretary (presiding)

The Under Secretary

The Counselor

Mr. Benton

Mr. Braden

Mr. Hackworth

Mr. McCormack

Mr. Pasvolsky

Mr. Russell

Mr. Thorp (for M. Clayton)

Mr. Gange

Mr. Lewis

Mr. Rothwell

Absent:

Mr. Clayton

Mr. Dunn

[Here follows discussion of matters unrelated to intelligence.]

Continuance of FBI
Program in Other American Republics (Annex IV to Document
SC-172)

Mr. Braden called the Committee's
attention to Annex IV to document SC-1721
urging that steps be taken to request the continuance of the work of
FBI personnel assigned to our
missions in the other American republics (for previous discussion, see
the Minutes of November 27).2 Mr. Braden pointed out that some of the FBI personnel had been recalled and all would be on their
way home by December 15. This would leave the Government without any
counter espionage or security intelligence in Latin America by the end
of the year, and he said this was gravely impairing our interests. Mr.
Braden said he had discussed
the matter with the Deputy Director of the Budget Bureau on November
28,3 and the latter had informed him that the only
solution would be for the Department to request an allotment from the
President's emergency fund.

The Secretary asked whether there were any deficiency bills bending in
Congress to which an appropriation for this purpose might be attached. Mr. Russell said that there were no such bills. The question was
raised whether the Department of Justice had any funds to continue the
work temporarily. Mr. Russell
said the Department of Justice had agreed to a rescission of its
appropriation for this work in view of the President's statement that he
did not wish the FBI to operate outside
the U.S. In this connection, Mr. Braden said he felt sure the President had not had full
information about the importance of this work when he had made this
decision.

Mr. McCormack agreed that the
importance of the work necessitated some arrangement to permit its
continuance. He said Army operations in the other American republics
probably could not be converted to this type of work. The FBI organization had the advantage of being
a “going concern”. He pointed out that it was very important at the
present time to keep a close watch on German and other foreign activity
in the other American republics.

The Secretary said there seemed to be no solution but to request an
allotment from the President's emergency fund. He suggested that
sufficient funds be requested to permit the continuance of the work
until a new central intelligence organization had been set up. Mr.
Russell agreed that this
should be done but he said it should be recognized that such action
would place the Federal Bureau of Investigation in a good position for
obtaining a permanent place in the new intelligence organization.

Mr. Russell asked how many
employees were involved and how much would be required to continue the
work. Mr. Braden said he thought
there were about 189 employees. He said no estimate had been made of the
funds required, but the opinion was expressed that at least $2,000,000
would be required to continue the work for the next 6 months.

The Committee agreed that it would be desirable to request an allocation
from the President's emergency fund to permit the continuance for at
least the next 6 months of the work of the FBI representatives. It was also suggested that, in the
meantime, consideration should be given to means of continuing the work
for such further time as is necessary, probably by requesting Congress
to appropriate funds. The Secretary said he would discuss the matter
with the President if Messrs. Braden and Russell would prepare an estimate and draft a letter to
the President recommending the allocation.4

* Source: National Archives and
Records Administration, RG 353, Records of Interdepartmental and
Intradepartmental Committees—State Department, Lot File No. 122,
Records of the Secretary's Staff Committee 1944-47. Top Secret. No
drafting information appears on the source text. The meeting was
held in the Secretary's office.

1 See
footnote 6, Document 50.

2 Document 50.

3 No other record of this conversation
has been found.

4 No record has been found of Byrnes' proposed conversation with the President or
of the letter that Braden and
Russell were to
prepare.

101. Memorandum From the Interim Activities Director of the Strategic Services Unit, Department of War (Irwin) to the Assistant Secretary of War (McCloy)101. Memorandum From the Interim Activities Director of the Strategic
Services Unit, Department of War (Irwin) to the Assistant Secretary of War (McCloy)Source

Washington, January 28,
1946.

SUBJECT

Tentative Plan for Disposition of Strategic Services Unit

1. With the establishment of the Central Intelligence Group (CIG), the question of the disposition of
Strategic Services Unit (SSU) arises.
The following are the three most obvious courses to follow:

a. Transfer the activity to G-2,

b. Liquidate the activity,

c. Place appropriate parts of SSU's
resources and activities under control of CIG.

2. a. Retention of SSU under G-2 would probably result in its liquidation
and the loss of personnel and operations suitable and valuable to CIG. Many individuals, either civilians or
military personnel eligible for discharge, are anxious to join a central
agency but are unwilling to serve G-2.
These would probably be lost if transfer to G-2 is made.

b. Actual liquidation of the activity is undesirable since certain
valuable assets will be dispersed, and trained personnel lost to the
serv-ice. However, the continuation of SSU as such is undesirable due to its known character and
its identification with OSS.

c. Transfer of SSU to the CIG would furnish that agency with an
organization in being for intelligence operation. The organization has
certain defects, its operations have exposed much of its personnel to
foreign intelligence agencies and its identification with OSS and its known clandestine activity
would deprive it of cover essential for future activity. While transfer
appears desirable, it must be done in such a manner as to retain assets
without unduly compromising future operations of the intelligence
section of the CIG.

3. The following is recommended:

a. An administrative group, selected from present SSU, be retained with the designation “Strategic Services
Unit” to continue the liquidation of SSU
and whatever remains of OSS under War
Department control.

b. The remainder of SSU be transferred to
operational control of the Director, under whatever designation he may
prescribe, including the buildings, equipment, etc., now under control
of SSU.

c. SSU, and that portion transferred to
the War Department representation in CIG, be kept in the Secretary of War's group in the War
Department, for convenience in administration and for budget
purposes.

S. LeRoy Irwin1
Major General, USA

* Source: Central Intelligence Agency Historical
Files, HS/CSG-1807, Job 83-00036, Box 12, Folder 11. No
classification marking. The source text is a copy transcribed for
the CIA Historian, presumably in the early 1950s.

1 Printed from a copy
that bears this typed signature.

102. Memorandum From the Director of the Strategic Services Unit, Department of War (Magruder) to Secretary of War Patterson102. Memorandum From the Director of the Strategic Services Unit,
Department of War (Magruder) to Secretary of War PattersonSource

Washington, February 4,
1946.

SUBJECT

Request for Determination of the Future Status of SSU

On 17 October 1946 I submitted a memorandum to the Assistant Secretary of
War, Subject: Status of Morale in Strategic Services Unit, stressing the
urgent need for clarification of the status of the SSU if its assets were to be
preserved.1 Since then the liquidation of its
wartime activities has been practically completed. Profitable
intelligence operations have been maintained, but the assets of the
organization continue to be sapped by attrition of high grade personnel,
and its morale lowered at a rate accelerated by continuing obscurity in
the Unit's future. Assets vanish alarmingly despite the generous and
constructive support of the Unit by all officials of the War Department
responsible for its maintenance. Long-range planning and commitments are
not possible under the circumstances.

Since the establishment of the Central Intelligence Authority on 22
January 1946, the disposition of the SSU
with respect to that Authority has remained undecided.

Moreover, other disturbing circumstances have arisen which tend further
to postpone decision. I refer to criticisms from various sources of
certain aspects of SSU tending to raise
doubt as to its value as an entity for use in the Central Intelligence
Group. Some of the criticisms take the cheap and familiar form of
innuendo reflecting on the competence of the personnel and security of
the Unit. Distorted facts and sheer opinions are expressed by
individuals who could not be familiar with the current methods of
operation, assets, or, if given favorable conditions, the potentialities
of the organization. On the other hand, some rational questionings have
been raised as to the propriety of the continuance of certain
activities, such as liaison with foreign intelligence services, and
semi-overt group activities in support of occupational forces.

Both the irresponsible criticism of the organization and the justifiable
queries as to the appropriate nature and scope of its functions are
causing indecision and delay respecting the future employment of SSU. The delay is serious. In the national
interest, immediate and authoritative study should be given to the
problem.

On 15 January 1946, I submitted to Major General S. LeRoy Irwin a
statement of the assets of the SSU as of
that date (Tab A).2 These assets are believed to be verifiable
by an objective survey.

A sound appraisal of these assets by representatives of the members of
the National Intelligence Authority should clarify the situation and
expedite central employment of existing assets of the SSU, their placement elsewhere, or their
orderly liquidation by the War Department.

Recommendations:

That, for the purpose of obtaining an early decision as to the
appropriate disposition of the assets of the SSU, the Secretary of War request the immediate convening
of a committee consisting of representatives of the members of the
National Intelligence Authority to:

a. Obtain at the earliest practicable date an objective analysis of the
functions and assets of the SSU and an
appraisal of their value for employment operationally in the Central
Intelligence Group.

b. To recommend to the National Intelligence Authority specific and
prompt action based upon the committee's findings.

John Magruder3
Brigadier General

* Source: National Archives and Records
Administration, RG 263, Records of the Central Intelligence Agency,
Troy Papers, SSU 1945. Secret. Sent
through Assistant Secretary of War McCloy and Major General S. LeRoy Irwin, the Interim
Director. Handwritten at the top of the source text is: “Magruder
asks for survey.”

1 Not printed. (Central
Intelligence Agency Historical Files, HS/CSG-1400, Item 13, Job
83-00036, Box 10, Folder 4)

2 Not printed. See the
Supplement. Also reproduced in CIA Cold War
Records: The CIA under Harry
Truman, pp. 21-27.

3 Printed from a copy that bears this
typed signature.

103. Memorandum by the Director of the Strategic Services Unit, Department of War (Magruder)103. Memorandum by the Director of the Strategic Services Unit,
Department of War (Magruder)Source

Washington, February 14,
1946.

SUBJECT

Establishment of Clandestine Collection Service for Foreign
Intelligence

1. At the time of the Inter-Departmental agreement on the reorganization
of intelligence it was generally understood that the Central
Intelligence Group would, as one of its major functions, operate a
clandestine service for procurement of intelligence abroad. For reasons
of security this function was not specified in the President's
directive. With this in view, the War Department undertook to prepare
that part of OSS assigned to it
(designated SSU) for future use as the
nucleus of this clandestine service.

2. The War Department considered itself responsible for liquidating the
wartime activities and liabilities of the parent organization, while
maintaining the SSU as a going concern
held available for central intelligence when established. The activities
of the Unit not related to strict intelligence purposes have now been
liquidated. The remaining assets are now fully operational and available
for employment in the central organization.

3. It will not be possible for SSU much
longer to continue effective operations in its present interim status.
Lack of specific directive permitting long-range plans and commitments
has seriously affected its logical development. Personnel has already
begun to melt away. Apart from its scheduled reduction in operational
strength from 9138 to 1967, the attrition has been particularly heavy
among key personnel. Furthermore, from the budget viewpoint, the War
Department cannot continue to justify for any substantial period the
maintenance of a provisional intelligence organization separate from its
established Military Intelligence Division. Unless early disposition is
made of the assets represented by SSU it
will undoubtedly become necessary to effect curtailment if not
liquidation of its remaining personnel and facilities.

4. The National Intelligence Authority has now approved a tentative table
of organization for the Central Intelligence Group. It would appear
inefficient for the three contributing Departments to detail personnel
from their own resources
against the commitments imposed by this table of organization without
first analyzing the extent to which these commitments can be met on
behalf of all three departments by making use of the available assets of
SSU.

5. SSU is at present in a position to
provide complete administrative services for CIG both immediately and for a considerable time in the
future. These services include not only an administrative and executive
staff but such essential facilities as communications, reproduction,
transportation, security-checked personnel, space and other auxiliary
services.

6. In addition SSU at present provides
significant intelligence coverage in many strategic parts of the world.
The present assets of SSU in no way
constitute a complete or adequate world-wide clandestine intelligence
agency, but to the extent that SSU is
the sole operating agency not only in many geographical areas but in
specialized functions it could profitably be employed by the CIG until replaced by, or incorporated
into, a permanent organization.

7. An immediate decision on the status of SSU is important not only to preserve its assets against
disintegration but to permit the War Department and the other
departmental intelligence services to undertake urgent planning. It may
prove desirable to discontinue certain functions of SSU. However, it would be far preferable
that such decisions be made by the authorities who are themselves
responsible for continuing operations in the field of clandestine
intelligence on the basis of experience, and on the basis of the
national rather than departmental requirements.

Recommendations:

1. That the NIA instruct the Director of
Central Intelligence to operate a clandestine intelligence service in
the foreign field and to organize such service as expeditiously as
practicable.

2. That the NIA agree that the assets,
personnel and facilities of the SSU,
less those non-essentials being liquidated by the War Department, be
placed under the operational control of the Director of Central
Intelligence.

3. That the NIA set a target date by
which the Director of Central Intelligence will assume operational
control of the assets provided in paragraph 2 above and present a plan
for administrative action which will enable the assets to be transferred
consistently with the intentions of the Presidential Directive.

John Magruder1
Brigadier General

* Source:
National Archives and Records Administration, RG 263, Records of the
Central Intelligence Agency, Troy Papers, Box 11, Folder 78. Secret.
On the source text the address line is blank. At the top of the
source text is handwritten “CIG
should take over SSU.”

1 Printed from a copy that bears this
typed signature.

104. Central Intelligence Group Directive No. 1104. Central Intelligence Group Directive No. 1Source

Washington, February 19,
1946.

SURVEY OF THE ACTIVITIES OF THE STRATEGIC SERVICES UNIT

Memorandum by the Director of Central Intelligence, with the unanimous
concurrence of the Intelligence Advisory Board

1. a. The President's letter of 20 September 1945, referring to functions
of the Office of Strategic Services which were transferred to the War
Department, stated: “The Secretary of War shall, whenever he deems it
compatible with the national interest, discontinue and wind up all
affairs relating thereto.” At a meeting of intelligence representatives
held in the War Department on 8 February,1 it was generally
agreed that an authoritative group should promptly make a study to
determine which functions and facilities of the Strategic Services Unit
should be preserved for permanent peacetime purposes after the
liquidation of SSU. It was further
agreed that prompt decisions should be reached as to which preserved
functions should be operated by CIG, and
which by departments or existing agencies.

b. The Central Intelligence Group is preparing a separate action for the
purpose of initiating a comprehensive survey of existing facilities for
the collection of foreign intelligence information by clandestine
methods. However, that survey will be a long-range matter requiring the
services of permanent personnel not yet assigned to CIG, whereas the disposition of SSU raises urgent questions which should be
studied immediately. Therefore, an interdepartmental committee should be
organized at once to undertake the study.

2. By unanimous approval of the Director of Central Intelligence and the
Intelligence Advisory Board an ad hoc committee is hereby established,
to consist of five members, one representing the Director of Central
Intelligence and one representing each permanent member of the
Intelligence Advisory Board.2 This committee will promptly make a
detailed study of SSU facilities,
resources and operations, and will recommend:

a. Which resources, facilities and operating functions should be
continued in the national interest after the SSU is liquidated.

b. What disposition should be made of the preserved resources and
facilities, and what assignments should be made of responsibility for
conducting the preserved operating functions.

c. What budgetary arrangements should be made.

The committee will submit a report of findings, conclusions and
recommendations to the Director of Central Intelligence, who will then
prepare suitable recommendations to be submitted to the National
Intelligence Authority after concurrence or comment by the Intelligence
Advisory Board. The Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation will
be invited to sit as a member of the Advisory Board for consideration of
these recommendations.

3. The CIG representative on the
committee will be steering member. The members of the Advisory Board
will have their respective committee members report to the Director of
Central Intelligence for instructions. Stenographic assistance and
office space will be furnished by the War Department, as arranged by
Assistant Chief of Staff, G-2.

* Source: National Archives and Records
Administration, RG 218, Records of the Joint Chiefs of Staff,
Leahy Papers, No.
130. Top Secret.

1 No
record of this meeting has been found.

2 The study group
established by this directive was informally known as the Fortier
Committee after its chairman, Brigadier General Louis J. Fortier of the CIG. (Darling, The Central Intelligence
Agency, pp. 96-98) The committee began its work on February 19.
(Minutes; Central Intelligence Agency Files, Job 83-00036R, Box 1,
Folder 6) The committee issued its report on March 14; Document 105. The February 19 minutes are
in the Supplement.

105. Memorandum From the Fortier Committee to the Director of Central Intelligence (Souers)105. Memorandum From the Fortier Committee to the Director of Central
Intelligence (Souers)Source

Washington, March 14,
1946.

SUBJECT

Report of Survey of Strategic Services Unit under CIG Directive No. 1

I. Introductory:

A. The Committee Directive: Under CIG
Directive No. 1,1 the present Committee
was required:

1. To make a detailed study of SSU
facilities, resources and operations;

2. To recommend:

(a) Which of the resources, facilities and operating functions should be
continued in the national interest after the liquidation of SSU;

(b) What disposition should be made of the preserved resources and
facilities;

(c) What assignments should be made of responsibility for conducting the
preserved operating functions;

(d) What budgetary arrangements should be made.

The Committee has considered that this assignment should be read in the
light of:

1. The President's letter of September 20, 1945, directing the Secretary
of War to liquidate SSU “whenever he
deems it compatible with the national interest;” and

2. The absence of any final, long term, decision respecting this
Government's institutions for the collection of foreign intelligence by
clandestine methods, referred to in the CIG Directive No. 1.

The decision that the SSU as such was to
be liquidated and abolished under War Department aegis the Committee
considered to be irrevocable.

B. The Survey Coverage:

1. On February 21, 1946, the undersigned Committee, comprising specially
designated representatives of the Director of Central Intelligence and
the Intelligence divisions of the State Department, G-2, ONI and
A-2 commenced a survey of the resources, facilities and operational
functions of the Strategic Services Unit in accordance with CIG Directive No. 1 (Tab A).

(a) With Brigadier General Louis J.
Fortier as steering member, the Committee interviewed
Brigadier General John
Magruder, Director of SSU
and SSU staff employees (Tab D).

(b) On February 25, 26 and 27 individual Committee members conducted more
intensive investigations of branches of SSU, as follows:

SI—Captain Thomas Cullen

X-2—Mr. Samuel Klaus

Operational Auxiliaries—Brigadier General Louis J. Fortier

Services Branch—Colonel Roy Boberg

Personnel and Staff Divisions—Colonel S. P. Walker

(c) Following Committee consideration of the reports by the individual
members upon the investigations conducted by them, the Committee
determined to conduct joint investigation of a number of selected
operations and facilities. Accordingly on March 4, 5 and 6 the Committee
conducted a joint investigation of the SI
Office and its branches and of the Reproduction Division and certain
aspects of the Budget and Fiscal Division of the Services Branch (see
Tab E).

(d) The Committee invited Brigadier General Magruder to make such further
statements and produce such additional witnesses as he thought should be
brought before the Committee. Accordingly, in response to the
Committee's invitation, Brig. Gen. Magruder produced thereafter
additional witnesses and submitted certain documents for the committee's
consideration (see Tabs D & E).

(e) Individual members of the Committee consulted with persons in their
respective agencies who have been served by SSU. Expressions of opinion were obtained with respect to
the value of the material disseminated by SSU and the effect of a termination of SSU activities on the operations of the
respective agencies (see Tab E).

2. The Committee desires to note that the survey was limited in its
coverage in the following particulars:

(a) No investigation was made by the Committee of the field stations and
missions of SSU in Europe, Asia and
Africa. In this respect the Committee had to rely on representations
made by Washington staff personnel, on the cursory perusal of some field
reports, and on conversations with a few former field operatives of
OSS.

(b) No detailed examination was conducted of the particular capabilities
or productivity of individual Washington or field personnel;

(c) No exhaustive attempt was made to evaluate on an individual basis the
current production of the staff or the field.

II. Findings.

A. History of SSU: The Strategic Services
Unit is the lineal descend-ant of the Office of the Coordinator of
Information, established by President Roosevelt in 1941 under the direction of Colonel
William J. Donovan. The
primary relevant function of this Office was the coordination and
preparation by experts drawn from various fields of scholarship of
intelligence material significant for the National defense and their
analysis for the use of the President and top Government officials. Soon
thereafter, in close coordination with the British, a clandestine
intelligence operation was begun with headquarters in London. Early
during the war propaganda functions of COI were transferred to the
Office of War Information and the remaining functions and personnel of
COI, under General Donovan, were
placed under the supervision of the Joint Chiefs of Staff in an
organization called the Office of Strategic Services. Thereafter OSS operations were performed strictly
under the directives of the Joint Chiefs of Staff. OSS included a research organization called
Research & Analysis; intelligence services, SI and X-2 (X-2 having been established in 1943 for the
performance of counter intelligence functions); and various special
operations—including sabotage, intelligence activities behind enemy
lines, etc. The only field activity performed by OSS in the United States was, it seems, by the Foreign
Nationalities Branch which
maintained contacts with various foreign groups in this country with a
view to obtaining intelligence of use to the total OSS function.

With the progress of the war much of the OSS activity was shifted to the field and OSS missions were set up close to the
theaters of military operation, leaving general direction to the
headquarters in Washington.

The personnel, like the operations, were characterized by strong military
elements; the Army and Navy supplied a majority of the personnel and a
considerable portion of the equipment and facilities.

Beginning with V-J Day, General Donovan ordered a liquidation of OSS.

OSS was abolished by Executive Order,
dated September 20, 1945, effective October 1, 1945. The Research and
Analysis and Presentation Branches (the latter concerned with
preparation of charts, visual aids and the like) were transferred to the
State Department and the remaining portions transferred, under the name
of Strategic Services Unit, to the War Department. Brig. Gen. John Magruder was appointed by the
Secretary of War to be Director of SSU
with the following instructions: “Subject to the authority of and
policies determined by the Assistant Secretary of War, and such persons
as he may designate, you will continue the program of liquidation of
those activities and personnel so transferred which are no longer
necessary or desirable, and preserve as a unit such of those functions
and facilities as are valuable for permanent peacetime purposes, or
which may be required by Theater Commanders or occupational authorities
to assist in the discharge of their responsibilities.” The Assistant
Secretary of War in a memorandum dated September 26, 1945,2 instructed Gen.
Magruder to the same effect. (See Tab E.)

At the present time the special, para-military operations of OSS have been substantially liquidated or
are in the process of liquidation; the unliquidated functions are those
which relate to or serve primarily the collection, analysis and
dissemination of foreign intelligence.

B. Organization of SSU: A chart of the
present organization of SSU is attached
hereto (Tab B). Individual analyses of the main divisions, based on
joint and several surveys by the Committee members, are attached hereto
(Tab E).

1. Number of Employees: Attached hereto (Tab F) is a breakdown of the
personnel employed by SSU, their
classifications and salaries. It is to be noted that as of March 1,
1946, the operating divisions employ 400 in the field and 260 in
Washington, while the auxiliary and service groups employ 1432
(including a liquidation pool of 358). Attention is called to the use of
unvouchered funds.

2. General Observations:

(a) In general, it may be said that the core of present SSU operations is the field staff, which is
charged with seeking information along lines of possible security
interest to the United States. These operatives, belonging either to the
SI office (originally charged with
seeking “positive” intelligence) or X-2
(originally charged with seeking “counter” intelligence), are divisible
into those attached to the military missions still functioning abroad
(as for example in Germany, [3 lines of source text
not declassified]). The Washington staff is concerned with (1)
directing or evaluating field operations, disseminating the intelligence
obtained among interested Government agencies, and planning directives
and future operations in consultation with interested Government
agencies; and (2) servicing the organization as a whole. The personnel
in the field and in Washington are partly civilian and partly military,
the percentage of the former being constantly on the increase as
military personnel either leave the organization on their discharge from
the military services or become reemployed as civilians.

(b) The Committee has noted that acting under the direction of the
Secretary of War, General Magruder has succeeded in reducing the
personnel employed from about 9,000 to about 2,000 and that he appears
to be engaged in actively liquidating those operations of SSU which could have no permanent peacetime
value to the United States. It is noted, however, that he is
simultaneously attempting to meet the requirements of military
commanders in the field in special areas and special military
contingents of SSU personnel involving
intelligence duties. It is noted also, however, that valuable personnel
who could profitably serve any peacetime authority engaged in analogous
work have probably been leaving the organization for more secure
employment elsewhere.

The loss of the Research and Analysis Branch, formerly in OSS and now in the State Department, has
apparently resulted in creating a gap between the investigating units
SI and X-2 and the primary consumer which also provided the day to
day directives for investigation. Nevertheless the existing units,
though skeleton in form, appear to operate on a day to day basis without
mortal impairment.

3. Field Operations: Detailed tabulation of the distribution of field
personnel of SI and X-2 is shown in an annexed exhibit (Tab C).
The following, however, may be noted:

(a) By an arrangement dating from the earlier days of the OSS, SSU
has no operating representatives in the Western Hemisphere, which is
reserved to the FBI, while the FBI is largely excluded (except for liaison
in Spain, Portugal, France and England) from the rest of the world.

(b) The SI Office is conducting certain
types of clandestine operations in connection with its work in the
military missions in Germany, [8 lines of source text
not declassified].

(c) X-2 has personnel [3
lines of source text not declassified] to some extent
apparently in Germany. In the Far East X-2 does not appear to be as overt as SI. The reasons for this difference do not
appear.

(d) It is to be noted that the field operation is based on the skillful
construction of networks of locally recruited agents, subagents and
informants. To the extent that these agents are paid out of unvouchered
funds or otherwise by SSU, and act under
the control of the SSU representatives,
they must be considered part of the SSU
organization. No information is available here on this subject as a
whole, although there appear to be files in which are kept the names of
these agents and pertinent data concerning them.

4. Washington Staff

(a) SI Office: In the SI office nominally there is a division
between the Processing and Planning Branch and the Operations Branch.
The latter in theory is divided into areas and country desks and deals
directly with the field representatives in communications, transmission
of operational directions and intelligence, and the like. The former is
divided more generally into geographical areas but includes also three
specialized sections—economic, technical and propaganda; the Branch is
concerned with the formulation of general directives, broad syntheses
and the preparation of materials for reports and dissemination to
interested agencies. In practice, however, especially in the area desks,
there is at present a tendency to disregard the distinctions between
processing and operations.

(b) X-2 Branch: The core of X-2 in Washington appears to be its
geographical area desks, directed by the Chief of Intelligence and
Operations working in conjunction with the Chief of the Branch and his
assistant. X-2 maintains its own liaison
section.

While X-2 and SI have theoretical separation, under the direction of
General Magruder attempts are being made to compel a closer affiliation
between the two branches.

(c) Operational Auxiliaries: (described in Tab E). These center, in terms
of importance to SSU operations, in a
communications section which is concerned with handling of ciphers and
indoctrination of staff in their use. Communications between Washington
and the field are either through the Army installations or through the
State Department. A special cipher system is employed for SSU communications. In addition the
Operational Auxiliaries Branch includes some personnel engaged in
research in such subjects as special wireless communication equipment
for clandestine agents, documentation intelligence (largely deriving
from the days when OSS engaged in
placing agents behind enemy lines), and secret inks.

(d) Services Branch: The services organization (described in Tab E) is
the central management unit. It is prepared, the Committee was told, to
handle 3,000 employees. Its chief special operational function, in
addition to the functions
usually performed by a management unit, is the handling of unvouchered
funds and procurement of secure funds for agent operations in the field
and the indoctrination of field men in the use of such funds. This
branch has also had a Reproduction Section, which through special
security provisions was prepared to handle highly confidential printing
and reproduction jobs of superior quality in reasonably small quantity.
The section, for example, has prepared secret documents for
international conversations, maps for the Joint Chiefs of Staff, secret
documents for the State Department, and the like. The unit also contains
a few individuals engaged in research in micro-photography, of use to
clandestine agents in the field, and in special problems of reproduction
arising from the unit's own work.

(e) Personnel: The Personnel Division (described in Tab E—Personnel) has
a security section, apparently geared in cooperation with the staff
officers of the operating branches to recruit and screen in the United
States staff and field personnel.

C. Operating Functions:

1. Absence of Directives: SSU today
operates without any authoritative directive for the procurement of
intelligence. This arises from the fact that OSS directives were concerned solely with the prosecution
of the war efforts against Germany, Italy and Japan. OSS received its directives from the Joint
Chiefs of Staff. The war against Germany, Italy and Japan having ceased
and the Joint Chiefs of Staff having ceased to issue directives to
SSU, the organization has operated
solely in accordance with instructions of the Secretary of War to
preserve the intelligence elements of permanent value until the
formulation of an authoritative final policy with respect to the
procurement of foreign intelligence. Thus there are, strictly speaking,
no de jure operating functions in SSU at
all.

2. De Facto Functions: Nevertheless since VE Day, and definitely since VJ
Day, the main de facto operations of SSU
have been concerned with:

(a) Planning for long term foreign clandestine intelligence operations by
the United States;

(b) Obtaining information in the field of an investigational character,
as requested by military commanders in military zones of occupation,
such as information with respect to the activities in the Russian
zones;

(c) Assisting the diplomatic missions in obtaining factual information
from police and intelligence sources, such as is involved in visa and
passport applications;

(d) The continued maintenance of liaison with intelligence authorities of
friendly and neutral countries with which the OSS representatives had maintained liaison during the
war;

(e) The transmission of such information, of a more or less secret
character, as would appear to be of interest to Washington agencies,
such as the activities of the Russians in their own zones and in other
countries, and activities of local intelligence agencies and
developments of a political and technical nature in countries to which
SSU representatives have access;

(f) The residual problems of the Axis defeat, the examination of captured
documents made available to SSU, the
interrogation of captured enemy personnel to the extent permitted by
military authorities, and miscellaneous assistance to the military
commanders in the areas of military occupation; as well as dealing with
aspects of the repatriation of Axis agents, enemy assets in neutral
countries and the like.

3. Operational Distinctions between SI and
X-2:

(a) The distinction between the activities of SI and X-2 has to a
considerable extent been broken down, first with the exclusion of SI representatives from certain areas, such
as the Iberian Peninsula, and to some extent Germany; secondly; with the
lack of specific allocation of functions between SI and X-2 for present
problems. In consequence the older distinction between “positive” and
“counter” intelligence has broken down.

(b) X-2: X-2 representatives are operating under an X-2 directive to obtain information
concerning (1) the intelligence organizations of the countries in which
they are stationed; (2) the activities of foreign intelligence
organizations in those countries; and they are required to assist the
State Department missions in obtaining facts to enable the missions to
pass upon applications for visas and passports, as well as in such
special assignments of a factual character which the missions may give
to X-2 representatives. To some extent
X-2 still “vets;” that is, checks
upon the security as disclosed by files of persons to be employed by
SSU openly or as agents.

(c) SI: SI
appears to be engaged specifically in investigations of a technical and
political character. The technical work includes investigations into the
atomic energy problem in cooperation with the Manhattan District. The
Committee, however, has made no attempt to evaluate this work or to
consult with the Manhattan District with respect to it.

(d) It is quite clear to the Committee that much of the distribution of
tasks between SI and X-2 is casual and fortuitous depending on
the contacts made by the field representatives rather than upon a clear
division of authority. It is also clear that General Magruder, in view
of the lessening distinction between the two branches, is attempting to
fuse them together, at least in Washington.

D. Resources and Facilities: From a housekeeping standpoint, the
Committee has been informed and believes that SSU has equipment sufficient to handle up to 3,000
employees. Unnecessary equipment and facilities such as those used in the other operations
of OSS which have been abolished, is
being disposed of, we were told. The chief assets of SSU are, therefore, its registries and
files, and a small amount of special equipment which may be useful for
future clandestine operations.

1. Files: The intelligence files of SSU
naturally relate mainly to the Axis problem. They include carded
information on individuals and organizations (deriving from British and
Allied sources and from X-2 experience);
studies and reports made by SI and X-2 personnel; cables and other
communications of information; lists of names of foreign agents and
suspects in the subversive field in foreign countries, and the like.
Studies have also been made, and are being made, of such current
problems as Soviet infiltration and regional political activities. The
operational files include rosters of former employees of OSS here and
abroad, with personnel and biographical data that may be useful for
future recruitment and investigation.

While the Committee was not authorized by CIG Directive No. 1 to conduct an examination into the
Research and Analysis and Presentation Branches of OSS transferred to the State Department,
the Committee deems it desirable to note that the files of those
branches bear an important relation to the usefulness and value of the
files of SSU. This fact arises from two
causes: (1) During the existence of OSS,
R&A was closely geared to the secret intelligence branches as their
chief customer and their chief guide in the selection and pursuit of
secret intelligence targets and the evaluation of secret intelligence
information; the total of OSS
information in this respect is, therefore, the sum of the files of
SSU and of the files of R&A, at
least as of October 1, 1945, when the two organizations were separated;
(2) A working arrangement exists, the Committee has been informed,
between the SI and R&A by which the
files of R&A up to October 1, 1945, are available to SI; indeed interchange of accession
materials and to some extent mutual consultation continue between SSU and R&A personnel.

The Committee notes further that files of other branches, now dissolved,
of OSS including especially personnel
rosters and reports on experience in clandestine operations are
important and should be considered as among the valuable assets of
SSU.

2. Equipment: The laboratory equipment of the Reproduction Branch (see
Tab E—Services), it is understood, has been transferred to the State
Department. Should this transfer be reconsidered, the Committee notes
that the plant is apparently of unusual value, and well-suited for
exploitation by any organization characterized by a high degree of
security in its operations and its literary production, at least from
external appearance and the assurance of its directors.

The small laboratory facilities and intelligence collections of the Cover
and Documentation Section (see Tab E—Operational Auxiliaries Branch) are likewise of considerable
intelligence value, and particularly suited to any organization
concerned with future clandestine intelligence operations.

The remaining equipment, such as vehicles and the like, are easily the
subject of ordinary Government procedures of transfer and
liquidation.

E. Evaluation of SSU: Individual members
of the Committee have obtained oral or written statements from
representatives of agencies which are serving as customers for the
SSU production. (See Tab E.) The
agencies consulted were the State Department, particularly the former
R&A Branch of OSS, and the Economic
Security Division, G-2, A-2 and ONI. It appears quite clear from these
evaluations that SSU has been producing
intelligence materials of definite value to sections in the agencies
mentioned and that any cessation in the gathering and dissemination of
such intelligence would definitely impair the work of the customer
agencies. It may be pointed out, however, that (1) in some agencies,
such as R&A in the State Department, an impairment would be suffered
also by the “going underground” of SSU
since much of the value of SSU is said
to lie in the close personal interchanges between individuals in both
agencies; (2) much of the product of SSU
is not obtained clandestinely at the present time and might well be
obtained by other agencies working overtly should SSU “go underground”—as, for example, the
interviewing of political figures, the collection of newspaper clippings
and like services not now being performed for various reasons by
diplomatic missions or other U.S. representatives abroad; (3) the
product of SSU has been diminishing in
quantity in many areas and in any event is of variable quality and would
stand considerable improvement.

F. Security of Personnel: The Committee has been assured by various
supervisory officials of SSU and
particularly by the Chief of the Security Section that the loyalty of
the present SSU staff is on the whole
unquestioned. However, there are several qualifications to this
conclusion:

1. Personnel originally recruited by OSS
was not subjected to any rigorous personnel security investigation; some
of this personnel is still in SSU.

2. Some of the personnel now in the R&A Branch (transferred to the
State Department), which maintains close liaison in various ways with
the personnel of SSU and is the chief
customer of SSU intelligence
procurement, has definitely been questioned as to bias in security
investigations already conducted.

3. Security checks within OSS were first
begun some time after the formation of the original organization; but
clearances were made in many instances on the basis of checks by other
organizations of the Government, such as the Civil Service Commission,
and with respect to the thoroughness of such investigations by third party organizations the
Chief of the Security Section reserves his own judgment.

4. The personnel policies of SSU, being
directed toward the procurement of specialists and experts in specific
German, Italian, and Japanese problems, are necessarily fundamentally
different from the policies of any future organization for clandestine
intelligence directed toward different ideological targets.

It follows therefore that the personnel of any new organization built out
of SSU elements should be selected on a
case by case basis, with reexamination, in the light of new formulations
of security policies, of each employee.

III. Conclusions and Comments.

A. The Committee's Assumptions. In performing the mission outlined in
CIG Directive No. 1, the Committee
found it necessary to proceed from certain assumptions:

1. Three possibilities were presented as alternative recommendations with
regard to the distribution of the essential operating functions and the
usable resources and facilities of SSU:

(a) These could be transferred to the Central Intelligence Group as a
going concern to form the nucleus of permanent future CIG operations (as envisaged by paragraph 3
of the President's letter of January 22, 1946);3

(b) They could be offered in whole or in part for distribution among
existing intelligence authorities to be continued so far as convenient
and possible in the national interest;

(c) They could be completely terminated, all personnel being recalled and
dismissed, permitting the CIG and other
interested agencies to make individual arrangements for the recruitment
of likely personnel and providing for the distribution of files and
equipment among interested government agencies.

These possibilities permitted such practical alternatives as the
abolition of SI, the transfer of X-2 to the State Department, transfer of
specialized equipment to Governmental research laboratories, etc.

2. In determining which of these solutions should be recommended the
Committee was impressed by several paramount considerations:

(a) There is immediate need for the continued maintenance of foreign
intelligence coverage throughout the world and for the implementation of
clandestine and semi-clandestine operations in the areas hitherto
covered by SSU. The national interest in
an emergency sense rather than
in ideal long term conditions seemed more determinative to the
Committee.

(b) No other intelligence authority has been established with appropriate
directions to perform throughout the world the functions of the
character of those performed by SSU and
there is no other operating unit presently directly available to the
Director of Central Intelligence for the collection, evaluation and
dissemination of clandestine intelligence, nor has any long term
decision on policy and operations been made by the National Intelligence
Authority.

(c) The present SSU organization is
geared to perform a minimum job in this field; it has plans and
personnel with experience in the area and in the subject matter and it
is a going concern, equipped with auxiliary services.

B. Conclusions:

1. The Committee, concerned with SSU
alone and what the Committee conceives to be the national interest and
the preservation of existing organization and facilities for tapping
foreign intelligence systems, is therefore led to the conclusion that
the present SSU organization provides a
going concern for operations in this field. The problems facing this
country are of an emergency nature. The CIG has no alternative organization now in the most
important field of necessary operation. The Committee freely concedes
that the organization has defects and deficiencies and its continuance
will require administrative decisions with respect to jurisdictional
demarcations of other Governmental agencies concerned with aspects of
foreign intelligence. On balance, therefore, the Committee has concluded
that the elements of value to the Government at the present time
outweigh deficiencies.

2. Until, therefore, a long term plan is evolved the Committee believes
the present SSU organization should be
placed under CIG and properly and
closely supervised, pruned and rebuilt, should function under specific
directives in selected and clearly defined fields of vital interest to
the United States in which clandestine operations and planning for
clandestine operations are deemed necessary.

3. The Committee is aware that other intelligence gathering agencies of
the Government with contacts in the foreign field exist—the Foreign
Service, the Military, Naval and Air Attache services and particularly
FBI. It does not believe, however,
that it is for the Committee to determine what extensions to the present
functions of these agencies should be recommended especially since the
Committee has not undertaken or been authorized to survey any of these
intelligence agencies.

C. Jurisdictional Conflicts: The Committee is aware, however, of the
possibility of some jurisdictional inconsistencies and conflicts. With
respect to those activities which FBI
has been reportedly performing for the diplomatic missions in the
Western Hemisphere and X-2 has been performing in the Eastern
Hemisphere, it is desirable that an early arrangement be made between
the Secretary of State, the Department of Justice (and the Director of
the FBI) and the Director of CIG, reconsidering the division now
existing on a geographic basis of analogous functions between the two
organizations. The subject is of importance to CIG in the clandestine problem since attachment to
diplomatic missions is claimed to provide a secure channel of
communications and protection for files as well as diplomatic immunity
to key operators.

2. A clear demarcation in the field between the activities of the
auxiliary mission members—such as the activities of the military
services—and SSU is needed; but the Committee concludes that a closer
integration of directives, guidance and coordination of SSU in
Washington and in the field are of greater importance for the success of
the SSU effort.

3. The Committee believes that further consideration should be given to a
plan which will permit the special development of purely clandestine
intelligence operations under the CIG in
close coordination with the total needs of CIG for foreign intelligence by whatever means obtained,
leaving more overt United States Governmental intelligence collection
activities to other agencies prepared and authorized to act in the field
with a minimum of embarrassment to the United States.

D. Immediate Directives: The directives for immediate operations to the
present SSU group, under CIG, should, based on a quick canvass
overall of needs for information from sources not otherwise available,
concentrate on:

1. Current activities of the Soviet Union and its satellites.

2. The preparation of plans for long term penetration by various devices
of the key institutions of the Soviet Union and its satellites for
information of a security nature and aid to possible military operations
of the United States.

3. The observation and reporting of Soviet activities in other countries,
through liaison with other intelligence agencies and the like.

4. The preparation of plans, and inauguration of operations, for sleeper
intelligence networks in the period following the removal of American
military intelligence authorities from Germany and Japan, with specific
interest in resurgence of German and Japanese aggression and violation
of American controls.

E. Liquidation Procedure: The Committee believes that the SSU liquidation should continue
substantially as proposed by General Magruder in his draft letter for
the signature of the Secretary of War.4 However, the Director
of Central Intelligence should take over the responsibility and complete
authority for the direction of the liquidation, the transfer of such personnel and facilities
to the Central Intelligence Group as he desires and the terms upon which
new employment shall be provided.

F. Budgetary: The Committee is aware that the assumption by CIG of operational functions will require
that at an early stage CIG undertake the
duty of preparing the budgets, seeking funds and defending budgetary
requests before the Bureau of the Budget and committees of Congress. The
Committee does not believe that in the long run CIG can or should rely solely on other departments in such
matters. Nevertheless, the Committee believes that the War Department
should continue to provide the funds necessary both for the SSU liquidation and for the current
operations to be carried on, until such time as CIG is in a position to pre-sent and defend a cohesive
program under established procedures and as a going concern. The
Committee is led to this conclusion chiefly by three considerations:

1. Practically speaking, it would be difficult to separate the
liquidation financing from the current operation financing during the
period of liquidation of SSU; since the
War Department has already allocated funds for this purpose the
Committee believes these funds should be so spent.

2. The current operations to be carried on beyond the fiscal year are so
akin to proper continuing War Department functions that it is believed
that the War Department should ask for and make available to CIG the
funds proposed by SSU to War Department
for the fiscal year 1947.

3. It is of great importance that so far as it is possible under the law
the amount of governmental expenditures for secret intelligence and the
nature of the items of expenditures should be concealed. The War
Department Budget is especially suited for this purpose.

The Committee is recommending, therefore, that by appropriate
arrangements between the Director of Central Intelligence and the
Secretary of War the War Department's handling of all budget figures,
supporting data and breakdown of items and expenditures be under
conditions of secrecy and in accordance with the desires of the Director
of Central Intelligence. A budget for SSU has already been prepared and accepted by the budgetary
authorities of the War Department for the fiscal year 1947. The
Committee concludes that this budget should for the time being be
adopted (see Tab E).

G. Internal Reorganization: Internally the SSU organization should be reorganized with a view to
redistribution of field personnel for the accomplishment of the above
mentioned missions, the pruning of administrative personnel in
Washington, and the closer coordination of the research and other
activities of the Government with the SSU organization through CIG. The Committee emphasizes the need for security both as
to the existence of the CIG operation
and to its activities.

For this purpose, the Director of CIG
should appoint his own staff for change-over and determination of
liquidation items and procedures, to work closely with General Magruder
and his office.

The Committee emphasizes the necessity for removing all personnel of
CIG from Civil Service control
(substituting, however, at least equivalent protections) and recommends
that procedural problems in effecting such a decision should be further
explored with appropriate authorities. The problem of financing,
transfer of budget allocations and the like should also be considered
with special emphasis on operating completely on unvouchered funds with
substantially, however, the same internal control as that provided by
the unvouchered funds arrangement of SSU.

The security functions within the new unit should be emphasized with a
reorientation in terms of the new problems facing the CIG and personnel chosen for transfer to
CIG should be hired on an individual
basis with de novo security checks in each case.

IV. Recommendations.

The Committee recommends that:

1. The Secretary of War turn over the liquidation and further disposition
of the resources, facilities, operating functions and personnel of SSU
to the Director of Central Intelligence, and for this purpose the
Secretary of War be requested to communicate to the Director of SSU an
instruction substantially in the form of Exhibit A.5

2. The Director of SSU continue the
liquidation of SSU as speedily as
possible under the supervision of the Director of Central
Intelligence.

3. The Director of Central Intelligence designate one or more assist-ants
(a) to effect, in consultation with the Director of SSU, an orderly liquidation coordinated
with further CIG operations, and (b) to
incorporate functions, personnel, resources and facilities as a branch
of CIG to execute such directives as the
Director of CIG with appropriate
approval may issue. These assistants should include:

(a) A deputy for the management of the staff and field operations;

(b) A security and personnel chief;

(c) A planning chief; and

(d) An operations chief.

None of these assistants should be drawn from the personnel of SSU but they should utilize existing SSU staff to the extent deemed advisable
and should coordinate their activities with the policy and directives of
NIA and CIG.

4. The Director of CIG issue operating
directives to the working organization along the lines and in the order
of priority indicated in paragraph 4 (d) of the “Conclusions and Comments” section above
in this report.

5. With respect to budgetary implementation, the War Department continue
to assume full budgetary responsibility for the liquidation of SSU and
the current operations herein recommended as follows:

(a) Out of War Department funds, as already agreed between the Director
of SSU and the War Department, to the
end of the fiscal year 1946.

(b) Obtaining appropriations in the name of the War Department for the
fiscal year 1947 in line with the budget recommendations previously
submitted by SSU for that fiscal year
and accepted by the budget authorities of the War Department.

(c) Keeping secret, as far as possible under the law, the existence,
amounts and nature of the items of requests, appropriations and
expend-itures, all handling thereof and consultation thereon being in
accordance with the desires of the Director of Central Intelligence.

6. The Director of CIG make appropriate
Civil Service and internal budgetary arrangements to invest the
personnel and operations of the new organization with the maximum of
security, secrecy and control;

7. That all action taken hereunder be secret so far as permissible.

Louis J. Fortier
Colonel, FA Representing CIG
Samuel Klaus
Representing Dept. of State
S. P. Walker
Colonel, GSC
Representing G-2, WD
Thomas F. Cullen
Capt., USNR Representing ONI
R. H. Boberg
Colonel, AAC Representing A-2

* Source: Central
Intelligence Agency Historical Files, HS/CSG-1808, Job 83-00036, Box
12, Folder 11. Top Secret. The source text is undated; the date used
is from Darling, The Central Intelligence Agency, p. 448, note 50.
The report contains references to Tabs A-F, none of which was found
with the source text.

1 Document 104.

2 Document 95.

3 Document 71.

4 Document 95.

5 Probably the attachment designated as “Exhibit A.”
See the Supplement.

106. National Intelligence Directive No. 4106. National Intelligence Directive No. 4Source

Washington, April 2,
1946.

POLICY ON LIQUIDATION OF THE STRATEGIC SERVICES UNIT

REFERENCES

a. The Executive Order of 20 September 1945, subject: “Termination
of the Office of Strategic Services and Disposition of Its
Functions”

b. C.I.G. Directive No. 11

Pursuant to paragraph 1 of the letter from the President dated 22 January
1946 which designated this Authority as responsible for planning,
developing and coordinating the Federal foreign intelligence activities
so as to assure the most effective accomplishment of the intelligence
mission related to the national security,2 the following policies
and procedures relating to the liquidation of the Strategic Services
Unit (SSU) are announced:

1. The national interest demands that the complete liquidation of SSU shall not be accomplished until it is
determined which of its functions and activities are required for the
permanent Federal foreign intelligence program, and should therefore be
transferred to the Central Intelligence Group or other agencies in order
that its useful assets may not be lost. Such determination and transfers
shall be made and the liquidation of the remainder of SSU shall be completed as promptly as
possible and prior to 1 July 1947. The Director of Central Intelligence
shall issue the necessary directives to effect the liquidation. He will
make recommendations to this Authority as to the intelligence activities
permanently required in the peace-time effort.

2. During the period of liquidation the SSU should be administered and operated so as to
service,3 to the extent practicable, the intelligence
agencies subject to our coordination. The Director of Central
Intelligence shall issue the necessary directives to the Director of
SSU required to accomplish this
mission. In addition, the Director of SSU will make available to the Director of Central
Intelligence, upon his request, any facilities and services of SSU which may be useful in the performance of an authorized
function of the Central Intelligence Group.

3. The Director of Central Intelligence will be responsible for
determining which funds, personnel and facilities of SSU are required for the performance of an
authorized function of the Central Intelligence Group. Such funds,
personnel and facilities of SSU will
then be transferred to an appropriate War Department unit. The Director
of Central Intelligence will be responsible for making the necessary
administrative arrangements and for issuing the necessary directives to
the Director of SSU.

4. The War Department will take the necessary budgetary action to carry
out this program.

5. The War Department shall retain the right to determine what portion of
War Department funds, personnel and facilities can be made available to
SSU by the War Department.

* Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 218,
Records of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, Leahy Papers, No. 132.
Confidential. The draft version of the directive was discussed at
the IAB meeting on March 26 (see
Document 144) and at the NIA meeting on April 2 (see Document 145).

1 Document 105.

2 Document 71.

3 At the NIA meeting on April 2, Secretary of War Patterson
suggested at this point the insertion of the phrase “within your
capabilities.” The NIA approved, but
the language apparently was subsequently modified to read “to the
extent practicable.” See Document
145.

107. Memorandum From Acting Secretary of War Petersen to the Director of the Strategic Services Unit, Department of War (Quinn)107. Memorandum From Acting Secretary of War Petersen to the Director of
the Strategic Services Unit, Department of War (Quinn)Source

Washington, April 3,
1946.

Effective immediately, you are directed to continue the liquidation of
the Strategic Services Unit (SSU) as
ordered in paragraph 3 of the Executive Order dated 20 September 1945,
subject: “Termination of the Office of Strategic Services and
Disposition of Its Functions.” The liquidation will be completed not
later than 30 June 1947.

The liquidation of SSU will be
coordinated with the development of the permanent peace-time
intelligence program. You will carry out the liquidation in accordance
with instructions of the Director of Central Intelligence or his
designated representative. The Director or his representative will deal
directly with you. He will have such staff as he requires working with
SSU.

During the period of liquidation you will administer and operate the
SSU so as to service, within your
capabilities, the intelligence agencies subject to coordination by the
National Intelligence Authority in accordance with directives provided
by the Director of Central Intelligence or his designated
representative. In addition, you will make available, within your
capabilities, to the Director of Central Intelligence, upon his request,
any facilities and services of SSU which
may be useful in the performance of an authorized function of the
Central Intelligence Group.

Previous War Department instructions relating to this problem are amended
accordingly.

Howard C. Petersen1

* Source: National
Archives and Records Administration, RG 218, Records of the Joint
Chiefs of Staff, Leahy
Papers, No. 130. Confidential. The version printed was distributed
as Enclosure A to CIG Directive No.
6 of April 8. See the Supplement. Colonel William W. Quinn had just
succeeded Magruder as Director of the SSU. (SSU General
Orders No. 11, April 4; Central Intelligence Agency Historical
Files, HS/HC-601, Job 83-00036, Box 4, Folder 9) See the
Supplement.

1 Printed from a copy that indicates
Petersen signed the
original.

108. Memorandum From the Director of Central Intelligence (Souers) to the Director of the Strategic Services Unit, Department of War (Quinn)108. Memorandum From the Director of Central Intelligence (Souers) to the
Director of the Strategic Services Unit, Department of War (Quinn)Source

Washington, April 4,
1946.

SUBJECT

Initial Directive

REFERENCE

N.I.A. Directive No. 41

Pursuant to the provisions of N.I.A. Directive No. 4, dated 2 April 1946,
it is hereby directed that you administer and operate the Strategic
Services Unit, War Department, in accordance with the initial policies
set forth herein:

1. Operations.

a. Until otherwise directed, you will continue such operations, serv-ices
and liaisons considered absolutely essential to

(1) United States Armies abroad,

(2) The United States sections of Allied Control Commissions,

(3) Diplomatic missions,

(4) Departmental agencies in the United States now being served.

b. You will perform such collecting missions, distribution, and other
intelligence services as may be ordered from time to time by my
representative.

c. Nothing contained in sub-paragraph 1-a will be construed as an
authority for any expansion of the functions and facilities now
operating, nor will additional personnel be assigned to duty outside the
continental limits of the United States without the approval of my
senior representative.

2. Administration.

a. You will continue the orderly liquidation of the Strategic Services
Unit.

b. You will furnish the administrative support to Operations indicated in
paragraph 1.

c. You will furnish such administrative support to the Central
Intelligence Group as may be called for by my representative.

d. You will provide the necessary administrative facilities to effect the
transition of personnel, funds, and communications, records, services
and facilities, with the necessary means of maintenance, from SSU to an appropriate group in the War
Department or to other appropriate agencies, as subsequently
determined.

3. Command Liaison.

Colonel Louis J. Fortier,
USA, Assistant Director and Acting Chief of Operational Services,
C.I.G., is designated as my senior representative. Further directives
and orders will be issued to you by me or by my senior representative.
You will keep my senior representative informed of the progress of the
mission outlined herein. Captain Thomas F. Cullen, USNR, will be his
deputy.

Sidney W. Souers2

* Source:
National Archives and Records Administration, RG 218, Records of the
Joint Chiefs of Staff, Leahy Papers, No. 130. Top Secret. The version
printed was distributed as Enclosure B to CIG Directive No. 6, April 8. See the
Supplement.

1 Document 106.

2 Printed from a
copy that indicates Souers signed the original.

109. Memorandum From the Director of Central Intelligence (Souers) to President Truman109. Memorandum From the Director of Central Intelligence (Souers) to President TrumanSource

Washington, April 17,
1946.

It has come to my attention that a three million dollar item in the
Federal Bureau of Investigation appropriation for the coming year has
been eliminated because the Congressional Committee believed that it did
not meet with your desire that the Federal Bureau of Investigation
[not?] engage in activities beyond the continental limits.

It is of the utmost urgency that the Federal Bureau of Investigation be
permitted to continue its security functions whose ramifications extend
into foreign areas. At the present time the Federal Bureau of
Investigation has representatives in the countries of the Western
Hemisphere, in London, Paris, Rome, Manila, Tokyo, and in the American
Zone in Germany.

The security mission which it performs may be illustrated by the Canadian
investigation in Ottawa which reaches into the United States as well as
England. They are engaged in other investigations which reach from South
American countries into Europe. It is difficult for them to begin these
matters at the continental borders but essential that they should
initiate their investigations at the sources from which the activities
emanate.

Approval is requested for the continuance of this function.

Respectfully submitted,

Sidney W. Souers1

* Source: Central Intelligence Agency
Historical Files, HS/CSG-2227, Job 83-00739R, Box 2, Folder 3. No
classification marking.

1 Printed from a
copy that bears this typed signature.

110. Letter From the Director of Central Intelligence (Souers) to the Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation (Hoover)110. Letter From the Director of Central Intelligence (Souers) to the Director of the Federal Bureau
of Investigation (Hoover)Source

Washington, April 19,
1946.

Dear Mr. Hoover: With reference to your letter of April 161 concerning your Special
Intelligence Service in the Western Hemisphere, I have been informed at
the White House that the President has passed the word to the
Congressional committee that it is his desire that this activity be
continued by you. I have also been informed by members of the
Appropriations Sub-Committee that the item covering these activities
will be inserted in your Appropriations Act in an appropriate
manner.

This should clear up the confusion which developed.

With all good wishes,

Sincerely,

Sidney W. Souers2

* Source: Central Intelligence Agency Historical
Files, HS/CSG-2227, Job 83-00739R, Box 2, Folder 3. Secret;
Personal.

1 Not found.

2 Printed from a
copy that bears this typed signature.

111. Memorandum From the Assistant Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation (Ladd) to the Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation (Hoover)111. Memorandum From the Assistant Director of the Federal Bureau of
Investigation (Ladd)
to the Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation (Hoover)Source

Washington, May 14,
1946.

SUBJECT

National Intelligence Authority

I attended another meeting of the Central Intelligence Group of the
National Intelligence Authority on the afternoon of May 14, 1946. On
this occasion, as I advised you in my memorandum of May 13, 1946,1 a
preliminary draft was drawn up
of an interim agreement for the handling of the intelligence coverage
for the world on an interim basis. In this directive as presently drawn,
it is recommended that those activities of SSU in Central Europe, but not the Balkans, be transferred
in toto to G-2 of the Theater Command for
the use of the military government.

It is further provided that G-2 will cover
world-wide intelligence on an interim basis, this to be decreased and
turned over to the FBI at such time as
the FBI is ready to assume world-wide
intelligence coverage.

It is provided that ONI shall have
world-wide coverage for the purpose of obtaining naval intelligence
material.

It is provided that G-2 have world-wide
coverage for obtaining military intelligence.

It is proposed that the FBI continue in
the Western Hemisphere for the fiscal year 1948 as at present, covering
economic, financial, political, and subversive matters, and that it
expand its operations to world-wide coverage at the earliest practical
date, and that a new Delimitation Agreement be drawn up between ONI, G-2,
and the FBI to be concurred in by the
Director of the National Intelligence Authority, delimiting and removing
G-2 from all except the military
intelligence field at such time as the FBI is able to assume jurisdiction in any given area.

It is also provided that the intelligence activities be coordinated by a
head to be designated by the Director of the National Intelligence
Authority which is to be concurred in by the Directors of the FBI, G-2,
and ONI, and the head of Foreign
Correlation of the State Department (this would be Fred Lyon), that this head when appointed
should be assisted by a subcommittee on a permanent basis representing
G-2, ONI, the head of Foreign Correlation of the State
Department (Fred Lyon), and an
Assistant Director of the FBI.2

A further meeting of the Central Intelligence Group is planned for 3:30
PM, Wednesday, May 15, 1946, for the purpose of going over the final
draft of this proposal. It is pointed out in this proposal that the
reason for the urgency is the fact that the various agencies will have
to prepare in the immediate future their budget requests for 1948. It is
also set forth in this directive that the activities of SSU shall be
completely liquidated throughout the world; including their Washington,
D.C., staff, at the earliest practicable date, within 90 days if
possible, and that the files of X-2 shall
be turned over to the nearest American Consulate inasmuch as the State
Department advises they are valuable for reference purposes in granting
visas. The files in Washington are to be turned over to the Central Intelligence Group for such
disposal as the Group will deem necessary after a study of these
records.

As a matter of interest, Colonel Cunningham stated at this meeting that
on the Monday following the newspaper article by Stuart Alsop relative
to the directive liquidating SSU and recommending the FBI for world-wide coverage, Jimmy Murphy
of SSU was fired. The reason for this
was that it had been learned that he had arranged for a subordinate
official of SSU to plant the story with
Alsop in order that that article might be written.

There is no use providing for FBI to take
over or assume world-wide intelligence coverage for we are not going to
do it. The most I will agree to now is to stay in the Western Hem. for 1
year. I am more & more certain that this is a project we must get
out of. The trouble we had in Germany; Japan; & refusal of Souers to
supply us with daily Int.[elligence] Survey; & Inglis protest re.
Amer. Mag. article based on an agreement entered into with British
unbeknowing to us—all tend to show what a headache we would have. We
would be carrying most of the work with none of the full authority to
get it done properly.3

* Source:
National Archives and Records Administration, RG 263, Records of the
Central Intelligence Agency, Troy Papers, FBI Documents. No classification marking.

1 Neither this memorandum nor the draft
“interim agreement” subsequently mentioned have been found.

2 At this point there is a marginal note in
Hoover's handwriting asking “What is to be the purpose of this?” and
suggesting that “just another position” or “more ‘brass’” was being
created. Hoover added that he thought Souers was supposed to be in
charge.

3 The last paragraph was
handwritten by Hoover.

112. Memorandum From the Director of the Office of Controls (Lyon) to the Chief of the Division of Foreign Activity Correlation (Neal)112. Memorandum From the Director of the Office of Controls (Lyon) to the Chief of the
Division of Foreign Activity Correlation (Neal)Source

Washington, July 1,
1946.

Jack:

I met with General Vandenberg1 the
afternoon of June 28. During the conversation the subject of cover for
SSU came up.

The General told me he was the first to recognize the dangers inherent in
any system of State Department cover. He said, however, that in his
opinion there would be several cases where it would be practically
imperative to have such cover. He told me he would see to it that the
requests for cover were
kept to a minimum. He suggested that he be permitted to make all such
requests directly to me rather than through any other channel in the
Department. I explained to him the difficulties we had encountered
within the Department in obtaining agreement on cover. He seemed to be
aware of these complications and obstacles.

He told me he had very concise ideas concerning the organization that
would be required to handle the CIG
work. His plans call for the complete liquidation of OSS but he intends to use certain of the
talent developed by them during the war. At the moment, it is
contemplated that SSU will be operated
by CIG. In other words, this is a
departure from the original plans for CIG, i.e., they are to become an operating as well as a
coordinating agency. Of particular interest was his statement to me that
he intended to use to a greater extent the Office of Controls and FC in particular, rather than go through
some of the other channels that had been established by Colonel
McCormack.

I give you the above for your information and for discussion with me when
we get together after the leave period.

* Source: National
Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Records of the
Department of State, Intelligence Files, Bureau of Administration,
1942-51: Lot 79 D 137, Folder SSU, Box 2. Secret.

1  Vandenberg
became Director of Central Intelligence June 10.

113. Letter From the Director of Central Intelligence (Vandenberg) to the Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation (Hoover)113. Letter From the Director of Central Intelligence (Vandenberg) to the
Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation (Hoover)Source

Washington, July 3,
1946.

Dear Mr. Hoover: I deeply appreciate your cooperation in expressing
approval of my proposed N.I.A. Directive in your letter of 2 July.1

With reference to your comments on the statement contained in the
Discussion to N.I.A. 4, you will note that it was amended to read as
follows:

“This does not, of course, preclude the use of specialized departmental
personnel under rigid central control as mutually agreed to by the
Director of Central Intelligence and authorized departmental
officials.”

This amended version was intended to clarify the meaning of the sentence
in view of the point which you raised your letter of 25 June.2 It is my intention to employ in the
operation in question the best qualified personnel from all possible
sources. It is therefore entirely conceivable that I would like to use
on specific missions specially qualified personnel of Government
departments other than State, War and Navy. I realize, however, that any
such arrangement would have to be agreed to by the responsible officials
of those departments, as indicated in the above amended sentence. I hope
that this amendment clarifies the meaning to your satisfaction.

With reference to the second paragraph of your letter of 2 July, I am
very pleased to concur in your offer to withdraw from Central and South
America provided you are willing to postpone withdrawal until the
Central Intelligence Group is adequately organized and staffed so that
we may arrange an orderly transfer with a minimum of interruption. As
evidenced by N.I.A. support for your 1947 budget for this activity, it
is anticipated that this will involve continued coverage of that area by
you for the better part of that fiscal year. With your cooperation to
this extent, I am sure that we can work out an orderly transition. I
also hope to discuss with you at some later date the possibility of my
utilizing the services of some of your experienced personnel.

With kindest personal regards, I am

Very truly yours,

Hoyt S. Vandenberg3
Lieutenant General, USA

* Source: Central
Intelligence Agency Historical Files, HS/CSG-2227, Job 83-00739R,
Box 2, Folder 3. Top Secret.

1 Not found, but quoted in full in Ladd's July 22 memorandum to Hoover.
(National Archives and Records Administration, RG 263, Records of
the Central Intelligence Agency, Troy Papers, FBI Documents) See the Supplement. The
proposed NIA Directive is National
Intelligence Authority Directive No. 5, Document
160.

2 Not found, but quoted in full in Ladd's July 22 memorandum to Hoover;
see footnote 1 above.

3 Printed from a copy that indicates
Vandenberg signed the original.

114. Memorandum by the Director of Central Intelligence's Executive (Wright)114. Memorandum by the Director of Central Intelligence's Executive
(Wright)Source

Washington, July 11,
1946.

SUBJECT

Activation of the Office of Special Operations

REFERENCE

N.I.A. Directive No. 5

1. The Office of Special Operations is activated this date.

2. This Office will be responsible for the performance of the functions
assigned to the Director of Central Intelligence in paragraph 4-a of
N.I.A. Directive No. 5.1

3. The Office of Special Operations will be organized and operated as
directed by the Director of Central Intelligence.

4. Colonel Louis J. Fortier,
USA, is relieved from duty as Assistant Director and Acting Chief of
Operational Services and assigned to the Office of the Director pending
relief from assignment to the Central Intelligence Group.

5. Colonel Donald H. Galloway,
USA, is announced as Assistant Director for Special Operations in charge
of the Office of Special Operations.

6. Captain William B. Goggins, USA, is relieved from duty as Assist-ant
Director and Acting Chief of the Central Planning Staff and is assigned
as Deputy Assistant Director for Special Operations.

7. Mr. Kingman Douglass is relieved from duty as Assistant Director and
Acting Deputy Director and is assigned as “B” Deputy for Special
Operations.

8. The following personnel are assigned to duties as indicated below:

Commander George B. McManus, USNR, Office “B” Deputy for Special
Operations

Mr. Richard H. Crowe; Office “B” Deputy for Special Operations

Mr. Walter Pforzheimer,
Administrative Division

Miss M. Gertrude Dove, Administrative Division

For the Director of Central Intelligence:

E.K. Wright2
Colonel, GSC

* Source: Central Intelligence Agency Historical
Files, HS/CSG-2154, Job 83-00739R, Box 3, Folder 19. Secret. The
memorandum is addressed to “All C.I.G. Personnel Concerned.”

1 Paragraph 4-a of
NIA Directive No. 5 made the
Director of Central Intelligence responsible for the “Conduct of all
organized Federal espionage and counter-espionage operations outside
the United States and its possessions for the collection of foreign
intelligence information required for the national security.”

2 Printed from a copy
that indicates Wright signed the original.

115. Letter From the Director of Central Intelligence (Vandenberg) to the Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation (Hoover)115. Letter From the Director of Central Intelligence (Vandenberg) to the
Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation (Hoover)Source

Washington, July 19,
1946.

My Dear Mr. Hoover: I acknowledge receipt of your letters of July 81 and July 15, 1946.2

I appreciate very much your offer of assistance and the suggestion that
we work out immediately a program for the transfer of secret
intelligence responsibilities in Central and South America. Accordingly,
I designated certain officials, who have conferred with Mr. E.A. Tamm on
18 July, to discuss the general policies for this transfer, the details
of which will be developed in subsequent conferences.3 It is understood that Mr.
Tamm will furnish the names
of your representatives, and designate the time when these conferences
can commence.

In the discharge of its intelligence functions, FBI has acquired many advantages which will facilitate
uninterrupted continuance of intelligence operations. Since our
immediate aim is to relieve FBI at the
earliest possible date, I believe it essential that the accomplishments
of FBI in gathering intelligence
information, and administrative facilities be made available to CIG insofar as is practicable. With this
principle, I am certain that I have your agreement and cooperation.

Since FBI has the authority and
responsibility to conduct intelligence operations in this area until
June 30, 1947, unless previously relieved by CIG, I recommend that your
field staff be maintained at the level you determine necessary for
operations until we advise that withdrawal is feasible. As agreed, I
have designated representatives who will study existing FBI coverage and collaborate with your own
officials in devising an orderly detailed plan for transfer. It is my
recommendation that FBI personnel should
remain at each field station for a time after the arrival of my
representatives in order that the successors may enjoy the benefits of
the Bureau's experience in each country.

Copies of intelligence reports in the field and in Washington, prepared
by the FBI, would be of the greatest
value to CIG. It was agreed that field
reports would be turned over to my representatives. I am confident that
specific reports in your Washington Office will be made available to me
whenever we consider it necessary. Our field officers should also be
acquainted by your special agents with local contacts and sources of
information which you have developed, and arrangements worked out for
possible further utilization of these persons. Your advice on the
handling of such informants, and safeguards against untrustworthy
individuals, will be greatly appreciated. It is understood that these
details are agreeable to you.

Administrative facilities now existing in the field will be of
considerable advantage to the continuance of operations. I refer to
office furniture and equipment, vehicles, radio communication apparatus,
and the like. To replace such equipment would entail delay which would
be difficult to justify. It is understood that such a transfer is
agreeable to you except in the case of photographic equipment, and I
concur in your retention of this apparatus. I will also arrange
replacement in kind locally for the radio communication apparatus which
you will leave in the various stations, as agreed upon.

With regard to your letter of July 15, 1946, I request that you
reconsider the withdrawal of your personnel in the Dominican Republic
and Costa Rica. It would be most unfortunate to leave these posts vacant
even for a short time. I am sure our representatives can devise an early
relief for these particular posts and I am confident you will agree to
this.

In outlining the general policies and agreements herein, I have stressed
the principle of orderly withdrawal without hiatus, bearing in mind our
several responsibilities to the Government in this important work. You
and your representatives have been most cooperative and I desire to
express my sincere appreciation.

With all good wishes,

Sincerely yours,

Hoyt S. Vandenberg4
Lieutenant General, USA

* Source: Central
Intelligence Agency Historical Files, HS/CSG-2227, Job 83-00739R,
Box 2, Folder 3. Top Secret. The letter is dated July 19, 1946,
which has been changed by hand to July 22. The latter date, in turn,
has been annotated by hand, “must be [July] 19.”

1 Not found, but quoted in full in a July 22
memorandum from Ladd to Hoover; see footnote
1, Document 113.

2 Not found.

3 See the July 18 memorandum from Galloway to
Vandenberg and a July 17 memorandum from Galloway to Tamm (both in
Central Intelligence Agency Files, HS/CSG-2227, Job 83-00739R, Box
2, Folder 3) in the Supplement.

4 Printed from a copy that bears this
typed signature.

116. Letter From the Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation (Hoover) to the Assistant Secretary of State for American Republic Affairs (Braden)116. Letter From the Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation
(Hoover) to the Assistant Secretary
of State for American Republic Affairs (Braden)Source

Washington, July 22,
1946.

My Dear Mr. Braden: I am informed
that a circular wire was sent to all Ambassadors in Latin America by the
State Department concerning the plans of the Central Intelligence Group
for taking over intelligence coverage in Latin America and the
withdrawal of the FBI from that
field.1 I have noted
that the Ambassadors were informed that in view of the forthcoming
taking over by the new organization on a world-wide basis, it is my
opinion that all FBI personnel be
withdrawn from Latin America. I wish to advise that this is not entirely
accurate. When the Federal Bureau of Investigation secured its
appropriation for the operation of the Special Intelligence Service in
Latin America during the fiscal year 1947, the Central Intelligence
Group did not have a field operating unit and it was not understood that
they planned to set up such a unit. Upon learning of the issuance of the
directive by the National Intelligence Authority authorizing the Central
Intelligence Group to set up a field force for the purpose of securing
intelligence on a world-wide basis, I wrote General Vandenberg, the head
of Central Intelligence, inquiring as to whether the Federal Bureau of
Investigation should withdraw from the Latin American Intelligence
field. General Vandenberg advised that it was the desire of the Central
Intelligence to take over the Latin American coverage and it was, of
course, necessary for me to make immediate plans for the withdrawal of
the FBI personnel now in Latin
America.2

I have also noted that the Ambassadors were informed by the State
Department that a gradual transfer is being proposed of intelligence
coverage from the FBI to the CIG, perhaps with absorption of some of the
present FBI personnel into the new
Central Intelligence organization. I must advise that there is no
understanding or agreement with regard to the transfer of FBI personnel to the CIG and I cannot acquiesce in any such
transfer as there is an urgent need for the trained personnel in Latin
America in connection with the discharge of FBI responsibilities within the United States.

With best wishes and kind regards,

Sincerely yours,

J. Edgar Hoover

* Source:
National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Records of the
Department of State, Decimal File 1945-49, 101.5/7-2246. Personal
and Confidential.

1 Not found.

2 Document 115.

117. Memorandum From Acting Secretary of State Acheson to the Members of the National Intelligence Authority117. Memorandum From Acting Secretary of State Acheson to the Members of the National Intelligence AuthoritySource

Washington, August 5,
1946.

SUBJECT

Replacement of FBI Personnel in
Latin America by Personnel of the new Central Intelligence
Group

Federal Bureau of Investigation agents who since 1940 have been
performing security intelligence functions in Latin America are
scheduled to be replaced by personnel of the now Central Intelligence
Group under General Vandenberg. A schedule (copy attached)1 has been drawn
up by the CIG for discussion with Mr.
Hoover, calling for progressive assumption of intelligence functions
between February 15 and May 15, 1947. In the meantime, however, orders
have been transmitted by the FBI
directing that the respective offices be closed and FBI personnel be withdrawn.

There is grave danger in this situation that the excellent FBI organization in Latin America may
disintegrate before it can be taken over by new personnel of the CIG. This would be a major blow to the
effectiveness of our security intelligence work in the Latin American
field, from which it might take us many years to recover.

Since the withdrawal movement started, messages of concern, apprehension
or alarm have been received from every American Ambassador in Latin
America, testifying to the excellent work accomplished since the
establishment of the Legal Attaché service of the FBI in Latin America, and recommending with
the utmost urgency that the change-over be gradual and orderly. The
Ambassadors have in particular recommended that no FBI personnel be
withdrawn until successors have arrived and have had sufficient time and
opportunity to familiarize themselves with the work.

The Department of State shares in every respect the views expressed by
our Ambassadors in the field. When a similar step was contemplated last year, Secretary Byrnes sent a letter (Top Secret,
November 30, 1945—copy enclosed)2 to the then Director of the Bureau of the Budget, in
which he stated:

“The situation is so serious…that I recommend as strongly as I can the
immediate provision of sufficient funds to enable the Federal Bureau of
Investigation to maintain its security intelligence service in the other
American republics until a definitive decision shall have been taken on
the over-all integrated intelligence plan and that
plan put in effective operation.” (Underscoring supplied.)3

The integrated plan referred to by Secretary Byrnes has now been adopted, but it has not yet been put
“in effective operation”. In order to safeguard the existing
organization and to provide for an orderly transition, it is urgently
recommended that a Presidential directive be sent to the Federal Bureau
of Investigation, covering the following points.

1) In effecting the transfer of responsibility for security intelligence
operations in Latin America from the Federal Bureau of Investigation to
the Central Intelligence Group, it is essential that the turnover be
orderly and that the existing FBI
intelligence organization, together with its facilities, equipment and
records, not be impaired.

2) No FBI personnel now serving in Latin
America should be withdrawn until after replacement CIG personnel have arrived. There should
then be a period of time, deemed by the American Ambassador concerned to
be sufficient, for the new personnel to familiarize themselves with the
nature, scope and details of the work, prior to the departure of FBI personnel.

3) In some cases, present FBI personnel
may desire to transfer to the CIG. This
should be facilitated, and the opportunity should be afforded for all
such personnel considered by CIG to be
qualified to transfer to the CIG
rolls.

I consider the foregoing to be of the utmost urgency and importance in
connection with national security.

* Source: Central Intelligence Agency
Historical Files, HS/CSG-2227, Job 83-00739R, Box 2, Folder 3. Top
Secret. Drafted by E.O. Briggs. Covered by an August 5 note signed
with Acheson's typed initials,
addressed to Secretaries Forrestal and Patterson and Admiral
Leahy, asking that
the memorandum be discussed at the NIA meeting on August 7. The covering note also
contains a footnote stating that a copy of the memorandum was given
to the CIG Assistant Director for
Special Operations by Assistant Secretary Braden on August 6.

1 Not found attached to the source text but probably
the same as the schedule attached to the letter from Vandenberg to
Braden, July 29. (Ibid.) See the Supplement.

2 Not
found.

3 Printed here as italics.

118. Minutes of the Fifth Meeting of the National Intelligence Authority118. Minutes of the Fifth Meeting of the National Intelligence
AuthoritySource

Washington, August 7, 1946, 10:30 a.m.

PARTICIPANTS

Members Present

Acting Secretary of State Dean
Acheson, in the Chair

Secretary of War Robert P.
Patterson

Secretary of the Navy James
Forrestal

Fleet Admiral William D.
Leahy, Personal Representative of the
President

Colonel Donald H.
Galloway, USA, representing the Director of Central
Intelligence

Also Present

Assistant Secretary of State Donald
Russell

Assistant Secretary of State Spruille Braden

Colonel William A. Eddy,
Special Assistant to the Secretary of State for Research and
Intelligence

Colonel Charles W. McCarthy, USA

Captain Robert L. Dennison, USN

Secretariat

Colonel Donald H.
Galloway, USA, acting for Mr. James S. Lay, Jr., Secretary,
N.I.A.

1. Withdrawal of F.B.I. Representatives From Latin America

Mr. Russell stated that the
Department of State was very much concerned over the intention of the
Federal Bureau of Investigation to withdraw its representatives from
Latin America prior to the time that the personnel of the Central
Intelligence Group could properly replace them.1 He outlined the understanding of the Department of
State that the F.B.I. was obligated to remain in Latin America until
June 30, 1947, if necessary.

Admiral Leahy indicated that
that was the understanding of the National Intelligence Authority, and
he was surprised to learn that the F.B.I. was withdrawing its
representatives from the Dominican Republic and Costa Rica by August 16.
He inquired as to whether or not General Vandenberg had been
informed.

Colonel Galloway stated that General Vandenberg had been informed and
that he had requested the Director of the F.B.I. to reconsider his decision and to retain his
personnel until the C.I.G. representatives could adequately replace
them. However, Mr. Hoover had informed General Vandenberg that this was
impracticable.

Mr. Braden stated that he had made
efforts to induce the F.B.I. to keep its personnel in these two
countries without avail, and that he had also been informed, on August
6, that the F.B.I. was contemplating withdrawing their personnel from
Haiti, El Salvador, and Tegucigalpa on 30 September.

Colonel Galloway informed the N.I.A. that the C.I.G., by withdrawing an
operative from a European post, was prepared to send him immediately to
Costa Rica to replace the F.B.I. agent being withdrawn from that
locality; that the Department of State had been advised to this effect,
and that the only thing that was preventing the departure of this C.I.G.
operative was the processing of his papers by the Department of
State.

The National Intelligence Authority:

Directed the representative of the Central Intelligence Group to draft a
letter, for the signature of the members of the Authority, to the
Attorney General, requesting him to direct the F.B.I. to retain its
personnel in the Latin American countries to which presently assigned
until C.I.G. personnel could properly replace them. It was also desired
that a period of turnover be provided for so that the new organization
could be properly oriented and be given contacts in each country.

The meeting adjourned at approximately 11:00 a.m.

* Source: National Archives and
Records Administration, RG 218, Records of the Joint Chiefs of
Staff, Leahy Papers, No.
132. Top Secret. The meeting was held at the Department of
State.

1 See Document 117 and the
minutes of the third meeting of the Department of State Advisory
Committee on Intelligence, August 6, in the Supplement. (National
Archives and Records Administration, RG 353, Records of
Interdepartmental and Intradepartmental Committees—State Department,
Lot File No. 122, Records of the Secretary's Staff Committee
1944-47)

119. Draft Letter From President Truman to Attorney General Clark119. Draft Letter From President Truman to Attorney General ClarkSource

Washington, August 7,
1946.

Dear Mr. Attorney General: Under date of August 8, 1946, the members of
the National Intelligence Authority communicated to you a request that
the Federal Bureau of Investigation personnel presently charged with
intelligence coverage in Latin America be retained at their posts until the representatives of the
Central Intelligence Group can take over in an orderly and efficient
manner.1

It is my desire that in the national interest this request be
granted.

Sincerely,

Harry S. Truman2

* Source: Central Intelligence Agency
Records, Job 83-00764R, Box 1, Folder 5. No classification marking.
According to Document 122, the letter was
drafted by Secretary to the National Intelligence Authority
Lay and approved by all
members on the understanding that it would be sent if necessary. It
appears that the draft was never used.

1 Document 120.

2 Printed from a copy that bears this
typed signature.

120. Letter From the National Intelligence Authority to Attorney General Clark120. Letter From the National Intelligence
Authority to Attorney General ClarkSource

Washington, August 8,
1946.

Dear Mr. Attorney General: Pursuant to authority contained in the
President's directive of 22 January 1946,1 the National
Intelligence Authority has directed the Central Intelligence Group to
assume, by June 30, 1947, the intelligence coverage in Latin America
that is now performed by the Federal Bureau of Investigation. The
Director of Central Intelligence, by letter dated 3 July 1946,2 concurred in the
offer of the Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation to withdraw
from Latin America provided Mr. Hoover was willing to postpone
withdrawal until the Central Intelligence Group is adequately organized
and staffed to arrange an orderly transfer with a minimum of
interruption.

However, the Federal Bureau of Investigation has notified the Department
of State and the Central Intelligence Group that its representatives
will be withdrawn [less than 1 line of source text not
declassified] by August 16, 1946. The Department of State has
also received intimations that the Federal Bureau of Investigation is
preparing to withdraw its representatives from the other Latin American
countries prior to the time that the Central Intelligence Group will be
able to replace them.

The attached tentative schedule3 indicating the dates by which the Central
Intelligence Group is prepared to assume intelligence responsibility in the various countries of
Latin America has today been furnished the Federal Bureau of
Investigation. It is requested that the Federal Bureau of Investigation
be instructed to retain its present personnel in the Latin American
countries to which presently assigned until the Central Intelligence
Group is able to assume responsibility. After the arrival of the
representatives of the Central Intelligence Group, the Federal Bureau of
Investigation staff must remain for an adequate period in order that the
new organization can profit by the Bureau's experience in each country
and in order that continuity of operation may be assured.

The Department of State is at present processing the papers of a C.I.G.
representative who is now available to replace the F.B.I. man in [less than 1 line of source text not declassified]
all other instances, it is imperative that no withdrawals be made until
the C.I.G. has an opportunity to satisfactorily install their
personnel.

We are certain that you appreciate the wisdom of this course of action
and feel certain that it meets with the desire of the President of the
United States.

The National Intelligence Authority:4

* Source: Central Intelligence Agency
Records, Job 83-00764R, Box 1, Folder 5. Secret. According to
Wright's August 8 memorandum (Document
122) the letter was drafted by the Central Intelligence
Group.

1 Document 71.

2 Document 113.

3 Not printed;
see the Supplement.

4 Printed from a copy that indicates the original was
signed by Acheson, Patterson, Acting Secretary
Sullivan, and Admiral
Leahy.

121. Memorandum From the Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation (Hoover) to Attorney General Clark121. Memorandum From the Director of the Federal Bureau of
Investigation (Hoover) to Attorney
General ClarkSource

Washington, August 8,
1946.

I have been advised by Mr. Tamm of
his discussion today with you relative to the letter addressed to you
under date of August 8th and bearing the signatures of Messrs. Patterson, Acheson and Sullivan and Admiral Leahy, relative to the transfer of the intelligence
functions performed by the Federal Bureau of Investigation in Latin
America to the Central Intelligence Group.1 I am addressing to
you separately today a memorandum outlining in detail the developments
with reference to this
situation since the Central Intelligence Authority obtained a
Presidential directive establishing itself as an operating unit in the
collection of intelligence information, and General Vandenberg, pursuant
to that directive, indicated his desire to take over the coverage of
Latin American intelligence.2
Mr. Tamm has advised me of your
desire to agree to the tentative schedule for the transfer of
intelligence functions to CIG in so far
as it is practicable and possible, in view of your feeling that the
President has undoubtedly approved the attached action recommended by
Mr. Patterson and the co-signers
representing the State and Navy Departments and the White House.3

It is noted that this schedule proposes that the Central Intelligence
Group will take over the coverage of designated Latin American countries
on February 15, 1947, will take over a second group on April 1, 1947,
and the balance of the Latin American countries on May 15, 1947. If you
insist on my complying with this schedule, I will, of course, have no
alternative but to agree to it. I desire to point out to you, however,
that I had anticipated insisting with General Vandenberg that the
Central Intelligence Group take over the first group of offices on
September 15, 1946, a second group on November 1, 1946, and the balance
of the Latin American offices on January 1, 1947. I contemplated this
action in order, first, to return to the domestic service of the FBI as promptly as possible the experienced
Bureau Agents who have been operating the intelligence service in South
America. It is unnecessary for me to point out to you again the dire
need which the Bureau has at this time for special Agents, and I feel
that since the Central Intelligence Group desired to take over the Latin
American coverage, the sooner the Bureau Agents return to their domestic
duties, the better off the Bureau will be.

Since my representatives in Latin America know of the contemplated
program of General Vandenberg—the State Department has already advised
all of its Latin American Ambassadors of the proposed CIG program—it is a matter of considerable
difficulty to keep the interest of the Bureau personnel in Latin America
at an efficient level. Since these men know that their assignments as
intelligence agents in South America will shortly terminate, they
rapidly, as a matter of human nature, lose interest in a job which they
consider is now finished and their interests naturally turn to their new
assignments and responsibilities in the United States. I feel,
consequently, that the quality of the Bureau's performance in Latin
America will probably decline because of the diminishing interest on the
part of Bureau Agents in these assignments. I think that in the interest of
efficiency it is highly desirable to transfer these men to their new
duties and the duties in which their interests will now lie as soon as
possible. I think, conversely, it is highly desirable, since the CIG desires to go into the Latin American
field, that they take over their responsibilities as soon as
possible.

A third element which enters into a decision upon this subject is the
fact that undoubtedly, and despite their assurances to the contrary, the
Central Intelligence Group, will definitely endeavor to proselyte Bureau
personnel presently serving upon intelligence assignments. The Bureau's
representatives in the Latin American field are men of outstanding
qualifications with exceptional backgrounds and they have performed very
meritorious service in the Latin American field. It is logical to assume
that the Central Intelligence Group will endeavor to secure the services
of these people. I feel that the sooner the Bureau brings these people
back to the United States, the less danger there is of the Bureau's
losing the services of experienced personnel, which it so vitally
requires in the domestic field at the present time.

I do not believe that the General Vandenberg group can contend that they
are unable to take over the Latin American intelligence duties until
next year because of their inability to obtain personnel. Certainly when
the Bureau was instructed to establish a Latin American intelligence
service, no latitude was allowed for any extended period of personnel
recruitment and the Bureau virtually overnight placed in the Latin
American countries an operating, efficient intelligence service. A
recent organization chart of the Central Intelligence Group indicated
that a staff of some 90 persons is presently assigned at the seat of
Government in Washington. This staff is about tenfold that which the
Bureau has utilized to operate a Latin American intelligence service. In
addition, I have been informed that the personnel investigative division
of the Central Intelligence Group has been investigating about 187
applicants for positions each month. Recently General Vandenberg advised
the National Intelligence Authority that he contemplated having the
services of 3,000 people in his organization by the end of the current
fiscal year, of whom 1900 would be engaged in secret intelligence.
General Vandenberg advised that in addition to the $12,000,000.00 made
available to him for the fiscal year 1947, he would need $10,000,000.00
for his operations during the current year and expressed the view that
he might have to secure an independent budget rather than operate from
funds made available by the State, War and Navy Departments. It seems to
me, consequently, that the Central Intelligence Group is not confronted
with any personnel problems and apparently is financially able to carry
on their operations. I think it is rather interesting to note that when
the Federal Bureau of Investigation prepared an estimate for a worldwide
intelligence system, we
contemplated the use of 650 Agents at an annual cost of about
$10,000,000.00 a year.

I feel, consequently, that the Central Intelligence Group should be
required to take over the Latin American intelligence in three
stages—taking over the first group of offices in their proposed schedule
on September 15, 1946, the second group on November 1, 1946, and the
final group on January 1, 1947. While I, of course, will do whatever you
desire in this situation, I do want you to know that I feel very
strongly that the Central Intelligence Group, having sought the coverage
of intelligence in the Latin American field, should be required to
assume promptly the responsibility for this coverage.

I am returning herewith the original letter addressed to you by Messrs.
Patterson, Acheson, Sullivan and Leahy and the attachment referred to therein.

* Source: National Archives and Records
Administration, RG 263, Records of the Central Intelligence Agency,
Troy Papers, FBI Documents, Box 8,
Folder 18. No classification marking.

1 Document 120.

2 Dated August 8;
not printed. (National Archives and Records Administration, RG 263,
Records of the Central Intelligence Agency, Troy Papers, FBI Document, Box 8, Folder 18)

3 Document 120.

122. Memorandum for the Record122. Memorandum for the RecordSource

Washington, August 8,
1946.

Late in the afternoon of 6 August 1946, the Office of the Secretary of
State requested a meeting of NIA to be
held on 7 August 1946.1 The purpose of the
proposed meeting was to air the danger involved in pulling FBI operatives out of Central and South
America prior to the time CIG was
prepared to take over—and to come to necessary decisions in the matter.
At the time of calling the meeting, the State Department requested we
prepare a memorandum for NIA, outlining our actions to date in this
regard and indicating our time schedule for taking over Central and
South American activities.

The NIA meeting was held on the morning
of 7 August2 and our memo3 was submitted by Colonel Galloway. All NIA members were adamant in the necessity
for FBI to remain operative in the area
until he took over and in the
necessity for an overlap of operatives in order to preserve
continuity.

The meeting was brief, spearheaded by Admiral Leahy. The Secretary NIA was directed to prepare a letter to the
Attorney General, requesting that FBI be
directed to retain their operation in the subject area until we were
fully operative. The Secretary was also directed to draft a letter to
the Attorney General, to be signed by the President, for use in the
event no action was taken by the Attorney General on the letter from
NIA.

The NIA letter to the Attorney General
was prepared by us on 7 August, signed by all members of NIA, and dispatched on the morning of 8
August 1946.4 The draft of the
Presidential letter5 has been approved by
all members of NIA and is being retained
for later use if necessary.

E. K. Wright

Colonel, GSC

Executive to the Director

On Saturday, 10 August, I was called to the office of Admiral Leahy and informed that the
Attorney General had agreed to take steps providing that FBI personnel did not move out of Latin
American areas until CIG could replace
them with proper operatives and until there was a reasonable overlap of
time between the arrival of CIG
personnel and the departure of FBI
personnel.6 Admiral Leahy also stated that Mr.
Clark was anxious that CIG take no steps toward the employment of
FBI personnel in Latin American
areas as this personnel were all trained operators and were needed in
the domestic field.

* Source:
Central Intelligence Agency Historical Files, HS/CSG-2227, Job
83-00739R, Box 2, Folder 3. Top Secret. Although the memorandum is
dated August 8, it was obviously amended later, since the postscript
refers to developments on August 10.

1 See Document 117.

2 Document 118.

3 Dated August 7. (Central Intelligence Agency
Historical Files, HS/CSG-2227, Job 83-00739R, Box 2, Folder 3) See
the Supplement.

4 Document 120.

5 Document 119.

6 See Document 123, which gives an account by Hoover's
assistant of the Attorney General's August 10 meetings with the
President and Admiral Leahy.

123. Memorandum From the Director's Assistant (Tamm) to the Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation (Hoover)123. Memorandum From the Director's Assistant (Tamm) to the Director of
the Federal Bureau of Investigation (Hoover)Source

Washington, August 10,
1946.

Pursuant to your instructions, I talked to the Attorney General this
morning at his request with reference to the SIS situation. He stated that he had been to the White
House yesterday and that he spent almost two hours talking to the
President about this situation. Prior to the time that he talked to the
President, Admiral Leahy had
talked to the Attorney General1 and had
indicated to him that it was desired that the Department of Justice
through the Bureau render every possible assistance to the CIG in taking over the SIS work in South America. Admiral
Leahy indicated that the
CIG would not be able to move into
any of the countries as rapidly as the Bureau desired to withdraw from
them but that the State Department desired to insure a continuity of
coverage and that, consequently, the Bureau should only withdraw upon
the basis of a harmonious schedule with CIG moving in to take over the various countries.

The Attorney General stated he talked to the President about this
situation and the President indicated some doubt that the CIG would work but the President stated he
had to at least try it out in view of the recommendations made to him by
his Cabinet members. The Attorney General advised him that Ambassador
Pawley, Spruille Braden and various other State Department
representatives were very much opposed to FBI withdrawing but the President thought the FBI should coordinate its program in such a
way that CIG could move in on an orderly
basis and take over the operations. The Attorney General desired,
therefore, that the Bureau arrange through appropriate conference with
CIG so as to insure that our
withdrawal would be upon the basis of CIG's ability to move in and take over the operations in
various countries.

I advised the Attorney General that while you had not so stated in your
recent memorandum,2 you had instructed me
to advise him orally that the CIG was
definitely stalling in this situation. I pointed out to him that it was
rather inconsistent that Bureau Agents were not good enough to carry on
the SIS operations in the Latin Americas
but at the same time their services are so indispensable that they
cannot now be withdrawn or replaced. I told the Attorney General that
the CIG had a bright group of alleged
intelligence representatives, including a number of men who had deserted
from the service of the FBI during the
war, who appeared, according to
CIG estimates, at least capable of
carrying on the SIS operations. I stated
that as a matter of fact General Vandenberg had the effrontery to
designate as his representatives to confer with the Bureau on the
change-over of operations ex-FBI Agents
who had deserted from the Bureau service while on foreign assignment and
who were definitely persona non grata to you and to the Bureau.

The Attorney General was advised that you had instructed that we be
entirely reasonable in attempting to work out a schedule for the
transfer of SIS duties but that from the
schedule submitted by CIG, it was very
obvious that CIG was stalling and the
dates set by them were unreasonable. I told him that you had, upon the
basis of my previous conversation with him in which he expressed the
desire to support the President in getting this plan set up and in
operation, instructed that we make reasonable concessions to the CIG in an effort to bring about a
reasonable schedule for the transfer of duties. I pointed out to the
Attorney General that the withdrawal of individual personnel, such as
the withdrawal of the Legal Attaché in Brazil, did not indicate that the
office was being closed but that this was an administrative transfer of
an individual Agent predicated upon a reduction program which you had
outlined subsequent to the termination of the war. I told the Attorney
General that there were some 25 or 30 men currently under transfer back
to the United States but that these transfers had nothing to do with the
change-over of the SIS coverage to CIG,
but rather were routine transfers which would have been effected even
though the Bureau remained in SIS. I
told the Attorney General you desired him to have this information in
the event any question were raised about the recall to the United States
of any individual Agent.

The Attorney General stated that he desired to make reasonable
concessions to CIG in permitting them to
take over the intelligence coverage and stated he desired me to talk to
Admiral Leahy and outline to
him the Bureau's problem and its position with reference to these
problems. I suggested to the Attorney General that, in the light of the
information which I had furnished to him, he might desire himself to
talk to Admiral Leahy and
indicate that we would go along in anything that was reasonable in the
light of all the circumstances, but the Attorney General stated he
believed it would be better if a Bureau representative conferred direct
with Admiral Leahy. He stated
he would call Admiral Leahy
and arrange an appointment and asked that I let him know how we made out
with Leahy.

The Attorney General indicated that he told the President that it was
anticipated that CIG would try to
proselyte the Bureau's personnel and the President said that of course
he would not tolerate anything of that kind and if it became necessary,
he would issue an order to CIG
prohibiting them from hiring FBI
people.

* Source: National
Archives and Records Administration, RG 263, Records of the Central
Intelligence Agency, Troy Papers, FBI Documents. No classification marking.

1 No record of
these conversations with Clark has been found.

2 Presumably Document 121.

124. Memorandum From the Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation (Hoover) to Attorney General Clark124. Memorandum From the Director of the Federal Bureau of
Investigation (Hoover) to Attorney
General ClarkSource

Washington, August 12,
1946.

Pursuant to the appointment arranged by you with Admiral Leahy, Mr. Tamm consulted with the Admiral this
morning. Admiral Leahy was
informed that I was endeavoring, in accord with your desires, to assist
in every practical way to arrange for the transfer of the Latin American
coverage to the Central Intelligence Group but that there were certain
elements and factors about which it was felt Admiral Leahy should be advised. He was
informed that some months ago, in accord with your authorization, I had
drawn up a schedule for a worldwide intelligence service under the
Bureau's direction, which contemplated the use of some 650 agents, at an
annual cost of ten million dollars, with the cost of operation concealed
within the Bureau's appropriation to avoid publicity with reference
thereto. It was pointed out that this plan had not been acceptable, but
that the Bureau had, after the Central Intelligence Group was
established, been virtually evicted from South America.

Admiral Leahy was informed
that when General Vandenberg was asked whether he desired to take over
the Latin American coverage, he stated that he did desire to do so, but
when I had attempted to initiate a program of withdrawing the FBI staff from South America, this
withdrawal had been opposed except on an unacceptable long-term basis.
It was pointed out to the Admiral that this placed the Bureau in a
position where its Agents were not good enough to remain in South
America but at the same time their services were, at least at this time,
indispensable. It was pointed out to Admiral Leahy that it is impossible to
maintain the morale and efficiency of the Bureau Agents on Latin
American assignments on a high basis due to the fact that their interest
was bound to lag in the knowledge of their pending return to domestic
responsibilities, and that as a result the whole spirit of the Bureau's
SIS Division was bogging down.

Admiral Leahy was advised that
the Bureau had, upon Mr. Roosevelt's direction, placed in operation in Latin
America virtually overnight an efficient intelligence service. In answer
to Admiral Leahy's question
as to whether it is impossible for the Central Intelligence Group to
obtain an adequate operating staff, the Admiral was advised that while
this program might be somewhat difficult, it was not impossible as
evidenced by the fact that the
Bureau had done it under the difficulties of wartime pressure.

It was pointed out to Admiral Leahy that while Bureau Agents were apparently not good
enough to continue in the Latin American intelligence field, the persons
designated by General Vandenberg to work with the Bureau in turning over
the SIS responsibilities to the Central
Intelligence Group were ex-FBI Agents
who had deserted the Bureau service in time of war for personal reasons
and were definitely persona non grata to the Bureau.

Admiral Leahy indicated that
it was President Truman's desire
to establish a worldwide intelligence service and to relieve the Bureau
of all of its foreign responsibilities in the interest of enabling the
Bureau to discharge its domestic responsibilities. He stated that the
President and he were of the opinion that the Bureau should continue to
maintain agents in any part of the world deemed necessary for the
facilitating of the discharge of the Bureau's domestic
responsibilities.

Admiral Leahy was advised of
the fact that many of the Latin American Ambassadors are protesting
against the withdrawal of the Bureau but that I would not permit our
agents to plan with them any program of opposition.

To summarize the Bureau's overall position, Admiral Leahy was informed that I am making
every effort to coordinate the Bureau's program of withdrawal with
CIG's program of taking over, but
that I was convinced that the CIG was
stalling. Admiral Leahy is of
the opinion that General Vandenberg and his group are stalling and
indicated that he would take this entire matter up with General
Vandenberg upon the latter's return to the United States in order to
facilitate, expedite and clarify this situation. The Admiral was assured
that the Bureau has no desire to be arbitrary or stubborn in this
situation but will do everything possible to bring about an expeditious
clarification of the entire change-over program.

Respectfully,

John Edgar Hoover1

* Source: National Archives and Records
Administration, RG 263, Records of the Central Intelligence Agency,
Troy Papers, FBI Documents. No
classification marking. A typed note on the source text indicates
that it was sent at 5 p.m. on August 12. This memorandum from Hoover
is based on a longer August 12 memorandum from Tamm to Hoover. (Ibid.) See the
Supplement.

1 Printed from a
copy that bears this typed signature.

125. Memorandum From the President's Chief of Staff (Leahy) to the Director of Central Intelligence (Vandenberg)125. Memorandum From the President's Chief of Staff (Leahy) to the Director
of Central Intelligence (Vandenberg)Source

Washington, August 12,
1946.

August 12th Attorney General Clark sent Mr. Tamm of F.B.I. to see me in regard to providing reliefs
for the F.B.I. intelligence agents now in Latin America.1
The Attorney General wishes that the provision of National Intelligence
Agents be expedited as much as possible and the President wishes us to
comply.

F.B.I. needs its agents for work here within the United States.

Positive objection was expressed to our having sent ex-F.B.I. men to
discuss our common problems with F.B.I.

It would appear advantageous for the Director of C.I. himself to make all
contacts with Mr. Hoover, and that ex-F.B.I. men now in the C.I. Group
should certainly not be used for such contacts.

Granting that there will be a temporary reduction of efficiency by an
early relief of F.B.I. agents in Latin America, it is my opinion that
the reliefs can be accomplished at a much earlier date than as at
present scheduled and that it should be done.

It is certain that we should not employ in the C.I.G. any persons now in
F.B.I., and it is my opinion that to avoid offending Mr. Hoover we
should not hereafter, without specific approval in each instance by the
Authority, employ any persons who at any time separated themselves from
F.B.I.

William D. Leahy2

* Source: National
Archives and Records Administration, RG 218, Records of the Joint
Chiefs of Staff, Leahy
Papers, No. 131. Secret.

1 See Document 124.

2 Printed from a copy that bears this
typed signature.

126. Memorandum for Record126. Memorandum for RecordSource

Washington, August 19,
1946.

REFERENCE

Letter to the Attorney General from NIA dated 8 August 461

At 1045 this date the undersigned talked with Mr. Douglas McGregor,
Acting Attorney General, concerning the reference letter.

Mr. McGregor stated that the Attorney General had informed him that the
F.B.I. would not withdraw from Latin American countries until the
Central Intelligence Group had been able to furnish replacements and
arrange an orderly transfer. Mr. McGregor said that he understood no
formal reply to the reference letter was to be made since the above
decision of the Attorney General was already known.

The undersigned expressed the belief that no reply was necessary if the
N.I.A. could be assured that the request in the reference letter would
be honored. Mr. McGregor reaffirmed the fact that the Attorney General
had agreed to this request.

James S. Lay, Jr.

* Source: Central
Intelligence Agency Historical Files, HS/CSG-2227, Job 83-00739R,
Box 2, Folder 3. Secret.

1 Document 120.

127. Letter From the Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation (Hoover) to the Director of Central Intelligence (Vandenberg)127. Letter From the Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation
(Hoover) to the Director of Central
Intelligence (Vandenberg)Source

Washington, August 19,
1946.

Dear General Vandenberg: Reference is made to the letter of Colonel Edwin
K. Wright of the Central Intelligence Group directed to me on August 7,
1946,1 which attached a schedule for the transfer of
responsibility for intelligence coverage from the FBI to the CIG in Latin America. I must advise that the dates set forth in this schedule
for transfer of responsibility, that is, February 15, 1947, for the
first group of countries, April 1, 1947, for the second group, and May
15, 1947, for the third group, make the position of the FBI in Latin America rather difficult.
Operations under the limited scope and the restrictions necessary
incidental to complete withdrawal make difficult efficient and
productive operations over an extended period. The FBI personnel involved in Latin American
operations are critically needed in connection with our domestic
responsibilities and I am most anxious to return them to the domestic
field.

I had hoped that the CIG would be able to
take over responsibility in the first group of countries by September
15, 1946; in the second group by November 1, 1946; and the remainder by
January 1, 1947. As you will note, this would give approximately six
months from the time of the issuance of the directive to the Central
Intelligence Group for the orderly transfer of responsibility from the
FBI to the CIG in Latin America. I would appreciate your further
consideration in this matter and your advice as to any adjustments that
can be made in the schedule.2

With best wishes and kind regards,

Sincerely yours,

J. Edgar Hoover

* Source: Central
Intelligence Agency Historical Files, HS/CSG-2227, Job 83-00739R,
Box 2, Folder 3. Strictly Confidential.

1 Not printed. (Ibid.) See the
Supplement.

2 In Vandenberg's
September 3 reply to Hoover he asserted that “it would not be
possible in any case to approximate the dates you mention,…for the
three areas indicated.” (Central Intelligence Agency Historical
Files, HS/CSG-2227, Job 83-00739R, Box 2, Folder 3) See the
Supplement.

128. Memorandum From the Director of Central Intelligence (Vandenberg) to Secretary of State Byrnes128. Memorandum From the Director of Central Intelligence (Vandenberg) to
Secretary of State ByrnesSource

Washington, September 12,
1946.

SUBJECT

External Activities of the Central Intelligence Group

All activities of the Strategic Services Unit will be discontinued
effective 19 October 1946.

Coincident therewith, the Special Operations Office of the Central
Intelligence Group will assume responsibility for the conduct of
espionage and counter-espionage operations in the field for the
collection of foreign intelligence information required for the national
security. Every possible effort is being made to extend and develop
foreign coverage. Only a limited number of carefully selected
individuals formerly with Strategic Services Unit will be employed to
inaugurate the program under the new auspices.

It is, and will continue to be, the primary objective of Special
Operations, Central Intelligence Group, to make a real contribution to
the effective operation of the various departments of the
Government.

It is requested that interested agencies of the State Department be
advised of the above.

Hoyt S. Vandenberg
Lieutenant General, USA

* Source: National Archives and Records
Administration, RG 59, Records of the Department of State, Decimal
File 1945-49, 101.5/9-1246. Top Secret. Similar memoranda were sent
to the other NIA principals.

129. Letter From the Director of Central Intelligence (Vandenberg) to the Assistant Secretary of State for American Republic Affairs (Braden)129. Letter From the Director of Central Intelligence (Vandenberg) to the
Assistant Secretary of State for American Republic Affairs (Braden)Source

Washington, October 9,
1946.

Dear Mr. Braden: The excellent
dispatch from Ambassador Flack, in which he sets forth his views
concerning essential intelligence services in Bolivia,1 has been read by me with interest
and appreciation.

On the one hand, facts so forcibly brought out in this communication are
gratifying to me because they confirm the very real need for effective
CIG service in Latin America and
manifest an appreciation of that need by an ambassador whose support and
cooperation are essential to the success of our activities. On the other
hand, conclusions are depressing for I must agree with Ambassador Flack
in his conviction that continuous and effective coverage is imperative
and that no new organization, regardless of its potentialities, can equal an established service
until the novice has gained an equal experience and established
comparable contacts. I concur in Ambassador Flack's implication that it
would be most desirable to retain in Bolivia, and elsewhere in Latin
America, as much of the present functioning FBI organization as it is possible to transfer to CIG. Such a transfer was hoped for when
first the Latin American assignment was given to CIG and a proper request for such an arrangement was duly
made to the Federal Bureau of Investigation. The Director, FBI, disapproved the transfer to CIG of any FBI personnel stationed in Latin America for the reason
that these experienced agents were badly needed in domestic work. I
understand Mr. Hoover's desire to retain in his organization experienced
personnel trained by the Bureau and of continued usefulness on the home
front and I propose to do nothing in violation of his decision. However,
I seriously doubt that the withdrawal from Latin America of all FBI representatives, many of whom would
cheerfully elect to remain at their posts, is in the interest of the
United States.

I appreciate the continued cooperation and support of the Department of
State.

With kindest regards,

Sincerely,2

* Source: Central Intelligence Agency Historical
Files, HS/CSG-2461, Job 83-00764R, Box 4, Folder 7. Secret. The date
is handwritten on the source text. No drafting information appears
on the source text but the tone of the letter suggests that it was
written by Vandenberg.

1 Not found.

2 Printed from an unsigned
copy.

130. Strategic Services Unit General Orders No. 16130. Strategic Services Unit General Orders No. 16Source

Washington, October 19,
1946.

TERMINATION OF SSU OPERATIONS

1. Effective 2400, 19 October 1946, all operations of the Strategic
Services Unit are terminated.

2. Administrative activities incident to disposition of personnel,
material, records, claims, settlements, etc., will be continued until
final and complete liquidation
of the Strategic Services Unit is effected at a later date.

William W. Quinn
Colonel, Infantry Director

* Source: Central Intelligence Agency Historical
Files, HS/CSG-601, Job 83-00036, Box 4, Folder 9. Restricted. Draft
copies (dated September 5) of SSU
Headquarters' message to its field stations closing down operations
and Vandenberg's parallel message are ibid. Colonel Quinn's October
16 memorandum to Penrose and others outlines administrative
arrangements concerning the transfer. (Ibid.)

131. Instruction From the Assistant Secretary of State for Administration (Russell) to the Minister in Tangier (Alling)131. Instruction From the Assistant Secretary of State for
Administration (Russell) to the Minister in Tangier (Alling)Source

Washington, January 3,
1947.

Sir:

SUBJECT

Security Intelligence Coverage. Relationship Between Department of
State and the National Intelligence Authority. Assignment of CIG Representatives to Foreign Service
Establishments

Background:

The Secretary of State refers to Department of State Radio Bulletin No.
19 dated January 22, 1946. Within the White House Section, and under the
heading Foreign Intelligence, is set forth a Presidential Directive
creating the National Intelligence Authority consisting of the
Secretaries of State, War and Navy, and a personal representative of the
President. The Secretary of State is Chairman of the National
Intelligence Authority (NIA). (The
Presidential Directive is also contained in State Department Bulletin No. 334, dated February 3, 1946.)

Section Two (2) of the Directive provides for the formation of a Central
Intelligence Group (CIG) consisting of
persons and facilities assigned from State, War and Navy. Heading CIG is a Director of Central Intelligence,
Lt. General Hoyt S.
Vandenberg.

Under authority of the intelligence directive, the National Intelligence
Authority has charged CIG with
world-wide security intelligence coverage.

As will be recalled, during the past few years, there have been operating
in a number of our missions and consulates, personnel of other
government agencies who have been assisting with security intelligence—
one of these organizations, the Strategic Services Unit (former OSS) of the War Department, was liquidated
as of October 20, 1946. Another of the agencies, the Federal Bureau of
Investigation, soon will withdraw its personnel from abroad. The new
organization, CIG, will assume many of
the duties previously performed by both organizations.

State Department Part in the New Security
Intelligence Operations:

The member agencies of CIG (State, War
and Navy) are each providing that organization with certain facilities
as called for in Section Two (2) of the Presidential Directive of
January 22, 1946.

[3 pages of source text not declassified]

Communications From Missions and Consulates to
the Department:

This document is regarded as the basic instruction covering the
relationship between the Department of State and CIG. It is not considered all-inclusive. As necessity
requires, there will be other instructions. Missions and Consulates
should feel free to request clarification on specific points, and bring
to the attention of the Department any phase of the operation which
appears to be distinctive to a particular post.

[2 paragraphs and 1 heading (12 lines of source text)
not declassified]

Inasmuch as the Secretary of State is Chairman of the National
Intelligence Authority (NIA) and the
Department of State is a member of the Central Intelligence Group
(CIG), much importance is placed in
the Department's responsibility as regards the Presidential Directive of
January 22, 1946. The Acting Secretary, in a recent communication to the
Director of Central Intelligence, stated: “I hope that the cooperation
between the Department of State and your representatives abroad will
result in efficient and cordial integration of our foreign
intelligence.”1

The success of this counter-intelligence program depends upon the manner
in which it is put into effect at the various posts. Care should be
taken in the designation of the Mission's representative who will
coordinate the activities. Full responsibility is placed upon the Chief
of Mission for implementing the plan; therefore, his personal attention
should be given to its activation.

Very truly yours,

For the Secretary of State:

Donald Russell2

* Source: National
Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Records of the
Department of State, Decimal File 1945-49, 101.5/1-347. Top Secret.
More or less identical instructions presumably were sent to other
posts, but no other instructions or list of other addresses has been
found.

1 Not found.

2 Printed from a copy that bears this
typed signature.

132. Letter From the Director of Central Intelligence (Vandenberg) to Secretary of State Byrnes132. Letter From the Director of Central Intelligence (Vandenberg) to
Secretary of State ByrnesSource

Washington, January 3,
1947.

Dear Mr. Secretary: As you are aware, arrangements have been completed
for the withdrawal from Latin America of special agents of the Federal
Bureau of Investigation who have been performing intelligence duties as
legal attaches of the various diplomatic missions in South and Central
America and in the Caribbean area. Representatives of the Central
Intelligence Group will take over the intelligence duties in Latin
America which have been performed by the FBI since 1942. In order that the continuity of
intelligence operations in Latin America shall not be prejudiced,
arrangements have been made with Mr. J.
Edgar Hoover to the effect that legal attaches
representing the FBI shall not depart
from their posts of duty until such time as qualified and trained CIG representatives shall arrive at the
respective capitals in the American Republics.

I am transmitting to you herewith a schedule1 setting forth the dates
when CIG representatives will arrive for
duty in the various Latin American countries. This schedule has also
been supplied to the FBI, which has
indicated that an FBI representative
will be present at each post when the local attaché relinquishes his
duties and the CIG representative takes
over. Mr. Daniel DeBardaleben, of CIG,
will proceed to Latin America and his trip will follow the itinerary and
schedule attached hereto. Mr. DeBardaleben has my entire confidence and
he is completely familiar with the arrangements which have been made as
between the FBI and the CIG in regard to the latter's assumption of
intelligence duties in the American Republics.

Mr. Frederick B. Lyon, Director of
the Office of Controls of the Department of State, and Mr. Jack D. Neal,
Chief of the Division of Foreign Activity Correlation of the Department,
have worked closely with the appropriate representatives of CIG in the implementation of the
arrangements looking forward to the assumption by CIG of intelligence duties in Latin
America. Both Mr. Lyon and Mr. Neal are not only entirely familiar with
the Intelligence activities of the FBI
in Latin America but are also being kept completely informed as to
CIG plans to assume intelligence
operations in that area.

The purpose of this communication is not only to advise you of the
foregoing, but also to suggest that you may care to appoint a
representative of the
Department of State to accompany Mr. DeBardaleben and Mr. J. Edgar Hoover's representative, in
order that the Department of State may be represented in each case when
the CIG representative is installed in
the various diplomatic missions in South and Central America and in the
Caribbean area. The CIG representatives
who have been selected and who are currently being trained for duty in
the American Republics are, I believe, excellently qualified for their
duties. I wish to assure you that I consider the CIG intelligence commitment in the American Republics as
second to none in importance and significance, and that CIG representatives who will shortly
proceed to their posts of duty in South and Central America and in the
Caribbean area are being instructed to cooperate in every way possible
with the various chiefs of diplomatic missions in the Latin American
capitals, with a view to obtaining the best possible results and
integration of the intelligence effort.

Respectfully yours,

Hoyt S. Vandenberg2
Lieutenant General, USA

* Source: Central Intelligence Agency
Historical Files, HS/CSG-2227, Job 83-00739R, Box 2, Folder 3. No
classification marking.

1 Not printed; see the Supplement.

2 Printed from a copy that indicates
Vandenberg signed the original.

133. Letter From Secretary of State Byrnes to the Director of Central Intelligence (Vandenberg)133. Letter From Secretary of State Byrnes to the Director of Central
Intelligence (Vandenberg)Source

Washington, January 8,
1947.

Dear General Vandenberg: The receipt is acknowledged of your letter of
January 31 with reference to
contemplated arrangements covering the replacement in Latin America of
special agents of the Federal Bureau of Investigation with
representatives of the Central Intelligence Group.

You may recall that as a result of our discussions last year it was
agreed not only that the FBI
representatives would remain until after the arrival of their CIG
replacements, but also that because of varying circumstances at each
capital, no period could be specified in advance as representing the
time necessary between the arrival of the CIG representative and the departure of his FBI predecessor. It was left therefore that
the American Ambassador concerned would be responsible for indicating,
after the arrival of the CIG
representative at his post, the overlap necessary at that post.

Provided this arrangement is maintained I see no objection to the
projected trip of Mr. DeBardaleben of CIG and a colleague from FBI, and I am also prepared in accordance with your
suggestion to authorize Mr. Jack D. Neal, Chief of the Division of
Foreign Activity Correlation, to proceed to Latin America as the
representative of the Department of State at approximately the same
time.

In connection with the foregoing we are fully convinced of the importance
of the work which you are about to undertake in Latin America, and we
share your desire to have that work accomplished with the fullest and
most complete collaboration between field representatives of CIG and the personnel of the Foreign
Service.

Sincerely yours,

For the Secretary of State:

Spruille Braden
Assistant Secretary

* Source: Central
Intelligence Agency Historical Files, HS/CSG-2227, Job 83-00739R,
Box 2, Folder 3. Secret.

1 Document 132.

134. Memorandum From the Director of the Strategic Services Unit, Department of War (Quinn) to the Assistant Secretary of War (Petersen)134. Memorandum From the Director of the Strategic Services Unit,
Department of War (Quinn) to the
Assistant Secretary of War (Petersen)Source

Washington, April 11,
1947.

SUBJECT

Liquidation of SSU

1. On 2 April 1946 you appointed me Director of the Strategic Services
Unit of the War Department. On 3 April 1946 you issued instructions to
me directing that liquidation of SSU be
completed not later than 30 June 1947.1 You further directed
that this liquidation be coordinated with development of the permanent peace-time intelligence
program, and that SSU service the
intelligence agencies and make available to the Director of Central
Intelligence any facilities or services of SSU which might be useful in the performance of the
authorized functions of the Central Intelligence Group.

2. All civilian personnel of SSU have
been terminated and military personnel have been transferred or
reassigned. Foreign missions and stations were liquidated as SSU installations on or before 20 October
1946.

3. Funds adequate to meet outstanding obligations of SSU have been allocated from appropriations
of the War Department available for that purpose. These funds will be
administered in accordance with arrangements which have been made with
administrative personnel of your office. Experience indicates that
claims and inquiries arising out of past operations of OSS-SSU
will continue, and no accurate estimate can now be made of their number
or when they will cease. They are, however, so few that personnel now on
duty with the Central Intelligence Group and familiar with such matters
can supply necessary information and assistance. Such questions may,
therefore, be referred to proper CIG
officials.

4. The disposition of the assets and facilities of SSU has been coordinated with the Director
of Central Intelligence in accordance with his requirements and to his
satisfaction.

5. Effective this date liquidation of SSU
is complete with the exceptions noted in paragraph 3, above, and your
instructions have been complied with. It is therefore recommended that I
be relieved as Director, SSU.2

William W. Quinn3
Colonel, Inf.

* Source: Central
Intelligence Agency Historical Files, HS/HC-804, Item 7.
Confidential. The source text may be a transcript prepared for the
CIA Historian in the early 1950s.

1 Document 107.

2 In an April 11 memorandum to Petersen, Vandenberg concurred in
Quinn's recommendations. (Central Intelligence Agency Historical
Files, HS/HC-804, Item 7)

3 Printed from a
copy that bears this typed signature.

135. Letter From the National Intelligence Authority to Representative Clare E. Hoffman135. Letter From the National Intelligence
Authority to Representative Clare E.
HoffmanSource

Washington, June 26,
1947.

My Dear Mr. Chairman: It has been brought to our attention that numerous
newspaper articles have stated that the Central Intelligence Group has
usurped various departmental intelligence functions and forced
established organizations out of the field. These charges have been
particularly leveled at the operation by the Central Intelligence Group
of clandestine intelligence activities. These charges are not true.

It has long been felt by those who have successfully operated clandestine
intelligence systems that such work must be centralized within one
agency. As a corollary to this proposition, it has likewise been proven
that a multitude of espionage agencies results in two shortcomings:
first, agents tend to uncover each other or block each other's funds or
similarly neutralize each other, being unaware of identical objectives;
second, each agency tends to hoard its own special information or
attempts to be the first to deliver a choice piece of information to
higher authorities. This latter type of competition does not permit the
overall evaluation of intelligence on a given subject, as each agency is
competing for prestige.

For the reasons cited above, which were highlighted by experience during
the last war, it was felt inadvisable, after due study by
interdepartmental committees, to permit the several departments to
conduct independent clandestine operations. For this reason, the
National Intelligence Authority, under date of 8 July 1946, issued the
following directive, which is quoted in part:

“Pursuant to the President's letter of 22 January 1946, designating this
Authority as responsible for planning, developing and coordinating all
Federal foreign intelligence activities, so as to insure the most
effective accomplishment of the intelligence mission related to the
national security, … . the Director of Central Intelligence is hereby
directed to perform the following services of common concern, which this
Authority has determined can be more efficiently accomplished centrally:
Conduct of all organized Federal espionage and counter-espionage
operations outside the United
States and its possessions for the collection of foreign intelligence
information required for the national security….”

This Authority reaffirms this directive as of the utmost importance to
the national security, for the reasons outlined above. Similarly, the
Central Intelligence Group should be free to assume, under our
direction, or the subsequent direction of a National Security Council,
the performance, for the benefit of the intelligence agencies of the
Government, of such services, of common concern, including the field of
collection, as this Authority or a subsequent Council determines can be
more efficiently performed centrally.

Sincerely yours,

Secretary of State1
Secretary of War
Secretary of The Navy
Personal Representative of the President

* Source: Central Intelligence Agency
Records, Job 90-00610R, Box 1, Folder 3. Top Secret. Representative
Hoffman (Republican, Michigan) was Chairman of the House Committee
on Expenditures in the Executive Departments. At the time the letter
was written, the committee was considering the legislation on armed
forces unification, which included provisions establishing the
Central Intelligence Agency on a statutory basis. The question of
clandestine operations arose in the committee as a result of press
stories and press criticism about the efforts to centralize all
clandestine intelligence operations in CIG. See Document 319, which
records the NIA's discussion of the
letter, which was proposed to the Authority by Hillenkoetter.

1 No signatures or any annotation indicating
the letter was signed and sent appears on the source text. The
NIA minutes cited in the source
note above, however, explicitly state that the NIA members signed the letter.

136. Memorandum of Conversation136. Memorandum of ConversationSource

Washington, April 16,
1948.

SUBJECT

Publicity on Bogota Intelligence Reports

PARTICIPANTS

CIA—Rear Admiral R. H.
Hillenkoetter

S/S—Mr. Humelsine

SA-A—Mr. Armstrong

Upon entering Admiral Hillenkoetter's office, he said to Mr. Armstrong, “Well, I kept you off the
spot, didn't I?” To this Mr. Armstrongreplied, “Perhaps, but you
certainly put the State Department on it.” Admiral Hillenkoetter
admitted this.

Admiral Hillenkoetter then described the circumstances of the hearing
before the Committee headed by Congressman Clarence Brown on the
preceding day. He said that the statement which he had made before the
Committee had been shown to Admiral Leahy (and indicated that the President had been
consulted in the matter) and that he had then shown it to Secretary
Forrestal. He stated that
Admiral Leahy and Secretary
Forrestal had told him to go
ahead with the statement even if it involved a public hearing. Admiral
Hillenkoetter stated that the hearing before the Committee had been
first in executive session, but that upon its completion, the Chairman
had called in the press and required him to read his statement again to
the reporters.

Mr. Humelsine requested Admiral
Hillenkoetter to explain his references in his testimony to the CIA
report allegedly “censored” by a Mr. O.J. Libert at Bogota. Admiral
Hillenkoetter picked up a memorandum, a copy of which is attached, and
read it.1

The memorandum had been prepared, he said, by the CIA Agent [less than 1 line of source text not declassified]
in Bogota and was an explanation of the Agent's instructions to CIA in
Washington that the message he sent on March 23rd should not be
forwarded to the State Department. Mr. Humelsine and Mr. Armstrong noted that the statement did not indicate that
Ambassador Beaulac had interposed any objection to the message being
transmitted to the State Department and that the CIA Agent had accepted
unquestioningly the authority of an administrative officer of the
International Conference Division as sufficient to block the
transmission of the message. Mr. Armstrong asked why the Agent had not gone back to the
Ambassador and urged the sending of the information, if he thought it
was important. Admiral Hillenkoetter responded that the Agent had to
“live” with the Embassy and therefore could not afford to antagonize the
personnel there.

Mr. Humelsine then said to Admiral
Hillenkoetter, “It is inconceivable to me that you personally could have
had the information to which your man attached such importance and not
have sent it to the Department regardless of your subordinate's
instructions from Bogota.” Admiral Hillenkoetter replied that in
hindsight he felt he should have done so and that, in fact, when the
information was received, on or about March 23, he had suggested doing
so. However, in a discussion of the matter with his Deputy, General E.K.
Wright, his Executive Officer, Captain Ford, and Colonel Galloway, the
Deputy Director for Special Operations, he had been advised against
doing so on the grounds that their man in Bogota would be placed in serious trouble vis-à-vis the
Ambassador and the staff.

Admiral Hillenkoetter went on to indicate the general character of the
difficulties which his overseas covert operations have encountered at
various [less than 1 line of source text not
declassified] posts. He particularly referred to a situation at
[1 line of source text not declassified] and
pointed out that the man had gone to [less than 1 line
of source text not declassified] in September 1947 and had not
as yet been able to make any official report or even send official word
of his arrival on duty. Mr. Humelsine said that this was news to him and, it being a
serious matter, would be investigated at once.

Admiral Hillenkoetter then recited the history of the efforts CIA has
made to obtain departmental agreement to the enlargement of its overseas
staff and said that since July 1947 he had been trying to get [less than 1 line of source text not declassified]
additional number of agents without success. He stated that he had
talked to Mr. Peurifoy about it
last fall and had at first found him sympathetic to his request and to
the CIA's staffing problem. After a further delay, Mr. Peurifoy had written him to the effect
that the additional assignments not only would not be granted, but that
by January 1st the overseas force would have to be reduced to no more
than 200 agents. He recalled that Mr. Peurifoy had subsequently told him that he had signed
this letter only with “great reluctance”. Admiral Hillenkoetter
recounted conversations which he had had with Mr. Armour, Mr. Neal, Mr.
Ravndal, and others on the subject in which the divergence of views on
the function of CIA in the field became apparent. He stated that he had
also talked to Secretary Forrestal and that the latter had talked to Mr.
Lovett. It had been agreed
between them that the Committee surveying CIA operations headed by Mr.
Allen Dulles would attempt to
resolve the impasse. [3 lines of source text not
declassified]

Admiral Hillenkoetter said that the CIA had been unjustifiably, in his
opinion, put on the spot by the State Department's failure to release
publicly the information which had been given by Lincoln White at a
Thursday evening, April 15th, press conference and that he thought the
Department deserved whatever heat might now be on it. Mr. Humelsine pointed out that the State
Department looked upon this situation as being the responsibility of the
Executive Branch of the Government, not of one department which could
disclaim responsibility by shifting the burden to another. He asked the
Director why he had not informed the Department that CIA was under
pressure and requested its cooperation. Mr. Humelsine recalled to the Director that he had
telephoned him, at Mr. Lovett's
request, when he first heard that there would be a congressional
investigation and had asked him if there was anything the State
Department could do to help. Mr. Armstrong said that he too had telephoned the Director
in the same vein and noted that in neither case had the Director indicated that the CIA was
under disturbing pressure or that the State Department could, or should,
do anything in the circumstances. Admiral Hillenkoetter referred to the
fact that the newspapers and radio had continuously indicated that CIA
was being held accountable for the alleged intelligence failure at
Bogota and said that the Department should have known that the only
corrective would be to issue a statement on the quantity and quality of
information that had been available.

Admiral Hillenkoetter then reverted to the difficulties he has
encountered in getting his program implemented through the State
Department and the Foreign Service and said that he would much prefer to
have relations with the Department centralized in one office and that if
he could do all of his business with Mr. Armstrong's office, he thought that better results would
ensue. He emphasized that his relations with Mr. Armstrong and the substantive side of
intelligence were satisfactory, and that he hoped that the Department
would take steps to make his relations center in one place. Mr.
Humelsine said that he
thought this was essential and should be carried into effect and he
would so report to Mr. Lovett.

In closing, Admiral Hillenkoetter stated that if relations with the
Department did not improve in the near future, [2
lines of source text not declassified] he intended to inform
the President and, if necessary, the Congress, that they could not hold
him responsible for obtaining the intelligence information that he is
charged with at present. He stated that he would have to bring the
blocking of his plans by the Department to public notice, since not, in
some cases, he is able to get only 60% or less of the information that
he should and would get if his program were fully put into effect.

* Source:
National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Records of the
Department of State, Records of the Office of the Assistant
Secretary for Administration— Subject Files, 1944-47: Lot 53 D 28,
Special Assistant for Research and Intelligence, Box 19. Secret.
Drafted by Humelsine and
Armstrong.

1 Not printed; see the
Supplement.

Souers' Tenure as Director of Central IntelligenceSouers' Tenure as Director of Central Intelligence: Document List

Introduction

Document 137: Memorandum From the Director of Central Intelligence (Souers) to the National Intelligence Authority

Washington, February 2, 1946.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Records of the Department of State, Records of the Bureau of Intelligence and Research: Lot 58 D 776, History of the National Intelligence Structure. Confidential.

Document 138: Minutes of the First Meeting of the Intelligence Advisory Board

Washington, February 4, 1946, 3:30 p.m.

Source: Central Intelligence Agency Historical Files, HS/HC-281. Confidential. The meeting was held in the New War Department Building.

Document 139: Minutes of the 184th Meeting of the Secretary of State's Staff Committee

Washington, February 5, 1946, 9:35 a.m.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 353, Records of Interdepartmental and Intradepartmental Committees— State Department, Lot File No. 122, Records of the Secretary's Staff Committee 1944-47. Secret. Drafted by E.A. Jamison. The meeting was held in the Secretary's office.

Document 140: Minutes of the First Meeting of the National Intelligence Authority

Washington, February 5, 1946, 11:30 a.m.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Records of the Department of State, Decimal File 1945-49, 811.002/1-2446. Confidential. The meeting was held at the Department of State.

Document 141: National Intelligence Authority Directive No. 1

Washington, February 8, 1946.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 218, Records of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, Leahy Papers, No. 132. Confidential. Also reproduced in CIA Cold War Records: The CIA under Harry Truman, pp. 35-37.

Document 142: National Intelligence Authority Directive No. 2

Washington, February 8, 1946.

Source: Central Intelligence Agency Historical Files, HS/HC-244. Confidential. This “tentative” version was approved at the February 8 NIA meeting. Appendices A-C are in the Supplement under cover of a February 11 memorandum from Souers. (National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Records of the Department of State, Decimal File 1945-49, 101.5/2-1146)

Document 143: Memorandum From the Director of Central Intelligence (Souers) to the Secretary of State's Special Assistant for Research and Intelligence (McCormack)

Washington, February 14, 1946.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Records of the Department of State, Decimal File 1945-49, 101.5/2-1446. Confidential.

Document 144: Minutes of the Second Meeting of the Intelligence Advisory Board

Washington, March 26, 1946, 3:30 p.m.

Source: Central Intelligence Agency Historical Files, HS/HC-281. Top Secret. Limited Distribution. The meeting was held at the New War Department Building.

Document 145: Minutes of the Third Meeting of the National Intelligence Authority

Washington, April 2, 1946, 11 a.m.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 218, Records of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, Leahy Papers, No. 132. Confidential. The meeting was held at the Department of State. This was an instance in which the meetings of the National Intelligence Authority and the Committee of Three overlapped. A record of the NIA portion of the meeting also exists in the Committee of Three minutes. (Ibid., RG 107, Records of the Office of the Secretary of War, Secretary of War Patterson's Subject File, RPP Committee of Three, Safe File No. 1) A note on the source text indicates Admiral Leahy “subsequently approved the action taken at the meeting.”

Document 146: Minutes of the Third Meeting of the Intelligence Advisory Board

Washington, April 8, 1946, 3 p.m.

Source: Central Intelligence Agency Historical Files, HS/HC-281. Confidential; Limited Distribution. The meeting was held at the New War Department Building.

Document 147: Central Intelligence Group Administrative Order No. 3

Washington, April 19, 1946.

Source: Central Intelligence Agency Historical Files, HS/HC-208. Confidential. The source text is dated by hand and carries the handwritten notation “Revised.”

Document 148: Memorandum by the Director of Central Intelligence (Souers)

Washington, April 29, 1946.

Source: Central Intelligence Agency Historical Files, HS/HC-276. Top Secret; Limited Distribution.

Document 149: Memorandum From the Director of Central Intelligence (Souers) to the President's Chief of Staff

Washington, May 7, 1946.

Source: Truman Library, Papers of Harry S. Truman, President's Secretary's Files. Secret. Truman had directed General Eisenhower, the Army Chief of Staff, to recommend a successor to Souers. Eisenhower proposed General Bonesteel. (Letter, Eisenhower to Truman, April 27; ibid.) See the Supplement.

Document 150: Memorandum From the President's Chief of Staff (Leahy) to President Truman

Washington, May 9, 1946.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 218, Records of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, Leahy Papers, No. 131. Secret.

Document 151: Minutes of the Fourth Meeting of the Intelligence Advisory Board

Washington, May 9, 1946, 2:30 p.m.

Source: Central Intelligence Agency Historical Files, HS/HC-281. Top Secret. The meeting was held at the War Department.

Document 152: Memorandum From President Truman to Secretary of War Patterson

Washington, May 16, 1946.

Source: Truman Library, Papers of Harry S. Truman, Official File. No classification marking.

Document 153: Memorandum From the Secretary of State's Special Assistant for Research and Intelligence (Langer) to the Secretary of State's Staff Committee

Washington, June 6, 1946.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 353, Records of Interdepartmental and Intradepartmental Committees— State Department, Lot File No. 122, Box 94. Restricted. Transmitted by a covering note stating that the Advisory Committee on Intelligence had considered the problem and decided that it required a decision at the level of the Secretary's Staff Committee. (Memorandum from Langer to John Gange, June 7; ibid.) See the Supplement. The action by the Advisory Committee on Intelligence is in the minutes of its first meeting, June 4. (National Archives and Records Administration, RG 353, Records of Interdepartmental and Intradepartmental Committees— State Department, Lot File No. 122, Box 94) See the Supplement.

Document 154: Memorandum From the Director of Central Intelligence (Souers) to the National Intelligence Authority

Washington, June 7, 1946.

Source: Central Intelligence Agency Historical Files, HS/HC-39, Item 1. Top Secret. Also reproduced with title page in CIA Cold War Records: The CIA under Harry Truman, pp. 41-51.

IntroductionIntroduction

With the signing of the directive on coordination of foreign intelligence
on January 22, 1946 (Document 71), a peacetime
national intelligence system was finally established. In fact, however,
it existed only on paper. OSS had been
broken up and dissolved. The Strategic Services Unit remained in the War
Department as a potential nucleus of a clandestine intelligence
capability, but at that point no one was certain of how or even whether
it would be absorbed into the new national intelligence structure. A
mechanism for producing “strategic and national policy intelligence” had
yet to be devised, and there was not yet even a common definition of the
term.

Beyond the generalities, there was no agreed view of how the new system
should operate or even of what it should do. President Truman had his own idea of what the new
arrangements could do for him, reflecting mainly his concern to be kept
informed in a way that ensured that all of the relevant information was
put together in a single package. Apart from this, his interest in the
intelligence set-up seemed to be limited. The armed forces had been the
prime movers of the effort to set up a centralized intelligence
capability but they would soon begin to show signs of alarm that the new
system was becoming too independent. The Department of State wanted to
exert major influence on the Central Intelligence Group but seemed
uncertain about how to do so, perhaps because it was still in the middle
of its own bruising battle over intelligence. Secretary of State
Byrnes feared that the new
arrangements would enhance Admiral Leahy's role in foreign policy, to the detriment of the
Department's.

Truman appointed Rear Admiral
Sidney W. Souers as the first Director of Central Intelligence on
January 23, 1946. As Deputy Director of Naval Intelligence, Souers had
been one of the architects of the system that came into being with the
President's directive. He had written the intelligence chapter of the
Eberstadt Report, which
advocated a unified intelligence system and apparently had made a
significant impact on Forrestal.
Toward the end of 1945, when the competing plans for a national
intelligence system were deadlocked, Souers' views had come to the
attention of the President, and he seems to have played a role in
breaking the impasse. Working with Clark
Clifford, he helped turn the Three Secretaries' proposal
of January 7 into the directive signed by the President on January
22.

On the same day that he appointed Souers Director of Central
Intelligence, Truman named
Admiral Leahy as his personal
representative on the National
Intelligence Authority (NIA). Leahy heretofore had played a
significant behind-the-scenes role on intelligence matters. From now on,
he was a somewhat more visible as well as influential figure.

The documentation on Souers' tenure is limited, and partly because he was
so briefly in office (serving less than 5 months), and partly because
the intelligence structure was still so rudimentary. What has been found
seems adequate to trace major trends, but there is a change in the
quality of the surviving documentation, which begins to be more formal
and bureaucratic, a change that becomes even more marked as the
institutional development of the intelligence system continues under
Souers' successors.

Although there were latent conflicts over fundamental intelligence issues
from the beginning, these conflicts were muted under Souers'
directorship. A reserve officer, he had been anxious to return to
private life but was prevailed upon to serve as Director of Central
Intelligence while a “permanent director” was sought. Both his personal
style and the nature of his responsibilities at that point made it
possible for him to avoid or at least minimize controversy. At the same
time, having been through the controversy over the founding of the
system, Souers was aware of the potential for disagreement and tended to
move carefully. All of these tendencies were reinforced by his awareness
that he was dependent on the State, War, and Navy Departments for
personnel and funds. His approach was perhaps best summed up in National
Intelligence Authority Directive No. 1, which declared that “The Central
Intelligence Group shall be considered organized and operated as a
cooperative interdepartmental activity, with adequate and equitable
participation by the State, War and Navy Departments.” (Document 141)

Souers had gone to work the last week of January. One of his first jobs
was to organize the Central Intelligence Group, but even before that he
had to write its charter. He did so in NIA Directive No. 1, in effect a set of instructions to
himself, which laid out the basic guidelines for the operation of the
national intelligence system. In two of its provisions, the directive
foreshadowed later controversies. Paragraph 2, which provided that “The
Central Intelligence Group will furnish strategic and national policy
intelligence to the President and the State, War and Navy Departments”
marked, at least symbolically, the beginning of the debate over national
intelligence estimates and over whether CIG should be a large research and analytical agency or a
small but expert estimative staff. Similarly, paragraph 3 of NIA Directive No. 1 encapsulated another
future debate. It provided that “All recommendations, prior to
submission to this Authority, will be referred to the [Intelligence
Advisory] Board for concurrence or comment… . If any member of the Board
does not concur, you will submit to this Authority the basis for his
non-concurrence at the same time that you submit your recommendation.”
In a sense, this was the
starting point for the long-running contest over the respective powers
of the Director of Central Intelligence and the departmental
intelligence chiefs that was fought out in the Intelligence Advisory
Board and its successor, the Intelligence Advisory Committee. Whether
the IAB/IAC was a board of directors or simply an advisory panel
was an issue that was still being debated 4 years later.

The inauguration of the new intelligence system also marked the beginning
of its two deliberative groups, the National Intelligence Authority and
the Intelligence Advisory Board. The former held three meetings during
Souers' directorship, the latter four. In general, their records during
the Souers' period tend to be briefer and “drier” than in later periods,
when a fuller record of the discussions (and eventually a transcript)
were introduced. In any case, the proceedings of both bodies are
important sources both at this and later periods, and the records of the
NIA during its approximately 18
months of existence especially so because they provide a record of
Cabinet-level oversight of the intelligence structure.

During Souers' tenure there also began the series of National
Intelligence Authority Directives which provided the basic charters for
the intelligence system during its formative period. While these are
formal documents, they tend to reflect the main issues and concerns, at
least of an institutional and procedural nature, with which the
intelligence system was grappling. The discussions of the draft
directives in the NIA and the IAB, despite the latter's penchant for
becoming involved in detail, provide significant insights into how
intelligence issues were approached.

Souers' organizational problems were in one sense relatively simple. His
main concerns were to have a planning group that could sort out the
problems and issues that had to be addressed and a reporting group that
could provide a nucleus for the “strategic and national policy
intelligence” function. All of this could be and was done with a small
staff. Souers' problem was that the staff (and the funding) had to come
from the State, War, and Navy Department, and there seems to have been a
constant struggle to ensure a flow of qualified personnel to CIG.

NIA Intelligence Directive No. 2 of
February 8, 1946 (Document 142), drafted for
the Authority by Souers and his colleagues, assigned two “first
priority” tasks to the new Director of Central Intelligence. One of
them, “conducting a survey of existing facilities for collection of
foreign intelligence information, and submission of appropriate
recommendations,” was the charter for the planning process on which
Souers understandably put so much emphasis. To achieve this objective,
he established a Central Planning Staff responsible for “planning for
the coordination of intelligence activities related to the national
security, and…preparing recommendations regarding the establishment of
such over-all policies and
objectives as will assure the most effective accomplishment of the
national intelligence mission.” In this initial phase, the Planning
Staff seems to have been occupied mainly in preparing studies on a wide
variety of proposed functions and real or perceived intelligence
problems. There are some indications that at the outset Souers would
have preferred to conduct the planning process by interdepartmental
committee but that the problem of getting adequate committee staffing
from all concerned agencies led him to rely increasingly on his own
Planning Staff.

The second of the “first priority” tasks laid upon Souers was the
“production of daily summaries containing factual statements of the
significant developments in the field of intelligence and operations
related to the national security and to foreign events for the use of
the President.”

Although there was little question that the President wanted some kind of
daily digest of information (in his own mind it seems to have been one
of the main reasons he established a national intelligence system), the
President's summary gave the National Intelligence Authority its first
contentious issue. At the Authority's first meeting on February 5,
Secretary of State Byrnes raised
the problem and “pointed out that he is responsible for reporting to the
President on matters of foreign policy.” (Document
140)

Byrnes was not mollified by
Souers' explanation that his reports to the President, based on
intelligence dispatches, would be “purely factual” and not imperative or
offer advice or by a subsequent explanation by Admiral Leahy of why the President wanted
the summaries. The Authority decided to defer action “pending further
study by Secretary Byrnes.”
Byrnes then discussed the
matter with the President and at the NIA's second meeting on February 8 (see the Supplement) and
told his colleagues that the President had assured him that “only
factual statements were desired” in the summaries. The Authority
thereupon agreed to describe them accordingly in NIA Directive No. 2. The daily summary appeared for the
first time the following week.

For the preparation of summaries and other substantive intelligence
papers, Souers established a Central Reports Staff, which was intended
from the beginning to produce estimates but which had to devote much of
its energy and resources to the preparation of summaries. During Souers'
directorship, it had not been decided whether the Central Reports Staff
should try to develop a separate research capability of its own or
whether it would remain a small group of experts who would work closely
with the departmental intelligence agencies, drawing on their resources
and synthesizing their products. But there was a hint of the future in
the Intelligence Advisory Board meeting on April 8, 1946 (Document 146). After a discussion of the State
Department's difficulties in securing budgetary support for its
fledgling intelligence organization, and against the prospect of the Russell Plan's dispersal of the
analytical units to the policy offices, both the Army G-2 (who would
shortly become the Director of Central Intelligence) and the Chief of
Naval Intelligence suggested that perhaps the time had come for the
State Department to transfer the research and analysis function it had
inherited to the Central Intelligence Group.

In his valedictory report to the National Intelligence Authority on June
7, 1946 (Document 154), Souers laid out the
agenda for his successor. He indicated that the initial planning and
organizing phase had been completed and that the Central Intelligence
Group should begin operation of centralized common services as soon as
possible. He alluded to the inauguration of the Presidential summaries,
but declared that “the primary function of C.I.G in the production of
intelligence, however, will be the preparation and dissemination of
definitive estimates of the capabilities and intentions of foreign
countries as they affect the national security of the United
States.”

Finally, Souers asserted that “the National Intelligence Authority and
the Central Intelligence Group should obtain enabling legislation and an
independent budget as soon as possible, either as part of a new national
defense organization or as a separate agency.” This last recommendation
became one of General Vandenberg's first and highest priorities when he
succeeded Souers a few days later.

137. Memorandum From the Director of Central Intelligence (Souers) to the National Intelligence Authority137. Memorandum From the Director of Central Intelligence (Souers) to the National
Intelligence AuthoritySource

Washington, February 2,
1946.

SUBJECT

Proposed Tentative Organization of the Central Intelligence
Group

1. The President's letter of January 22, 1946,1 requires the assignment
of accessory personnel and facilities from the Departments of State, War
and the Navy in order to form a Central Intelligence Group.

2. An initial personal authorization and an outline of organization
should now be approved so that the Group may be activated and proceed
with the pressing problems
now confronting the National Intelligence Authority. The problems
requiring earliest attention are:

a. The production of daily and weekly summaries of the most significant
intelligence and operational information related to national security
and foreign policy for the use of the President, the members of the
National Intelligence Authority, and certain additional limited
distribution.

b. Conducting a survey of existing facilities for collecting foreign
intelligence information, with a view to determining how these
facilities may be better coordinated and improved.

3. The proposed organization is set forth in the enclosed directive2 which has been
prepared for your approval. It provides the necessary tentative charter
and sufficient personnel to activate the organization and begin
operating.

4. It is recommended that the members of the National Intelligence
Authority approve and sign the enclosed directive.

Sidney W. Souers3

* Source: National Archives and Records
Administration, RG 59, Records of the Department of State, Records
of the Bureau of Intelligence and Research: Lot 58 D 776, History of
the National Intelligence Structure. Confidential.

1 Document 71.

2 Not printed; see the Supplement. The
enclosure was a draft of NIA
Directive No. 2. For text of the directive as issued, see Document 141.

3 Printed from a
copy that bears this typed signature.

138. Minutes of the First Meeting of the Intelligence Advisory Board138. Minutes of the First Meeting of the Intelligence Advisory
BoardSource

Washington, February 4, 1946, 3:30 p.m.

PARTICIPANTS

Rear Admiral Sidney W. Souers, Director of Central Intelligence,
in the Chair

Members Present

Mr. Alfred McCormack,
Special Assistant to the Secretary of State in Charge of Research
and Intelligence

Brig. Gen. John Weckerling (representing Lt. Gen. Hoyt Vandenberg,
Assistant Chief of Staff, G-2, WDGS)

Rear Admiral Thomas B.
Inglis, Chief of Naval Intelligence

Brig. Gen. John A. Samford, Acting Assistant Chief of Air Staff,
Intelligence

Also Present

Capt. Thomas F. Cullen, USNR

Capt. W. B. Goggins, USN

Mr. L. L. Montague,
Department of State

Col. E. P. Mussett, USA

Col. C. P. Nicholas, USA

Col. W. A. Perry, USA

Secretary

Mr. James S. Lay, Jr.,
Department of State

1. Proposed Policies and Procedures Governing the
Central Intelligence Group

The paper1 was discussed
paragraph by paragraph.

Admiral Inglis questioned whether
paragraph 3, on the composition of the Intelligence Advisory Board,
permitted other officials of the State, War and Navy Departments, such
as the Director of Naval Communications, to participate in meetings of
that Board. After discussion and amendment

The Intelligence Advisory Board:

a. Concurred in the paper as amended at the meeting. (Subsequently
circulated as N.I.A. 1.)2

b. Agreed that the wording of paragraph 3 does not preclude membership by
heads of other intelligence agencies of the State, War and Navy
Departments, but that each case will be decided on its merits by
agreement between the Director of Central Intelligence and the permanent
members of the Intelligence Advisory Board.

2. Proposed Tentative Organization of the Central Intelligence Group

The paper was discussed and amended.

The Intelligence Advisory Board:

Concurred in the paper as amended, subject to a revision of Appendix “A”
so that the totals would be approximately 40 each for State and Navy,
and 80 for War. (Subsequently circulated as N.I.A. 2.)3

* Source: Central Intelligence
Agency Historical Files, HS/HC-281. Confidential. The meeting was
held in the New War Department Building.

1 A draft of NIA Directive No. 1, not found.

2 Appended to a
February 4 covering memorandum from Souers to the NIA. (National Archives and Records
Administration, RG 59, Records of the Department of State, Records
of the Bureau of Intelligence and Research: Lot 58 D 776) See the
Supplement.

3 The paper discussed was the enclosure to Souers'
February 2 memorandum to the NIA.
(National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Records of the
Department of State, Records of the Bureau of Intelligence and
Research: Lot 58 D 776) See the Supplement. A version circulated as
NIA 2, dated February 5, is in
the National Archives and Records Administration, RG 218, Records of
the Joint Chiefs of Staff, Leahy Papers. See the Supplement. Appendix “A” dealt
with personnel assignments.

139. Minutes of the 184th Meeting of the Secretary of State's Staff Committee139. Minutes of the 184th Meeting of the Secretary of State's Staff
CommitteeSource

Washington, February 5, 1946, 9:35 a.m.

PARTICIPANTS

Present:

The Secretary (presiding)

The Under Secretary

Mr. Benton

Mr. Braden

Mr. Clayton

Mr. McCormack

Mr. Russell

Mr. Henderson (for Mr. Dunn)

Mr. Matthews (for Mr.
Dunn)

Mr. Vincent (for Mr. Dunn)

Mr. Culbertson (WE)

Mr. Jamison

Mr. Lewis

Absent:

The Counselor

Mr. Hackworth

Mr. Pasvolsky

[Here follows discussion of matters unrelated to intelligence.]

National Intelligence Authority

Mr. McCormack reviewed for the
Committee the drafts of two directives which it was proposed that the
newly created National Intelligence Authority would issue to the
Director of Central Intelligence.1 He explained that these were prepared by
Admiral Souers who had been appointed Director of Central Intelligence
under the plan issued by the President. Mr. McCormack said that the final order for the National
Intelligence Authority differed in two respects from that proposed by
the Department of State2 because of
amendments which had been suggested by Admiral Leahy at a meeting in which the
State Department was not represented. These changes had involved taking
the coordinating authority away
from the Department of State, placing it in the hands of a Director
appointed by the President, and adding Admiral Leahy as the Personal
Representative of the President on the Authority.

Mr. McCormack outlined the two
draft directives, indicating that they prescribed the functions of the
National Intelligence Authority, specified certain details of the
dissemination and distribution of intelligence, and outlined personnel
requirements. He said that the directives would require each of the
three Departments to provide for the Director of Central Intelligence
with competent people for a survey of materials which might be
available. He referred particularly to Section 7 of the first directive,
under which the Director would be authorized to obtain all necessary
facilities, intelligence and information in the possession of the
respective Departments, including necessary information as to policies,
plans, actions, capabilities and intentions of the United States with
reference to foreign countries. He said that this provision would open
to inspection all available material in the Department. Mr. McCormack pointed out that the second
directive described the two main missions of the Intelligence Authority
as (1) the preparation of a daily and weekly summary of all important
intelligence, to be made available to the President, to members of the
Authority and to certain others, and (2) to conduct a survey of existing
facilities for collecting foreign intelligence information with a view
to making recommendations as to how they may be better coordinated and
improved. The second directive also outlined a table of organization to
be established by June 30, 1946, including a statement of the facilities
to be contributed by each of the Departments. Under this the State
Department would be called upon to furnish, by the end of the year or
before, 43 people to the Central Intelligence Group. Mr. McCormack explained that this would
necessarily be contingent upon obtaining the people and the necessary
appropriation.

The Secretary asked Mr. McCormack
for details on that section of the directives outlining materials to be
made available, and Mr. McCormack
repeated Section 7 of the first Directive as given above. The Secretary
pointed out that the determination of what was “necessary” under that
section carried with it much responsibility. He said that a great deal
would depend upon the individual who performed this function.

Mr. Russell inquired whether the
danger of misinterpretation of the Department's position might not arise
as a result of the coordination of intelligence by the Director. Mr.
McCormack remarked that the
term “intelligence” apparently would be interpreted quite broadly so
that it would include steps taken in the adoption of policies and in
their implementation. The Secretary expressed the view that the
practical question concerned the method by which the reporting would be
done. Mr. Russell stated his view
that there would be considerable danger in reports on State Department
policy being presented to the President from sources other than the Department, since these
would be no less binding upon the Department. It was his view that
statements of policy in any form should be made by the person
responsible for their formulation and implementation. Mr. McCormack emphasized the important
influence which might be exerted if there were any inclination to short
circuit the Department on matters of policy. Mr. Acheson said that danger was inherent in
the decision which had been made to take the primary responsibility for
coordination out of the Department of State.

Mr. Henderson asked whether it would not still be possible for the
Department of State to approach the President directly with its own
report of intelligence. Mr. Russell said that this would probably be ex post facto,
and the Secretary agreed that that would be the likely result. The
Secretary said that, since the information for the President would come
from the Intelligence Authority and not from the Department of State,
someone else would do the reporting. There would be coordination without
full explanation and the way would be left open for misinterpretation.
The Secretary again expressed the view that much would depend upon the
person doing the job.

Mr. Braden pointed out that the
situation which had existed during the war period, with the War and Navy
Departments doing considerable reporting on political affairs, had been
confusing, however necessary, in the emergency. The Secretary agreed
that War and Navy were continuing to do political reporting. He
indicated that the only method under the new plan by which the
Department could be sure that its policies and actions might not be
misinterpreted would be to submit a report of its own directly to the
President before the coordinated report from the Director of Central
Intelligence had been sent in.

In answer to a question by Mr. Vincent as to whether the Department of
State would have the authority to see the coordinated reports of the
Director of Central Intelligence before they were presented to the
President, Mr. McCormack said
that under the proposed directives a copy would be sent to the
Department after presentation to the President. Mr. Braden emphasized the importance of
State Department controlling the reporting of its activities and
policies but Mr. McCormack again
indicated that struggle had been lost in the order establishing the
National Intelligence Authority.

(The Under Secretary left the meeting at this point.)

Mr. Braden inquired as to what
would be done about the FBI program in
this hemisphere since ARA had found this to be highly valuable if not
essential. Mr. McCormack said
that Admiral Souers was apparently seeking to avoid placing large
numbers of OSS personnel in the
Departments of War and State, and did not wish to replace such useful
functions as those of the FBI in the
other American republics. The Secretary said that he had come to have a
much higher regard than formerly for the work of the FBI in such
activities, and he added that there was additional practical value in
the fact that the FBI was highly
successful in obtaining appropriations from Congress.

Mr. Henderson, referring to the 43 people who would be assigned from
State Department to the National Intelligence Authority, asked whether
they would continue to be responsible to the Department. Mr. McCormack said that they would be
entirely under control of the Director of Central Intelligence. Mr.
Henderson said that in his view the Department should maintain control
over them.

Mr. Clayton stated that it was his
view that the only department or agency of the Government competent to
express foreign policy was the Department of State through its
responsible officers. Plan as outlined in these directives, he felt,
would only bring continued and interminable trouble. The Secretary said
that this meant that the Department must coordinate its reports and
present them to the President each day, that this must be done in the
most attractive and impressive manner by competent officers.

In stating again his view that the Secretary should proceed very
cautiously on the program as set forth, Mr. Russell indicated that an alternative method might be
for the Department of State to prepare a report for the President within
the Department, a copy of which would be sent to the Director of Central
Intelligence for the purpose of coordinating it with intelligence from
other sources. Mr. McCormack
suggested that another possible solution was to confine the daily report
to intelligence, under a narrow definition, from the War, Navy and State
Departments, but the Secretary expressed his fear that this would not
prove practicable. The consensus was that in his meeting with the other
members of the National Intelligence Authority the Secretary should
present fully the Department's position on the coordination and
reporting of policies to the President.

The meeting adjourned at 10:00 a.m.

Annex I3

There was considerable discussion of the degree to which Admiral
Leahy was maintaining
control of the intelligence function. The Secretary said that although
the President felt that by closing the Map Room in the White House Admiral Leahy's influence would be reduced,
actually under this setup his control would be very much greater. He
said that the Admiral would now be able to spend all of his time with
the National Intelligence Authority. Mr. Russell said that the President would be put in a
position of seeing only that material which had been screened through
Admiral Leahy and that
reporting on policies or actions would be done without State Department
approval. Mr. McCormack reported
that Admiral Leahy had
apparently facetiously noted in his comments on the proposed directives
that the requirement that the State Department furnish reports on its
policies should be left out, since the State Department had no policies.
Mr. Russell said that however
facetiously suggested this proposal should be seized upon, and that the
requirement in the directives that statements on policies be submitted
should be taken out.

* Source: National Archives and
Records Administration, RG 353, Records of Interdepartmental and
Intradepartmental Committees— State Department, Lot File No. 122,
Records of the Secretary's Staff Committee 1944-47. Secret. Drafted
by E.A. Jamison. The meeting was held in the Secretary's
office.

1 Drafts of
NIA 1, attached to Souers'
February 4 memorandum to the NIA
(ibid., RG 59, Records of the Department of State, Records of the
Bureau of Intelligence and Research: Lot 58 D 776), and NIA 2, February 5 (ibid., RG 218,
Records of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, Leahy Papers, No. 130), are in
the Supplement. NIA 1 and NIA 2 are printed as Documents 141 and 142.

2 See document SC-172.
Mr. McCormack mentioned,
however, that the three Secretaries did not send to the President
the plan proposed by the Department but a compromise plan prepared
by the Navy Department. [Footnote in the source text; SC-172 is
printed as Document 46.]

3 Secret— Not for Circulation to Anyone
Without Express Approval of Executive Secretary. This addendum is
designated as “Annex I” although it is the only annex found with
this set of minutes.

140. Minutes of the First Meeting of the National Intelligence Authority140. Minutes of the First Meeting of the National Intelligence
AuthoritySource

Washington, February 5, 1946, 11:30 a.m.

PARTICIPANTS

Members Present

Secretary of State James F.
Byrnes

Secretary of War Robert P.
Patterson

Secretary of the Navy James
Forrestal

Fleet Admiral William D.
Leahy, Personal Representative of the
President

Rear Admiral Sidney W. Souers, Director of Central
Intelligence

Also Present

Mr. H. Freeman Matthews, Department of State

Mr. Davidson Sommers, War Department

Mr. Edward Hidalgo, Navy Department

Secretariat

Mr. James S. Lay, Jr.,
Central Intelligence Group

1. Proposed Policies and Procedures Governing the
Central Intelligence Group (N.I.A. 1)1

Secretary Patterson suggested
deleting the word “prior” on the 8th line of page 3, in order to make it
clear that approval by the Authority was not required.

Admiral Souers suggested that this might also be accomplished by
substitution of the words “action by” for “prior reference to”. He also
recommended that a period be placed after “departments” on line 4,
paragraph 7, page 4, and that the remainder of the sentence be
deleted.

The National Intelligence Authority:

Agreed to the following amendments in N.I.A. 1:

a. Substitute “action by” for “prior reference to” in line 8 of page
3.

b. Place a period after the word “departments” in line 4, paragraph 7 of
page 4 and delete the remainder of that sentence.

2. Proposed Tentative Organization of the Central
Intelligence Group (N.I.A. 2)2

Secretary Byrnes asked what
paragraph 2-a on page 1 contemplated as to foreign policy. He pointed
out that he is responsible for reporting to the President on matters of
foreign policy.

Admiral Souers explained his understanding was that the President wanted
him only to go through the dispatch traffic and make a digest of
significant developments. Admiral Souers emphasized that there was no
intention that he should interpret these dispatches or advise the
President on any matters of foreign policy. His report was intended to
be purely factual as regards the activities of the United States in the
field of foreign affairs.

Secretary Byrnes stressed the fact
that it was his function to furnish the President with information on
which to base conclusions.

Admiral Leahy expressed his
understanding that the President wanted the information from all three
departments (State, War and Navy) summarized in order to keep him
currently informed. Admiral Leahy pointed out that Secretary Byrnes presents the viewpoint of the
Department of State while the President would like to receive
significant information available in all three departments in a single
summary.

Secretary Byrnes pointed out that
Admiral Souers would not be presenting the viewpoint of any single
department. Although the Central Intelligence Group would be composed of
personnel from all three departments, Secretary Byrnes believes that any man assigned
to that Group must be responsible solely to Admiral Souers.

Admiral Souers suggested that, in order to clarify the meaning of
paragraph 4 on page 3, it might be reworded as follows: “Production of
daily and weekly summaries of the significant developments in the field
of intelligence and operations related to the national security and to
foreign events for the use of
the President, the members of this Authority, and additional
distribution shown in Appendix ‘C’.”

After further discussion,

The National Intelligence Authority:

Agreed to defer final action on N.I.A. 1 and N.I.A. 2, pending further
study by Secretary Byrnes.

* Source: National Archives and
Records Administration, RG 59, Records of the Department of State,
Decimal File 1945-49, 811.002/1-2446. Confidential. The meeting was
held at the Department of State.

1 See
footnote 1, Document 139.

2 See footnote 3, Document 138.

141. National Intelligence Authority Directive No. 1141. National Intelligence Authority Directive No. 1Source

Washington, February 8,
1946.

POLICIES AND PROCEDURES GOVERNING THE CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE GROUP

Pursuant to the attached letter from the President, dated 22 January
1946, designating the undersigned as the National Intelligence
Authority, you are hereby directed to perform your mission, as Director
of Central Intelligence, in accordance with the following policies and
procedures:

1. The Central Intelligence Group shall be considered, organized and
operated as a cooperative interdepartmental activity, with adequate and
equitable participation by the State, War and Navy Departments and, as
recommended by you and approved by us, other Federal departments and
agencies. The Army Air Forces will be represented on a basis similar to
that of the Army and the Navy.

2. The Central Intelligence Group will furnish strategic and national
policy intelligence to the President and the State, War and Navy
Departments, and, as appropriate, to the State-War-Navy Coordinating
Committee, the Joint Chiefs of Staff, and other governmental departments
and agencies having strategic and policy functions related to the
national security.

3. The composition of the Intelligence Advisory Board will be flexible
and will depend, in each instance, upon the subject matter under
consideration. The Special Assistant to the Secretary of State in charge
of Research and Intelligence, the Assistant Chief of Staff G-2, WDGS, the Chief of Naval Intelligence and
the Assistant Chief of Air Staff, Intelligence (or their
representatives) will be permanent members. You will invite the head (or his representative)
of any other intelligence agency having functions related to the
national security to sit as a member on all matters within the province
of his agency.

All recommendations, prior to submission to this Authority, will be
referred to the Board for concurrence or comment. Any recommendation
which you and the Intelligence Advisory Board approve unanimously and
have the existing authority to execute may be put into effect without
action by this Authority. If any member of the Board does not concur,
you will submit to this Authority the basis for his non-concurrence at
the same time that you submit your recommendation.

4. Recommendations approved by this Authority will, where applicable,
govern the intelligence activities of the separate departments
represented herein. The members of the Intelligence Advisory Board will
each be responsible for ensuring that approved recommendations are
executed within their respective departments.

5. You will submit to this Authority as soon as practicable a proposal
for the organization of the Central Intelligence Group and an estimate
of the personnel and funds required from each department by this Group
for the balance of this fiscal year and for the next fiscal year. Each
year thereafter prior to the preparation of departmental budgets, you
will submit a similar estimate for the following fiscal year. As
approved by this Authority and within the limits of available
appropriations the necessary funds and personnel will be made available
to you by arrangement between
you and the appropriate department through its member on the
Intelligence Advisory Board. You may determine the qualifications of
personnel and the adequacy of individual candidates. Personnel assigned
to you will be under your operational and administrative control,
subject only to necessary personnel procedures in each department.

6. The Central Intelligence Group will utilize all available intelligence
in producing strategic and national policy intelligence. All
intelligence reports prepared by the Central Intelligence Group will
note any substantial dissent by a participating intelligence agency.

7. As required in the performance of your authorized mission, there will
be made available to you or your authorized representatives all
necessary facilities, intelligence and information in the possession of
our respective departments. Arrangements to carry this out will be made
with members of the Intelligence Advisory Board. Conversely, all
facilities of the Central Intelligence Group and all intelligence
prepared by it will be made available to us and, through arrangements
agreed between you and the members of the Intelligence Advisory Board,
subject to any authorized restrictions, to our respective
departments.

8. The operations of the intelligence agencies of our departments will be
open to inspection by you or your authorized representatives in
connection with your planning functions, under arrangements agreed to
between you and the respective members of the Intelligence Advisory
Board.

9. You are authorized to request of other Federal departments and
agencies any information or assistance required by you in the
performance of your authorized mission.

10. You will be responsible for furnishing, from the personnel of the
Central Intelligence Group, a Secretariat for this Authority, with the
functions of preparing agenda, reviewing and circulating papers for
consideration, attending all meetings, keeping and publishing minutes,
initiating and reviewing the implementation of decision, and performing
other necessary secretarial services.

Secretary of State1
Secretary of War
Secretary of the Navy
Personal Representative of the President

* Source: National Archives and Records
Administration, RG 218, Records of the Joint Chiefs of Staff,
Leahy Papers, No.
132. Confidential. Also reproduced in CIA Cold
War Records: The CIA under Harry
Truman, pp. 35-37.

1 No signatures or any annotation indicating
the directive was signed appears on the source text.

142. National Intelligence Authority Directive No. 2142. National Intelligence Authority Directive No. 2Source

Washington, February 8,
1946.

REFERENCES

A. The President's letter of 22 January 1946, establishing the
National Intelligence Authority

B. N.I.A. Directive Number 11

ORGANIZATION AND FUNCTIONS OF THE CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE GROUP
(Tentative)

1. Pursuant to the President's letter of 22 January 1946, designating the
undersigned as the National Intelligence Authority, the Central
Intelligence Group is hereby
constituted and will be activated this date by the Director of Central
Intelligence. In accordance with personnel authorizations approved by
this Authority, the Departments of State, War, and the Navy will assign
personnel to the Central Intelligence Group, and make reliefs and
replacements, upon the Director's requisition. The approved initial
personnel authorization is enclosed (Appendix “A”).

2. The initial authorization provides the minimum personnel necessary for
the tasks of organizing, surveying pressing problems, and meeting
initial requirements. As soon as practicable the Director will submit
his recommendations for augmentation of the Group.

3. Initial principal offices and sub-divisions shall be as shown on the
chart (Appendix “B”), with functions as follows:

a. Director of Central Intelligence—Responsible for all operations of the
Central Intelligence Group in accordance with the President's letter of
22 January 1946 and Directives of the National Intelligence Authority.
He will make the assignments of all personnel in the Group. At the
appropriate time, he will select an Assistant Director from each of the
four personnel contingents (State, Army, Navy, Air), one of whom he may
designate as his Deputy.

b. Administrative Section—This Section will perform all necessary
administrative and security functions of the Group, and will provide the
Secretariat for the National Intelligence Authority.

c. Central Reports Staff—This Staff will assist the Director in
accomplishing the correlation and evaluation of intelligence relating to
the national security, and in accomplishing appropriate dissemination
within the Government of the resulting strategic and national policy
intelligence.

d. Central Planning Staff—This Staff will assist the Director in planning
for the coordination of intelligence activities related to the national
security, and in preparing recommendations regarding the establishment
of such over-all policies and objectives as will assure the most
effective accomplishment of the national intelligence mission.

e. Central Intelligence Services—The Central Intelligence Services shall
be such operating agencies as may hereafter be established upon approval
of this Authority under the provisions of paragraph 3c of the
President's Directive of 22 January.

4. Initial Tasks. The Director of Central Intelligence will give first
priority to the following tasks:

a. Production of daily summaries containing factual statements of the
significant developments in the field of intelligence and operations
related to the national security and to foreign events for the use of
the President, the members of this Authority, and additional
distribution shown in Appendix “C”.

b. Conducting a survey of existing facilities for collection of foreign
intelligence information, and submission of appropriate
recommendations.

Secretary of State2
Secretary of War
Secretary of the Navy
Personal Representative of the President

* Source: Central Intelligence Agency Historical
Files, HS/HC-244. Confidential. This “tentative” version was
approved at the February 8 NIA
meeting. Appendices A-C are in the Supplement under cover of a
February 11 memorandum from Souers. (National Archives and Records
Administration, RG 59, Records of the Department of State, Decimal
File 1945-49, 101.5/2-1146)

1 Document 141.

2 No signatures or any annotation indicating
the directive was signed appears on the source text.

143. Memorandum From the Director of Central Intelligence (Souers) to the Secretary of State's Special Assistant for Research and Intelligence (McCormack)143. Memorandum From the Director of Central Intelligence (Souers) to the Secretary of State's Special
Assistant for Research and Intelligence (McCormack)Source

Washington, February 14,
1946.

SUBJECT

Arrangements to make certain State Department intelligence and
information available to the Current Section, C.I.G.

1. In accordance with paragraph 7, N.I.A. Directive No. 1,1 I request that you
make appropriate arrangements within the Department of State to make the
following intelligence and information available to the Current Section,
C.I.G., in the performance of the priority task indicated in paragraph 4
a, N.I.A. Directive No. 2:2

a. Information copies of the selected dispatches now delivered to Mr.
Reams in the Office of the Secretary.

b. A copy of Mr. Reams' daily one-page summary of the most important of
such dispatches, normally completed at 0930.

c. Advanced copy prepared by Mr. Edgar for the Staff Officers' Top Secret daily summary,
normally available between 1030 and 1130.

d. The several daily and weekly Top Secret and Secret summaries prepared
in the Department.

2. Access to this material will be limited to members of the Current
Section, all of whom have been cleared for access to intelligence and
information of the highest security classification.

3. I request also that you obtain any necessary authorization in the
Department of State for the installation of properly secure teletype
communications between Mr. Edgar's
office (Room 108) and the location of the Current Section in the
Pentagon, and for the transmission thereon of the material indicated
under 1 b and 1 c. This provision is essential to ensure its timely
availability to the Current Section. Messrs. Reams and Edgar have been consulted by Messrs.
Montague and Ruddock in this
regard, and have indicated their informal concurrence. In view of the
urgency of the matter, I am concurrently requesting of General
Vandenberg that he arrange for the installation of such communications
and for the indoctrination and technical training of operators to be
furnished by me.

Sidney W. Souers

* Source:
National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Records of the
Department of State, Decimal File 1945-49, 101.5/2-1446.
Confidential.

1 Document 141.

2 Document 142.

144. Minutes of the Second Meeting of the Intelligence Advisory Board144. Minutes of the Second Meeting of the Intelligence Advisory
BoardSource

Washington, March 26, 1946, 3:30 p.m.

PARTICIPANTS

Rear Admiral Sidney W. Souers, Director of Central Intelligence,
in the Chair

Members Present

Mr. Ludwell L. Montague
(representing Mr. Alfred
McCormack, Special Assistant to the Secretary of
State in Charge of Research and Intelligence)

Lt. General Hoyt S.
Vandenberg, Assistant Chief of Staff, G-2, WDGS

Commodore Charles J. Rend (Representing Rear Admiral Thomas B. Inglis, Chief of Naval
Intelligence)

Brig. General George C.
McDonald, Assistant Chief of Air Staff,
Intelligence

Mr. J. Edgar Hoover,
Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation

Also Present

Mr. Kingman Douglass, Central Intelligence Group

Colonel Louis J.
Fortier, USA, Central Intelligence Group

Captain Thomas F. Cullen, USNR, Central Intelligence Group

Colonel Charles P. Nicholas, USA, Central Intelligence
Group

Colonel Harry F. Cunningham, USA, Central Intelligence
Group

Colonel Willis A. Perry, USA, Central Intelligence Group

Secretariat

Mr. James S. Lay, Jr.,
Secretary, National Intelligence Authority

Mr. J.K. Tibby, Assistant Secretary

1. Policy on Liquidation of the Strategic
Services Unit

The directives proposed for submittal to the National Intelligence
Authority were read and minor amendments agreed upon.

Admiral Souers emphasized that the intention was not to absorb SSU as an entity within the Central
Intelligence Group, but rather to assure the careful liquidation of the
Unit, over a period of months, so as to utilize its services during that
period and to permit the preservation and transfer to permanent
departments and agencies of SSU elements
found to be of continuing usefulness.

General Vandenberg asked whether under the contemplated liquidation
procedure, the G-2 of U.S. Forces, in the China Theater would be
protected from the liquidation of the SSU unit now in China before other arrangements could be
made by G-2 to provide for those operations considered essential by
G-2.

Admiral Souers said that this was an example of the departmental
interests which the proposed liquidation directives were designed to
protect. He recalled that General Vandenberg had recently forwarded to
C.I.G. a plan for post-war intelligence in China as prepared by G-2,
USFCT. In the course of planning
post-war intelligence coverage in that area, it might be found desirable
to charge C.I.G. itself with responsibility for filling certain gaps.
However, C.I.G. could not enter such fields directly except by
authorization of the National Intelligence Authority, and in the
meantime it would be the task of the Director of Central Intelligence to
insure that no available and necessary services were discarded, through
liquidation of SSU, until services as
good or better could be provided to take their place.

Commodore Rend proposed a revision of the paper designed to clarify its
language, but after Admiral Souers explained the reasons for the present
language of the paper, Commodore Rend expressed his agreement.

Mr. Hoover said he was glad to see that the directives provided for
gradual rather than abrupt liquidation, since this would more readily
permit the retention of valuable elements by the Government. He thought
the objectives were very satisfactorily expressed.

After concluding discussion,

The Intelligence Advisory Board:

Concurred in the draft directives as amended (subsequently submitted to
the National Intelligence Authority as N.I.A. 3).1

2. C.I.G. Weekly Summary

Admiral Souers reported that plans for issuance of a C.I.G. Weekly
Summary were in hand. The Central Reports Staff had worked up several
practice issues. However, it was clear that if the Weekly were to
fulfill its real function—and be more than a rehash of preceding Daily
Summaries—two or three seasoned intelligence officers with specialized
experience would have to be added to the staff. He was attempting to
strengthen the present staff with this in mind, by negotiations with the
several departments.

The Intelligence Advisory Board:

Took note of the above comments.

3. J.I.C. Papers

The Director said that arrangements had been made with the Joint
Intelligence Committee2 for C.I.G. to receive copies of
appropriate J.I.C. papers. In reply the Secretary of J.I.C. had
suggested that all C.I.G. papers be furnished to his office for file and
for the use of the Joint Intelligence Staff. Admiral Souers was willing
to send appropriate C.I.G. papers to the Secretary of J.I.C., but felt
that many papers of C.I.G. would not be of benefit to J.I.S. and should
therefore not be sent.

The Intelligence Advisory Board:

Concurred with Admiral Souers' proposed policy.

4. Special Agents

General Vandenberg inquired how soon the Central Intelligence Group would
be in a position to interview the individuals who are now presenting
themselves as prospective special agents abroad. General Vandenberg said
there were a number of these candidates, and that he was using a few of
them. He is anxious to turn such activities over to the Central
Intelligence Group, however, as soon as possible, because of the danger
that agents from different agencies may get crossed up in the field.

Admiral Souers stated that he wanted to be completely prepared to conduct
such operations before interviewing or hiring any individuals. He does
not want to confuse the permanent program with the existing operations
of SSU. One of the biggest problems will
be to find the appropriate man to head this operation, who can then
utilize the services of these individuals on a professional basis. In
the meantime, Admiral Souers would prefer that existing agencies conduct
their operations in this field until a permanent program has been
decided upon by the N.I.A. and established. He feels that one of the
most urgent elements in this program is the use of ordinary business,
scientific and professional men and travelers who are going abroad. This
will not be a “cloak and dagger” type of operation, but will require
careful organization.

General Vandenberg expressed the belief, and Admiral Souers agreed, that
all such clandestine operations should be under a single directing
head.

The Intelligence Advisory Board:

Took note of the above discussion.

* Source: Central Intelligence
Agency Historical Files, HS/HC-281. Top Secret. Limited
Distribution. The meeting was held at the New War Department
Building.

1 NIA 3 was a draft of NIA Directive No. 4, “Policy on
Liquidation of the Strategic Services Unit,” Document 106.

2 A committee of the
Joint Chiefs of Staff responsible for preparing intelligence
estimates and studies.

145. Minutes of the Third Meeting of the National Intelligence Authority145. Minutes of the Third Meeting of the National Intelligence
AuthoritySource

Washington, April 2, 1946, 11 a.m.

PARTICIPANTS

Members Present

Secretary of State James F.
Byrnes, in the Chair

Secretary of War Robert P.
Patterson

Secretary of the Navy James
Forrestal

Also Present

Mr. Howard C. Petersen,
Assistant Secretary of War

Mr. H. Freeman Matthews, Department of State

Mr. Edward Hidalgo, Navy Department

1. Progress Report by Director of Central
Intelligence

At Secretary Byrnes' request,
Admiral Souers gave a brief report on the progress of organization of
the Central Intelligence Group, and noted some of the more important
projects now in progress. He invited attention to the fact that the most
urgent problem concerning the disposition of the Strategic Services Unit
was covered by the paper1 for
consideration at this meeting. Admiral Souers also explained that
further details concerning current projects were available in the weekly
Status Report which was distributed to the Authority.2

2. Policy on Liquidation of the Strategic
Services Unit (N.I.A. 3)

Secretary Patterson suggested the
following amendments:

a. The addition of a new paragraph to the proposed N.I.A. Directive (page
4) as follows:

“5. The War Department shall retain the right to determine what portion
of War Department funds, personnel and facilities can be made available
to SSU by the War Department.”

b. Insert the words “within your capabilities” in the second line of the
third paragraph following the word “service”, and in the sixth line of
the third paragraph following the word “available.”

The National Intelligence Authority:

Approved N.I.A. 3 subject to the above amendments (Enclosure A thereto
subsequently circulated as N.I.A. Directive No. 4).3

* Source: National Archives and
Records Administration, RG 218, Records of the Joint Chiefs of
Staff, Leahy Papers, No.
132. Confidential. The meeting was held at the Department of State.
This was an instance in which the meetings of the National
Intelligence Authority and the Committee of Three overlapped. A
record of the NIA portion of the
meeting also exists in the Committee of Three minutes. (Ibid., RG
107, Records of the Office of the Secretary of War, Secretary of War
Patterson's Subject File,
RPP Committee of Three, Safe File No. 1) A note on the source text
indicates Admiral Leahy
“subsequently approved the action taken at the meeting.”

1 See the source
note, Document 106.

2 Not printed.

3 Document 106.

146. Minutes of the Third Meeting of the Intelligence Advisory Board146. Minutes of the Third Meeting of the Intelligence Advisory
BoardSource

Washington, April 8, 1946, 3 p.m.

PARTICIPANTS

Mr. Kingman Douglass, Acting Director of Central Intelligence, in
the Chair

Members Present

Mr. Alfred McCormack,
Special Assistant to the Secretary of State in Charge of Research
and Intelligence

Lt. General Hoyt S.
Vandenberg, Assistant Chief of Staff, G-2, WDGS

Rear Admiral Thomas B.
Inglis, Chief of Naval Intelligence

Brig. General George C.
McDonald, Assistant Chief of Air Staff,
Intelligence

Also Present

Captain W.B. Goggins, USN, Central Intelligence Group

Colonel C.P. Nicholas, USA, Central Intelligence Group

Secretariat

Mr. James S. Lay, Jr.,
Secretary, National Intelligence Authority

1. 1947 Budget for Intelligence Work of the Department of State

Mr. McCormack submitted the letter
in Enclosure “A”1 for consideration.

Mr. Douglass asked for the comments of the other members on the
suggestion in Mr. McCormack's
letter.

General Vandenberg felt that the Secretary of State had considerable
influence in the Congress and might well be able to secure the requested
appropriation if he so desired. Therefore, until the Secretary of State
requests assistance from the other N.I.A. members, General Vandenberg is
very reluctant to advise the Secretary of War to take any action.
General Vandenberg noted that Admiral Souers in the last N.I.A. meeting
had already expressed the opinion, from the viewpoint of C.I.G., that
more than $2,000,000 was required for State Department intelligence.
General Vandenberg understood that the Secretaries of War and the Navy
had concurred with Admiral Souers.

Admiral Inglis agreed with General
Vandenberg that N.I.A. action should not be taken until the Secretary of
State requested such assistance. Admiral Inglis asked whether Mr. McCormack was representing the Secretary of State in
presenting this matter.

Mr. McCormack explained that his
action was not taken on a specific request from the Secretary of State.
In his capacity as Special Assistant, however, Mr. McCormack felt that it was his duty to
do all in his power to secure the appropriation which the Secretary of
State had requested and had not officially revised or withdrawn. He
admitted that there was some difference of opinion within the Department
of State as to the organization and even the need for intelligence
activities in that Department.

Admiral Inglis did not wish to
comment upon any matters of internal disagreement within the Department
of State. He felt, however, that the Central Intelligence Group should
take over from the Department the basic intelligence research and
analysis function.

Mr. McCormack stated that he was
not insisting that any action be taken, but he thought it entirely
appropriate that the Board advise the N.I.A. what effect the reported
action of the House Appropriations Subcommittee, if sustained by the
Congress, would have upon the work of the Central Intelligence
Group.

General Vandenberg believed that the N.I.A. would always have difficulty
in such cases until it has its own operating funds. With such funds its
recommendations regarding departmental budgets will have more weight
with Congress. So long as its funds come from the various Departments,
however, its recommendations regarding budgets will not have great
influence. General Vandenberg questioned whether this Board should
become involved in this matter at this time, or whether it would not be
preferable to find out first what the Secretary of State proposes to
do.

Mr. McCormack believed that this
Board has the authority to advise the N.I.A. at this time on its own
initiative.

General Vandenberg maintained that Admiral Souers had already advised the
N.I.A. of the C.I.G. views on this point; the only question at present
was whether that advice was sufficient.

Mr. Douglass thought there was an additional question of how much burden
would be placed upon the War and Navy Departments to fill the gap
created by the lack of a State Department intelligence organization. He
thought this might require an increase in War and Navy Department
budgets for intelligence.

Admiral Inglis pointed out that
the Navy Department intelligence budget had already been submitted. It
might, therefore, be harder to change that than to attempt to retain the
State Department budget.

General Vandenberg felt that if the State Department intelligence budget
was refused, Congress would react unfavorably to a subsequent War and
Navy Department request for additional appropriations for the same
purpose.

Admiral Inglis believed that the
Board should either suggest doing nothing, or recommend to the N.I.A.
that the research and analysis function be transferred from State to C.I.G. In the latter case,
he felt that the personnel assigned to C.I.G. should be carefully
screened and that the funds for research and analysis should come from
the State Department for the 1947 fiscal year. He thought that C.I.G.
should have an independent budget for the 1948 fiscal year.

General Vandenberg thought that the N.I.A. was already in a difficult
situation for the coming year, and questioned whether the additional
burden of a research and analysis unit should be added during that time.
He was in agreement, however, with the ultimate desirability of having
such a research and analysis unit in C.I.G.

Mr. Douglass thought that the Secretary of State might feel that
$2,000,000 was enough to meet his needs and would be reluctant to
transfer anything to C.I.G. Mr. Douglass, however, also agreed with the
desirability of a research and analysis unit in C.I.G. General
Vandenberg said that if the State Department decided to decentralize
intelligence, he did not think that Department could object to C.I.G.
assuming the research and analysis function.

General McDonald thought that the
N.I.A. should not do anything unless the Secretary of State requested
its assistance.

Mr. McCormack pointed out that so
far as the official record is concerned, the Secretary of State had
requested over $5,000,000 for intelligence, which the Bureau of the
Budget had reduced to about $4,000,000.

Admiral Inglis thought that C.I.G.
could be properly concerned about the loss of the $330,000 earmarked for
its operations.

General Vandenberg thought that the C.I.G. had a proper interest in this
budget, but that the actions of C.I.G. should depend on what action the
Secretary of State planned to take. General Vandenberg therefore thought
that the first step should be for the Director of Central Intelligence
to discuss the matter with the Secretary of State and find out his views
and proposed actions.

Colonel Nicholas questioned whether the Director of Central Intelligence,
with the concurrence of this Board, could not advise the Secretary of
State of the detrimental effect upon C.I.G. of the proposed cut in the
budget.

General Vandenberg agreed. He thought that if the Secretary of State
indicated that he felt further action in support of his intelligence
budget was unnecessary, this Board might justifiably express its alarm
at that time.

Mr. McCormack suggested that his
letter be tabled until the Director of Central Intelligence had seen the
Secretary of State and until the House Appropriations Committee had
acted on the budget.

Mr. Douglass thought the solution might be to advise Admiral Leahy of the situation.

General Vandenberg thought the C.I.G. should find out what the Secretary
of State intends to do. If he intends to accept the refusal of the
budget without further action on his part, the C.I.G. should express its
alarm. However, if the Secretary of State proposes to take all possible
action in support of his budget. General Vandenberg believed that no
further action was necessary by C.I.G.

Mr. McCormack noted that the great
difficulty is the uncertainty in the minds of his employees created by
the action of the House Appropriations Subcommittee. This uncertainty
causes the capable personnel to resign in favor of more secure
employment.

Mr. Douglass agreed to attempt to see the Secretary of State as
suggested.

Admiral Inglis suggested that the
possibility of transferring the research and analysis function from
State to the C.I.G. might also be discussed with the Secretary of
State.

General Vandenberg expressed his willingness to concur in such a transfer
if State agreed to finance the operations for the next year. He
believed, however, that C.I.G. should not oppose the State Department if
it desired to retain that function.

Admiral Inglis said that he still
considered the transfer as the best ultimate solution.

General Vandenberg thought that the Director of Central Intelligence
might find out from the Secretary of State his reactions to a
recommendation by this Board that C.I.G. assume this research and
analysis function. General Vandenberg thought that intelligence would be
forthcoming if this function was in either the State Department or the
C.I.G., but he agreed that transfer to C.I.G. was the preferable
solution.

Mr. McCormack expressed the belief
that the Secretary of State has not yet formulated a definite opinion
regarding the ultimate form or composition of the intelligence
activities in the State Department.

After further discussion,

The Intelligence Advisory Board:

a. Agreed to recommend to the Director of Central Intelligence that
he:

(1) Advise the Secretary of State of the adverse effect, upon the work of
the Central Intelligence Group, of a substantial reduction or deletion
of the 1947 appropriation for intelligence work in the Department of
State.

(2) Ascertain the views and proposed actions of the Secretary of State
regarding this appropriation.

(3) Ascertain, if the opportunity arises, the views of the Secretary of
State as to the possibility that the intelligence research and analysis
function, for which this
appropriation was requested, might be transferred from the Department of
State to the Central Intelligence Group.2

b. Agreed to defer further consideration of Mr. McCormack's letter (Enclosure hereto)
pending the above action by the Director of Central Intelligence and
further information concerning the action of the House Appropriations
Committee on the 1947 budget for State Department intelligence work.

* Source: Central Intelligence
Agency Historical Files, HS/HC-281. Confidential; Limited
Distribution. The meeting was held at the New War Department
Building.

1 In the April 8 letter,
McCormack asked Douglass
to obtain the IAB's views on a
possible recommendation by the NIA
to Congress in support of the Department of State intelligence
budget. See the Supplement.

2 No
record has been found of a communication or discussion between
Souers and Byrnes on these
subjects.

147. Central Intelligence Group Administrative Order No. 3147. Central Intelligence Group Administrative Order No. 3Source

Washington, April 19,
1946.

ACTIVATION OF THE CENTRAL REPORTS STAFF

Reference: N.I.A. Directives Nos. 1 and 21

1. Pursuant to N.I.A. Directive No. 2, the Central Reports Staff is
hereby established, its initial strength to be as authorized in N.I.A.
Directive No. 2, Appendix A.2

2. The Chief, Central Reports Staff, shall be responsible to the Director
of Central Intelligence for the preparation, substantive content, and
appropriate dissemination of all intelligence reports produced by the
Central Intelligence Group pursuant to paragraph 3-a of the President's
directive of 22 January 1946 and to N.I.A. directives.

3. One Assistant to the Chief, C.R.S., shall be designated by each
permanent member of the Intelligence Advisory Board. In distinction from
other C.R.S. personnel, who, in accordance with N.I.A. Directive No.1,
shall be assigned to C.I.G. and responsible to the Director of Central
Intelligence, these Assistants shall be assigned to the offices of the
permanent members of the I.A.B. and responsible to them, although
detailed to serve full-time with the Chief, C.R.S. They shall:

a. Represent the interests of their respective members of the Advisory
Board in the operations of the Central Reports Staff.

b. Represent the Central Reports Staff in its relations with their
respective agencies.

c. Assist the Chief, C.R.S., in:

(1) The formulation of directives to the subdivisions of C.R.S and of
requests upon departmental agencies for essential information.

(2) The review of summaries, estimates, and studies prepared by the
subdivisions of C.R.S.

(3) The recommendation of appropriate dissemination of such summaries,
estimates, and studies.

Although it shall be the endeavor of the Chief, C.R.S., and his
Assist-ants to effect such reconciliation of conflicting departmental
estimates as to obviate disagreement at the level of the Intelligence
Advisory Board, unanimous concurrence shall not be required, it being
the responsibility of the Chief to determine the position to be taken in
the C.R.S. report in accordance with the weight of the evidence or of
opinion. In all cases of important disagreement, however, the substance
of the disagreement shall be reported.

4. On assignment to the Central Intelligence Group and detail to the
Central Reports Staff, the remaining personnel authorized in N.I.A.
Directive No. 2, Appendix “A”, shall be responsible to the Chief, C.R.S.
They shall be selected with a view to obtaining a proper balance of
regional and functional specialization. The internal organization of the
Central Reports Staff shall be effected in a manner calculated to
utilize the resources inherent in this group as a whole in the
preparation of both periodical summaries and special estimates. During
the period of activation the Chief, C.R.S., is authorized to organize
the personnel then present as he may consider most expedient for the
accomplishment of the tasks then undertaken, keeping the Director of
Central Intelligence informed. When the Staff has been fully activated,
he will submit to the Director a formal plan of organization based on
experience for approval and publication.

5. The initial task of the Central Reports Staff shall be the production
of a daily summary in accordance with paragraph 4-a of N.I.A. Directive
No. 2.

Sidney W. Souers3

* Source: Central Intelligence Agency Historical
Files, HS/HC-208. Confidential. The source text is dated by hand and
carries the handwritten notation “Revised.”

1 Documents 141 and 142.

2 Not printed.
(National Archives and Records Administration, RG 218, Records of
the Joint Chiefs of Staff, Leahy Papers) Attached to NIA 2, February 5, in the Supplement.

3 Printed from a
copy that bears this typed signature.

148. Memorandum by the Director of Central Intelligence (Souers)148. Memorandum by the Director of Central Intelligence (Souers)Source

Washington, April 29,
1946.

CIG 8

DEVELOPMENT OF INTELLIGENCE ON U.S.S.R.

1. By informal arrangement under the coordination of the C.I.G., M.I.S.
has sponsored the organization of a Planning Committee, with
representation of the C.I.G., State Department, M.I.S., O.N.I., and A-2,
to formulate a plan to utilize the facilities of all interested
Government agencies for the production of the highest possible quality
of intelligence on the U.S.S.R. in the shortest possible time. It was
agreed that C.I.G. would take over formal sponsorship of the project at
the earliest possible moment, but that meanwhile active work on it would
be started.

2. The Planning Committee has drawn up a plan for Development of
Intelligence on the U.S.S.R. which has been approved informally by each
of you. The plan provides that after such approval, formal action will
be arranged for as deemed advisable by C.I.G.

3. Paragraph 3 of N.I.A. Directive No. 1 provides a procedure by which
the necessary formal directive can be published and carried out by
unanimous approval of the Director of Central Intelligence and the
Intelligence Advisory Board, without action by the National Intelligence
Authority.

4. A draft of a formal directive is enclosed. If all members of the
Intelligence Advisory Board concur in the draft without substantial
change, a meeting will not be necessary. It is recommended that the
draft be approved and that each member of the Intelligence Advisory
Board arrange for any additional implementation required by this
Department.

Sidney W. Souers1

Enclosure2

Draft Central Intelligence Group Directive

DEVELOPMENT OF INTELLIGENCE ON U.S.S.R.

Memorandum by the Director of Central
Intelligence, With the Unanimous Concurrence of the Intelligence
Advisory Board

1. There is an urgent need to develop the highest possible quality of
intelligence on the U.S.S.R. in the shortest possible time. By informal
agreement, a Planning Committee, composed of a coordinator from the
Central Intelligence Group (C.I.G.) and representatives from the State
Department, Military Intelligence Division (G-2), Office of Naval
Intelligence (O.N.I.) and the Office of the Assistant Chief of Air
Staff-2 (A-2), has been formed and has drawn up a plan to coordinate and
improve the production of intelligence on the U.S.S.R. This plan has
been approved informally by all members of the Intelligence Advisory
Board and is now in operation.

2. The purpose of this Directive is to formalize the temporary agreement
and establish it as a project under the coordination of the Director of
Central Intelligence. The mission of the project is to develop and pool
the appropriate resources of all agencies of the United States
Government in order to insure the production of the highest possible
quality of intelligence on the U.S.S.R. and its peripheral areas in the
minimum time.

3. A Planning Committee is established to devise ways and means for
carrying out the mission. This Committee will consist of a coordinator,
furnished by the Director of Central Intelligence, and of one
representative each of the Special Assistant to the Secretary of State
in Charge of Research and Intelligence; the Assistant Chief of Staff,
G-2, W.D.G.S.; the Chief of Naval Intelligence; and the Assistant Chief
of Air Staff-2. The coordinator will act in a supervisory capacity. The
Planning Committee will select a chairman and a secretary from among its
representatives. The chairman of the Committee will consult the
coordinator whenever necessary to secure assistance of the Central
Intelligence Group on problems confronting the Committee. When
appropriate, the coordinator will meet with the Committee. In case of
disagreement within the Planning Committee, the matter will be submitted
by the coordinator to the Director of Central Intelligence for
decision.

4. a. A Working Committee is established to carry out the policies and
plans prepared by the Planning Committee. It will be composed of the
necessary personnel from the State Department, G-2, O.N.I. and A-2. The
secretary of the Planning Committee will be the chairman of the Working
Committee. The chairman of the Committee will consult the C.I.G.
coordinator on the Planning Committee whenever necessary to secure
assistance of the Central Intelligence Group on problems confronting the
Committee. When appropriate, the C.I.G. coordinator will meet with the
Committee.

b. The Working Committee will establish and coordinate a system to
compile a digest of all types of factual strategic intelligence on the
U.S.S.R. This digest shall be known as Strategic Intelligence Digest
(S.I.D.). Facilities of the member agencies will be utilized to the
maximum extent. The Committee will establish its own methods of
operation.

c. Copies of S.I.D. will be distributed to member agencies and the C.I.G.
only. Strategic Intelligence Estimates (S.I.E.), based on the S.I.D.,
will be prepared by member agencies individually as required to meet
their own needs and also whenever requested by the Director of Central
Intelligence. All estimates prepared by member agencies will be
furnished the C.I.G. Whenever the national interest requires it,
estimates will be prepared by the C.I.G.

d. The Assistant Chief of Staff, G-2, W.D.G.S., will provide office space
and other necessary facilities for the Working Committee in the Pentagon
Building.

5. Each member of the Intelligence Advisory Board will furnish the name
of his representative on the Planning Committee to the Director of
Central Intelligence. These representatives will be responsible for
furnishing the lists of personnel authorized to work in or help the
Working Committee.

6. a. The classification of this project shall be Top Secret. The
greatest care will be taken to maintain the security of the existence of
the operation.

b. Access to Government agencies other than those participating in the
project will be arranged by C.I.G. Representation on the Working
Committee from additional Government agencies will be approved first by
the Planning Committee.

* Source: Central Intelligence Agency Historical
Files, HS/HC-276. Top Secret; Limited Distribution.

1 Printed from a copy that
bears this typed signature.

2 Top Secret.

149. Memorandum From the Director of Central Intelligence (Souers) to the President's Chief of Staff149. Memorandum From the Director of Central Intelligence (Souers) to the
President's Chief of StaffSource

Washington, May 7,
1946.

Attached is a brief of the biographical data of Major General Charles
Hartwell Bonesteel.1 The data on which it is based was obtained from
public sources and was not discussed with anyone.

There is nothing in the record of this officer to indicate that he has
ever had any broad experience in intelligence matters. He has had no
intelligence duties.

The N.I.A. is a new concept in intelligence which requires a breadth of
view and a deep understanding of the entire field on the part of the
Director of Central Intelligence. The officers in the various
departments engaged in this activity on the working level are generally
experts in their spheres and too often the officers assigned to the
higher level posts have been possessed of limited experience in
intelligence. To insure the most beneficial results in the Central
Intelligence Group it is necessary that the Director be an officer to
whom those specialists will look for leadership and guidance based on a
thorough and comprehensive knowledge of this complex subject.

In order that coordination be effected to the greatest extent, and the
transfer effected of many functions of ONI, G-2, A-2 and State to the C.I.G., it is essential that
these services recognize the strong leadership and inherent skill in
C.I.G. top level personnel.

General Bonesteel is 61 years of age and seems to have passed the peak of
his career some years ago. His record while honorable is not too
impressive.

Lieutenant General Vandenberg is 47 years of age, has a fine war record,
is regarded as an outstanding officer and is keenly interested in
intelligence. His leadership in G-2 has been strong and determined. He
has demonstrated his recognition of the necessity for the reorientation
of the intelligence structure.

Respectfully,

Sidney W. Souers

* Source: Truman
Library, Papers of Harry S.
Truman, President's Secretary's Files. Secret.
Truman had directed
General Eisenhower, the Army Chief of Staff, to recommend a
successor to Souers. Eisenhower proposed General Bonesteel. (Letter,
Eisenhower to Truman, April
27; ibid.) See the Supplement.

1 Not printed, but see the
Supplement.

150. Memorandum From the President's Chief of Staff (Leahy) to President Truman150. Memorandum From the President's Chief of Staff (Leahy) to President
TrumanSource

Washington, May 9,
1946.

Referring to the attached letter addressed to you by General Eisenhower
on 27 April 19461 in regard to
the appointment of a Director of Central Intelligence to relieve Rear
Admiral Souers, I have looked into the suitability of Major General
Bonesteel for this assignment and am in agreement with the memorandum of
7 May by Rear Admiral Souers attached hereto.2

In my opinion it is essential in the formative period of the National
Intelligence Authority to have as Director of Central Intelligence an
officer of proved ability in the collection and evaluation of
intelligence, who has also superior executive ability and an established
prestige in the intelligence field, as well as in the opinions of the
Secretaries of State, War, and Navy.

We appear to be unable to find any available officer of the Army other
than General Vandenberg who fully meets these specifications.

It is therefore recommended that the Secretary of War be informed of the
high importance that the President attaches to the successful completion
of the development of the National Intelligence Authority and that he
desires that General Vandenberg be made available for assignment as
Director of Central Intelligence to relieve Rear Admiral Souers within
the ensuing two months.

W. D. Leahy3

* Source: National Archives and Records
Administration, RG 218, Records of the Joint Chiefs of Staff,
Leahy Papers, No.
131. Secret.

1 Not printed, see the source
note, Document 149.

2 Document 149.

3 Printed from a copy that bears this
typed signature.

151. Minutes of the Fourth Meeting of the Intelligence Advisory Board151. Minutes of the Fourth Meeting of the Intelligence Advisory
BoardSource

Washington, May
9, 1946, 2:30 p.m.

PARTICIPANTS

Rear Admiral Sidney W. Souers, Director of Central Intelligence,
in the Chair

Members Present

Dr. William L. Langer,
Special Assistant to the Secretary of State in Charge of Research
and Intelligence

Lt. General Hoyt S.
Vandenberg, Assistant Chief of Staff, G-2,
W.D.G.S.

Commodore Charles J. Rend (representing Rear Admiral Thomas B. Inglis, Chief of Naval
Intelligence)

Brig. General George C.
McDonald, Assistant Chief of Air Staff,
Intelligence

Mr. D. M. Ladd, for Items 1 and 2 (representing Mr. J. Edgar Hoover, Director, Federal
Bureau of Investigation)

Also Present

Mr. Kingman Douglass, Deputy Director, Central Intelligence
Group

Colonel M. N. Huston, G-2

Captain R. K. Davis, USN, O.N.I.

Colonel E. P. Mussett, A-2

Lt. Colonel F. K. Newcomer, G-2

Colonel L. J. Fortier, Central Intelligence Group

Captain W. B. Goggins, USN, Central Intelligence Group

Colonel R. H. Boberg, Central Intelligence Group

Colonel H. F. Cunningham (for Item 1), Central Intelligence
Group

Captain R. Goldthwaite, USN (for Items 2-4), Central Intelligence
Group

Colonel C. P. Nicholas, Central Intelligence Group

Colonel W. A. Perry, Central Intelligence Group

Colonel T. J. Sands, Central Intelligence Group

Secretariat

Mr. James S. Lay, Jr.,
Secretary, National Intelligence Authority

Mr. J. K. Tibby, Assistant Secretary

1. Policy on Clearance of Personnel for Duties With Central Intelligence
Group (C.I.G.7 and C.I.G. 7/1)1

The proposed amendments to C.I.G. 7, as contained in C.I.G. 7/1, were
taken under consideration.

Admiral Souers was of the opinion that the screening committee
recommended by the Chief of Naval Intelligence in C.I.G. 7/1 would be
difficult to administer and in fact, was an unnecessary duplication of
other provisions of the paper, since Paragraph 8 of C.I.G. 7 provided
that no individuals could be certified for duties with the Central
Intelligence Group until after a security inquiry which would include a
records check of member agencies of the I.A.B.

Commodore Rend felt that it is impossible to do too much in the interests
of security. He saw no completely desirable substitute for the proposed
formal screening committee, even if it were to involve some degree of
duplication, and he was sure that he spoke the views of the Chief of
Naval Intelligence in this connection.

Admiral Souers agreed that all practicable security measures should be
taken even if they involved extra work, but he thought all such measures
should be practical and capable of efficient administration.

In the course of further discussion, in which other members expressed
satisfaction with the language of the section as written, Colonel Boberg
proposed as the basis of a generally agreeable solution the revision of
Paragraph 7 of C.I.G. 7 to read:

“7. Reports of investigations will be subject to review in each case by
the Security Officer, C.I.G., who will verify that member departments
other than the nominating department have cleared the nominee. Final
decision as to acceptability of an individual for an assignment to the
Central Intelligence Group will rest with the Director of Central
Intelligence.”

The amendment was accepted.

The recommendations of the Federal Bureau of Investigation and of the
State Department were then considered. Admiral Souers said that he
agreed with Mr. Hoover's criticism of Paragraph 9 of C.I.G. 7 and
believed that the remedy should be the addition to that paragraph of the
following provision:

“In each case of clearance based on a previous satisfactory character and
loyalty investigation or on the basis of a minimum of ten (10) years
honorable Government service, a check of the appropriate records in the
Department of State; Federal Bureau of Investigation; Military
Intelligence Service, War Department, and Office of Naval Intelligence,
Navy Department, will be made prior to the issuance of a clearance
certificate.”

Mr. Ladd and other members of the
Intelligence Advisory Board agreed to this change.

Dr. Langer set forth the purpose
of the State Department recommendations covering exceptional cases, but
after discussion it was agreed that the provisions of C.I.G. 7
(Paragraph 13) were satisfactory to all concerned. After accepting
further minor amendments offered by the Central Planning Staff,

The Intelligence Advisory Board:

Approved C.I.G. 7, subject to the amendments above (Enclosure to C.I.G. 7
subsequently issued as C.I.G. Directive No. 82 ).

2. Provision for Monitoring of Press and Propaganda Broadcasts of Foreign
Powers (C.I.G. 1/1 and C.I.G. 1/2)3

Admiral Souers reviewed the history of the Foreign Broadcast Intelligence
Service (FBIS). He noted the
recommendation in his own report (C.I.G. 1/1) that the service be
continued under C.I.G. direction and War Department administration, and
invited attention to the dissenting recommendation of the Assistant
Chief of Staff, G-2, in C.I.G. 1/2, that the project be administered by
the Department of State or by the C.I.G. directly. On the second point,
Admiral Souers could not agree with General Vandenberg that the Central
Intelligence Group should administer such a service directly. The C.I.G.
is not an independent agency and thus is not empowered to sign
contracts, nor does it have technical personnel readily available. While
the C.I.G. was authorized to perform “such serv-ices of common concern
as the National Intelligence Authority determines can be more
efficiently accomplished centrally”, he believed the most efficient
procedure in this case was probably that outlined in C.I.G. 1/1.

General Vandenberg agreed it would be difficult for the C.I.G. to assume
direct administrative control of FBIS at this time. Yet he felt that the
position of the War Department should be appreciated and understood. As
he saw it, the War Department had accepted the interim responsibility
for administering FBIS until the end of
this fiscal year, in order to serve the many Government agencies
interested in the product of monitoring. Now, more than ever, it was
clear that the bulk of the information obtained by this means was not
primarily related to military intelligence; rather it related to
political and economic intelligence, and for this reason was surely of
greater interest to the Department of State than to the War Department.
He doubted whether G-2 could continue to justify requests for FBIS appropriations for these reasons, and
he felt there should be no delay in placing the administration of FBIS in an agency of primary interest,
such as State, or in C.I.G. as a centralized service.

Admiral Souers noted that the disposition proposed in C.I.G. 1/1 would
require the approval of the National Intelligence Authority. Should the
Authority agree that the War Department was the appropriate agency to
administer the service, it could be presumed that the Secretaries of
State, War, and the Navy could defend the conclusion in relation to
appropriations.

General Vandenberg thought it would be easier for the three Secretaries
to defend the service within State or C.I.G. than in the War
Department.

Admiral Souers said he had originally thought the State Department would
be the ideal lodgment for FBIS, and in
fact he believed the former Special Assistant for Research and
Intelligence (Mr. McCormack) had
once held the same view. However, there had recently been so much
question as to the scope of the operations to be undertaken by State
that he thought it best to leave the administrative responsibility where
it was— that is, in the War Department— with over-all direction from
C.I.G.

General Vandenberg pointed out that, since only about 5% of all foreign
broadcasts are monitored, priorities must be constantly shifted to meet
the most important requirements. The War Department is unable to
anticipate the shifting requirements for political and economic
information, and thus to adjust its coverage of foreign output, as
promptly as would a directly interested agency such as the Department of
State. Moreover, all that would be necessary for such a change would be
to transfer the existing technical group and point their activities in
the direction of major interest.

Dr. Langer said he recognized the
force of General Vandenberg's argument. Much of the material which
FBIS was obliged to cover dealt
with political, economic, and psychological developments of the greatest
interest and importance to the State Department. It might be logical to
place FBIS administration under State.
At the same time, in view of the current heavy burden on State
Department administrative facilities, he was not sure that the
Department could now assume a new responsibility of such dimensions. The
subject was one on which he could not express a final judgment without
checking with his own Department.

General Vandenberg added that G-2 would be glad to lend to State the
services of necessary experts, and to arrange for a gradual transfer of
administrative responsibility, if such measures would assist a
solution.

After concluding discussion, and on the motion of Admiral Souers,

The Intelligence Advisory Board:

a. Deferred action on C.I.G. 1/1 pending further study.

b. Noted that the Director of Central Intelligence directed the Central
Planning Staff to consult with appropriate officials in G-2 and the
State Department as to the practicability of transferring the monitoring
function to the State Department, and to recommend any revisions in
C.I.G. 1/1 deemed appropriate.

3. Development of Intelligence on USSR (C.I.G. 84 and C.I.G. 8/15 )

The memorandum of the Director of Central Intelligence (C.I.G. 8) and the
proposed amendments thereto (C.I.G. 8/1) were considered by the
Members.

After discussion, the following amendments to the Enclosure to C.I.G. 8
were adopted:

a. In Paragraph 3 the fourth sentence was revised to read: “The Planning
Committee will select a chairman from among its representatives. The
Secretary shall be furnished by a member agency by mutual
agreement.”

b. In Paragraph 4.a., the words “as necessary and available” were
inserted at the end of the second sentence.

c. In Paragraph 4.b., the word “practicable” was inserted at the end of
the third sentence.

4. Distribution of C.I.G. Daily Summary

Admiral Souers advised that inquiry had been received from the Director
of the Federal Bureau of Investigation as to the possibility of his
being placed on the distribution for the C.I.G. Daily Summary. He noted
that since the distribution of the Summary had been established by the
National Intelligence Authority, any increased distribution would
require the Authority's approval.

After discussion,

The Intelligence Advisory Board:

Noted that the Director of Central Intelligence would discuss informally
with the Secretary of State the distribution of the C.I.G. Daily Summary
to the Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation.

* Source: Central Intelligence
Agency Historical Files, HS/HC-281. Top Secret. The meeting was held
at the War Department.

1 Neither
printed. (Both ibid., HS/HC-276)

2 Dated May 9. (National Archives and Records
Administration, RG 218, Records of the Joint Chiefs of Staff,
Leahy Papers, No.
130) See the Supplement.

3 CIG 1, February 25, 1946, CIG 1/1, April 26, 1946, and CIG 1/2, May 8, 1946. (Central
Intelligence Agency Historical Files, HS/HC-276) See the
Supplement.

4 Document 148.

5 Dated May 8, 1946. (Central Intelligence
Agency Historical Files, HS/HC-276) See the Supplement.

152. Memorandum From President Truman to Secretary of War Patterson152. Memorandum From President Truman to Secretary of War PattersonSource

Washington, May 16,
1946.

Admiral Souers, who has been serving as the Director of the Central
Intelligence Group, will be leaving that position in a short time

I discussed his successor with General Eisenhower and suggested to him
that Lieutenant General Vandenberg was the proper man to succeed Admiral
Souers. General Eisenhower told me that he needed General Vandenberg and
he recommended Major General Bonesteel to me.1

It seems to me that Lieutenant General Vandenberg is the proper person
for this position—he knows it from “A to Z”, he is a diplomat and will
be able to get along with the State and Navy, as well as the War
Department, and if it will not completely cripple General Eisenhower I
would like very much to have Lieutenant General Vandenberg assigned to
serve as the Director of the Central Intelligence Group.2

Harry S. Truman3

* Source: Truman Library, Papers of Harry S. Truman, Official File. No
classification marking.

1 See the source note to Document
149.

2  Vandenberg was sworn in as Director of Central
Intelligence on June 10.

3 Printed from a copy that indicates
President Truman signed
the original.

153. Memorandum From the Secretary of State's Special Assistant for Research and Intelligence (Langer) to the Secretary of State's Staff Committee153. Memorandum From the Secretary of State's Special Assistant for
Research and Intelligence (Langer) to the Secretary of State's
Staff CommitteeSource

Washington, June 6,
1946.

ARMY AND NAVY DESIRE TO ESTABLISH INTELLIGENCE ACTIVITIES AT U.S.
CONSULATES

The Problem:

The War and Navy Departments have requested the State Department to
undertake negotiations for permission to assign military and naval
personnel for intelligence activities at a number of U.S. consulates
throughout the world. The State Department has drawn the attention of
the Army and Navy to the unprecedented character of the requests in
peace-time and to the inevitability of reciprocity having to be accorded
the foreign nations involved.

On April 29 the Department forwarded memoranda to the Assistant Chief of
Staff, G-2, and the Chief of Naval Intelligence, requesting that their
Departments provide (a) details of the total program which each
contemplated, (b) statements of the privileges and immunities desired
for the personnel attached to the consulates and their archives and (c)
a statement of the extent to which they are prepared to have reciprocal
privileges granted to the countries concerned.1

On May 23 the War Department furnished the requested information. Its
program contemplates the establishment of intelligence activities at
nine locations, involving a total of 53 persons on a permanent basis.
The War Department desires that its personnel and their archives have
the same privileges, exemptions and immunities as the personnel of the
State Department at consular offices, and it has no objection to
according reciprocal privileges to the countries concerned. Up to this
time no reply to the April 29 memorandum has been received from the Navy
Department.

Recommendation:

1. That the Department formulate an overall policy with respect to the
establishment of Army and Navy intelligence personnel and activities at
U.S. consulates which will provide for the disposition of the requests
of the War and Navy Departments.

Discussion:

Since November 1945, in the case of the War Department, and since May
1945, in the case of the Navy Department, the State Department has
received requests from time to time to initiate negotiations with
certain foreign governments for permission to assign military or naval
personnel to designated U.S. consulates for intelligence purposes. A
meeting of representatives of the Offices and Divisions of the
Department whose areas were affected by the requests was held on March
13, 1946, to consider the fundamental problems raised by those requests.
The matter was referred to LE for an opinion on the feasibility of
concluding such arrangements. While recognizing the lack of precedent
for agreements of that nature, LE found
nothing to estop arrangements being negotiated with the foreign
countries concerned, pointing out, however, that the privileges and
immunities to be accorded the assigned military or naval personnel and
their archives should be specified clearly in any agreement
concluded.

After further discussion of the question among the affected Offices and
Divisions of the Department, on April 29 substantially identical
memoranda were dispatched to the Assistant Chief of Staff, G-2, and the
Chief of Naval Intelligence
(Annex I).2 It was pointed out that the Department felt it
necessary to be apprised of the complete programs contemplated by the
Army and the Navy before approaching other governments in the matter,
and it was requested that information to that end be provided, together
with statements of the privileges, exemptions and immunities desired for
the assigned military and naval personnel. A statement was also
requested of the extent to which the War and Navy Departments were
prepared to grant reciprocal privileges to each country concerned. It
was pointed out that the granting of such privileges to one power would
probably cause others to request like privileges, whether or not the
U.S. desired to establish intelligence personnel within their
territory.

The War Department replied on May 23 and furnished the information
requested in the memorandum of April 29 (Annex II). The program of the
War Department contemplates a total of nine locations; three would
involve the consent of France, three of Great Britain and one each of
Holland, Belgium and Portugal. The program provides for the assignment
of 18 officers, 10 warrant officers, and 25 clerical assistants, or a
total of 53 persons (Annex III). The War Department states that the
arrangements would be of a permanent nature in each case. It desires
that the proposed assigned personnel have the same diplomatic
privileges, exemptions and immunities as personnel of the State
Department at consular offices. It states that it has no objection to
according reciprocal privileges to the countries concerned but it does
not indicate its attitude with respect to other countries.

No reply to the April 29 memorandum to the Chief of Naval Intelligence
has as yet been received. The individual requests made to the State
Department by the Navy Department from time to time indicate, however,
that the Navy desired arrangements which would involve the consent of
Great Britain, Holland and Norway.

* Source: National Archives and Records
Administration, RG 353, Records of Interdepartmental and
Intradepartmental Committees— State Department, Lot File No. 122,
Box 94. Restricted. Transmitted by a covering note stating that the
Advisory Committee on Intelligence had considered the problem and
decided that it required a decision at the level of the Secretary's
Staff Committee. (Memorandum from Langer to John Gange, June 7; ibid.) See the
Supplement. The action by the Advisory Committee on Intelligence is
in the minutes of its first meeting, June 4. (National Archives and
Records Administration, RG 353, Records of Interdepartmental and
Intradepartmental Committees— State Department, Lot File No. 122,
Box 94) See the Supplement.

1 None of the documents referred to in this
memorandum has been found.

2 None of the annexes has been
found.

154. Memorandum From the Director of Central Intelligence (Souers) to the National Intelligence Authority154. Memorandum From the Director of Central Intelligence (Souers) to the National Intelligence AuthoritySource

Washington, June 7,
1946.

SUBJECT

Progress Report on the Central Intelligence Group

1. Establishment

The Central Intelligence Group was officially activated on 8 February
1946 pursuant to the approval of N.I.A. Directive No. 2. Actually, a
small group of personnel from the State, War, and Navy Departments had
been assembled beginning on 25 January, three days after the President
signed the letter directing the establishment of the National
Intelligence Authority.

2. Organization

The Central Intelligence Group has been organized in accordance with
N.I.A. Directive No 2. The major components at the present time are the
Central Planning Staff, charged with planning the coordination of
intelligence activities, and the Central Reports Staff, responsible for
the production of national policy intelligence. A Chief of Operational
Serv-ices, with a small staff, has been designated as a nucleus from
which an organization to perform services of common concern may be
built. A small Secretariat to serve the National Intelligence Authority,
the Central Intelligence Group, and the Intelligence Advisory Board, has
been created. The Administrative Division consists of an Administrative
Officer, a Security Officer, a Personnel Officer, and a small group of
trained personnel to provide necessary administrative services for the
Central Intelligence Group.

3. Personnel

Personnel for C.I.G. has been requested and selected on the principle
that only the most experienced individuals in each field of intelligence
activity should be utilized in this vital preliminary period. The
responsible officers in the Departments have cooperated wholeheartedly
toward this end. However, the procurement of C.I.G. personnel has
necessarily been a rather slow process, in view of the demobilization
and the fact that C.I.G. and departmental requirements for qualified
individuals naturally had to be reconciled in many specific cases. The
present status of C.I.G. personnel is shown in the following
tabulation:

State
Actual
Auth.1War
Actual
Auth.Navy
Actual
Auth.Total
Actual
Auth.

Central Reports Staff51710(5A2)264181961

Central Planning Staff61013(5A)208102740

Administrative Division351616(3A)334152564

TOTAL164339(13A)79164371165

Accepted but not yet assigned to C.I.G.5— 6—2— 13 —

TOTAL21434579184384165

% of Authorized49%—57%—42%—51%—

1 “Auth.”— Authorized by N.I.A. Directive No. 2. [Footnote in the source
text.]

2 “A”— Personnel assigned by A-2. [Footnote in the source text.]

3 Includes Office of Director, Secretariat, and Chief of Operational
Services. [Footnote in the source text.]

It may be seen that the organization of the Central Planning Staff has
been given priority, since effective planning is considered a necessary
prelude to accomplishment of the C.I.G. mission. Concentration is now
placed on manning the Central Reports Staff. The need for filling
positions in the Administrative Division has been largely alleviated by
the part-time use of the personnel and facilities of the Strategic
Services Unit, although this Division will require reinforcement when
centralized operations are undertaken.

A development of great importance regarding personnel has been the
designation of specially qualified consultants to the Director of
Central Intelligence. An outstanding scientist with wide intelligence
experience, Dr. H. P. Robertson, is Senior Scientific Consultant to the
Director. Arrangements are well advanced for the designation of Mr.
George F. Kennan, recently
Charge d'Affaires in Moscow and a Foreign Service Officer with a
distinguished career, as Special Consultant to the Director,
particularly on U.S.S.R. affairs.

4. Activities

The activities of the Central Intelligence Group to date have been
characterized principally by the administrative details of organization,
the consideration of urgent problems, and the basic planning for a sound
future intelligence program. Basic policies and procedures regarding the
organization have been established. Urgent problems in the intelligence
field, especially as
regards certain vital operations, have been carefully studied and
appropriate action has been or is ready to be taken. Substantial
progress has been made in the analysis of long-range intelligence
problems. The throes of initial organization and planning are,
therefore, generally past, and the time for initiation of centralized
intelligence operations has now been reached.

Coordination of Intelligence Activities. Beginning on 12 February 1946,
four days after the activation of C.I.G., the C.I.G. has been receiving
numerous suggestions or recommendations for studies leading to the
effective coordination of Federal intelligence activities. A number of
other studies of this type have been initiated by C.I.G. These problems
generally fall into three categories: (a) problems for which partial but
inadequate solutions were evolved during the war; (b) problems which
existing Governmental machinery was unable to solve or incapable of
solving; and (c) problems which required new solutions in the light of
the post-hostilities situation.

Some of these problems, particularly in the third category, require
urgent interim solution. Among these problems for which interim
solutions have been evolved or initiated are the liquidation of the
Strategic Services Unit, the development of intelligence on the
U.S.S.R., and the coordination of scientific intelligence.

Problems for which immediate solutions are well advanced include the
following:

a. Provision for monitoring press and propaganda broadcasts of foreign
powers.

b. Provision for coordinating the acquisition of foreign
publications.

c. Coordination of collection of intelligence information.

d. Coordination of intelligence research.

e. Essential elements of information.

f. Provision for collecting foreign intelligence information by
clandestine methods.

g. Intelligence on foreign industrial establishments.

h. Interim study of the collection of intelligence information in
China.

i. Central Register of Intelligence Information.

Projects which are in various stages of study or planning cover the
following additional subjects:

a. Disposition of files of the U.S. Strategic Bombing Survey.

b. Censorship planning.

c. Intelligence terminology.

d. Resources potential program.

e. Application of sampling techniques to intelligence.

f. Survey of coverage of the foreign language press in the United
States.

g. Intelligence on foreign petroleum developments.

h. Coordination of geographical and related intelligence.

i. Disposition of the Publications Review Subcommittee of the Joint
Intelligence Committee.

j. Survey of the Joint Intelligence Study Publishing Board.

k. Disposition of the photographic intelligence file in the Department of
State.

l. Coordinated utilization of private research in the social
sciences.

m. Index of U.S. residents of foreign intelligence potential.

n. Exploitation of American business concerns with connections abroad as
sources of foreign intelligence information.

o. Planning for psychological warfare.

p. Utilization of the services of proposed minerals attaches.

One of the functions of C.I.G. which has assumed great importance is the
support of adequate budgets for Departmental intelligence. Coordinated
representation to the Bureau of the Budget and the Congress, of the
budgetary requirements for intelligence activities, promises to be one
of the most effective means for guarding against arbitrary depletion of
intelligence resources at the expense of national security. So long as
the C.I.G. is dependent upon the Departments for budgetary support,
however, its authority to speak as an unbiased guardian of the national
security will be suspect and therefore not wholly effective.

Production of National Policy Intelligence. Pursuant to N.I.A. Directive
No. 2, the Central Reports Staff concentrated on the production of a
factual Daily Summary, the first issue of which was dated 13 February.
Although this Summary covered operational as well as intelligence
matters and involved no C.I.G. interpretation, it has served to keep the
C.I.G. personnel currently advised of developments and formed a basis
for consideration of future intelligence reports.

Despite the undermanned condition of the Central Reports Staff, the
urgent need for a Weekly Summary has resulted in the decision to produce
the first issue on 14 June. Until adequately staffed in all geographic
areas, however, this publication will concentrate on those areas for
which qualified personnel are now available. The concept of this Weekly
Summary is that it should concentrate on significant trends of events
supplementing the normal intelligence produced by the Departments.
Procedures are being developed to ensure that the items contained
therein reflect the best judgment of qualified personnel in C.I.G. and
the Departments.

The primary function of C.I.G. in the production of intelligence,
however, will be the preparation and dissemination of definitive
estimates of the capabilities and intentions of foreign countries as
they affect the national security of the United States. The necessity of
assigning the best qualified and carefully selected personnel to this
vital task has delayed its initiation. Solution of the relationship of
this C.I.G. activity to the Departments, the State-War-Navy Coordinating
Committee, the Joint Chiefs of
Staff, and other agencies concerned with the national security, has also
been deferred pending the procurement of adequate personnel. This
procurement has now been given priority, and it is anticipated that the
Central Reports Staff will be prepared to produce national policy
intelligence at an early date.

Performance of Centralized Operational Services. The operation of central
services by the C.I.G. has been considered to be a subject requiring
careful study to insure that Departmental operations are not impeded or
unnecessarily duplicated. The urgent need for central direction of the
activities and liquidation of the Strategic Services Unit was recognized
by the N.I.A. and an arrangement was effected whereby this Unit is
operated by the War Department under directives from the Director of
Central Intelligence. This arrangement temporarily provided C.I.G. with
facilities for direct collection of required information but is
admittedly only a stop-gap measure.

C.I.G. planning and organization has now progressed to the point where
firm recommendations may be made for C.I.G. operation of intelligence
services which can be more efficiently accomplished centrally. Among
those operations under consideration as C.I.G. activities are:

a. Monitoring press and propaganda broadcasts of foreign powers.

b. Collection of foreign intelligence information by clandestine
methods.

c. Production of static intelligence studies of foreign areas, to replace
Joint Army-Navy Intelligence Studies (JANIS).

d. Establishment of a Central Register of Intelligence Information.

e. Basic research and analysis of intelligence subjects of common
interest to all Departments, such as economics, geography, sociology,
biographical data, etc.

In the consideration of performance by C.I.G. of central operations,
however, the administrative, budgetary and legal difficulties of the
present organization have presented real problems. The reduction of
Departmental funds and personnel for intelligence activities have made
it difficult for Departments, despite their desire to cooperate, to
furnish the necessary facilities to C.I.G. The inability of C.I.G. to
recruit personnel directly from civilian life, and the administrative
complications of procuring personnel from the Departments, are likely to
jeopardize effective conduct of C.I.G. operations. The lack of enabling
legislation making the C.I.G. a legal entity has made it impossible to
negotiate contracts which are required for many operations, such as the
monitoring of foreign broadcasts.

5. Conclusions

a. The present organizational relationship between the National
Intelligence Authority, the Central Intelligence Group, and the
Intelligence Advisory Board is sound.

b. The initial organizational and planning phase of C.I.G. activities has
been completed and the operation of centralized intelligence serv-ices
should be undertaken by C.I.G. at the earliest practicable date.

c. The National Intelligence Authority and the Central Intelligence Group
should obtain enabling legislation and an independent budget as soon as
possible, either as part of a new national defense organization or as a
separate agency, in order that (1) urgently needed central intelligence
operations may be effectively and efficiently conducted by the Central
Intelligence Group, and (2) the National Intelligence Authority and the
Central Intelligence Group will have the necessary authority and
standing to develop, support, coordinate and direct an adequate Federal
intelligence program for the national security.

Sidney W. Souers4

* Source: Central Intelligence Agency
Historical Files, HS/HC-39, Item 1. Top Secret. Also reproduced with
title page in CIA Cold War Records: The CIA under
Harry Truman, pp. 41-51.

4 Printed from a
copy that bears this typed signature.

Vandenberg's Tenure as Director of Central IntelligenceVandenberg's Tenure as Director of Central Intelligence: Document List

Introduction

Document 155: Minutes of the Fifth Meeting of the Intelligence Advisory Board

Washington, June 10, 1946, 2:30 p.m.

Source: Central Intelligence Agency Historical Files, HS/HC-281. Confidential. The meeting was held at the War Department.

Document 156: Memorandum From the Director of Central Intelligence (Vandenberg) to the Intelligence Advisory Board

Washington, June 20, 1946.

Source: Central Intelligence Agency Historical Files, HS/HC-276. Top Secret; Limited Distribution.

Document 157: Memorandum From C. H. Carson of the Federal Bureau of Investigation to the Assistant Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation (Ladd)

Washington, June 21, 1946.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 263, Records of the Central Intelligence Agency, Troy Papers, FBI Documents. No classification marking.

Document 158: Memorandum for the Secretary of State's Special Assistant for Research and Intelligence (Langer)

Washington, June 28, 1946.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Records of the Department of State, Decimal File 1945-49, 101.5/6-2846. Top Secret. Drafted by W. Park Armstrong of Langer's staff. Attached to this document was a 7-page chronology dated January 1946 and entitled “History of the National Intelligence Authority.” See the Supplement.

Document 159: Minutes of the Sixth Meeting of the Intelligence Advisory Board

Washington, June 28, 1946, 2:30 p.m.

Source: Central Intelligence Agency Historical Files, HS/HC-281. Top Secret; Limited Distribution. The meeting was held at the War Department building.

Document 160: National Intelligence Authority Directive No. 5

Washington, July 8, 1946.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 218, Records of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, Leahy Papers, No. 132. Top Secret; Limited Distribution.

Document 161: Central Intelligence Group Directive No. 14

Washington, July 19, 1946.

Source: Central Intelligence Agency Historical Files, HS/HC-275. Confidential.

Document 162: Memorandum From the Director of Central Intelligence (Vandenberg) to the National Intelligence Authority

Washington, August 13, 1946.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Records of the Department of State, Decimal File 1945-49, 101.5/8-1546. Top Secret. The source text is covered by an August 15 note from Acting Secretary of State Acheson to his Special Assistant, Herbert S. Marks, which reads as follows:”

Document 163: Minutes of the Sixth Meeting of the National Intelligence Authority

Washington, August 21, 1946, 11 a.m.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 218, Records of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, Leahy Papers, No. 132. Top Secret. This meeting was called at the request of Acting Secretary of State Acheson; see Darling, The Central Intelligence Agency, p. 162 and p. 455, note 156. The meeting was held at the Department of State.

Document 164: Telegram From the President's Chief of Staff (Leahy) to President Truman

Washington, August 21, 1946, 8 p.m. (Z).

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 218, Records of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, Leahy Papers, No. 131. Top Secret. The time of transmission is taken from Truman's reply (see footnote 1 below). Also reproduced in CIA Cold War Records: The CIA under Harry Truman, pp. 79-80.

Document 165: Letter From the Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation (Hoover) to the President's Chief of Staff (Leahy)

Washington, August 23, 1946.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 218, Records of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, Leahy Papers, No. 132. Personal and Confidential.

Document 166: Minutes of the Seventh Meeting of the Intelligence Advisory Board

Washington, August 26, 1946, 2:30 p.m.

Source: Central Intelligence Agency Historical Files, HS/HC-281. Secret; Limited Distribution. The meeting was held at the New War Department Building.

Document 167: Letter From the President's Chief of Staff (Leahy) to the Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation (Hoover)

Washington, September 4, 1946.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 263, Records of the Central Intelligence Agency, Troy Papers, FBI Documents. No classification marking.

Document 168: Letter From the Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation (Hoover) to the President's Chief of Staff (Leahy)

Washington, September 6, 1946.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 263, Records of the Central Intelligence Agency, Troy Papers, FBI Documents. Personal and Confidential.

Document 169: Minutes of the Seventh Meeting of the National Intelligence Authority

Washington, September 25, 1946, 11:15 a.m.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 218, Records of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, Leahy Papers, No. 132. Secret; Limited Distribution. The meeting was held at the Department of State.

Document 170: Minutes of the Eighth Meeting of the Intelligence Advisory Board

Washington, October 1, 1946, 2:30 p.m.

Source: Central Intelligence Agency Historical Files, HS/HC-281. Secret: Limited Distribution. No drafting information appears on the source text. The meeting was held at the New War Department.

Document 171: Central Intelligence Group Directive No. 15

Washington, October 1, 1946.

Document 172: Minutes of the Eighth Meeting of the National Intelligence Authority

Washington, October 16, 1946, 11:15 a.m.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 218, Records of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, Leahy Papers, No. 132. Secret; Special Distribution. No drafting information appears on the source text. The meeting was held at the Department of State.

Document 173: Memorandum From the Secretary of State's Special Assistant for Research and Intelligence (Eddy) and the Assistant Secretary of State for Administration (Russell) to Secretary of State Byrnes

Washington, October 30, 1946.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Records of the Department of State, Decimal File 1945-49, 101.5/10-2446. Secret. The source text bears the handwritten annotation: “I approve. James F. Byrnes.”

Document 174: Minutes of the Ninth Meeting of the Intelligence Advisory Board

Washington, October 31, 1946, 2:30 p.m.

Source: Central Intelligence Agency Historical Files, HS/HC-281. Top Secret; Limited Distribution. No drafting information appears on the source text. The meeting was held at the Department of State.

Document 175: Letter From the Secretary of State's Special Assistant for Research and Intelligence (Eddy) to the Director of Central Intelligence (Vandenberg)

Washington, November 4, 1946.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Records of the Department of State, Decimal File 1945-49, 101.5/10-2446. Secret.

Document 176: Minutes of the Tenth Meeting of the Intelligence Advisory Board

Washington, November 7, 1946, 2:30 p.m.

Source: Central Intelligence Agency Historical Files, HS/HC-281. Top Secret; Limited Distribution. The meeting was held at the New War Department Building.

Document 177: Memorandum From the Commanding General of the Manhattan Engineer District, Department of War (Groves) to the Atomic Energy Commission

Washington, November 21, 1946.

Source: Central Intelligence Agency Historical Files, HS/HC-208. Secret. The source text is a copy transcribed for the CIA Historical Staff on January 14, 1954.

Document 178: Minutes of the 11th Meeting of the Intelligence Advisory Board

Washington, November 26, 1946, 10 a.m.

Source: Central Intelligence Agency Historical Files, HS/HC-281. Secret. No drafting information appears on the source text. The meeting was held at the New War Department Building.

Document 179: Minutes of the 12th Meeting of the Intelligence Advisory Board

Washington, December 17, 1946, 2:30 p.m.

Source: Central Intelligence Agency Historical Files, HS/HC-281. Confidential. The meeting was held at the New War Department Building.

Document 180: Memorandum From the Chairman (Eddy) to the Members of the Advisory Committee on Intelligence

Washington, December 24, 1946.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 353, Records of Interdepartmental and Intradepartmental Committees—State Department, Lot File No. 122, Records of the Secretary's Staff Committee 1944-47, Box 94. Confidential.

Document 181: National Intelligence Authority Directive No. 7

Washington, January 2, 1947.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 218, Records of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, Leahy Papers, No. 132. Confidential.

Document 182: Memorandum From the Chief of the Interdepartmental Coordinating and Planning Staff, Central Intelligence Group (Edgar) to the Assistant Director for Reports and Estimates (Huddle)

Washington, January 13, 1947.

Source: Central Intelligence Agency Historical Files, HS/HC-804, Item 29. Confidential. The source text is a copy transcribed for the CIA Historian on July 16, 1952. This copy gives no indication of the sender but the document appears to be identical to one described in Darling, The Central Intelligence Agency, p. 141. This memorandum is referred to as a draft in a memorandum from Montague to the Assistant Director for Reports and Estimates, January 29. (Central Intelligence Agency Historical Files, HS/HC-450) See the Supplement.

Document 183: Central Intelligence Group Directive No. 18

Washington, January 23, 1947.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 218, Records of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, Leahy Papers, No. 130. Confidential.

Document 184: Memorandum From the Chief of the Intelligence Staff, Central Intelligence Group (Montague) to the Assistant Director for Reports and Estimates (Huddle)

Washington, January 29, 1947.

Source: Central Intelligence Agency Historical Files, HS/HC-450. Confidential. The source text is a transcript prepared for the CIA Historian on December 16, 1952.

Document 185: Minutes of the 9th Meeting of the National Intelligence Authority

Washington, February 12, 1947, 11 a.m.

Source: Central Intelligence Agency Historical Files, HS/HC-245. Top Secret. No drafting information appears on the source text. The meeting was held at the Department of State. Also reproduced in CIA Cold War Records: The CIA under Harry Truman, pp. 113-121.

Document 186: Memorandum From the Secretary of State's Special Assistant for Research and Intelligence (Eddy) to Secretary of State Marshall

Washington, February 15, 1947.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Records of the Department of State, Decimal File 1945-49, 101.61/2-1547. Top Secret. Marshall annotated this memorandum “Hold. G.C.M.”

Document 187: Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, February 19, 1947.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Records of the Department of State, Decimal File 1945-49, 101.5/2-1947. Drafted by Allan Evans. The memorandum was covered by a brief handwritten transmittal note from Evans to Eddy and had attached a paper, possibly a draft, entitled “Relations With Other Government Intelligence Agencies,” dated June 14, 1946. See the Supplement.

Document 188: Memorandum From the Secretary of State's Special Assistant for Research and Intelligence (Eddy) to the Under Secretary of State (Acheson)

Washington, February 28, 1947.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Records of the Department of State, Decimal File 1945-49, 101.61/2-2847. Confidential.

Document 189: Central Intelligence Group Paper

Washington, March 12, 1947.

Source: Central Intelligence Agency Historical Files, HS/HC-276. Confidential. For the background on this paper, see Document 185.

Document 190: Letter From the Director of Central Intelligence (Vandenberg) to the Chairman of the Joint Research and Development Board (Bush)

Washington, March 13, 1947.

Source: Central Intelligence Agency Historical Files, HS/HC-804, Item 46, Job 84-B00443R, Box 7. Secret. The source text is a transcript made for the CIA Historian on July 29, 1952.

Document 191: Memorandum by the Deputy Director of Central Intelligence (Wright)

Washington, March 28, 1947.

Source: Central Intelligence Agency Historical Files, HS/HC-100, Item 5. Secret. Addressed to the CIG Assistant Directors for Reports and Estimates, Collection and Dissemination, Operations, and Special Operations and the Chief, Interdepartmental Coordinating and Planning Staff.

Document 192: Circular Instruction From the Department of State

Washington, April 9, 1947.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Records of the Department of State, Decimal File 1945-49, 101.5/4-947. Confidential. Drafted by P.G. Strong and T.M. Nordbeck. Addressed to American diplomatic and consular officers “except Germany, Austria, Japan and Korea.”

Document 193: Circular Instruction From the Department of State

Washington, April 15, 1947.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Records of the Department of State, Decimal File 1945-49, 101.5/4-1547. Confidential. Addressed to American Diplomatic Officers in the other American Republics. Drafted by Briggs on February 27.

Document 194: National Intelligence Authority Directive No. 9

Washington, April 18, 1947.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 218, Records of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, Leahy Papers, No. 132. Top Secret.

Document 195: Memorandum by the Acting Secretary of the National Intelligence Advisory Board (Earman)

Washington, April 21, 1947.

Source: Central Intelligence Agency Historical Files, HS/HC-280. Secret. Prepared for the Intelligence Advisory Board.

IntroductionIntroduction

Souers had agreed to serve as the first Director of Central Intelligence
with the understanding that it was an interim appointment. By at least
April 1946, he, Admiral Leahy, and the President had found a successor, General Hoyt
Vandenberg, the Army's Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence
(G-2).

Souers had established the basic, although still embryonic, institutions
of what today is known as the Intelligence Community and had emphasized
planning for their development and elaboration. In his final report to
the National Intelligence Authority, however, he articulated the view
that more far-reaching steps would have to be taken in the future to
make the Presidential directive of January 22, 1946, effective.

If Souers had been a conciliator who moved cautiously in order to
maintain the “cooperative interdepartmental activity,” Vandenberg was an
aggressive Director of Central Intelligence who actively sought to
extend the responsibilities of the Central Intelligence Group and the
powers of his office. Because the relatively simple beginnings under
Souers became an increasingly complex pattern of intelligence activities
and institutions under Vandenberg, there are many lines of development
to be traced in the history of his directorship, brief though it was.
There are two dominant themes, however. One was Vandenberg's effort to
alter drastically the balance between the Central Intelligence Group and
the departmental intelligence agencies, at the expense of the latter.
The second is the resulting contest between Vandenberg and the
departmental intelligence chiefs over their respective powers, which was
really a clash between (or among) different concepts of the national
intelligence system. Vandenberg's tenure began and ended with high
points in these controversies, and in between there were few issues
concerning the developing intelligence structure that did not reflect
the tension.

The documentation in this chapter is fairly full and gives a reasonably
accurate sense of the main issues, especially as they relate to the
debate over the allocation of power within the intelligence structure.
As in the case of Souer's tenure, the documentation is increasingly
bureaucratic in character and in numerous instances the debates are
waged over or reflected in fairly routine or at least undramatic issues.
During the period covered by this volume, the Director of Central
Intelligence and the departmental intelligence chiefs rarely discussed
substantive intelligence issues concerning foreign developments or the
capabilities and intentions of foreign governments. Although there was
considerable debate in the
intelligence system, what was recorded at senior levels almost
exclusively concerned the intelligence system, jurisdictional,
organizational, and procedural issues.

The minutes of the National Intelligence Authority and the Intelligence
Advisory Board, together with the papers prepared for their
consideration, document these concerns, albeit somewhat formally. There
is also a limited amount of material available on Department of State
and to a lesser extent Central Intelligence Group views on developments
in the intelligence system, as well as some documentation on the
initiation of various intelligence programs and activities. What are
lacking are less formal documents providing more intimate and less
discreet comments and observations, documents giving insights into the
making of intelligence policy at senior levels, and documents clearly
reflecting the impact of intelligence on foreign and strategic policy.
By comparison with the period leading up to the signing of the January
22 Presidential directive, the subsequent documentation tends to be much
more guarded and less revealing.

When Vandenberg took over as Director of Central Intelligence on June 10,
1946, he inherited a going concern but a small one whose future was
still uncertain. If the Central Intelligence Group in fact was to become
the dominant agency in the national intelligence structure, and the
Director of Central Intelligence the effective and unchallenged head of
that structure, there were major obstacles to be overcome. One of these
was that the CIG existed on a
non-statutory basis and depended on budgetary allocations from the
State, War, and Navy Departments (documents on this subject are in the
section on the National Security Act of 1947). In addition to these,
however, there were other major barriers. One was that the Central
Intelligence Group had only a minimal capability for research and
analysis. It had, of course, been producing political summaries, but it
lacked the resources to produce on its own “strategic and national
policy intelligence,” however that term was defined.

Another barrier was the unsettled status of the Director of Central
Intelligence in the national intelligence structure and, by extension,
the respective roles of the Central Intelligence Group and the
departmental intelligence components. Was the DCI independent of and above the departmental intelligence
chiefs, or were the latter, in their common capacity as the Intelligence
Advisory Board, a “board of directors” who had collective status and
authority? Neither of these issues was resolved by the time Vandenberg
left office, but during his brief tenure he defined them sharply and
highlighted their significance by taking strong and sometimes
confrontational positions on them. To some degree he even provoked these
conflicts (although they were probably latent in the system) since it
was in reaction to Vandenberg's policies that the IAB first seriously asserted the doctrine
of “collective responsibility.”

A Central Intelligence Agency historian (who was also a participant in
and observer of many of the events of which he later wrote) sums up
Vandenberg's tenure as follows:

“Although Vandenberg had no long-term interest in the subject, he had
very positive ideas about the proper role of the DCI and the CIA. He had a poor opinion of Souers' cautious,
consultative approach to the IAB and was
resolved not to follow it. A youthful, vigorous, and self-confident man
at forty-seven, his instinct was to take command and issue orders. In
this he was a reincarnation of General Donovan. Indeed, he outdid Donovan, who had been more realistic. Vandenberg's
simple conception was to build up the prospective CIA into an
independent, entirely self-sufficient, national intelligence service. He
would then discover wasteful duplication of intelligence effort and
reduce the departmental intelligence services to mere staffs of briefers
for presenting the CIA product in their respective departments. Thus,
Vandenberg's purpose was to create the single intelligence service that
the wartime G-2 Policy Staff had warned against. Moreover, it was
entirely contrary to the intention of JIC 239/5, JCS 1181/5, the
Lovett Report, and the President's letter.” (Ludwell Lee Montague, General Walter Bedell
Smith as Director of Central Intelligence, October
1950-February 1953 (University Park: The Pennsylvania State
University Press, 1992), pages 27-28)

Vandenberg had been in office about 10 days when he circulated to the
Intelligence Advisory Board a draft NIA
directive (Document 156), proposing “a
redefinition of the functions of the Director of Central Intelligence
which will give him the necessary authority to augment the Central
Intelligence Group so that he may effectively perform his assigned
missions.” The draft directive authorized the Director of Central
Intelligence to centralize interagency research and analysis, “to act as
the executive agent of this Authority in coordinating and supervising
all Federal foreign intelligence activities,” and to conduct “all
Federal espionage and counter-espionage operations for the collection of
foreign intelligence.” The draft directive also required the State, War,
and Navy Departments to “make available to the Director of Central
Intelligence, upon his request, the necessary funds, personnel,
facilities, and other assistance required for the performance of the
functions authorized herein.”

The Intelligence Advisory Board, with a strong lead from Dr. William L. Langer, the Secretary of
State's Special Assistant for Research and Intelligence (the successor
to Colonel McCormack), forced
Vandenberg to draw back, although not necessarily to back down. As
eventually adopted by the National Intelligence Authority, the directive
(Document 160) was cast in milder and less
prescriptive language. Nevertheless, Vandenberg had won some, and
perhaps a great deal, of the substance he was seeking. Moreover, his
financial problem was considerably eased by the NIA's agreement to seek new arrangements for handling
CIG funding (see the section on the
National Security Act of 1947). For a summary of this episode, see Montague, General
Walter Bedell Smith as
Director of Central Intelligence, pages 28-29.

Although this initial clash was echoed in a number of other engagements
throughout the months that followed, Vandenberg did not again seek an
across-the-board expansion of his authority until February 1947, when he
once more asked the National Intelligence Authority to clarify his
powers vis-à-vis the Intelligence Advisory Board and the departmental
intelligence chiefs. After discussion, the Authority agreed to approve a
formula proposed by Vandenberg which read as follows:

“The Director of Central Intelligence shall operate within his
jurisdiction as an agent of the Secretaries of State, War and the Navy,
and the necessary authority is hereby delegated … to the Director of
Central Intelligence so that his decisions, orders and directives shall
be considered as emanating from them and shall have full force and
effect as such, provided any aggrieved agency may have access to that
agency's Secretary and through him to the N.I.A.” (Document 185)

The Authority's action did not settle the matter and, indeed, probably
intensified the conflict. Within a month, Admiral Inglis, Director of
Naval Intelligence and perhaps the most persistent and articulate
proponent of the idea that the Intelligence Advisory Board was a board
of directors for the national intelligence system had circulated to the
IAB a paper proposing procedures to
ensure that the comments or concurrence of the Board were secured on all
matters referred by the Director of Central Intelligence to the NIA. (Document
189) But the issue raised by Inglis was to be debated during
Admiral Hillenkoetter's directorship rather than Vandenberg's and not
really settled until General Smith became Director of Central
Intelligence in the fall of 1950.

The controversy over the DCI's authority
permeated, or at least touched, a number of other issues. Discussions of
such subjects as “static intelligence” (the then current term for what
later became known as “basic intelligence,” the preparation of
intelligence handbooks and encyclopedias), the delineation of collection
responsibilities (a project pressed by the Department of State) and the
development of the first set of “National Intelligence Requirements” (on
China), all had overtones of the authority question.

One of the most sensitive issues concerned intelligence estimates, the
“strategic and national policy intelligence” of the 1946 Presidential
directive. The directive made the DCI
responsible for this kind of intelligence but said no more. Hardly any
aspect of the subject escaped debate; for example, how estimates were to
be produced, who should produce them, whether and how agencies were to
participate in the process, and how dissents would be handled. Even the
definition of “strategic and national policy intelligence” was involved.
In fact, it was a central issue, because the definition of the term also
involved a definition of the powers of the Director of Central
Intelligence.

As noted earlier, one of Vandenberg's major goals was to build up the
CIG's research and analytical
capability. He established an Office of Research and Evaluation and
began to build up an analytical staff, proposing to expand an existing
establishment of 60 to a strength of 2,000. In July 1946, he directed
the preparation of an assessment of “Soviet Foreign and Military
Policy,” designated as “ORE-1.” (Text
reproduced in Michael Warner, ed., CIA Cold War Records: The CIA under
Harry Truman (Washington,
D.C.: Central Intelligence Agency, 1994), pages 65-76) ORE-1 was a forerunner of what later became
known as National Intelligence Estimates. It also touched off renewed
controversy about procedures and responsibilities for estimative papers
and revealed deep and genuine differences of view on these issues. The
estimates controversy overlapped the separate but related issue of
whether CIG should engage in the
production of finished analytical intelligence, a source of particular
concern to the Department of State, which saw CIG encroaching on its responsibilities for political and
economic analysis. It was for all of these reasons that the definition
of “strategic and national policy intelligence” was so important to
Vandenberg, since the definition held one of the keys to breaking down a
major obstacle to a predominant CIG role
in the production of finished intelligence.

Eventually, in February 1947, Vandenberg went to the National
Intelligence Authority and won the Authority's endorsement for the
following definition:

“Strategic and national policy intelligence is that composite
intelligence, interdepartmental in character, which is required by the
President and other high officers and staffs to assist them in
determining policies with respect to national planning and security in
peace and in war and for the advancement of broad national policy. It is
in that political-economic-military area of concern to more than one
agency, must be objective, and must transcend the exclusive competence
of any one department.” (Document 185)

As with so many other issues, the NIA's
action did not settle the case, and estimative intelligence remained a
source of contention throughout the tenure of Vandenberg's successor,
Admiral Hillenkoetter.

The long controversies over jurisdictional boundaries and authority were
often more substantive than they appeared. Although there were unabashed
bureaucratic contests for power, there were also genuinely held and
fundamentally different concepts of how the intelligence system should
function and what it should do, differences that went back to 1945 and
before and that were to last long beyond the 1940s. In retrospect, the
national intelligence leadership, which was trying to do a number of
things for the first time, inadvertently fueled many of the
controversies. Never having had a peacetime national intelligence system
before, there was an inevitable process of trial and error in which the
participants often
magnified and complicated what appear now to be relatively simple
problems.

Nevertheless, the conflicts and difficulties of the time should not
obscure the incremental progress toward the construction of a national
intelligence system. Vandenberg reorganized the CIG, made an important beginning in the field of scientific
intelligence, dealt with the vexing and arcane problem of the
relationship between the CIG and the
Joint Intelligence Group of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, began developing
a centralized system of biographic information and reference, helped to
give foreign broadcast monitoring a permanent home, and made some
progress on the production of “basic intelligence” handbooks and
encyclopedias. These and many other subjects were prosaic, but they
played important roles in the formation of the national intelligence
system. In all of these fields, too, the departmental intelligence
components made significant contributions and, more important, were at
this period the major producers of finished intelligence.

As in the case of his predecessor, Vandenberg's tenure was short. As the
administration and Congress moved toward armed services' unification,
Vandenberg was being mentioned as a candidate for a senior post in the
soon-to-be-created independent Air Force. By February 1947, the National
Intelligence Authority had chosen his successor, and on May 1 Vandenberg
departed to become Deputy Commander of the Army Air Forces and shortly
thereafter, Vice Chief of Staff (and later Chief of Staff) of the U.S.
Air Force.

155. Minutes of the Fifth Meeting of the Intelligence Advisory Board155. Minutes of the Fifth Meeting of the Intelligence Advisory
BoardSource

Washington, June
10, 1946, 2:30 p.m.

PARTICIPANTS

Lt. General Hoyt S.
Vandenberg, Director of Central Intelligence

Rear Admiral Sidney W. Souers, in the Chair

Members Present

Mr. William L. Langer,
Special Assistant to the Secretary of State for Research and
Intelligence

Maj. General Stephen J.
Chamberlin, Director of Intelligence, WDGS (Designate)

Commodore Charles J. Rend (representing Rear Admiral Thomas B. Inglis, Chief of Naval
Intelligence)

Brig. General George C.
McDonald, Assistant Chief of Air Staff,
Intelligence

Mr. D. M. Ladd (representing Mr. J.
Edgar Hoover, Director, Federal Bureau of
Investigation)

Also Present

Dr. Kingman Douglass, Deputy Director, Central Intelligence
Group

Colonel Carter W. Clarke, G-2

Captain R.K. Davis, USN, O.N.I.

Captain J.J. Rochefort, USN, O.N.I.

Colonel E.P. Mussett, A-2

Lt. Colonel F.K. Newcomer, G-2

Colonel L.J. Fortier, Central Intelligence Group

Captain W.B. Goggins, USN, Central Intelligence Group

Mr. L.L. Montague, Central Intelligence Group

Colonel H.F. Cunningham, Central Intelligence Group

Colonel C.P. Nicholas, Central Intelligence Group

Colonel W.A. Perry, Central Intelligence Group

Colonel T.J. Sands, Central Intelligence Group

Secretariat

Mr. James S. Lay, Jr.,
Secretary, National Intelligence Authority

Mr. J.K. Tibby, Assistant Secretary

1. Provision of Monitoring of Press and
Propaganda Broadcasts of Foreign Powers (C.I.G. 1/1, C.I.G. 1/2, and
C.I.G. 1/3)1

Admiral Souers recalled that the proposals raised in C.I.G. 1/1 and 1/2
had been considered provisionally in the previous meeting. In view of
General Vandenberg's suggestion that the operation of FBIS be assumed by State, that department
had been asked to make a study of its capabilities. The State Department
replied (in C.I.G. 1/3) that while they were keenly interested in having
the monitoring service continue it would be impossible for the
Department to assume administrative responsibility for FBIS during the next fiscal year. Admiral
Souers felt that these developments justified the Members in approving
C.I.G. 1/1, which in substance called for War Department operation of
FBIS under directives from the
Director of Central Intelligence as to collecting and distributing
missions.

Dr. Langer underscored the reasons
leading to State's conclusions. These were chiefly technical and
budgetary. For example, State estimated that the administrative costs of
FBIS would mean a 50 per cent
increase in the entire amount budgeted for State's intelligence
service—at a time when even the presently budgeted amounts had not been
finally approved by Congress. There were also questions of the
establishment of new stations in military zones, the transfer of some
facilities now under British auspices, the procurement of new equipment,
and the like—all of which he
felt could be more effectively handled by the War Department at
present.

General Vandenberg observed that an eventual alternative to State or War
Department administration would be direct control by Central
Intelligence, if C.I.G. were to obtain an operating appropriation of its
own. But such considerations could not apply in the solution of the
immediate problem.

In the course of the general discussion which followed it was brought out
by Admiral Souers that the Central Intelligence Group at present could
not accept a transfer of funds from War for direct administration of
FBIS, since C.I.G. was not an
authorized disbursing agency. It was therefore the consensus of the
Members that the best immediate solution was operation by the Director
of Central Intelligence with the administrative assistance of the War
Department.

After concluding discussion,

The Intelligence Advisory Board:

Approved C.I.G. 1/1 subject to textual clarification to insure that the
recommendation to the National Intelligence Authority provided for
operation of the monitoring function by the Director of Central
Intelligence with the administrative assistance of the War Department.
(Report to N.I.A. to be circulated as N.I.A. 5.)2

2. C.I.G. Weekly Summary

Admiral Souers invited discussion and criticism of the trial issue of the
C.I.G. Weekly Summary circulated on 7 June.3 The discussion which followed centered on two
issues developed by Dr. Langer:
first, whether interpretive articles such as the Weekly contained could
be prepared more effectively in C.I.G. Specifically, he asked Dr.
Langer to arrange a means
whereby political intelligence texts could be promptly checked when
necessary with a State Department specialist. He transmitted further
specific comments and suggestions from G-2 regarding the trial issue to
Mr. Montague.

The Members of I.A.B. were in agreement with General Vandenberg's
proposal.

Commodore Rend commented that it was essential to commence regular
publication of the Weekly, despite shortcoming that might be inevitable
in early issues; and General McDonald and Mr. Ladd thought that, in view of all the circumstances, the
reports staff should be congratulated on a good beginning.

3. Provisions for Coordinating the Acquisition of
Foreign Publications (C.I.G. 9)4

Admiral Souers noted that replies had not yet been received from all
Members regarding C.I.G. 9, which had been circulated for informal
consideration. After brief discussion, during which it was agreed to
reduce the classification of the paper to “Restricted”,

The Intelligence Advisory Board:

Approved C.I.G. 9. (Enclosures to be submitted to N.I.A. as N.I.A.
4.)

4. Remarks by Admiral Souers

Admiral Souers said he wanted to take occasion, on being relieved as
Director of Central Intelligence, to express to all Members of the
Intelligence Advisory Board his appreciation for the unstinted
cooperation he had received from each one. He took great satisfaction in
turning over his duties to General Vandenberg.

General Vandenberg, in an acknowledgment in behalf of all those present,
expressed the hope that the work of Central Intelligence should be
maintained at the standard set by Admiral Souers.

* Source: Central Intelligence
Agency Historical Files, HS/HC-281. Confidential. The meeting was
held at the War Department.

1 None printed. (Dated
respectively, April 26, May 8, and June 4; ibid., HS/HC-276) See the
Supplement for all.

2 Not printed. (Central Intelligence Agency
Historical Files, HS/HC-243) NIA 5
was a slightly revised version of CIG 1/1. See footnote 1
above.

3 Not found.

4 Dated May
31. (Central Intelligence Agency Historical Files, HS/HC-276) In its
final form the paper was issued as NIA Directive No. 6, July 26. (National Archives and
Records Administration, RG 218, Records of the Joint Chiefs of
Staff, Leahy Papers, No.
132) Both are in the Supplement.

156. Memorandum From the Director of Central Intelligence (Vandenberg) to the Intelligence Advisory Board156. Memorandum From the Director of Central Intelligence (Vandenberg) to the
Intelligence Advisory BoardSource

Washington, June 20,
1946.

CIG 10

FUNCTIONS OF THE DIRECTOR OF CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE

REFERENCES

a. Minutes, I.A.B. 2nd Meeting, Item 41

b. Minutes, I.A.B. 3rd Meeting, Item 12

c. C.I.G. 1/13

d. Minutes, I.A.B. 5th Meeting, Item 14

1. The former and the present Directors of Central Intelligence are in
agreement that the initial organizing and planning stages of the Central
Intelligence Group have been completed, and that the time has arrived to
request that the National Intelligence Authority authorize the Director
of Central Intelligence to undertake certain operations and functions of
vital importance to the national intelligence mission. The enclosed
report to the National Intelligence Authority is designed to obtain that
authority.

2. Attention is invited to the fact that the provisions of paragraph 2 of
Appendix “A” hereto have been previously discussed in reference b. The
provisions of paragraph 4 a of Appendix “A” hereto were briefly
discussed in reference a. Paragraph 4 b is intended to serve in lieu of
the revision of C.I.G. 1/1 agreed in reference d. Paragraph 3 of
Appendix “A” hereto has not been previously discussed by the
Intelligence Advisory Board, although its concept has been incorporated
in approved papers on specific problems involving the coordination of
intelligence activities.

3. It is recommended that the Intelligence Advisory Board concur in the
submittal of the Enclosure for consideration by the National
Intelligence Authority.

Hoyt S. Vandenberg5

Lieutenant General, USA

Enclosure

Draft Report by the Director of Central Intelligence
(Vandenberg)6

FUNCTIONS OF THE DIRECTOR OF CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE

REFERENCES

a. President's letter of 22 January 19467

b. N.I.A. Directive No. 18

c. N.I.A. Directive No. 29

Report by the Director of Central Intelligence,
with the Unanimous Concurrence of the Intelligence Advisory Board

1. The President's letter of 22 January 1946, directing the establishment
of the National Intelligence Authority, contained, in paragraph 3
thereof, a general description of the functions envisaged for the
Director of Central Intelligence. N.I.A. Directive No. 1, containing the
basic policies and procedures governing the Central Intelligence Group,
further clarified the functions of the Director of Central Intelligence,
particularly as regards his relationship with the National Intelligence
Authority and the Intelligence Advisory Board. N.I.A. Directive No. 2
contained an initial personnel authorization for the Central
Intelligence Group, providing only the minimum necessary for the tasks
of organizing, surveying pressing problems, and meeting initial
requirements. N.I.A. Directive No. 2 also instructed the Director of
Central Intelligence to submit his recommendations for augmentation of
the Central Intelligence Group as soon as practicable. Pursuant to those
instructions, this report proposes a redefinition of the functions of
the Director of Central Intelligence which will give him the necessary
authority to augment the Central Intelligence Group so that he may
effectively perform his assigned missions.

2. A draft N.I.A. directive, redefining the functions of the Director of
Central Intelligence, is contained in Enclosure “A” (Appendix “A”
hereto). Discussion of the provisions of this draft directive is
contained in Enclosure “B” (Appendix “B” hereto).

3. The former Director of Central Intelligence, Rear Admiral Sidney W.
Souers, has concurred in the recommendations contained herein. This report also has the
unanimous concurrence of the Intelligence Advisory Board, which included
the Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation in this case.

4. It is recommended that the National Intelligence Authority approve the
draft directive in Enclosure “A” (Appendix “A” hereto).

Appendix A

Draft National Intelligence Authority Directive

FUNCTIONS OF THE DIRECTOR OF CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE

Pursuant to the President's letter of 22 January 1946 designating this
Authority as responsible for planning, developing and coordinating all
Federal foreign intelligence activities so as to assure the most
effective accomplishment of the intelligence mission related to the
national security, the functions of the Director of Central Intelligence
are hereby redefined as follows:10

1. Paragraph 3 of the President's letter of 22 January 1946 defined the
functions of the Director of Central Intelligence as follows:

“3. Subject to the existing law, and the direction and control of the
National Intelligence Authority, the Director of Central Intelligence
shall:

“a. Accomplish the correlation and evaluation of intelligence relating to
the national security, and the appropriate dissemination within the
Government of the resulting strategic and national policy intelligence.
In so doing, full use shall be made of the staff and facilities of the
intelligence agencies of your departments.

“b. Plan for the coordination of such of the activities of the
Intelligence agencies of your Departments as relate to the national
security and recommend to the National Intelligence Authority the
establishment of such over-all policies and objectives as will assure
the most effective accomplishment of the national intelligence
mission.

“c. Perform, for the benefit of said intelligence agencies, such services
of common concern as the National Intelligence Authority determines can
be more efficiently accomplished centrally.

“d. Perform such other functions and duties related to intelligence
affecting the national security as the President and the National
Intelligence Authority may from time to time direct.”

2. In performing the functions specified in paragraph 3 a of the
President's letter, the Director of Central Intelligence is hereby
author-ized to undertake such basic research and analysis of
intelligence and counter-intelligence information as may in his
opinion11 be required to produce the necessary
strategic and national policy intelligence. This will include the
centralization of research and analysis activities of common
intelligence interest to more than one agency when, in the opinion of
the Director of Central Intelligence, such activities can be more
efficiently performed centrally. Under such procedure, existing
organizations of the State, War and Navy Departments, including their
funds, personnel and facilities, performing those functions, will be
integrated into the Central Intelligence Group as a central service to
all intelligence agencies subject to N.I.A. coordination.12

3. In addition to the functions specified in paragraph 3 b of the
President's letter, the Director of Central Intelligence is hereby
directed to act as the executive13 agent of this
Authority in coordinating and supervising all Federal foreign
intelligence activities related to the national security in accordance
with the over-all policies and objectives established by this
Authority.

4. Pursuant to paragraph 3 c of the President's letter, the Director of
Central Intelligence is hereby directed to perform the following
services of common concern which this Authority has determined can be
more efficiently accomplished centrally:

a. Conduct of all Federal espionage and counter-espionage operations for
the collection of foreign intelligence information required for the
national security.

b. Conduct of all Federal monitoring of press and propaganda broadcasts
of foreign powers required for the collection of intelligence
information related to the national security.

5. To the extent of available appropriations and within the limits of
their capabilities,14 the State, War and Navy Departments will make
available to the Director of Central Intelligence, upon his request, the
necessary funds, personnel,
facilities and other assistance required for the performance of the
functions authorized herein. At the earliest practicable date, the
Director of Central Intelligence will submit for approval by this
Authority any supplemental budget required to perform the functions
authorized herein, in addition to the appropriations available for this
purpose in the State, War and Navy Departments.

6. Where the performance of functions authorized herein requires the
liquidation, transfer or integration of funds, personnel or facilities
for existing activities of the State, War and Navy Departments, the
liquidation, transfer or integration will be accomplished at the
earliest practicable date by mutual agreement between the Director of
Central Intelligence and the official now responsible15 for such
activities so as to involve a minimum of interruption in the performance
of these functions.

Appendix B

Discussion of the Draft National Intelligence
Authority Directive

Discussion by paragraphs of the provisions of the draft directive in
Enclosure “A” (Appendix “A” hereto) follows:

Paragraph 2: Paragraph 3-a of the President's letter makes the Director
of Central Intelligence responsible for the correlation, evaluation and
dissemination of strategic and national policy intelligence relating to
the national security, making full use of the staff and facilities of
the intelligence agencies of the State, War and Navy Departments. This
means that the Director of Central Intelligence is responsible for the
accuracy, adequacy and timeliness of intelligence required for the
national security. To discharge his vital responsibilities, the Director
of Central Intelligence should not be required to rely solely upon
evaluated intelligence from the various Departments. He should also have
the authority, when he deems it necessary in the interests of national
security, to undertake within the Central Intelligence Group basic
research and analysis of original and unevaluated intelligence and
counter-intelligence information from all available sources. This
authority is especially necessary to ensure adequate coverage, from a
national viewpoint, of those fields which are of common intelligence interest to more than
one agency, such as economics, science, biography, geography, sociology,
etc. In many of those fields the national security requires that basic
research and analysis activities be centralized so as to serve the
intelligence agencies subject to N.I.A. coordination.

Paragraph 3: Paragraph 3-b of the President's letter charges the Director
of Central Intelligence with planning for the coordination of
intelligence activities related to the national security and
recommending over-all policies and objectives to the National
Intelligence Authority. No provision is made in the President's letter
for an executive agent of the National Intelligence Authority who will
be responsible for coordinating and supervising intelligence activities
related to the national security so as to ensure that policies are
properly implemented and objectives are successfully accomplished. Such
coordination and supervision is considered a necessary step in the
effective execution of the national intelligence program. It is
therefore recommended that the Director of Central Intelligence be
specifically charged with this responsibility.

Paragraph 4-a: It is considered that the conduct of all Federal espionage
and counterespionage operations for the collection of foreign
intelligence information required for the national security can be more
efficiently accomplished centrally by the Director of Central
Intelligence for the following reasons:

A. Conduct of this type of operation by the executive departments would
almost certainly embarrass these departments in the conduct of their
official overt activities.

B. Such operations must be centrally controlled to ensure that they serve
the national interest rather than the interests of any single department
or agency, and that they do not conflict with overt intelligence
activities.

C. Since such operations require maximum security they should be
performed by a single closely controlled central agency.

D. The danger of competition and confusion between agents of different
agencies necessitates the use of a single agency. Moreover, the
interdependency and interrelationship between geographical areas and
foreign countries makes it imperative that there be one agency with
world coverage. This does not, of course, preclude the use of
specialized departmental personnel under rigid central control.

E. The difficult and specialized administrative problems involved in such
operations make a single central agency more efficient and
economical.

Paragraph 4-b: It is recommended that the conduct of all Federal
monitoring of press and propaganda broadcasts of foreign powers required
for the collection of intelligence information related to the national
security be centrally operated under the Director of Central
Intelligence for the following reasons:

A. The present organization carrying on this function under War
Department direction should be liquidated because its reports are
circulated too generally and
its personnel have not been adequately screened for security.

B. This function is of value to the State, War, Navy and other Government
departments. It should therefore be centrally directed to serve the
needs of all these departments.

C. The Department of State appears to have the greatest interest, but the
War Department is the only agency which has included funds for this
function in its 1947 budget. The Department of State, however, has
stated that it is not practicable for that Department to assume
responsibility for this operation. The War Department considers that
under no circumstances should it engage on a continuing basis in this
predominantly nonmilitary intelligence function. The same viewpoint
applies to the Navy Department. It therefore appears that this function
is a service of common concern which can be accomplished more
efficiently centrally.

Paragraph 5: The primary source of funds, personnel and facilities
required by the Director of Central Intelligence to discharge the
functions proposed in this report, should be those which can be made
available by the State, War and Navy Departments. Since, however, some
of these functions have not been performed by any department, or have
not been performed on the adequate scale now contemplated, the Director
of Central Intelligence should be authorized to submit for N.I.A.
approval any supplemental budget required pursuant to this
directive.

Paragraph 6: This paragraph is intended to ensure that the transition of
any activities from departmental to central direction or operations be
accomplished with a minimum of interruption in the performance of those
functions.

* Source: Central Intelligence Agency
Historical Files, HS/HC-276. Top Secret; Limited
Distribution.

1 Document 144.

2 Document 146.

3 Dated April 26; see footnote 1, Document 155.

4 Document 155.

5 Printed from a copy that bears this typed
signature.

6 As indicated in Vandenberg's covering
memorandum, the report was submitted to the National Intelligence
Authority.

7 Document 71.

8 Document 141.

9 Document 142.

10 In a June
26 memorandum Vandenberg submitted a “corrected” form of the draft
NIA Directive “based upon
informal discussions of C.I.G. 10.” At this point the following
phrase was added; “subject to the provisions of the said letter.”
(Central Intelligence Agency Historical Files, HS/HC-276) See the
Supplement.

11 In Vandenberg's correction of
June 26 the rest of this sentence reads: “and that of the
appropriate member of the Intelligence Advisory Board, be required
to supplement the research and analysis performed by the State, War
and Navy Departments in the fields of primary interest to each of
those Departments.”

12 The last sentence of paragraph 2 was eliminated in
the June 26 draft.

13 In the
June 26 draft “executive” was omitted.

14 In the June 26 draft
the phrase “as determined by the respective Departments,” was added
at this point.

15 The phrase “by mutual agreement between the
Director of Central Intelligence and the official now responsible”
became in the June 26 draft “as agreed to by the Director of Central
Intelligence and the official responsible”.

157. Memorandum From C. H. Carson of the Federal Bureau of Investigation to the Assistant Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation (Ladd)157. Memorandum From C. H. Carson of
the Federal Bureau of Investigation to the Assistant Director of the
Federal Bureau of Investigation (Ladd)Source

Washington, June 21,
1946.

SUBJECT

Central Intelligence Group

World-Wide Coverage

There is attached a memorandum by the Director of Central Intelligence to
the Intelligence Advisory Board submitting a proposed memorandum to the National Intelligence
Authority and a proposed directive to be issued by the National
Intelligence Authority extending the powers and duties of the Director
of Central Intelligence.1 In the proposed
memorandum to the National Intelligence Authority it is stated that the
attached draft of an NIA Directive
redefining the functions of the Director of Central Intelligence has the
unanimous concurrence of the Intelligence Advisory Board, including the
Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation.

Proposed NIA
Directive

The Directive which it is proposed that the NIA issue provides in essence the following additional
functions and powers for the Director of Central Intelligence:

(1) The Director of Central Intelligence is authorized to undertake such
basic research and analysis of intelligence and counterintelligence as
may in his opinion be required.

(2) The Director of Central Intelligence is “to act as the executive
agent of this authority (NIA) in
coordinating and in supervising all federal foreign intelligence
activities.”

(3) The Director of Central Intelligence is directed to perform the
following services of common concern:

A. Conduct all federal espionage and counterespionage operations for the
collection of foreign intelligence.

B. Conduct all federal monitoring of press and propaganda broadcasts of
foreign powers for the collection of intelligence information.

Finances

The Directive provides that to the extent of available appropriations and
within the limits of their capabilities, State, War and Navy Departments
will make available the necessary funds, personnel, and facilities
required for the performance of the new functions authorized. The
Director of Central Intelligence is to submit for the approval of the
NIA any supplemental budget required
to perform these functions in addition to the appropriations available
from State, War, and Navy.

Discussion

There is attached to the Directive an Appendix labeled “Discussion.”2 According to this Appendix, the
purpose in giving the Director of Central Intelligence authority for
research and analysis was to prevent his being required to rely solely
upon the evaluated information from the various departments and to
provide means by which he could do basic research and analysis of original and unevaluated
intelligence and counterintelligence. With reference to the provision
for giving the Director of Central Intelligence power to coordinate and
supervise all federal intelligence, it is pointed out that there was no
provision in the original Directive for an executive agent of the
National Intelligence Authority to be responsible for these duties in
order “to insure that the policies are properly implemented and
objectives successfully accomplished.”

With reference to the provision that the Central Intelligence Authority
shall conduct all federal espionage and counterespionage for the
collection of foreign intelligence, it is pointed out that the conduct
of this type of operation by executive departments would embarrass them
in their regular work; central control would insure that these
operations are not conducted solely in the interests of a single
department or agency; performance by a single, closely-controlled
central agency would secure maximum security; the specialized and
difficult administrative problems can better be handled by a central
agency; and the use of a single agency is necessary because
interdependency and inter-relationship between geographical areas and
foreign countries makes it imperative that one agency handle world
coverage. It is stated, however, this would not preclude the use of
specialized departmental personnel under rigid central control.

The discussion seems to indicate that the supplemental budget is to be
presented to Congress after approval by the NIA as it is stated that some of the functions provided for
in the Directive have not previously been performed by any department or
have not been performed on the adequate scale now contemplated and,
therefore, a supplemental budg-et is required.

Comment

This proposed Directive, of course, is the same super-colossus originally
proposed by General Donovan. It
is not the original plan as proposed by the President or which was
envisioned by the discussions occurring prior to the time the President
issued his Directive. The original plans insofar as the Bureau was
advised, contemplated the setting up of solely a coordinating agency
which was given the power, of course, to perform certain functions which
it would determine could more adequately and economically be performed
centrally for the benefit of all government agencies. This Directive,
however, blankets the field of intelligence operations and puts it under
one strong central control with practically no control by the
departments which are interested in the problems, which is the same as
the old Donovan proposal. It is
noted in particular that this Directive omits the stipulation set forth
in the Presidential Directive of January 22, 1946, placed therein at the
insistence of the Attorney General on the advice of the Bureau, which
stipulation provided, “Within the scope of existing law and Presidential
Directives, other departments and agencies of the executive branch of
the federal government shall
furnish such intelligence information relative to the national security
as is in their possession and as the Director of Central Intelligence
may from time to time request pursuant to regulations of the National
Intelligence Authority.”

This Directive, of course, as is revealed in the discussion, appears
directly aimed at getting the Bureau out of Latin America. In view of
the Bureau's present policy, we should not, of course, oppose this
Directive inasmuch as the Bureau desires to operate the Special
Intelligence Service only until July, 1947, or until some other agency
is ready to take over these duties. It should be noted, however, that
undoubtedly if this Directive is approved and the Central Intelligence
Group is successful in setting up complete foreign coverage, the Bureau
would undoubtedly be pushed into a “second-rate” position insofar as
purely intelligence functions are concerned in the domestic field. Our
law enforcement functions, of course, could not be touched by the
Central Intelligence Group. It is inevitable that the Central
Intelligence Group must enter into the domestic field picture insofar as
intelligence is concerned because of the sources of foreign intelligence
existing in that field. Also, it is impossible to separate entirely
foreign intelligence and the domestic functions performed by the Bureau.
In other words, whether we prosecute a spy in a given case would be
intimately bound up in the question of what would be best from the
standpoint of foreign intelligence. We might find ourselves prosecuting,
investigating, and using every means to disband subversive foreign
nationality organizations in the United States, but the policy with
respect to foreign intelligence would be to encourage, collaborate with,
and assist these same groups. The sheer size of the foreign intelligence
set up and its intimate relationship with powerful departments of the
United States Government would probably mean that the Central
Intelligence Group would be in a position to win out in any controversy
as to action to be taken touching on intelligence in the foreign field.
In the past, the State Department, the Army, and the Navy have
incessantly disagreed with respect to intelligence, which has certainly
facilitated the Bureau's position and our domination of the intelligence
picture. The concentration, however, of all these intelligence
functions, including the research and analysis formerly performed by
various agencies, into one strong, central group would place the Bureau
at a great disadvantage and would probably mean that we would be
overshadowed in this field and that we would be forced to accede to the
desires of the Central Intelligence Group in domestic intelligence
problems, if not to give the field entirely to them.

Suggested Changes

In view of present Bureau policy of not accepting responsibility for
foreign intelligence in the Western Hemisphere beyond July, 1947, we are
not, of course, in a position to oppose the issuance of this proposed
Directive. Our main concern
naturally would be to insure as much protection for domestic
jurisdiction as is possible. In line with this, the following
suggestions are made:

(1) In Paragraph 3 of the Directive it states, “The Director of Central
Intelligence is hereby directed to act as the executive agent of this
Authority in coordinating and in supervising all federal foreign
intelligence activities …”. This could mean, of course, that the
Director of CIG would supervise federal
foreign intelligence even though performed in the United States,
although I believe the sense is intended that he will supervise foreign
intelligence performed outside of the United States. It is suggested
that this be clarified by making the sentence read: “The Director of
Central Intelligence is hereby directed to act as executive agent of
this Authority in coordinating and supervising of federal intelligence
activities performed outside the United States and its possessions …
.”

(2) In Paragraph 4, Section A it is provided that the Director of Central
Intelligence is to perform services of common concern as follows:
“Conduct all federal espionage and counterespionage operations for the
collection of foreign intelligence information required for the national
security.” For the reason set forth above, it is suggested this read:
“Conduct all federal espionage and counterespionage operations outside
the United States and its possessions for the collection of foreign
intelligence information required for the national security.”

Although I do not believe that we can eventually oppose the Central
Intelligence Group entering into the domestic picture on the basis that
it is essential to foreign operations, the above suggested changes would
insure some grounds on which the Bureau could frame a protest.

Recommendation:

There is attached a letter to General Vandenberg advising him that the
proposed directive is approved with the above suggested changes.3 In this
letter the statement in the “Discussion” set forth under Appendix “B” of
the proposed Directive to the effect that personnel of other agencies
can be used subject to rigid control is apparently an erroneous
interpretation of the original Presidential Directive. This action is
recommended, of course, in light of the Bureau's decision to withdraw
from all foreign intelligence operations by July, 1947, or as soon as
another agency is ready to take over these functions.

Addendum4

Hoover added the following handwritten comment: “I am not as optimistic
as are Tolson & Tamm. I think it is inevitable that there will be a
collision with C.I.G. over our domestic jurisdiction or rather their
expansion into our intelligence matters. It ought not occur but this new
memo of C.I.G. shows how greedy it is. It is the Donovan plan almost in
toto & is being slyly put over. It means we must zealously guard our
domestic jurisdiction & not yield an inch & be ever alert to
resist any encroachment. H.”

Mr. Tolson and Mr. Tamm do not
concur with the conclusion expressed in this memorandum that “It is
inevitable that the Central Intelligence Group must enter into the
domestic field picture insofar as intelligence is concerned because of
the sources of foreign intelligence existing in that field.” They feel
that a coordinated program for the exchange of information between the
Central Intelligence Authority and the FBI, permitting a free and comprehensive exchange of
information in matters of mutual interest, will enable the Bureau to
work in the domestic field without interference from the Central
Intelligence Authority in the same manner that the Bureau works, for
example, with local police departments or other governmental agencies
within defined jurisdictional lines. We believe that the attached letter
to General Vandenberg is satisfactory.

Hoover added the following handwritten comment: “I am not as optimistic
as are Tolson & Tamm. I think
it is inevitable that there will be a collision with C.I.G. over our
domestic jurisdiction or rather their expansion into our intelligence
matters. It ought not occur but this new memo of C.I.G. shows how greedy
it is. It is the Donovan plan almost in toto & is being slyly put
over. It means we must zealously guard our domestic jurisdiction &
not yield an inch & be ever alert to resist any encroachment.
H.”

Edw
C.A. Tolson5

* Source: National
Archives and Records Administration, RG 263, Records of the Central
Intelligence Agency, Troy Papers, FBI Documents. No classification marking.

1 See Document 156.

2 See Appendix B to Document 156.

3 Not attached and not found.

4 Assistants to the FBI Director Tolson and Tamm added the following addendum to this
memorandum.

5  Tolson's typed
signature appears on the source text; apparently Edward Tamm signed for them
both.

158. Memorandum for the Secretary of State's Special Assistant for Research and Intelligence (Langer)158. Memorandum for the Secretary of State's Special Assistant for
Research and Intelligence (Langer)Source

Washington, June 28,
1946.

AIDE-MEMOIRE TO SA-L:1 CIG 102

1. General. a. The Department has been a consistent and enthusiastic
supporter of the concept of centralized intelligence. It is anxious to
contribute in every way
possible to the successful and efficient operation of CIG. It believes, however, that a great
deal of constructive accomplishment remains to be undertaken within the
framework of the present functions and duties of the Director of Central
Intelligence (DCI).

b. The Department believes that the President's letter of January 22,
1946 expressed the mutually agreed upon conception of centralized
intelligence and that the basic theory there established is that the
NIA, the DCI and CIG should be at
the managerial, not the operational, level, except with respect to
“services of common concern” performed “for the benefit of said
intelligence agencies” [i.e., State, War and Navy].3 The provisions
of CIG 10 would radically affect the
original concept.

2. Paragraph 2 of CIG 10. The powers and
duties conferred upon the DCI by this
paragraph extend his functions and responsibilities into operational
intelligence activities. The language of paragraph 2 permits a number of
differing interpretations of its intent and the phraseology lacks
clarity with respect to the functions and the powers granted the DCI. Numerous questions arise, some of
which are:

a. The DCI is authorized to undertake
“basic research and analysis” supplemental to that of the State, War and
Navy Departments when “in his opinion and that of the appropriate member
of the IAB it is required by the
national security.” Should it devolve upon the DCI in the first instance to determine “the appropriate
member” of the IAB and the “fields of
primary interest” for each of the Departments?

b. What are “fields of primary interest”? Is “political” intelligence the
only field of primary interest for State? Can political intelligence be
separated from economic, geographic, biographic or sociological
intelligence, or, for that matter, from order-of-battle or maritime
intelligence at certain times and under certain circumstances?

c. The DCI is authorized to perform
research and analysis activities in the fields of “common but secondary
interest to more than one of those Departments,” provided centralization
increases efficiency or effectiveness. What is a “secondary interest” to
the State Department? Here again the DCI
is charged with determining which of the members of the IAB are “the appropriate members” with
respect to the activities of common but secondary interest.

d. It has been rumored that the DCI may
take over some of the branches of MIS,
such as the Pol-Ec Branch, the Who's Who Branch and the Scientific
Branch. How, specifically, would the provisions of paragraph 2 cover the
determination by the DCI of his right or
duty to conduct the activities now performed by those branches of MIS?

e. It is possible that the exercise of the duties and functions of the
DCI under paragraph 2 may come into
direct conflict with certain provisions of the President's letter (to
which the redefinitions are subject) and thus prove abortive. For
example, paragraph 6 of the President's letter makes it obligatory for
State, War and Navy to continue “to collect, evaluate, correlate and
disseminate departmental intelligence.” Do not questions arise as to
what constitutes “departmental intelligence” and whether the departments
can turn over even secondary activities if they are “departmental”?

f. Is not the effect of paragraph 2 to diminish the authority and
function of the IAB to a marked
degree?

3. Legality. a. Entirely apart from the substantive questions involved in
the redefinition of the functions of the DCI, there is some doubt whether the NIA, under the provisions of the
President's letter of January 22, has the authority to redefine the
functions of the DCI so as to empower
him to undertake activities not specifically delineated in the
President's letter. Paragraph 3-d of the President's letter directs the
DCI to perform “such other functions
and duties related to intelligence affecting the national security as
the President and the National Intelligence Authority may from time to
time direct.” It is not clear from the language whether the requirement
is imposed that both the President and the NIA are to direct the DCI
to perform other functions, but the more logical, and possibly the
legal, interpretation would be that such a requirement was established.
In that case, the NIA would have no
authority to direct the DCI to perform
functions other than those enumerated in the President's letter unless
and until the President so directs.

b. The foregoing does not, apparently, apply to the assumption by the
DCI of the duties specified in
paragraph 4 of CIG 10, for it would seem
likely that those activities fall within the provisions of paragraph 3-c
of the President's letter which directs the DCI to “perform, for the benefit of said intelligence
agencies, such services of common concern as the National Intelligence
Authority determines can be more efficiently performed centrally.”

* Source: National
Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Records of the
Department of State, Decimal File 1945-49, 101.5/6-2846. Top Secret.
Drafted by W. Park Armstrong
of Langer's staff. Attached
to this document was a 7-page chronology dated January 1946 and
entitled “History of the National Intelligence Authority.” See the
Supplement.

1 The designator or
routing symbol for the Special Assistant to the Secretary of State
for Research and Intelligence.

2 Document 156.

3 Brackets in the source text.

159. Minutes of the Sixth Meeting of the Intelligence Advisory Board159. Minutes of the Sixth Meeting of the Intelligence Advisory
BoardSource

Washington, June
28, 1946, 2:30 p.m.

PARTICIPANTS

Lt. General Hoyt S.
Vandenberg, Director of Central Intelligence, in the
Chair

Rear Admiral Sidney W. Souers, former Director of Central
Intelligence

Members Present

Dr. William L. Langer,
Special Assistant to the Secretary of State for Research and
Intelligence

Maj. General Stephen J.
Chamberlin, Director of Intelligence, W.D.G.S.

Commodore Charles J. Rend, USN (Representing Rear Admiral
Thomas B. Inglis, Chief
of Naval Intelligence)

Colonel E. P. Mussett (Representing Brig. General George C. McDonald, Assistant Chief of
Air Staff-2)

Also Present

Mr. Park Armstrong,
Department of State

Captain R. K. Davis, USN, ONI

Colonel Joseph A. Michela, G-2

Secretariat

Mr. James S. Lay, Jr.,
Secretary, National Intelligence Authority

1. Functions of the Director of Central
Intelligence (C.I.G. 10)1

General Vandenberg expressed regret that the original version had caused
such turmoil. He explained that his primary purpose was to get the
people necessary to do the job of assisting the three departments. He
wants these people to try to find out where, because of lack of people
or money, the departments have to stop their intelligence activities
short of national requirements. General Vandenberg explained that he was
not trying to unsurp any departmental prerogatives. He realized that
C.I.G. cannot do its job unless there is an intelligence system within
State, War and Navy which is as strong as possible. He wants to find out
where the departments have to stop and thus where there are deficiencies
or holes in our intelligence organization. General Vandenberg stated
that he had talked with the Secretaries of War and the Navy, and with
Fleet Admiral Leahy, and they
were all in agreement with his concept. He would, however, welcome any
comments or criticism on the subject paper.

Dr. Langer explained that he was
very interested in making C.I.G. a real going concern, including
provision of the necessary money and people. His chief objection to the
paper was that it was rather loose in places and would subsequently give rise to suspicions.
The State Department had no objection to a large part of the paper. It
did object, however, to paragraph 2 of Appendix “A”. Dr. Langer felt that this paragraph went
beyond the provisions in the President's letter. He doubted that it was
necessary for C.I.G. to undertake extensive research and analysis. He
felt that if the departments showed themselves unable to do the job for
C.I.G., specific authorization for C.I.G. to perform such functions
could be given at that time. Dr. Langer also felt that it would be extremely difficult to
define what fields were of primary or secondary interest to the
departments.

General Vandenberg felt that point would be covered, since he was
required to obtain the concurrence of appropriate members of the Board
in any given case.

Dr. Langer noted that the decision
as to which member was appropriate in any case was left to the
discretion of the Director. He felt that setting up the proposition of
negotiating with individual members would cause the Board to pass into
eclipse. He would be very sorry to see that happen, since solidarity of
the Board gave necessary moral support to the Director. Dr. Langer explained that it was only
because of the interest of State in C.I.G. that he would like to avoid
unnecessary debate, acrimony, or any suggestion that would break down
the solidarity of the Board. He thought that paragraph 2 should be more
specific, and therefore circulated an alternative paragraph 2.

General Vandenberg thought the alternative paragraph would tie his hands
unnecessarily. If he is to produce national intelligence he must fill
the holes as rapidly as possible. If he has to obtain approval by the
entire Board in each case, it will become a debating society and no
action will be taken.

Dr. Langer pointed out that the
departments have definite functions and responsibilities which must be
recognized. He noted that the Secretary of State has the responsibility
of informing the President regarding the foreign situation and advising
him of what should be done in that field.

General Vandenberg stated that one of the main purposes of this paper was
to enable C.I.G. to define precisely the fields of primary interest to
the departments.

General Chamberlin expressed his
regret that he had to leave the meeting at this point, but stated that
Colonel Michela could vote for him unless there were particularly
controversial issues involved. General Chamberlin then left the meeting.

General Vandenberg said that he must prepare a supplementary budget
within the next few days or C.I.G. would be without necessary funds
during the fiscal year 1947. He was therefore anxious to obtain N.I.A.
approval of the concept of this paper to enable him to secure the necessary funds. He felt that
C.I.G. would be unable to find the gaps in the intelligence situation
unless it was able to perform the research and analysis operation.

Dr. Langer expressed the
understanding that the Central Planning Staff was designed to find the
gaps.

General Vandenberg thought, and Admiral Souers agreed, that this was a
problem for research and not for planning. Unless C.I.G. actually
performed research functions, it would not know where the gaps were.

Dr. Langer asked whether C.I.G.
intended to have so large a staff that it would be able to take care of
any conceivable emergency.

General Vandenberg explained that he wanted only enough experts to find
the holes. It would then be necessary to determine whether those holes
could be filled by one of the departments or whether, in each particular
field, the research and analysis should be centralized in C.I.G. In
other words, he did not want to do the work now being done in the
departments, but rather to find out what the departments cannot do.

Dr. Langer agreed with this
concept, but felt that a revision of the wording of paragraph 2 was
necessary.

After further discussion, a revision of paragraph 2 was accepted by the
Board.

Commodore Rend was concerned about the wording of paragraph 3 of Appendix
“A”, since it seemed to infringe upon the responsibility of each Board
member to execute approved N.I.A. recommendations within his
department.

The Board agreed to a re-wording of paragraph 3.

Commodore Rend suggested that paragraph 4-a make it clear that C.I.G.
would conduct such operations only outside the limits of the continental
United States.

General Vandenberg noted that the Director of the Federal Bureau of
Investigation had suggested a similar revision of paragraph 4-a, and
this revision was accepted by the Board.

Colonel Michela suggested re-wording the last two lines of paragraph 5 of
Appendix “A”, and a revision was subsequently agreed upon by the
Board.

The Intelligence Advisory Board:

Concurred in C.I.G. 10 subject to the following amendments to Appendix
“A” thereto and appropriate changes in Appendix “B”:

a. Revise paragraph 2 to read:

“2. In performing the functions specified in paragraph 3-a of the
President's letter, the Director of Central Intelligence is hereby
author-ized to undertake such research and analysis as may be necessary
to determine what functions in
the fields of national security intelligence are not being presently
performed or are not being adequately performed. Based upon these
determinations, the Director of Central Intelligence may centralize such
research and analysis activities as may, in his opinion and that of the
appropriate member or members of the Intelligence Advisory Board, be
more efficiently or effectively accomplished centrally.”

b. Revise paragraph 3 to read:

“3. In addition to the functions specified in paragraph 3-b of the
President's letter and in accordance with paragraph 4 of N.I.A.
Directive No. 1, the Director of Central Intelligence is hereby directed
to act as the agent of this Authority in coordinating all Federal
foreign intelligence activities related to the national security to
ensure that the over-all policies and objectives established by this
Authority are properly implemented and executed.”

c. Revise paragraph 4-a to read:

“a. Conduct of all organized Federal espionage and counter-espionage
operations outside the United States and its possessions for the
collection of foreign intelligence information required for the national
security.”

d. Revise the last two lines of paragraph 5 to read:

“herein, in addition to the appropriations which can be made available
for this purpose by the State, War and Navy Departments.”

(Enclosure to C.I.G. 10 as amended subsequently submitted for N.I.A.
consideration as N.I.A. 4.)2

* Source: Central Intelligence
Agency Historical Files, HS/HC-281. Top Secret; Limited
Distribution. The meeting was held at the War Department
building.

1 Document 156.

2 The NIA apparently did not meet as a body
to discuss the draft directive. On July 8 the Secretaries of State,
War, and the Navy approved Enclosure A to NIA 4 without change. Admiral Leahy, however, objected to the
use of the word “agent” in paragraph 3 of Enclosure A because it
might imply unwarranted freedom of the Director of Central
Intelligence to act for the NIA.
Vandenberg agreed that the language was subject to such an
interpretation and stated that he had only intended that the
Director of Central Intelligence would implement NIA policies. (NIA 4/1, Memorandum from Lay to NIA, July 8; National Archives and Records
Administration, RG 218, Records of the Joint Chiefs of Staff,
Leahy Papers, No.
132) The paragraph as revised is printed as paragraph 3 of NIA Directive No. 5, Document 160.

160. National Intelligence Authority Directive No. 5160. National Intelligence Authority Directive No. 5Source

Washington, July 8,
1946.

FUNCTIONS OF THE DIRECTOR OF CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE

REFERENCES

a. President's letter of 22 January 1946

b. N.I.A. Directive No. 1

Pursuant to the President's letter of 22 January 1946 designating this
Authority as responsible for planning, developing and coordinating all
Federal foreign intelligence activities so as to ensure the most
effective accomplishment of the intelligence mission related to the
national security, the functions of the Director of Central Intelligence
are hereby redefined as follows, subject to the provisions of said
letter:

1. Paragraph 3 of the President's letter of 22 January 1946 defined the
functions of the Director of Central Intelligence as follows:

“3. Subject to the existing law, and to the direction and control of the
National Intelligence Authority, the Director of Central Intelligence
shall:

“a. Accomplish the correlation and evaluation of intelligence relating to
the national security, and the appropriate dissemination within the
Government of the resulting strategic and national policy intelligence.
In so doing, full use shall be made of the staff and facilities of the
intelligence agencies of your departments.

“b. Plan for the coordination of such of the activities of the
Intelligence agencies of your departments as relate to the national
security and recommend to the National Intelligence Authority the
establishment of such over-all policies and objectives as will assure
the most effective accomplishment of the national intelligence
mission.

“c. Perform, for the benefit of said intelligence agencies, such services
of common concern as the National Intelligence Authority determines can
be more efficiently accomplished centrally.

“d. Perform such other functions and duties related to intelligence
affecting the national security as the President and the National
Intelligence Authority may from time to time direct.”

2. In performing the functions specified in paragraph 3-a of the
President's letter, the Director of Central Intelligence is hereby
authorized to undertake such research and analysis as may be necessary
to determine what functions in the fields of national security
intelligence are not being
presently performed or are not being adequately performed. Based upon
these determinations, the Director of Central Intelligence may
centralize such research and analysis activities as may, in his opinion
and that of the appropriate member or members of the Intelligence
Advisory Board, be more efficiently or effectively accomplished
centrally.

3. In addition to the functions specified in paragraph 3-b of the
President's letter and in accordance with paragraph 4 of N.I.A.
Directive No. 1, the Director of Central Intelligence is hereby
authorized and directed to act for this Authority in coordinating all
Federal foreign intelligence activities related to the national security
to ensure that the over-all policies and objectives established by this
Authority are properly implemented and executed.

4. Pursuant to paragraph 3-c of the President's letter, the Director of
Central Intelligence is hereby directed to perform the following
services of common concern which this Authority has determined can be
more efficiently accomplished centrally:

a. Conduct of all organized Federal espionage and counter-espionage
operations outside of United States and its possessions for the
collection of foreign intelligence information required for the national
security.

b. Conduct of all Federal monitoring of press and propaganda broadcasts
of foreign powers required for the collection of intelligence
information related to the national security.

5. To the extent of available appropriations and within the limits of
their capabilities, as determined by the respective Departments, the
State, War and Navy Departments will make available to the Director of
Central Intelligence, upon his request, the funds, personnel, facilities
and other assistance required for the performance of the functions
authorized herein. At the earliest practicable date, the Director of
Central Intelligence will submit for approval by this Authority any
supplemental budget required to perform the functions authorized herein,
in addition to the appropriations which can be made available for this
purpose by the State, War and Navy Departments.

6. Where the performance of functions authorized herein requires the
liquidation, transfer or integration of funds, personnel or facilities
for existing activities of the State, War and Navy Departments, the
liquidation, transfer or integration will be accomplished at the
earliest practicable date as agreed to by the Director of Central
Intelligence and the official responsible for such activities so as to
involve a minimum of interruption in the performance of these
functions.

* Source: National Archives and Records
Administration, RG 218, Records of the Joint Chiefs of Staff,
Leahy Papers, No.
132. Top Secret; Limited Distribution.

161. Central Intelligence Group Directive No. 14161. Central Intelligence Group Directive No. 14Source

Washington, July 19,
1946.

REORGANIZATION OF THE CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE GROUP

REFERENCE

N.I.A. Directive No. 51

Memorandum by the Director of Central
Intelligence

1. In order to perform the functions assigned to the Director of Central
Intelligence by N.I.A. Directive No. 5, the Central Intelligence Group
is hereby reorganized as shown in the attached chart, effective 20 July
1946.2
Budgetary requirements for the attached organization will be submitted
to the National Intelligence Authority for approval pursuant to
paragraph 5 of N.I.A. Directive No. 5. All previous directives and
orders regarding the organization of the Central Intelligence Group are
hereby rescinded.

2. The detailed organization and activation of the various elements of
the Central Intelligence Group will be announced by subsequent C.I.G.
Administrative Orders, while personnel will be assigned by C.I.G.
Personnel Orders.

Hoyt S. Vandenberg3
Lieutenant General, USA

* Source: Central Intelligence Agency Historical
Files, HS/HC-275. Confidential.

1 Document 160.

2 See the Supplement.

3 Printed from a copy that bears this
typed signature.

162. Memorandum From the Director of Central Intelligence (Vandenberg) to the National Intelligence Authority162. Memorandum From the Director of Central Intelligence (Vandenberg) to the
National Intelligence AuthoritySource

Washington, August 13,
1946.

NIA 6

The President feels strongly that this action should not be taken. He
approves of my stalling and using the authority he has given me in any
way to prevent it from happening.”

He is concerned about paragraph 2 saying that General Groves has already
transferred his people and thinks I should tell somebody that the
transfer should not take place.”

Some of the Department of War background is in memoranda for the record
by the Deputy Director of Central Intelligence, General Wright, dated
August 1 and August 5. (Both in Central Intelligence Agency Records,
Wright Office Diaries, Job 80-01731R, Box 32, Folder 1)

COORDINATION OF INTELLIGENCE ACTIVITIES RELATED TO FOREIGN ATOMIC ENERGY
DEVELOPMENTS ANDPOTENTIALITIES

Memorandum by the Director of Central
Intelligence With the Unanimous Concurrence of the Intelligence Advisory
Board

Foreign atomic energy developments and potentialities constitute a
paramount field of intelligence related to the national security. As
such, the National Intelligence Authority is responsible for planning,
developing, and coordinating Federal foreign intelligence activities in
this field.

To date, the Foreign Intelligence Branch of the office of Major General
Leslie R. Groves, the Commanding General of the Manhattan Engineer
District, has been the agency performing functions of collecting and
evaluating intelligence related to foreign atomic energy developments
and potentialities. This Branch has operated under the personal
direction of General Groves, who is in turn responsible, by Presidential
directive, to the Secretary of War.

The newly created Atomic Energy Commission will be concerned with the
entire field of atomic energy in the United States, including commercial
as well as military aspects. The Commission will, upon Presidential
directive, take over the responsibilities of the Manhattan Engineer
District. It is considered appropriate at this time that the National
Intelligence Authority should authorize and direct the Director of
Central Intelligence to coordinate the collection by agencies subject to
N.I.A. coordination of all intelligence information related to foreign
atomic energy developments and potentialities affecting the national
security and to accomplish the correlation, evaluation and appropriate
dis-semination within the
Government of the resulting intelligence. To accomplish this function,
the personnel and working files of the Foreign Intelligence Branch
operated by General Groves should be transferred to the Central
Intelligence Group.

The enclosed draft N.I.A. Directive1
is designed to carry out the conclusions contained in the above
paragraph. This Directive has been unanimously concurred in by the
Director of Central Intelligence and the Intelligence Advisory Board,
which in this case included the Commanding General of the Manhattan
Engineer District.

It is recommended that the National Intelligence Authority approve the
draft directive in the Enclosure.

Hoyt S. Vandenberg2
Lieutenant General, USA

* Source: National Archives and Records
Administration, RG 59, Records of the Department of State, Decimal
File 1945-49, 101.5/8-1546. Top Secret. The source text is covered
by an August 15 note from Acting Secretary of State Acheson to his Special Assistant,
Herbert S. Marks, which reads as follows:”

1 Not
printed. For text as adopted by the NIA, see Document 164.

2 Printed from a copy that bears this
typed signature.

163. Minutes of the Sixth Meeting of the National Intelligence Authority163. Minutes of the Sixth Meeting of the National Intelligence
AuthoritySource

Washington, August 21, 1946, 11 a.m.

PARTICIPANTS

Members Present

Acting Secretary of State Dean
Acheson, in the Chair

Secretary of War Robert P.
Patterson

Secretary of the Navy James
Forrestal

Fleet Admiral William D.
Leahy, Personal Representative of the
President

General Hoyt S.
Vandenberg, Director of Central Intelligence

Also Present

Assistant Secretary of State William
Benton

Colonel William A. Eddy,
Special Assistant to the Secretary of State for Research and
Intelligence

Mr. John D. Hickerson, Department of State

Colonel Charles W. McCarthy, USA

Captain Robert L. Dennison, USN

Secretariat

Mr. James S. Lay, Jr.,
Secretary, N.I.A.

1. Coordination of Intelligence Activities
Related to Foreign Atomic Energy Developments and Potentialities (N.I.A.
6)1

Secretary Patterson stated that
the present position is that, despite the President's directive
establishing N.I.A. and its implementation, the Manhattan Engineer
District under General Grove has a small division collecting information
on foreign activities in the field of atomic energy. It seemed to
Secretary Patterson senseless to
have this division isolated without any connection with or relationship
to C.I.G. He stated that he had talked with General Groves about this
problem. Secretary Patterson
believes that the N.I.A. will be carrying out the President's directive
only if this division is transferred. He is not concerned particularly
as to where it is transferred, although he approves the proposed
transfer to C.I.G. This intelligence division has nothing to do with the
Manhattan Engineer District proper and therefore has nothing to do with
the Atomic Energy Commission. Even if it did, it would still come under
the terms of the President's directive to N.I.A. At the present time the
intelligence on this subject is lost and is not available to the
agencies represented on N.I.A.

Secretary Forrestal questioned
whether it is intended to deny the use of this information to the Atomic
Energy Commission.

Secretary Patterson felt that the
information involved has nothing to do with ideas for improving our own
atomic energy program since we are already so far ahead of other
nations.

Secretary Acheson said that he was
troubled by this paper and had spoken about it to the President who was
not familiar with it.2 Secretary Acheson said that he had been informed
that the Atomic Energy Commission would be almost entirely dependent on
foreign sources of uranium ore. He understood that it was one function
of General Groves' intelligence group to find out where uranium ore is
and how to get it to this country or to deny it to others. The President
expressed the opinion that this paper might be all right but that, if it
is carried out before the Commission is established, it may take away
from them an important part of their activities. The President felt that
it would be wiser to let the matter rest until the Commission is
established.

Secretary Patterson pointed out
that the transfer of only a few people here and abroad is involved.
Their sole job is to watch what is going on in foreign countries in the development of
atomic energy. The present position is hard to defend and Secretary
Patterson believed that the
N.I.A. should have taken this action before this. He noted that this was
an Army unit under General Groves, about which General Vandenberg knows
nothing. Secretary Patterson
expressed the belief that it has nothing to do with the statutory
authority of the Atomic Energy Commission since it involves what he
considers to be a military intelligence unit.

Admiral Leahy stated that he
was favorably impressed with the paper but had not wanted to act on it
in a hurry. He found no fault with it on the assumptions expressed by
Secretary Patterson.

Secretary Forrestal felt that it
was urgent that something be done. He stressed the fact that there was
no intent to deny the information involved to the Atomic Energy
Commission.

Secretary Patterson agreed on the
urgency. He felt that the Commission will have a big job to do, of which
this is only a small segment. He believed that the Army and Navy would
be open to serious criticism if they did not act on this matter. He felt
that they could not go on treating this new field of intelligence
concerning atomic energy as if it didn't exist because they knew nothing
about it.

General Vandenberg stated that he would hate to have anyone think that
C.I.G. withheld material from any governmental agency that needed it,
since the furnishing of such information is basically the mission of
C.I.G. If the N.I.A. authorizes C.I.G. to furnish this information to
the Atomic Energy Commission, he will certainly do it. He feels that
C.I.G. can perform this function more efficiently since it can use all
collecting facilities, whereas neither General Groves nor the Commission
are or will be able to do this. At the present time the intelligence
agencies are not cooperating with the Manhattan Engineer District
because it is a one-way street. The best source of this information,
according to General Groves, has been SSU, which will be replaced by C.I.G.'s Special Operations.
If this nation is to know about foreign developments in this field, it
must use all sources. If the N.I.A. approves this paper, the entire
intelligence organization of the government will be utilized.

Secretary Patterson pointed out
that if General Groves had information that the Russians were prepared
to use atomic bombs, the members of N.I.A. would not know about it.

Secretary Acheson stated that he
was not clear about the facts. He agreed that insofar as this involves
finding out what other countries are doing, it should be under General
Vandenberg. If, however, it involves finding out where uranium ore is,
this is of vital interest to the Atomic Energy Commission.

Secretary Patterson stated that
General Groves is performing this function in complete isolation. Mr.
Patterson feels this is
hostile to the spirit and
probably the letter of the President's directive establishing N.I.A.

Admiral Leahy believed it was
conceivable that the Commission might find it necessary to build up an
intelligence organization of its own. He felt that this organization,
however, should coordinate with C.I.G.

Secretary Acheson thought it would
be a mistake to do anything in the week or ten days before the
Commission is appointed. He also understands that this is the
President's wish.

Secretary Forrestal could see no
great harm that would be done by acting now and was very reluctant to
delay action on this matter.

Secretary Patterson pointed out
that this could not be accomplished after the Commission is appointed
because then the personnel involved would be under the Commission. If he
was a member of the Commission, he would ask for all that General Groves
has, would take up the important problems first, and in the meantime
freeze all personnel. It would, therefore, involve serious delay to ask
the permission of the Commission.

Secretary Acheson felt that these
points were the strongest reasons for not acting at this time.

Secretary Forrestal stated that it
was the intent of N.I.A. to draw together all intelligence activities of
this type. He felt that there should not be one unit separate and
isolated. If this principle were sound, he believed the N.I.A. should
approve this paper.

Secretary Patterson reiterated
that this involved only military information. The whole subject involved
is military and will be unless the United Nations is perfected and
international controls are effected. He considered that it would be
extremely derelict to frame major policies without considering what
other countries are doing in this field.

Admiral Leahy believed that
the Commission could get better information from C.I.G. than from any
organization that might be set up for some time to come. He pointed out
that the N.I.A. has the authority to direct C.I.G. to furnish this
information to the Commission.

Secretary Acheson observed that
naturally all N.I.A. members would do whatever the President desires. He
suggested that Admiral Leahy
might clear this paper with the President.

Secretary Patterson stated that he
of course had no objection to taking it up with the President but
questioned the need since the matter falls so clearly within the
directive to N.I.A.

Admiral Leahy stated that he
agreed with Secretary Patterson
and Secretary Forrestal. He
thought it would be possible to reverse the decision, if necessary,
after the Commission is established.

Secretary Acheson was concerned
about acting too hurriedly. He said that the wording sounded all right
to him but that this was a very complex subject. He thought that if
similar wording were used regarding a matter of finance, the N.I.A.
wouldn't act because they would be familiar with the fact that the
Treasury Department would be deeply concerned. He agreed that it might
be necessary to coerce the Commission on this matter, but in any case he
felt that they should have an opportunity to express their views.

General Vandenberg stated that C.I.G. was interested primarily in
obtaining the existing organization since C.I.G. is not now getting the
necessary information. He suggested that the unit might be transferred
to C.I.G.; then if the Commission asks N.I.A. to reconsider, the unit
will be intact for any future disposition decided upon.

Secretary Patterson noted that he
had taken the view regarding other units of the Manhattan Engineer
District, that they should be kept intact for the Commission. This unit,
however, dealt with military intelligence and fell within the terms of
the President's directive to N.I.A. He, therefore, felt that the
proposed action could be taken immediately.

Admiral Leahy asked why it
would not be possible for C.I.G. to go ahead and do this type of
intelligence in addition to Groves' people.

General Vandenberg said that this might result in having two agents in
the field on the same mission, which always results in one exposing the
other.

Admiral Leahy then suggested
that the N.I.A. direct C.I.G. to collect and evaluate the information,
without transferring the unit at this time.

General Vandenberg noted that the individuals are a part of General
Groves' personal staff and they have been brought to the point where
they know generally all that General Groves knows. They are, therefore,
in a position to tell other agencies to collect certain information
without divulging their background knowledge on atomic energy. If,
however, C.I.G. sets up a new unit it must inform additional people of
the basic atomic energy secreta, which might further jeopardize their
security.

Secretary Forrestal believed that
N.I.A. would be doing a dangerous thing to mark time on this matter.

Secretary Patterson stated that he
already has the power to send the intelligence personnel involved to G-2
right away. He can not, however, transfer them to C.I.G. without N.I.A.
agreement.

Secretary Forrestal stated that he
wanted the record to show that, if the Atomic Energy Commission is
created, he does not want the military people who are charged with
national defense to be denied this vital information regarding foreign
atomic energy developments.

General Vandenberg noted that that was exactly the position to date.

Mr. Lay suggested that, since the
Atomic Energy Commission was not mentioned in the directive, an
additional paragraph might be added to the effect that intelligence
produced as a result of this directive should be made available as
required to the Commission.

General Vandenberg suggested amending this to indicate that C.I.G. would
make the intelligence available “as directed by N.I.A.”

Mr. Benton suggested an additional
paragraph to the effect that this directive would be reviewed with the
Atomic Energy Commission when established.

Admiral Leahy proposed certain
editorial amendments. He then suggested that the proposed directive be
rephrased either with or without the proposed amendments, and sent by
telegram to the President with a notation to the effect that the N.I.A.
recommends approval without prejudice to any future change that may be
desired by the Atomic Energy Commission.

The National Intelligence Authority:

a. Agreed to recommend that the President approve the directive in the
Enclosure to N.I.A. 6,3 amended as follows, with an understanding that
any action taken by the N.I.A. will be without prejudice to future
change that may be desired by the Atomic Energy Commission:

(1) Page 3, paragraph 1, line 4, change “N.I.A. coordination” to read
“coordinationa by N.I.A.”

(2) Page 3, paragraph 1, line 5, change “affecting” to read “which may
affect.”

b. Noted that Admiral Leahy
would transmit the above agreement to the President by telegram. (The
President subsequently replied that he wished to defer taking action
until he returned to Washington.)4

* Source: National Archives and
Records Administration, RG 218, Records of the Joint Chiefs of
Staff, Leahy Papers, No.
132. Top Secret. This meeting was called at the request of Acting
Secretary of State Acheson; see Darling, The
Central Intelligence Agency, p. 162 and p. 455, note 156.
The meeting was held at the Department of State.

1 Document 162.

2 No record of Acheson's conversation with the
President has been found.

3 For text of the
directive as approved by the NIA, see Document
164.

4 See footnote 1, Document 164.

164. Telegram From the President's Chief of Staff (Leahy) to President Truman164. Telegram From the President's Chief of Staff (Leahy) to President
TrumanSource

Washington, August 21, 1946, 8 p.m. (Z).

White 26. The National Intelligence Authority today approved the
following quoted directive to be issued by the Authority to General
Vandenberg. General Groves approves.

Secretaries Patterson and
Forrestal consider it very
important that the directive be issued without delay. Secretary
Acheson stated that your
approval should be obtained.

The members of the Authority recommend your approval with an
understanding that any action taken by the Authority will be without
prejudice to future change that may be desired by the Atomic Energy
Committee. I recommend approval.1

“Pursuant to the President's letter of 22 January 1946, designating this
Authority as responsible for planning, developing, and coordinating all
Federal foreign intelligence activities so as to assure the most
effective accomplishment of the intelligence mission related to the
national security, the following policies and procedures relating to
Federal intelligence activities in the field of foreign atomic energy
developments and potentialities affecting the national security are
announced:

1. The Director of Central Intelligence, subject to the direction and
control of this Authority, is hereby authorized and directed to
coordinate the collection by agencies subject to coordination by N.I.A.
of all intelligence information related to foreign atomic energy
developments and potentialities which may affect the national security,
and to accomplish the correlation, evaluation, and appropriate
dissemination within the Government of the resulting intelligence. The
Director of Central Intelligence is further authorized to arrange with
other intelligence agencies of the Government to utilize their
collection facilities in this field.

2. To accomplish the function assigned in paragraph 1, the Secretary of
War and the Commanding General of the Manhattan Engineer District have authorized the transfer
to the Central Intelligence Group of the personnel and working files of
the Foreign Intelligence Branch operated by the Commanding General of
the Manhattan Engineer District, effective at the earliest practicable
date.”

* Source: National Archives and Records
Administration, RG 218, Records of the Joint Chiefs of Staff,
Leahy Papers, No.
131. Top Secret. The time of transmission is taken from Truman's reply (see footnote 1 below). Also reproduced in
CIA Cold War Records: The CIA under Harry Truman, pp. 79-80.

1 According
to telegram Blue #44, August 22, Truman wished to defer action on the directive until
he returned to Washington. (National Archives and Records
Administration, RG 218, Records of the Joint Chiefs of Staff,
Leahy Papers, No.
131) See the Supplement. The matter was not resolved until the
following year with the issuance of National Intelligence Directive
No. 9 on April 18, 1947 (Document 194),
and the subsequent agreement that the Atomic Energy Commission would
become a member of the IAB.
Regarding AEC membership on the
IAB, see Hillenkoetter's August
12, 1947, memorandum to Leahy and others in the Supplement. (National
Archives and Records Administration, RG 218, Records of the Joint
Chiefs of Staff, Leahy
Papers, No. 131)

165. Letter From the Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation (Hoover) to the President's Chief of Staff (Leahy)165. Letter From the Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation
(Hoover) to the President's Chief
of Staff (Leahy)Source

Washington, August 23,
1946.

Dear Admiral Leahy: I am sure
you will recall your recent conversation with Mr. Tamm of my office, on August 12th,1 last, concerning the Central Intelligence Group.
With further reference to the matters discussed at that time I thought I
should call to your attention the proposed CIG Directive No. 152
which recently has been referred to me for approval and/or comment.3

Some of the provisions incorporated in this Directive have caused me
considerable concern. Briefly, they provide for CIG operations within the United States and its Territories
in a fashion which I regard to be an invasion of domestic intelligence
coverage which, according to our laws, is the sole responsibility of
this Bureau. I am attaching a copy of my letter of reply to General
Vandenberg, in which I outlined my objections in detail. This letter
should be self-explanatory.

We are sure you will agree that it is imperative that the present
arrangement for domestic intelligence coverage should not be tampered
with at this critical period. If the proposed Directive should be placed
into effect, it is our
feeling that it definitely would create considerable difficulty and
would inevitably lead to confusion, duplication of effort and
intolerable conditions to the detriment of the national well-being.

Sincerely yours,
J. Edgar Hoover

Attachment4

Letter From the Director of the Federal Bureau of
Investigation (Hoover) to the Director of Central Intelligence
(Vandenberg)

Washington, August 23, 1946.

Dear General Vandenberg: I refer to your memorandum of August 21, 1946,
concerning the exploitation of American business concerns,
non-governmental groups, and individuals with connections abroad as
sources of foreign intelligence information.5 I must
advise that the proposed directive which was attached does not
incorporate the changes suggested in my letter of August 6, 1946,6 and I, therefore, cannot
approve it. This new directive also includes provisions and statements
in which I cannot concur and, in fact, must oppose.

In the discussion attached to this new proposed directive it is stated:
“Foreign intelligence information related to the national security,
although it may be collected from sources whose headquarters are within
the limits of the United States and its possessions, is definitely part
of the national intelligence mission, the coordination of which is
specifically a function of the National Intelligence Authority under the
provisions of the President's letter of 22 January, 1946.” This
statement is not in agreement with Section 9 of the President's letter
of January 22 which states: “Nothing herein shall be construed to
authorize the making of investigations inside the continental limits of
the United States and its possessions except as provided by law and
Presidential Directives.”

I note that in the proposed directive it is stated that field agents of
the Central Intelligence Group will establish and maintain liaison with
the intelligence officers of
local Army and Navy headquarters and Air Force headquarters. If this
means that the CIG will establish
offices in the United States or will operate field agents within the
United States or its possessions, I am of the opinion that this is not
within the provisions of the President's original directive. I did not
understand that the President's original directive contemplated the
Central Intelligence Group engaging in any such activities within the
United States and its possessions.

In connection with the proposed directive, as previously advised, I will
approve a directive providing for the Director of Central Intelligence
establishing uniform procedures for securing the cooperation of American
business concerns in supplying foreign intelligence information required
for the national security. As set forth in my letter of August 6
concerning the original proposed directive, the Federal Bureau of
Investigation should be exempt from provisions requiring clearance from
the Central Contact Register inasmuch as it is necessary for us to
contact such various firms on a daily basis in matters involving the
discharge of our domestic responsibilities. I desire also to reiterate
my suggestion that the Central Contact Register advise the FBI with reference to each American
business firm with which arrangements are made to secure foreign
intelligence in order to prevent duplication of effort and possible
embarrassment to both the FBI and the
CIG.

I shall, of course, be most anxious to promptly transmit to the Central
Intelligence Group any information gathered through our domestic
operations involving foreign intelligence information relating to the
national security.

With best wishes and kind regards,

Sincerely yours,7

* Source: National
Archives and Records Administration, RG 218, Records of the Joint
Chiefs of Staff, Leahy
Papers, No. 132. Personal and Confidential.

1 See Document
124.

2 The number
12 has been crossed out, and 15 has been inserted by hand.

3  Hoover presumably was referring to a paper
designated as CIG 12/1,
“Exploitation of American Business Concerns, Non-Governmental Groups
and Individuals with Connections Abroad as Sources of Foreign
Intelligence Information,” which was circulated to the IAB on August 21. (Central Intelligence
Agency Historical Files, HS/HC-276) See the Supplement. It replaced
an earlier paper on the same subject that carried the designator
CIG 12. For the paper as finally
approved, see CIG Directive No. 15,
Document 171. There is an account of
the debate over this paper in Darling, The Central
Intelligence Agency, pp. 122-127.

4 Strictly Confidential; By Special
Messenger.

5 See footnote 3 above.

6 Not found.

7 Printed from an unsigned
copy.

166. Minutes of the Seventh Meeting of the Intelligence Advisory Board166. Minutes of the Seventh Meeting of the Intelligence Advisory
BoardSource

Washington, August 26, 1946, 2:30 p.m.

PARTICIPANTS

Lt. General Hoyt S.
Vandenberg, Director of Central Intelligence, in the
Chair

Members Present

Colonel William A. Eddy,
Special Assistant to the Secretary of State for Research and
Intelligence

Maj. General Stephen J.
Chamberlin, Director of Intelligence, W.D.G.S.

Rear Admiral Thomas B.
Inglis, Chief of Naval Intelligence

Brig. General George C.
McDonald, Assistant Chief of Air Staff-2

Mr. C. H. Carson (representing Mr. J.
Edgar Hoover, Director, Federal Bureau of
Investigation)

Also Present

Brig. General John A. Samford, U.S.A.

Dr. Kingman Douglass, Central Intelligence Group

Mr. A. S. Buford, State Department

Captain Ransom K. Davis, U.S.N.

Colonel Charles E. Taylor, U.S.A.

Colonel Robert Taylor III, U.S.A.

Colonel E. J. Treacy, U.S.A.

Lt. Colonel E. G. Edwards, U.S.A.

Commander George McManus, Central Intelligence Group

Secretariat

Mr. James S. Lay, Jr.,
Secretary, National Intelligence Authority

1. [3-1/2 lines of source text not declassified]
(C.I.G. 12/1)1

General Vandenberg explained that the need for coordination in this field
is to assure that all agencies' views and requirements are given the
same weight. It is also necessary to avoid the experiences during the
war when as many as twelve agencies called on a single firm for the same
information. It is considered that only C.I.G. could properly perform
this coordinating function. In addition, C.I.G. will be able to place
more people on the job than any other single agency. General Vandenberg
then requested comments on the paper.

General Samford stated that A-2 had no objection. They would like to see
the paper approved as it stands if it is considered to be strong
enough.

Admiral Inglis said that his
comments were primarily to clear up the wording. He questioned whether
this paper referred to exploitation only in the United States and
suggested that this point be cleared up.

General Vandenberg confirmed the fact that the exploitation would occur
only in the United States, and an amendment to that effect was agreed
upon.

Commander McManus also noted that the briefing would be done only with
individuals who were going abroad on short trips, and an amendment to
that effect was agreed upon.

Mr. Carson stated that the F.B.I. felt the directive was too broad since
it might or could conflict with F.B.I.'s operations in the United
States. Specifically the F.B.I. objected to including in this directive
the exploitation of “non-government groups and individuals with
connections abroad.” He suggested that such groups and individuals be
specifically defined or that this directive be confined to American
business concerns.

General Vandenberg stated that it was impossible to define specifically
the groups and individuals which C.I.G. wished to exploit since they
included any groups or individuals who might be sources of foreign
intelligence information related to the national security. He thought
that, in view of the President's directive, it might be necessary to put
this paper before the N.I.A. if the F.B.I. objected to it. General
Vandenberg noted that the term “investigations,” which C.I.G. was
precluded from making by paragraph 9 of the President's directive
establishing the N.I.A., was an entirely different matter from the type
of activities to be covered by C.I.G. 12/1. Under this proposed
directive the C.I.G. would not be making investigations in the United
States for internal security, criminal or counter intelligence purposes
as the F.B.I. uses this term, but rather would be collecting foreign
positive intelligence required for the national security.

Mr. Carson pointed out that the information in many cases would
nevertheless include what the F.B.I. is seeking.

General Vandenberg stated that whenever that was the case the information
would be turned over to the F.B.I.

Mr. Carson noted that his concern was to avoid conflict in this
borderline region between C.I.G. and F.B.I.

General Vandenberg questioned how there could be a conflict if the F.B.I.
received any information of interest to it.

Mr. Carson thought that C.I.G. activities might conflict with similar
F.B.I. activities and contacts.

General Vandenberg quoted the following paragraphs from a letter from the
Director of the F.B.I.2 concerning C.I.G.
12/1:

“In the discussion attached to this new proposed directive it is stated:
‘Foreign intelligence information related to the national security,
although it may be collected from sources whose headquarters are within
the limits of the United States and its possessions, is definitely part
of the national intelligence mission, the coordination of which is
specifically a function of the National Intelligence Authority under the
provisions of the President's letter of 22 January, 1946.’ This
statement is not in agreement with Section 9 of the President's letter
of January 22 which states: ‘Nothing herein shall be construed to
authorize the making of investigations inside the continental limits of
the United States and its possessions except as provided by law and
Presidential Directives.’

“I note that in the proposed directive it is stated that field agents of
the Central Intelligence Group will establish and maintain liaison with
the intelligence officers of local Army and Navy headquarters and Air
Force headquarters. If this means that the CIG will establish offices in the United States or will
operate field agents within the United States or its possessions, I am
of the opinion that this is not within the provisions of the President's
original directive. I did not understand that the President's original
directive contemplated the Central Intelligence Group engaging in any
such activities within the United States and its possessions.”

Admiral Inglis said that he
gathered from this letter that the F.B.I. feels that it has the
exclusive right to collect any information within the continental limits
of the United States. He pointed out that the Navy Department, and he
understood the War Department, has always collected foreign intelligence
information within the United States.

General Vandenberg stated that he failed to see how the C.I.G. could
contact business firms without establishing field offices for this
purpose.

General Chamberlin asked whether
it was planned to assign specific groups to be contacted by the various
agencies. He thought it might be possible to specify which groups would
be contacted by F.B.I. and which by other agencies.

General Vandenberg explained that it is difficult to draw a line in that
manner since, for example, shipping firms normally contacted by the Navy
might have information of direct interest to the Army.

General Samford said that he understood the purpose of this directive was
primarily to coordinate recognized activities.

General Chamberlin suggested that
the paper be amended to require consultation with the F.B.I. on the
advisability of contacts of other than American business concerns. With
that change he suggested that the meeting consider any further
amendments and then submit the paper as amended to the N.I.A.

Mr. Lay quoted paragraph 3 of
N.I.A. Directive No. 1 as follows:

“Any recommendation which you and the Intelligence Advisory Board approve
unanimously and have the existing authority to execute may be put into
effect without action by this Authority.”

He pointed out that, if this directive were confined to activities of the
State, War and Navy Departments and C.I.G., and the I.A.B. members
representing those Departments concurred, the directive could be issued
forthwith.

Admiral Inglis recommended, and
General Chamberlin concurred,
that the F.B.I. be given an opportunity to study the amended version of
C.I.G. 12/1.

General Vandenberg suggested that Mr. Carson consult with the Director of
F.B.I. as to whether the amended paper would be acceptable. If the
F.B.I. concurred, the directive could be issued forthwith. If the F.B.I.
did not concur, a split paper should then be submitted to the N.I.A.

The Board concurred with General Vandenberg's suggestions, subject to the
understanding that if the F.B.I. did not concur, the Board would have
another meeting prior to submitting the paper to the N.I.A.

Admiral Inglis suggested a
footnote on page 6 defining the terms “central register” and “contact
register.” He also suggested an amendment of paragraph 3 g of the
directive since, for example, Naval Reserve officers would prefer
briefing by O.N.I., which therefore would obtain more information from
them.

After further discussion of this paragraph an amendment was agreed
upon.

Admiral Inglis stated that he
wished the minutes to show an agreed interpretation of the meaning of
paragraph 3 of the directive. For example, if O.N.I. makes a contact,
the contact should be told that his name will be placed in the contact
register. If the contact does not agree, Admiral Inglis wondered whether that meant that
O.N.I. could not use this contact.

General Vandenberg thought that the contact would be willing to agree if
he knew that it would save him from interrogation by another agency for
the same purpose.

General Samford questioned why the contact needed to know that his name
would be placed in the register.

Admiral Inglis felt that this was
necessary in order to play fair and square.

General Vandenberg suggested that the contact be asked as diplomatically
as possible whether he objected to having his name in the contact
register. If the contact would object, then ask him if he would mind
having a representative of C.I.G. participate in the briefing and
debriefing. If the contact still objected, the briefing agency should
check with the C.I.G. as to what information other agencies might
want.

General Samford questioned whether the existence of the contact register
should not be kept highly secret.

General Vandenberg agreed that if possible the contact register should
not be mentioned.

Admiral Inglis pointed out that
individuals frequently volunteer their assistance. These contacts may
state that their financial security, continued employment and possibly
life itself depends on the assurance that the discussion will not go
beyond the immediate participants. In such cases Admiral Inglis considered that it is not fair
to give their names to the contact register without permission.

General Vandenberg suggested that contacts be told that, to prevent their
being approached by other agencies, a highly secure central point has
been established where all contacts are cleared.

General Samford felt, and it was agreed, that the names of contacts
should be given to the contact register unless they insisted upon
secrecy.

Colonel Eddy suggested, and it was
agreed upon, that certain changes be made in paragraphs 3 g and 5 of the
proposed directive and that paragraph 4 thereof be deleted since the
terms of that paragraph were already covered by previous directives.

The Intelligence Advisory Board:

a. Concurred in Appendix “A” to C.I.G. 12/1 as amended at the meeting,
except for the representative of the Federal Bureau of Investigation who
undertook to present the amended directive to the Director of F.B.I. for
further consideration (amended directive subsequently circulated as the
Enclosure to C.I.G. 12/2).3

b. Agreed with the Director of Central Intelligence that:

(1) If the Director of the F.B.I. concurred in the Enclosure, it would be
issued forthwith as a directive.

(2) If the Director of the F.B.I. did not concur in the Enclosure, the
Intelligence Advisory Board would meet again to discuss submitting this
matter to the National Intelligence Authority for decision.

c. Noted the interpretation of the procedures to be followed under the
proposed directive as developed in discussion at the meeting.

* Source: Central Intelligence
Agency Historical Files, HS/HC-281. Secret; Limited Distribution.
The meeting was held at the New War Department Building.

1 [text not
declassified] (Central Intelligence Agency Historical
Files, HS/HC-276) See the Supplement.

2 See the attachment to
Document 165.

3 [text not declassified] (Central Intelligence
Agency Historical Files, HS/HC-276) See the Supplement.

167. Letter From the President's Chief of Staff (Leahy) to the Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation (Hoover)167. Letter From the President's Chief of Staff (Leahy) to the Director
of the Federal Bureau of Investigation (Hoover)Source

Washington, September 4,
1946.

Dear Mr. Hoover: Because of an absence from Washington I have been unable
to make an earlier reply to your letter of 23 August in regard to
Instructions No. 12 proposed by the Director of Central Intelligence for
issue to his Central Intelligence Group.1

A careful reading of the proposed Instructions No. 12 fails to find
wherein it invades the domestic intelligence coverage that is the
responsibility of your Bureau.

It occurs to me that if you should send to my office an officer of your
Bureau who is qualified to explain your objections, it would be of great
assistance to me in an endeavor to correctly inform members of the
National Intelligence Authority when they meet to pass upon the proposal
of the Director to instruct his Central Intelligence Group in the matter
covered by his Directive No. 12.

I shall be very pleased to talk with one of your officers at any time
that an appointment is made by telephone.

Most sincerely,

William D. Leahy

* Source: National
Archives and Records Administration, RG 263, Records of the Central
Intelligence Agency, Troy Papers, FBI Documents. No classification marking.

1 See
Document 165 and footnote 3
thereto.

168. Letter From the Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation (Hoover) to the President's Chief of Staff (Leahy)168. Letter From the Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation
(Hoover) to the President's Chief
of Staff (Leahy)Source

Washington, September 6,
1946.

Dear Admiral Leahy: Reference
is made to your letter of September 4, 1946, which was in reply to my
letter of August 231 concerning the proposed CIG Directive No. 12,2 covering the
exploitation of American business concerns, non-governmental groups and
individuals with connections abroad as sources of foreign intelligence
information. Since my letter of August 23, a meeting has been held of
the Intelligence Advisory Board,3 CIG, and a number of minor changes have
been made in the proposed directive which has been reissued as proposed
CIG Directive No. 12/2.4 In answer to
the objections which had been previously made by me, the changed
directive provides, “The Director of Central Intelligence will establish
standards for security clearance of contacts by participating agencies,
which shall include consultation with the Federal Bureau of
Investigation on the advisability of contacts of other than American
business concerns.”

I thought you would be interested in my observations concerning the last
version of the proposed CIG Directive
No. 12/2, which are incorporated in a letter to General Vandenberg dated
September 5, 1946,5 a copy
of which is attached.

I am advising General Vandenberg that the suggestions I had previously
made were put forward solely for the purpose of preventing duplication
or confusion in contacts with representatives of foreign language groups
and non-governmental groups and individuals in whom the Federal Bureau
of Investigation is primarily interested because of its responsibility
in covering Communist activities within the United States. I informed
General Vandenberg that I do not believe it necessary for
representatives of CIG to check with the
Federal Bureau of Investigation in connection with contacts made with
American business concerns doing business abroad, as normally this
Bureau would have no interest in such contacts made by them. In order to
avoid duplication and confusion, as well as conflict which may arise in connection with the CIG and the Federal Bureau of Investigation
maintaining coverage of foreign language groups or other groups and
individuals, I proposed that this Directive be confined at this time to
contacts with American business concerns doing business abroad. I
suggested that further study be given to an alternate directive of
delimitation agreement which would codify a procedure mutually
acceptable in contacts with foreign language groups and other persons
presently included within the phrase “other non-governmental groups and
individuals with connections abroad”.

I feel that under terms of the current directive, the CIG would be authorized to contact and to
“exploit” foreign language groups and other individuals with similar
connections or background, which “exploitation” would be in addition to
the similar utilization of these channels by the Federal Bureau of
Investigation and I fear that there would be inevitable duplication,
confusion, misunderstanding and perhaps conflict which would operate to
the disadvantage of both the Federal Bureau of Investigation and the
Central Intelligence Group.

If, after examining my comments to General Vandenberg concerning proposed
CIG Directive 12/2, you desire
further clarification, I shall be most happy to have one of my
assistants contact you in the matter.

With best wishes and kind regards,

Sincerely,

J. Edgar Hoover

* Source: National
Archives and Records Administration, RG 263, Records of the Central
Intelligence Agency, Troy Papers, FBI Documents. Personal and Confidential.

1 Documents 164 and 165.

2 CIG No. 12 is not printed; the
revised version, CIG 12/1, August 21, is in the Supplement. (Central
Intelligence Agency Historical Files, HS/HC-276)

3 See Document 166.

4 Circulated August 27 (Central Intelligence Agency
Historical Files, HS/HC-276) See the Supplement.

5 Not found.

169. Minutes of the Seventh Meeting of the National Intelligence Authority169. Minutes of the Seventh Meeting of the National Intelligence
AuthoritySource

Washington, September 25, 1946, 11:15 a.m.

PARTICIPANTS

Members Present

Acting Secretary of State William L.
Clayton, in the Chair

Secretary of War Robert P.
Patterson

Secretary of the Navy James
Forrestal

Fleet Admiral William D.
Leahy, Personal Representative of the
President

Lieut. General Hoyt S.
Vandenberg, Director of Central Intelligence

Also Present

Under Secretary of the Navy John L.
Sullivan

Mr. William A. Eddy,
Special Assistant to the Secretary of State for Research and
Intelligence

Assistant Secretary of War Howard C.
Petersen

Mr. John D. Hickerson, Department of State

Captain Robert L. Dennison, USN

Secretariat

Mr. James S. Lay, Jr.,
Secretary, N.I.A.

1. Report by the Director of Central
Intelligence

General Vandenberg, using a series of charts, presented a report on the
activities of the Central Intelligence Group.

General Vandenberg first noted the objectives of the C.I.G. as expressed
in the President's letter of 22 January 1946 and N.I.A. Directives Nos.
1 and 5.1 He then
presented a definition of “intelligence related to the national
security” as interpreted by the C.I.G. He enumerated the following steps
as essential to the production of such intelligence:

a. Anticipating needs.

b. Determining most effective means.

c. Ensuring collection.

4[d]. Receiving all available intelligence information.

e. Checking each item against all others.

f. Correlating political, military, economic and other implications.

g. Reporting in useful form to appropriate officials.

General Vandenberg showed the initial organization of the C.I.G. which
was designed primarily for planning, except for a small staff preparing
the daily factual summary of incoming cables and dispatches. He noted
that the question of central intelligence services was left for
subsequent decision.

General Vandenberg submitted a list of 31 projects which had been
referred to C.I.G for study by one or more intelligence agencies. In the
light of the study of these projects and the experience gained up to
that time, C.I.G. was reorganized on 22 July along lines explained by
General Vandenberg. He noted that the need for such a reorganization was
noted in Admiral Souers' final report2 to the National
Intelligence Authority. General Vandenberg analyzed the personnel
allocations for this organization at the present time and as estimated
for 31 December 1946.

General Vandenberg then listed over 20 accomplishments of the C.I.G. to
date, stressing the fact that while many of these were incomplete and continuing projects, an
agreement as to the proper line of action in each case had already been
reached.

Secretary Forrestal stated that he
was dubious about the destruction of the F.B.I. operation in Latin
America. He considered these peripheral areas, such as Mexico, Cuba,
etc., to be extremely important to our national security, and thought
that the F.B.I. had conducted a very effective intelligence activity
there. He asked General Vandenberg whether he was satisfied with the
present arrangement.

General Vandenberg agreed that the F.B.I. had conducted a very effective
intelligence operation. He explained, however, that the F.B.I. had
agreed to turn over to C.I.G. the contacts it had developed in Latin
America. This turnover, of course, would take time to accomplish, but if
it is carried out as agreed at present, there should not be any serious
interruption in the operation.

In answer to a question by Mr. Hickerson, Admiral Leahy stated that, at the
insistence of Mr. Hoover, the C.I.G. was precluded from hiring former
F.B.I. men in Latin America.

General Vandenberg said that he was recruiting personnel for this
activity by personal contact. He also stated that C.I.G. was now
prepared to utilize, to the extent security permits, all American
business concerns with connections abroad as valuable sources of foreign
intelligence.

General Vandenberg then listed 19 problems in the coordination of
intelligence activities that are in process in C.I.G. for which
solutions have not yet been devised.

Admiral Leahy commented that
the problems enumerated were very far-reaching, and it was not hard to
understand why solutions had not yet been found.

General Vandenberg explained certain general plans for C.I.G.
intelligence operations overseas and for the F.B.I.S. activity.

General Vandenberg then presented some of the difficulties faced by
C.I.G. of which he felt the N.I.A. should be apprised. First of all, he
stressed the fact that C.I.G. could not produce national intelligence
without all the intelligence information available to the Government. In
this regard he felt strongly that only trained C.I.G. personnel could
determine whether a given piece of information contained important
intelligence implications. He noted that to the best of his knowledge
the State and Navy Departments were furnishing complete coverage of
their information. Some of the main sources of information to which
C.I.G. did not have access were the President's messages, General
Marshall's messages, and War Department OPD “eyes only” messages. He felt that the best solution
was to have a trained C.I.G. officer who was acceptable to each
department stationed in the message center of each department where he could review the
messages and transmit to C.I.G. subject to any necessary restrictions,
those messages having intelligence value.

Secretary Patterson expressed the
belief that such an arrangement could be made.

General Vandenberg then noted the difficult problem of the relationship
between C.I.G. and the Joint Chiefs of Staff.3 He pointed out that the
Joint Intelligence Committee duplicates the work of C.I.G. Also, J.I.C.
intelligence coordination activities may conflict with similar C.I.G.
activ-ities. He said that J.I.C. studies generally receive priority in
the War and Navy intelligence agencies since the J.C.S. were the
immediate superiors of the heads of those agencies. The possibility of
combining C.I.G. and the Joint Intelligence Staff (JIS) had been considered, but raised
difficulties since C.I.G. might then be serving two masters. He said
that the solution was a difficult one, but that it was being carefully
studied.

Secretary Patterson said that he
did not see why the J.I.S. should not be disbanded.

Admiral Leahy agreed that this
appeared to be the proper solution, and said that he had so stated to
the Joint Chiefs of Staff. He observed that this was not an easy problem
to solve, but he thought that a workable solution would be found.

General Vandenberg noted that a third difficulty which was under active
consideration was the relationship of C.I.G. to the State-War-Navy
Coordinating Committee.

A fourth and most serious difficulty enumerated by General Vandenberg was
the relationship of N.I.A. to the Atomic Energy Commission. He pointed
out that the Atomic Energy Act created an independent agency which had
the authority to engage in extremely important intelligence activities
without coordination by the N.I.A. Furthermore, it was rumored that the
Commission would conduct a foreign intelligence operation which would
involve a grave danger of conflict with similar C.I.G. operations.

Admiral Leahy stated that he
thought the President would do the best he can to turn atomic energy
intelligence activities over to the N.I.A. The President, however, does
not want to act until the Atomic Energy Commission is appointed. Admiral
Leahy thinks that this
matter will be arranged, but cannot say definitely at this time.

General Vandenberg stated that a fifth difficulty was the procurement of
key Army and Naval personnel for C.I.G. He said that the present C.I.G.
ceiling for Naval officers was 13, and that a request for an increase to
65 was under consideration in the Navy Department but had not been confirmed. He stated that any
assistance in this matter which Secretary Forrestal might render would be extremely helpful.

Secretary Forrestal agreed to look
into the present status of this request.

General Vandenberg then explained that Army and Naval officers assigned
to C.I.G. were fearful that they might lose their normal opportunities
for promotion. He felt that a few key promotions in C.I.G. at this time
would be of the greatest value in improving morale. He therefore
requested that the Secretaries of War and the Navy press for the
promotion of certain C.I.G. personnel.

General Vandenberg then presented a chart showing the time required for
processing a typical C.I.G. field officer to be from four to six months.
He explained that this was intended to indicate one of the reasons for
what might seem to be delay in establishing field operations such as in
Latin America. He assured the N.I.A. that every attempt was being made
to reduce the length of time involved in this processing.

Secretary Forrestal stated that he
would prefer to see this work done carefully rather than too
hurriedly.

The National Intelligence Authority:

Noted the report of C.I.G. activities by General Vandenberg.

* Source: National Archives and
Records Administration, RG 218, Records of the Joint Chiefs of
Staff, Leahy Papers, No.
132. Secret; Limited Distribution. The meeting was held at the
Department of State.

1 Documents 71, 141, and 142.

2 Document 154.

3 Reference is to CIG
15, September 18, 1946. (Central Intelligence Agency Historical
Files, HS/HC-276) See the Supplement.

170. Minutes of the Eighth Meeting of the Intelligence Advisory Board170. Minutes of the Eighth Meeting of the Intelligence Advisory
BoardSource

Washington, October 1, 1946, 2:30 p.m.

PARTICIPANTS

Lt. General Hoyt S.
Vandenberg, Director of Central Intelligence, in the
Chair

Members Present

Mr. William A. Eddy,
Special Assistant to the Secretary of State for Research and
Intelligence

Maj. General Stephen J.
Chamberlin, Director of Intelligence, W.D.G.S.

Rear Admiral Thomas B.
Inglis, Chief of Naval Intelligence

Brig. General John A. Samford, Deputy Assistant Chief of Air
Staff-2

Also Present

Mr. A. Sidney Buford, Department of State

Colonel E. J. Treacy, U.S.A.

Captain R. K. Davis, U.S.N.

Colonel E. P. Mussett, U.S.A.

Mr. George B. McManus, Central Intelligence Group (for Item 1
only)

Mr. Donald Edgar, Central
Intelligence Group

Secretariat

Mr. James S. Lay, Jr.,
Secretary, N.I.A.

Mr. John S. Earman,
Assistant Secretary, N.I.A.

1. [3 lines of source text not declassified]1

General Vandenberg stated that subsequent to the last I.A.B. meeting he
had conferred with Mr. Hoover of the Federal Bureau of Investigation.
After discussing C.I.G. 12/2, Mr. Hoover agreed with the paper provided
some changes were made. It appeared that Mr. Hoover's chief objection to
C.I.G. 12/2 was exploitation by C.I.G. of subversive groups which the
F.B.I. might be contacting or investigating.

Admiral Inglis asked specifically
what changes had been made in C.I.G. 12/2.

General Vandenberg explained the changes and stated that he was willing
to go along with the paper, as amended, since he was fully in accord
with Mr. Hoover's viewpoint.

Admiral Inglis questioned the
phrasing of paragraph 2 of C.I.G. 12/2,2 and
particularly that part thereof which reads “and American residents
travelling abroad”. He suggested that consideration be given to
clarifying that phrase.

Admiral Inglis then brought up the
question of whether or not the changes in this paper would preclude
O.N.I. from contacting “hyphenated” groups and individuals.

General Vandenberg replied that it would not, since such individuals and
groups were not mentioned in the paper at all and there was no effect
whatsoever.

Admiral Inglis suggested, and it
was agreed, that an understanding to that effect appear in the
minutes.

Mr. Lay read an interpretation of
the intent of paragraph 3-b, which was accepted.

The Intelligence Advisory Board:

a. Concurred in the revision of C.I.G. 12/2 (subsequently issued as
C.I.G. Directive No. 15).3

b. Noted that the revision of C.I.G. 12/2 eliminated provisions for
coordination of the exploitation of other non-governmental groups and
individuals not specifically mentioned therein.

[6 paragraphs (22 lines of source text) not
declassified]

2. Policy on Clearance of Personnel for Duties
With Central Intelligence Group (C.I.G. Directive No. 8)4

General Vandenberg stated that C.I.G. Directive No. 8 was based upon the
arrangement existing at that time under which departments assigned
personnel to C.I.G. The departments, therefore, assumed the
responsibility for conducting necessary security investigations. He
further stated that two developments had made this Directive out of
date. First, it is clear that in the future the majority of C.I.G.
personnel must be recruited from sources other than the departments.
Second, the War Department finds it impossible to carry out the
necessary investigations because of reduced personnel ceiling. As a
result of these facts it will be necessary for C.I.G. to assume
responsibility for all future security investigations required to clear
its personnel. In conducting these security investigations, C.I.G. will
adhere to the same security standards as established in this Directive
and will, of course, check with the departments in each case. General
Vandenberg assumed that when the departments nominate individuals in the
future for C.I.G., the nominating department has at least made a
preliminary check on its own files to determine that the individual
meets C.I.G.'s security standards. General Vandenberg also assumed that
the departments will complete all investigations initiated up to this
time.

General Chamberlin stated that the
War Department could check records on any new personnel nominations to
C.I.G. and also that those checks they have started can be completed.
However, that was about as far as he could go, in view of the greatly
restricted personnel ceiling and tremendous backlog of requested checks
now on hand.

Admiral Inglis stated that the
Navy Department could also give a quick check on any personnel
nominations they might make to C.I.G., but that the Navy Department too
was suffering from reduced personnel and also had a large number of
requested checks on hand. Admiral Inglis further stated that he believed that C.I.G.
should in some way be covered to take care of the type of individual who did not pass a full
security check but whose services would be of value to the Central
Intelligence Group.

General Chamberlin suggested that
exemption in these cases should be made by the Director of Central
Intelligence.

General Vandenberg agreed that provision for such exemptions would be
made.

The Intelligence Advisory Board:

a. Concurred in the proposal by General Vandenberg that C.I.G. undertake
responsibility for all future security investigations required to clear
its personnel, subject to the same security standards as established in
C.I.G. Directive No. 8 except for exemptions authorized by the Director
of Central Intelligence. (Recision of C.I.G. Directive No. 8
subsequently circulated.)

3. Assignment of Functions in the Field of Static
Intelligence to the Central Intelligence Group (C.I.G. 13)5

General Vandenberg noted that the C.I.G. has already given consideration
to this problem and its broad implications. Inter-departmental
discussions on coordination, allocation, and centralization are being
held under C.I.G. auspices. However, these discussions have indicated
the need for an early I.A.B. or N.I.A. decision regarding the broad
basis on which the assignment of primary responsibilities should be
considered, and how each agency of secondary interest will have its
needs for finished intelligence met.

Mr. Eddy asked what was meant by
the term “statis intelligence”.

Admiral Inglis explained that it
involved roughly the field covered by JANIS studies.6

General Vandenberg considered that it involved gathering a large mass of
data and then preparing a basic study which would be of use to many
agencies. He explained that political matters of a more or less
permanent nature were included, such as the constitution of the country
and the form of government if this was fairly stable.

Mr. Eddy felt that political and
economic matters were at the present time in a state of change
throughout a large part of the world. He said that the State Department
did not object to coordination of these fields, but was not willing to
turn over to C.I.G. the responsibility for getting this intelligence.
That responsibility must remain in the State Department.

Admiral Inglis explained that
O.N.I. must retain an interest in political and economic matters as they
affect naval affairs. He did not think that naval and military attaches
should be blind to political and economic developments. The subject
paper, however, was not concerned with the problem of collection.
Admiral Inglis explained that the
War and Navy Departments had been studying what functions and activities
could be performed jointly. It was useless, however, for these
departments to make any joint arrangement if C.I.G. proposed to take
over various functions and activities. The purpose of the subject paper
was to initiate a study to find out what C.I.G. planned to do. He
explained that the JANIS studies were
used only as an example of the fields involved, but not as an example of
the procedures to be used. The subject paper contemplated the
possibility of turning over to C.I.G. people in the various agencies
working on geographical desks who prepared material which is edited by
the JANIS Board. Admiral Inglis stated that the paper was not
confined to the subject of JANIS
studies.

Mr. Edgar stated that the question
raised by C.I.G. could be explained as follows: If political
intelligence, in which O.N.I has an interest, is allocated to the agency
of primary interest, would O.N.I. expect to receive this intelligence
directly from the primary agency in proper form, or would O.N.I. have a
group to put it into form, or would O.N.I. expect C.I.G. to do that?

General Vandenberg said that C.I.G. desired an expression of opinion from
the I.A.B. as to whether they would like C.I.G. to operate as a
middleman between departments, or if they would like direct contact
between departments with C.I.G. in a coordinating role. He explained
that if C.I.G. was to take over the preparation of static or strategic
intelligence studies, C.I.G. would either have to receive the
intelligence from the departments as JANIS now does, or would have to take over the people in
the agencies who are now preparing this intelligence.

General Chamberlin felt that it
was clear that certain departments were responsible for certain elements
of intelligence, although this had never been put in the form of a
written statement, to his knowledge. He wondered if it wasn't possible
for C.I.G. and the departments to parcel out functions on the basis of
primary responsibility. Then each department would furnish finished
intelligence to other departments who could rework it to meet their
particular needs.

General Vandenberg said that the question involved in such a plan was
whether C.I.G. should operate in the middle between departments or on
the side.

General Samford stated that he voted for C.I.G. in the middle
position.

Mr. Edgar said that a further
question was whether the required intelligence should be written in
proper form by the agency of primary responsibility, or by C.I.G.

General Chamberlin felt that
another solution was preferable. This was that the proper function of
C.I.G. should be to obtain intelligence from all departments and put it
in the best form for the use of all departments.

General Vandenberg said that it was hard to have the intelligence put in
the form required by any single department. For example, it would be
difficult to get people in State to put intelligence in final form for
use by the War Department.

Captain Davis said that the subject paper suggested a study of the
possibility of placing C.I.G. in the middle role.

Mr. Eddy said that the problems
facing the various departments were different. He thought that most of
the intelligence now produced in the War and Navy Departments was for
potential use in case of active operations. Political operations,
however, are going on day by day, and the State Department has to
produce intelligence for those current operations. He said that he would
be glad to have State's product sent to C.I.G. and integrated with
similar intelligence from the War and Navy Departments.

General Vandenberg pointed out that the economic intelligence produced by
State did not cover all of the needs in that field of the War and Navy
Departments.

General Samford said that what each intelligence agency does stems from
what its chief wants done. He felt that with C.I.G. in the middle role,
the agencies would find that C.I.G. could do completely many of the
things they required, and would eventually find that it was best to rely
on C.I.G.

Mr. Eddy said that he would like
to feel that C.I.G. would send to State the military and naval
intelligence required by the diplomats.

General Chamberlin stated that if
G-2 had an insight into State's needs, G-2 could incorporate those needs
into its documents. If all agencies sat down with C.I.G. to find each
other's needs, each agency could produce documents containing all the
essential elements in its field of primary responsibility that any other
agency needed to extract and pass to its operating officials.

Mr. Edgar felt that would mean that
C.I.G. would devise a format of a national intelligence handbook to meet
the individual requirements of each of the agencies.

General Chamberlin said that was
not quite what he intended. Rather, if C.I.G. would find out what
military intelligence State needs, then C.I.G. could arrange that G-2
include these needs in its documents.

General Vandenberg felt that a further step was involved. He thought that
General Chamberlin was talking
about weekly and daily reports, whereas the subject paper was concerned
with the preparation of basic handbooks for use by all agencies. The
question was whether C.I.G. should produce these handbooks, or ask each
agency to produce appropriate sections of them.

General Chamberlin said that he
preferred the latter arrangement. He noted, however, that the present
JANIS covers only a part of the
basic intelligence required.

Admiral Inglis enumerated the
following fields which he felt should be studied by the committee
proposed in the basic paper:

1. Establishment of elements which are susceptible of operation by
C.I.G.

2. Proposed organization for the operation of such elements by C.I.G.

3. Space requirements.

4. A time schedule for the steps involved in taking over by C.I.G.

5. Standard filing system and central library, standard report form, and
form for intelligence directives.

6. Method for responding to urgent requests.

General Samford felt that each agency should retain its own group to
prepare reports, but that the basic material would be easier to work on
if it were integrated by C.I.G.

Admiral Inglis thought that each
agency should retain responsibility for operational intelligence and for
collection and dissemination. He felt the place that C.I.G. could be of
most help would be in the processing required between collection and
dissemination. He felt that each agency must retain a staff to
disseminate and to put material into the final form desired by its
customers. He thought that each agency should assist in obtaining the
basic intelligence information for C.I.G.

Mr. Eddy and General Samford said
that they were in favor of the proposal as described by Admiral
Inglis.

General Chamberlin felt that one
other element must be retained in the departments, namely, that the
intelligence officers must always be able to give their commanders an
independent judgment. General Vandenberg said that this was possible if
the intelligence produced by departments was based on the same source
but differently oriented.

General Chamberlin stated that
each agency should not be excluded from getting information through
their field representatives on subjects outside of the field of its
primary interest.

General Samford agreed that each agency should be able to exploit all
sources available to it.

General Chamberlin reiterated that
it was necessary for each agency to retain independence of judgment.

Admiral Inglis said that this
should be satisfied by each agency having its own people in C.I.G. He
felt strongly that when naval officers were assigned to C.I.G. they were
still naval officers and responsible for seeing that C.I.G. gets all
necessary naval information and that the Navy gets all C.I.G.
intelligence of interest to it.

General Vandenberg added that naval officers in C.I.G. should also ensure
that C.I.G. estimates have the proper naval slant.

Admiral Inglis felt that if this
was understood, the concern of each intelligence head regarding
responsibility to his chief, was largely obviated.

Mr. Eddy said that State would be
willing to cooperate if C.I.G. produced documents the use of which was
permissible but not mandatory. If the subject proposal, however, lead to
referring State Department requests to C.I.G. for preparation, he felt
this would be a dangerous practice.

Admiral Inglis said that one of
the problems is that, if personnel are turned over to C.I.G. and the
departmental agencies accept this reduction of their force, they must be
assured of the quick service required by their departments.

Mr. Edgar noted a further step in
that, if the primary responsibility is allocated to another agency,
C.I.G. will have to arrange that the latter agency meets requirements on
time.

Mr. Eddy reiterated that each
agency must retain responsibility for intelligence of primary interest.
What is passed to C.I.G. will involve material of secondary interest to
the various agencies.

General Samford agreed that all agencies must still concentrate on
intelligence of primary interest.

General Chamberlin said that G-2
does not handle operational intelligence, but is concerned solely with
strategic intelligence.

Admiral Inglis agreed that this
was also true of O.N.I., except that it must retain a skeleton force for
mobilization in case of active operations.

General Chamberlin felt that the
solution lies along both lines suggested. Certain activities must be
performed in the departments and other activities should be done
centrally when they are of common interest and can be more efficiently
handled centrally. He did not think that the I.A.B. could give definite
guidance one way or the other. He felt that each case must be studied
separately.

Admiral Inglis agreed that the
problem could not be solved at this time, but that a committee must be
formed to break the problem down into its various elements.

General Vandenberg said that he would ask for nominations for such a
committee in the next few days. He explained that the purpose of this
discussion was to have Mr. Edgar
hear the viewpoints of the I.A.B. members so that he could guide the
committee's discussions.

The Intelligence Advisory Board:

Noted that the Director of Central Intelligence would ask for nominations
for a committee to conduct the study proposed in C.I.G. 13.7

4. War Plans for Central Intelligence Group
(C.I.G. 14)8

General Vandenberg noted the recommendations in C.I.G. 14 and stated that
as a general principle he firmly believed that the personnel
requirements of the C.I.G. should be as fully mobilized in peace as in
war. On that basis he stated that he would furnish the War and Navy
Departments with an estimate of C.I.G. personnel requirements based on
present planning, taking into account the probable number of Reserve
officers assigned to C.I.G. He stated, however, that at C.I.G.'s present
stage of organization any such estimates should be considered tentative
and subject to substantial revision as the organization develops.

Admiral Inglis agreed that all
C.I.G. personnel figures to be submitted at the present time could only
be estimates. However, he wanted to be sure that all Regular Line
officers assigned to C.I.G. would not be frozen in case of an emergency.
He stated that he felt that the Navy Department should have some
assurance that the Regular and Reserve Line officers assigned to C.I.G.
would either be retained in toto or that a certain number of them would
be released to the Navy for sea duty.

General Vandenberg agreed to give the Navy this information, and that
such information would be based on the best possible estimation.

General Chamberlin stated that the
War Department would like to have the same estimate on both Regular and
Reserve Army officers assigned to C.I.G.

Mr. Lay stated that C.I.G. had
already received such a request and that a reply was being prepared.

Mr. Eddy asked if C.I.G. would try
to protect civilians assigned to C.I.G. in case of an emergency, in
order that their services would not be lost.

General Vandenberg stated that these civilians would be protected unless
they would be of more service to the Government elsewhere.

Mr. Eddy brought out the point
that he believed that the civilians in C.I.G. would generally feel that
they should be in uniform. He suggested that provision be made for
retaining C.I.G. civilian personnel in time of war.

General Vandenberg stated that this involved a much longer range problem
and should, in his opinion, be considered at a later date.

The Intelligence Advisory Board:

Noted that the Director of Central Intelligence would furnish to the War
and Navy Departments estimates of C.I.G. military and naval personnel
requirements in case of mobilization.

5. Establishment of a Channel Between the Central
Intelligence Group and the Joint Chiefs of Staff (C.I.G. 15)9

General Vandenberg stated that Admiral Inglis had raised the question of the relationship
between C.I.G. and the Joint Chiefs of Staff. As a result of this,
C.I.G. has prepared a proposed directive on the subject, which he
believed had been seen by all I.A.B. members. General Vandenberg further
stated that it was his understanding, as a result of informal
discussions in the departments by members of the Interdepartmental
Coordinating and Planning Staff, that this proposed directive was
generally acceptable to the I.A.B., and he therefore recommended
concurrence in its submittal to the N.I.A. and the J.C.S.

Admiral Inglis and General
Chamberlin stated that this
paper as written was not entirely acceptable.

Mr. Lay stated that it was his
understanding that members of ICAPS
had coordinated this paper with representatives of the intelligence
agencies of the State, War, and Navy Departments.

Admiral Inglis said that he was
afraid the Joint Chiefs of Staff would be embarrassed if N.I.A. approved
this proposal prior to the J.C.S. having a chance to comment.

Mr. Lay said that this was merely
an attempt to find an appropriate recommendation for a solution to the
problem. He also said that this paper, if acceptable to the J.I.C.,
could be submitted by them to the J.C.S. prior to N.I.A.'s
consideration.

Admiral Inglis explained that this
problem had been brought up by a J.I.S. request for information on
nuclear energy, which had been prepared without knowledge of the fact
that C.I.G. was also working on this problem. His original proposal,
that J.I.S. serve as a staff for the I.A.B., was intended to offer an
immediate interim means for coordinating C.I.G. and J.I.C.
activities.

General Vandenberg felt that we should go the whole way if an acceptable
final solution could be found. He felt that it might even be desirable
for him as an intelligence representative to sit in on J.C.S. meetings
as a non-voting member in order to learn what areas of the world were
being worked on.

Admiral Inglis stated that he had
the following changes to suggest in the C.I.G. paper: He had no
objection to having the Director of Central Intelligence as a member of
the J.I.C., but he did not think that any one individual should be
designated as chief intelligence adviser to the J.C.S.

General Vandenberg stated that for his protection he wanted some
assurance that, if he served both the N.I.A. and the J.C.S., it was
clear that only one of them was his master.

General Chamberlin pointed out
that the difficulty was that the Joint Chiefs of Staff must be assured
that their priorities are met. He thought that they would therefore wish
to retain an intelligence organization under their control.

Mr. Eddy suggested a modification
of Admiral Inglis' proposal
whereby the J.I.S. would formulate J.C.S. requirements for intelligence
and would transmit them to C.I.G. for compilation. In this way the
J.I.S. would serve more as a secretariat, and the intelligence would be
produced by C.I.G.

General Samford noted that this would retain the J.I.S., who could then
fulfill J.C.S. requirements if C.I.G. was unable to give them the
necessary priority.

General Chamberlin questioned
whether this would be acceptable to the planners, since he wondered
whether they would be willing to let an outside agency in on their
plans. He stated that the J.I.C. even now was still working on the
problem of persuading the planners to let the intelligence people in on
their plans.

General Vandenberg suggested that this problem be deferred pending
further study.

General Chamberlin agreed, and
said that he would like to discuss it with General Eisenhower.

The Intelligence Advisory Board:

Deferred action on C.I.G. 15.

* Source: Central Intelligence
Agency Historical Files, HS/HC-281. Secret: Limited Distribution. No
drafting information appears on the source text. The meeting was
held at the New War Department.

1 [text not
declassified] (Central Intelligence Agency Histroical Files,
HS/HC-276) See the Supplement.

2 Inglis apparently was
referring to the changes in CIG 12/2
that Vandenberg had mentioned (no written version of which has been
found) [text not declassified].

3 [text not declassified] (Central Intellegence Agency
Historical Files, HS/HC-276) See the Supplement.

4 Not printed. (Central Intelligence Agency
Historical Files, HS/HC-275)

5 Dated September 17. (Ibid., HS/HC-276) See the
Supplement.

6 The Joint
Army-Navy Intelligence Studies (JANIS) were basic country handbooks intended to provide
essential information for military planners.

7 The committee appointed to make the study reported
on November 4, 1946. The report, CIG 13/1, concluded that
fundamental differences precluded a study. (Central Intelligence
Agency Historical Files, HS/HC-276) See the Supplement.

8 Dated September 19. (Central
Intelligence Agency Historical Files, HS/HC-276) See the
Supplement.

9 Dated September 18. (Central Intelligence Agency
Historical Files, HS/HC-276) See the Supplement.

171. Central Intelligence Group Directive No. 15171. Central Intelligence Group Directive No. 15

Washington, October 1,
1946.

[Source: Central Intelligence Agency Historical Files, HS/HC-275. Secret.
3 pages of source text not declassified.]

172. Minutes of the Eighth Meeting of the National Intelligence Authority172. Minutes of the Eighth Meeting of the National Intelligence
AuthoritySource

Washington, October 16, 1946, 11:15 a.m.

PARTICIPANTS

Members Present

Acting Secretary of State Dean
Acheson, in the Chair

Secretary of War Robert P.
Patterson

Secretary of the Navy James
Forrestal

Fleet Admiral William D.
Leahy, Personal Representative of the
President

General Hoyt S.
Vandenberg, Director of Central Intelligence

Also Present

Under Secretary of the Navy John L.
Sullivan

Mr. William A. Eddy,
Special Assistant to the Secretary of State for Research and
Intelligence

Assistant Secretary of State Donald
Russell

Mr. John D. Hickerson, Department of State

Mr. Dean Rusk, War Department

Captain Robert L. Dennison, USN

Colonel William H. Harris, CIG

Mr. Edward R. Saunders, CIG

Secretariat

Mr. James S. Lay, Jr., Secretary,
N.I.A.

1. Central Intelligence Group Budget for Fiscal
Year 1948

Secretary Acheson said that he had
received a recommendation by the CIG
Budget Review Board that the NIA approve
and sign an authorization to
the Director of Central Intelligence to submit a budget of specified
amount for the fiscal year 1948.1 He said that General Vandenberg had been asked to
talk to the NIA about this
recommendation.

“Mr. Acheson said that there had
come to him for signature a memorandum approving a budget of 40 million
dollars for the Central Intelligence Group of which 25 million is
unvouchered. The memorandum points out that the comparable expenditures
by OSS were 165 million dollars but
beyond this there is very little information on which to base a
judgment. Mr. Acheson said that
this proposed budget figure was probably all right but that he felt that
it would be useful if it could be explained to the members of the N.I.A.
in order that they could understand better what they were doing. It was
agreed that Mr. Hickerson would ask that arrangements be made for a
meeting of the N.I.A. next week and that if there were urgent reasons
why an earlier meeting was necessary arrangements should be made for a
special meeting before the end of this week. (After the meeting
arrangements were made for a meeting of the N.I.A. at 11:15, October
16).” (Ibid., RG 59, Records of the Department of State, Decimal File
1945-49, 101.61/10-946)

General Vandenberg explained that he did not think the NIA wanted a detailed discussion of this
proposed budget, but he had brought men along who could explain any
point the NIA questioned.

Secretary Forrestal asked how much
money the CIG planned to spend during
the current fiscal year.

General Vandenberg stated the amount now available to CIG for the conduct of present operations.
He explained that many of the CIG
personnel were now being paid by the participating departments rather
than by CIG. In 1948 it was proposed
that CIG would reimburse the departments
for any personnel assigned to CIG. He
felt that this was proper since CIG
would be submitting a separate budget for 1948.

Secretary Acheson asked whether
this meant that the proposed budget was not based upon the present
Presidential directive establishing NIA
and CIG.

General Vandenberg stated that the proposed budget was based on the
present Presidential directive. He said that it was designed to cover
CIG activities which would grow out
of existing NIA directives. He explained
that it was visualized that this budget would necessarily be larger than
normal during the period of training and establishment of overseas
operations. Once personnel had been established in overseas posts,
expenses would only be required to take care of normal turnover of
personnel. It was contemplated, therefore, that this might be the
highest budget CIG would have to
submit.

Secretary Patterson asked for an
explanation of the breakdown of vouchered and unvouchered funds.

General Vandenberg explained that this contemplated using vouchered funds
for domestic activities and unvouchered funds for all foreign activities. He said they used
this basis for vouchered funds in an effort to approximate the basis
used by other Government departments. He said that he would like to keep
unvouchered funds to a minimum necessary to safeguard security.

Secretary Acheson asked what the
proposed budget would be if personnel were not assigned from departments
on a reimbursable basis.

General Vandenberg said that he was unable to estimate such a figure
since he did not know how many CIG
personnel would be service personnel or others assigned from
departments. He explained that this budget was based on the total
personnel required, including any service personnel at their comparable
civilian grades and salaries. He said that if NIA so desired, he would attempt to make another guess, but
explained that it would be very difficult to arrive at a more accurate
estimate at this time.

Admiral Leahy agreed that this
budget was bound to be nothing more than a guess.

Secretary Acheson believed that the
budget people would raise the point that the reimbursable feature in
this budget would undoubtedly create some duplication between CIG and the departmental budgets.

General Vandenberg stated that this point had already been discussed with
the Bureau of the Budget.

Admiral Leahy questioned the
size of the estimate for Personnel and Administration.

Colonel Harris granted that this figure might look large, but explained
that it was designed to furnish support for all CIG activities at home and abroad. He said that CIG had used the experience of the Joint
Logistics Plans Committee and the Army Service Forces, which indicated
that 25% for support was the best planning figure. This proposed budget
was based on the assumption that CIG
would not depend on the departments for any supplies or support.
Therefore, the CIG figure was actually
less than the normal 25% planning figure. Of this, a large proportion
would be engaged in communications work alone. In addition, all supplies
and services for all CIG offices are
included in the figures shown for Personnel and Administration.

Admiral Leahy expressed the
belief that many of the functions enumerated were now being performed by
existing agencies who might be able to handle CIG requirements more economically.

Colonel Harris said that this procedure would be questionable since it
would jeopardize security in the purchase and shipment of supplies. He
also noted that the actual number of personnel engaged in normal
procurement, supplies, personnel, and medical activities was actually
very small for the size of the organization.

Admiral Leahy then expressed
the feeling that the budget for Research and Evaluation looked rather
large.

Secretary Forrestal asked how many
people OSS had engaged in similar
activities.

Mr. Russell said that OSS had at one time about 1,400 engaged in
research. He explained, however, that the State Department had taken
over the remainder of that organization and, therefore, State's research
personnel should be added to the CIG
figure if they were to be compared with OSS.

Colonel Harris noted that OSS had not
attempted to cover Latin America or General MacArthur's theater, as
CIG would do. He also explained that
the departments had asked CIG to
investigate taking over the Washington Document Center. CIG had also been asked to establish an
information center. He said that the Research and Analysis Branch of
OSS had been used only because it
was considered the best norm for estimating purposes, except that CIG would cover much more territory in
their activities.

Admiral Leahy asked what the
Washington Document Center was.

General Vandenberg explained that this unit was exploiting documents from
Japan for certain intelligence purposes. He explained that it was not a
permanent unit, but will probably complete its work in about a year and
a half.

Mr. Russell noted that if the
CIG budget was based on the former
OSS Research and Analysis Branch,
this would create complications, since the State Department has already
asked for funds for the successor to that Branch.

General Vandenberg explained that CIG had
not used OSS as a basis in order to
establish a similar or duplicative unit. CIG had only used OSS as an
example of the research personnel required to cover certain areas of the
world. He explained that CIG required
this research personnel to put together the finished intelligence from
the departments plus information collected by CIG itself, and to give all this material a national slant.
He noted that even when CIG receives
finished intelligence from the departments, CIG still has to analyze it and find out whether it is
pointed up from a national point of view. Each agency normally prepared
intelligence from its own departmental viewpoint. There must, therefore,
always be in CIG a research unit which
looks at the intelligence from the viewpoint of all departments rather
than any one. He assured NIA that CIG was not going to do the same research
done by the departments, but rather would cover marginal areas and fill
gaps not covered by any department.

Mr. Eddy stated that originally
the figure for CIG Research and
Evaluation had struck him as being rather large. Further examination
indicated that CIG was being asked to do
research on large areas which no department can do. He thought that CIG might well have to build up its research organization
to the size indicated in the budget.

General Vandenberg assured the NIA that
CIG had no intent to infringe upon
the fields of primary interest to the departments. He noted that both he
and the members of the Intelligence Advisory Board were watching that
point very carefully.

Mr. Russell asked if CIG could not call its office something
other than Research and Evaluation. He explained that this name was so
similar to that used by the State Department that it might cause
difficulty in obtaining appropriations since it would appear to involve
duplication.

General Vandenberg agreed that he would change the name of the CIG office.

Admiral Leahy asked what
objection the NIA would have to
author-izing the Director of Central Intelligence to proceed to attempt
to obtain the proposed budget. He thought that if this amount could be
obtained it could certainly be used judiciously in furnishing
intelligence services. If there was a possibility of obtaining this
amount, he thought General Vandenberg should at least try to get it. If
the budget should be cut, it would then be necessary to cut the cloth to
fit the reduced amount.

Secretary Forrestal asked what
Congressional committee General Vandenberg had appeared before.

General Vandenberg said that he had always appeared before the
Appropriations Committee.

Colonel Harris explained that the plan was to hide the CIG budget in the various departmental
budgets. Then at an agreed time, as arranged by the Bureau of the
Budget, General Vandenberg would appear before the Appropriations
Committees to justify the CIG budget as
a unit.

Colonel Harris, in answer to a question by Secretary Forrestal, said that only two
individuals in the Bureau of the Budget saw the integrated CIG budget.

General Vandenberg explained that both of these men have been
investigated for security by CIG.

Secretary Patterson asked what the
final form of the CIG budget would be.
He wondered whether it would appear anywhere as so many dollars for
CIG activities.

General Vandenberg said that it would appear nowhere in that form.

Secretary Forrestal said it was
his understanding that it would be buried in the budgets of the various
departments.

General Vandenberg confirmed that this was the arrangement which had been
worked out with the concurrence of the Bureau of the Budget.

Secretary Acheson, in answer to a
question by Admiral Leahy,
said that this meeting had been called at his request. He had thought it
would be wise, before approving a budget of this size, to have a clear
idea as to why this action had been taken. He thought that the
discussion had been very helpful in that regard.

Secretary Forrestal stated that
the important thing, as he was sure General Vandenberg realized, was
that CIG should screen the use of its
money, particularly its personnel, so that there would be no revulsion
in the next Congress.

Mr. Russell then made a helpful
suggestion as to the basis for estimating the proportion of vouchered
and unvouchered funds.

The National Intelligence Authority:

Approved and signed a memorandum authorizing the Director of Central
Intelligence to submit a budget of specified amount for the fiscal year
1948.

* Source: National Archives and
Records Administration, RG 218, Records of the Joint Chiefs of
Staff, Leahy Papers, No.
132. Secret; Special Distribution. No drafting information appears
on the source text. The meeting was held at the Department of
State.

1 According
to the minutes of the meeting of the Secretaries of State, War, and
Navy held on October 9, there was a discussion of the CIG budget, which was recorded as
follows:

173. Memorandum From the Secretary of State's Special Assistant for Research and Intelligence (Eddy) and the Assistant Secretary of State for Administration (Russell) to Secretary of State Byrnes173. Memorandum From the Secretary of State's Special Assistant for
Research and Intelligence (Eddy) and the Assistant Secretary of State for
Administration (Russell) to Secretary of State ByrnesSource

Washington, October 30,
1946.

SUBJECT

Request from the Director of the Central Intelligence for State
Department Policy Statements

In the attached letter dated October 24, 1946,1 to Mr.
Eddy, General Vandenberg,
Director of Central Intelligence, has requested that CIG be furnished with the Department's
Quarterly Policy and Information Statements.

The reasons given by General Vandenberg for desiring to receive the
Policy and Information Statements are that CIG feels intelligence requirements cannot be developed
without full knowledge of pertinent national policy and that he
considers the Department's policy statements to come within the category
of material included in the phrase “necessary facilities, intelligence,
and information in the possession of our respective departments” as used
in paragraph 7 of NIA Directive No. 1,
copy attached, to describe the material which CIG is authorized to receive in the performance of its
mission. General Vandenberg appears to desire the Department's policy
statements for the purpose of including them in Part I of documents on
“National Intelligence Requirements,” pertaining to various countries,
to be distributed by CIG.

We, therefore, recommend that General Vandenberg's request be denied.
Objective foreign intelligence is critically essential in the
formulation of our foreign policy. The procural of this intelligence,
its correlation and coordination is the function of CIG as the operating
arm of the National Intelligence Authority. This process cannot be
unbiased and objective if it is colored or affected by policy
pronouncements which are based on intelligence derived from sources with
which CIG is unfamiliar and which it is
in no position to evaluate. It is believed that General Vandenberg's
requirements in the field of policy orientation can be met by specific
directives furnished him by the State Department's representative on the
Intelligence Advisory Board after such directives have been considered
and cleared by the Department's Advisory Committee on Intelligence
(ACI).

Incidentally, the policy statements requested by General Vandenberg would
appear not to be covered in the phrase “strategic and national policy
intelligence” which paragraph 2 of NIA
Directive No. 1 charges CIG with
responsibility for furnishing to the President, the State, War, and Navy
Departments, and to others.

William Eddy
Donald Russell

* Source: National Archives and Records
Administration, RG 59, Records of the Department of State, Decimal
File 1945-49, 101.5/10-2446. Secret. The source text bears the
handwritten annotation: “I approve. James F. Byrnes.”

1 Not printed. See the Supplement.

174. Minutes of the Ninth Meeting of the Intelligence Advisory Board174. Minutes of the Ninth Meeting of the Intelligence Advisory
BoardSource

Washington, October 31, 1946, 2:30 p.m.

PARTICIPANTS

Lt. General Hoyt S.
Vandenberg, Director of Central Intelligence, in the
Chair

Members Present

Mr. William A. Eddy,
Special Assistant to the Secretary of State for Research and
Intelligence

Maj. General Stephen J.
Chamberlin, Director of Intelligence, W.D.G.S.

Rear Admiral Thomas B.
Inglis, Chief of Naval Intelligence

Brig. General John A. Samford, Deputy Assistant Chief of Air
Staff-2

Also Present

Mr. A. Sidney Buford, Department of State

Mr. James Heck, Department of State

Colonel E. K. Wright,
Central Intelligence Group (for Item 1 only)

Colonel E. J. Treacy, U.S.A.

Captain R. K. Davis, U.S.N.

Colonel E. P. Mussett, U.S.A.

Mr. Donald Edgar, Central
Intelligence Group

Secretariat

Mr. James S. Lay, Jr.,
Secretary, N.I.A.

Mr. John S. Earman,
Assistant Secretary, N.I.A.

1. Agenda and Weekly Date for I.A.B. Meeting

General Vandenberg asked Mr. Lay
to explain why there were three items left off the agenda of today's
meeting.

Mr. Lay stated that some of the
I.A.B. members were not ready to discuss C.I.G. 13 and 15,1
and ICAPS was still working on C.I.G.
18.2

Mr. Lay then asked if it was
agreeable with the Board to establish a standard time each week for
I.A.B. meetings. He explained that in the event there was nothing to come before the Board, the
members would be notified in advance and the meeting would be cancelled
for that week.

The Intelligence Advisory Board:

Agreed to set aside 1430 each Thursday as the normal time for I.A.B.
meetings, with the understanding that the Secretary would advise each
member early in the week whether a meeting was to be held.

2. Intelligence Estimates Prepared by the Central
Intelligence Group (C.I.G. 16 and C.I.G. 16/1)3

General Vandenberg asked Mr. Lay
to give a brief explanation as to how ORE-14 was prepared and coordinated with the
departments.

Mr. Lay stated that C.I.G. was
asked to prepare this estimate on Friday to be ready the following
Tuesday. He also brought out the fact that the estimate was based on an
existing J.I.S. study together with cables received from Moscow, and
that it was coordinated with specialized representatives of the I.A.B.
before going forward.

General Vandenberg stated that he believed C.I.G. would have difficulty
in meeting deadlines if the concurrence of each I.A.B. member had to be
obtained by a voting system prior to the forwarding of the
estimates.

Admiral Inglis stated that it was
his idea to separate concurrences of estimates into three parts, i.e.,
the Daily Summary, the Weekly Summary, and formal O.R.E. estimates. He
further stated that the Naval members of O.R.E. are perfectly competent
to represent and concur for the Director of Naval Intelligence in the
preparation of daily and Weekly summaries. However, in the case of
formal O.R.E. estimates, Admiral Inglis stated that he was in favor of using the J.I.C.
vote method, time permitting, and that he would like to have two to
three days to consider each paper. If time does not permit, he felt that
the paper could be put through with a statement that the estimate does
not bear the concurrence of the dissenting department but that such
concurrence or comments would follow. Admiral Inglis further stated that while the
relationship of J.I.S. to C.I.G. is not up for consideration at this
time and is the subject of another paper, he believed its solution would
go a long way in solving this present problem.

General Samford stated that A-2 would like the opportunity to comment on
all estimates. He said that he realized that this procedure would be
time-consuming, and believed possibly that an A-2 member of ICAPS could be designated to concur for
A-2 on the estimates in question.

General Vandenberg stated that an A-2 member of ICAPS could not be the person to be used by A-2 in
concurring on these estimates, since ICAPS is concerned with coordination problems rather than
the preparation or content of intelligence estimates.

Admiral Inglis said that the Naval
members of O.R.E. working on estimates would at all times be in
collaboration with people in O.N.I., hence both O.N.I. and the Naval
members of O.R.E. would be kept abreast of developments and the latter
would know the Navy Department's views.

Admiral Inglis stated that the
question regarding concurrence in the Daily Summary involves possible
omissions which can distort the picture. He said that omissions had not
happened lately, but he felt that General Vandenberg would be willing to
let Naval members of O.R.E. complain to Admiral Inglis if they felt that omissions had
occurred.

General Vandenberg expressed the belief that the whole situation would be
clarified when the I.A.B. considered C.I.G. 15.

Mr. Eddy said that in the meantime
he favored appointing an aide or a staff member as a representative in
O.R.E. to check estimates as proposed in C.I.G. 16/1. His reason for
favoring this solution, rather than C.I.G. 16, was that, although Army
and Naval officers remain in uniform and loyal to their service,
civilian employees are now becoming employees of C.I.G. rather than
State. Former State Department employees in C.I.G. will therefore have
no direct loyalties to State.

General Chamberlin said that he
was fundamentally opposed to considering a man assigned to C.I.G. as
partially responsible to him. He felt that such a man owes his whole
loyalty to C.I.G., and that it is impossible to divide his
loyalties.

General Samford thought that this was true except in ICAPS, where he felt there was a residual
representation of departmental interests.

Admiral Inglis said that he
understood General Chamberlin's
point of view, but he also understood that C.I.G. was to be a
cooperative interdepartmental venture. He could see the difference in
the situation regarding the State Department. However, in the case of
Naval officers, while they were working in C.I.G. he felt they had an
additional duty representing the Navy. If they felt that Navy's
interests were not properly represented in C.I.G., then they should
express this feeling to Admiral Inglis as their contact with the Navy Department. He
reiterated that he understood General Chamberlin's viewpoint and granted that this situation
may cause trouble in the
future, but felt that there had been no difficulty so far.

Mr. Eddy said that he thought
Admiral Inglis' viewpoint would
definitely cause trouble in the future, especially for the State
Department.

Admiral Inglis expressed the
understanding that there would always be a few people in C.I.G. who
continued to be State Department employees, such as Mr. Huddle.

Mr. Eddy agreed that there would
be a few key State Department positions in C.I.G., but these would carry
on liaison with the State Department rather than be State Department
representatives. He thought that this would encourage a closer relation
with State, but expressed the belief that if one of these State
Department people assigned to C.I.G. felt that State's interests were
not properly represented, he would appeal not to the State Department,
but to General Vandenberg.

General Chamberlin compared this
to the situation on the General Staff, where personnel are expected to
solve problems as they see it in the General Staff rather than from the
viewpoint of the basic arm or service from which they come. He thought
that if Admiral Inglis'
interpretation prevailed, it would destroy C.I.G.

General Vandenberg thought that the discussion led back to the solution
proposed in C.I.G. 16/1.

General Chamberlin felt that
General Vandenberg was appointed to head C.I.G. and that the I.A.B. were
only advisers. He felt that General Vandenberg was placed here by the
N.I.A. to perform functions assigned by that Authority. He did not feel
that the I.A.B. should concern itself with the detailed performance of
those functions. He said that General Vandenberg was responsible solely
to the N.I.A. and was expected to consult with the departments only
sufficiently to ensure coordination.

Admiral Inglis said that the way
the directive was written, the I.A.B. was more than an adviser. It is a
two-way street and a link between C.I.G. and the departmental agencies.
He felt that the I.A.B. had a responsibility for the operations of
C.I.G.

General Vandenberg felt that he has the right to put out what C.I.G.
thinks is correct. However, to fulfill its obligation as an
interdepartmental agency, C.I.G. must have the views of the four
departmental agencies. He felt it was best that C.I.G. have not only the
agencies' views, but the reasons for these views. He agreed with Admiral
Inglis that the I.A.B. has a
responsibility to see, not whether C.I.G. is doing the wrong thing but
that it is doing the right thing. In other words, General Vandenberg
felt that the solution lay somewhere between the views of Admiral
Inglis and of General
Chamberlin.

General Chamberlin said that his
viewpoint was that a person of General Vandenberg's caliber should be
entrusted to find his own method for determining departmental views. If General Vandenberg sees
a difference of opinion, it would be assumed that he would check it with
the departments concerned. This should be easy, since C.I.G. will always
have close liaison with the departments.

Admiral Inglis felt that it was a
fundamental question whether the I.A.B. has a responsibility for C.I.G.
operations. He thought that if General Chamberlin's philosophy were followed to its ultimate
conclusion, it would mean that ten years from now O.N.I. would still
have to have its same basic organization, since it would not be able to
entrust C.I.G. to perform functions for it. If, however, O.N.I. has
responsible Naval people within C.I.G., O.N.I. would then feel that the
Navy's views were being represented. He felt that C.I.G. could not go
off by itself. If the departmental agencies are represented, C.I.G.
could then perform many duties which are now being performed by each
departmental agency.

Mr. Eddy felt that the new budget
plans for C.I.G. indicated a shift, since C.I.G. may now employ its own
people. He did not feel, however, that this eliminated the possibility
of having C.I.G. serve the departments. If each department concentrates
on its primary interests, then C.I.G. can perform functions of secondary
interest and special jobs which no departmental agency can perform.
Then, so long as the I.A.B. is a two-way street, C.I.G. and the
departmental agencies can make available the best service each to the
other.

Admiral Inglis felt that this
would not work unless the departments were represented in C.I.G.

General Chamberlin said that if he
were called upon to submit a Naval estimate he would go to the Navy. He
felt General Vandenberg would do the same. He thought, however, that if
General Vandenberg felt the data on hand in C.I.G. corresponded to the
opinions of the departments, General Vandenberg should be authorized to
send that data forward as an intelligence estimate.

General Vandenberg said that he was afraid that if people in C.I.G. fail
to represent the departmental viewpoint, C.I.G. would get off the track.
He thought that C.I.G. personnel should be in close contact with the
departments in order to obtain departmental views. He said that he was
encouraging all C.I.G. personnel to get the views of all three
departments.

General Chamberlin said that he
was confident C.I.G. would do that, especially since Army officers in
C.I.G. are always subject to detail and rotation. He thought that the
War Department's viewpoint would be represented because of the years of
Army training each Army officer in C.I.G. would have. He thought that
C.I.G. personnel should express their own views and not pattern them
after the opinion of someone in an outside agency.

Admiral Inglis thought that the
idea was to assign people to C.I.G. in order to form a link with the
departments, to utilize the sources therein, and have the benefit of the
combined thinking of all departments.

General Vandenberg thought that Admiral Inglis' objective could be gained by having
representatives detailed to O.R.E.

Mr. Lay pointed out that the
procedure to be followed by each representative in clearing papers was a
matter for decision by each I.A.B. member. Admiral Inglis could instruct his
representative not to vote until Admiral Inglis had approved each
estimate.

Admiral Inglis said that he was
willing to appoint a representative part-time, but that this
representative would act only as a messenger.

Mr. Eddy said that he would like
to see this system tried. He thought that each I.A.B. member might
designate a deputy who was well trained and could bring papers to the
respective I.A.B. members for clearance when necessary.

General Chamberlin said that he
would give his representative the responsibility for deciding whether to
act on an estimate or to clear it with General Chamberlin. General Chamberlin felt, however, that this
arrangement should not prevent C.I.G. research personnel from working
closely with G-2 research sections.

General Chamberlin then expressed
the belief that C.I.G. estimates sent to the President should not show a
dissenting opinion.

Admiral Inglis thought that the
President should know of any dissenting opinions, although he hoped that
any differences could be reconciled before the estimates were issued. He
felt, however, that estimates should not be held up unduly in an effort
to reconcile divergent views.

General Chamberlin said that if
each paper were handled in detail it would defeat the purpose of C.I.G.,
since every word or shade of meaning would be questioned.

Admiral Inglis noted that this was
the procedure used in the Joint Chiefs of Staff. Although it had not
worked perfectly, he felt that for every example where this procedure
had failed to work there were ten examples where it had worked.

General Chamberlin noted, however,
that the Joint Chiefs of Staff has no head or commander, as is the case
in C.I.G.

Mr. Lay pointed out that the
wording of N.I.A. Directive No. 1 requires only that “substantial
dissent” should be noted in C.I.G. estimates, which was intended to
preclude discussion of every word or shade of meaning.

Admiral Inglis said that the
concept of N.I.A. was that all departments would be represented in all
matters. The Director of Central Intelligence is the executive
responsible for carrying out the policies of the N.I.A. The I.A.B. is
more than merely an adviser. All through the N.I.A. and C.I.G. structure it was intended
that there be equal representation of all departments.

General Vandenberg pointed out that it is a matter of record in N.I.A.
minutes that the N.I.A. is the agency responsible to the President, and
not the Director of Central Intelligence.

General Chamberlin noted that the
Director of Central Intelligence is not responsible to the I.A.B., but
rather to the N.I.A.

General Vandenberg pointed out, however, that the N.I.A. has delegated to
the I.A.B. the right to concur for the N.I.A. members. Therefore, in the
final analysis the I.A.B., by this delegation, has a measure of
responsibility for the success of C.I.G. activities.

General Chamberlin questioned how
this would work, since many other agencies of the Government were
involved.

Admiral Inglis noted that this was
covered by the fact that other agencies sat as members of the I.A.B. on
matters of interest to those agencies.

After further discussion of detailed amendments to the Enclosure to
C.I.G. 16/1,

The Intelligence Advisory Board:

Concurred in the issuance of the Enclosure to C.I.G. 16/1 subject to
amendment to read as follows:

“1. To implement the provisions of Paragraph 6 of N.I.A. Directive No. 1,
each member of the Intelligence Advisory Board will designate a personal
representative to remain assigned to his office and detailed as liaison
to the Projects Division of the Intelligence Staff of the Office of
Reports and Estimates of the Central Intelligence Group.

“2. These representatives will, as their chiefs direct, either concur in
C.I.G. intelligence estimates or present dissenting opinions.

“3. Each intelligence estimate issued by C.I.G. will either have the
concurrence of all I.A.B. members or will have any substantial dissent
appended as a part of the estimate or follow as provided in 4 below.

“4. This procedure will not be permitted to prevent the presentation of
any estimate on the required date. If concurrence or dissenting opinions
cannot be obtained in time to meet deadlines for completion and
submission of estimates, such estimates will be submitted together with
a statement that only limited coordination has been attained and
substantial dissent, if any, will be submitted at a later date.

“5. C.I.G. will afford designated representatives complete opportunity to
participate in all phases of the development of estimates.”

(Subsequently issued as C.I.G. Administrative Order No. 32.)

3. Plan for Coordination of Biographic
Intelligence (C.I.G. 17)5

General Vandenberg gave a brief description of the plan recommended in
C.I.G. 17.

General Chamberlin raised the
question as to whether paragraph 2-c of the proposed C.I.G. Directive
would authorize biographic intelligence data of one department to be
made available to another department.

General Vandenberg stated that if the biographic intelligence data of one
department was not available to other departments, such a system would
cause a great deal of duplication.

Mr. Eddy stated that he believed
the word “responsibility” should be left out of the first sentence of
paragraph 2-c.

General Vandenberg said that he was agreeable to this omission.

Admiral Inglis said that he
objected to the last sentence in paragraph 2 of the covering memorandum
by the Director of Central Intelligence, since O.N.I. does have a good
index system and it is maintained up to date.

Mr. Edgar stated that at the time
the covering memorandum was written he did not know that the Navy's
index system had been completed.

Admiral Inglis questioned whether
this proposed Directive would govern domestic coverage and, if so, the
Federal Bureau of Investigation should have a chance to express its
views on the matter under consideration.

General Vandenberg replied that the paper did not govern domestic
coverage, and was for foreign biographic intelligence only.

Admiral Inglis stated that the
majority of inquiries made to O.N.I. were in the domestic field and he
felt that this paper was too elaborate a plan for the coordination of
foreign biographic intelligence.

General Vandenberg stated that if the plan in this paper did not work, it
could be recalled.

Mr. Edgar stated that it was
desirable to get approval on this paper in order to gain proper
coordination in the field.

General Vandenberg stated that he should have central machine records in
order to point out biographic intelligence information contained in
other agencies.

Admiral Inglis agreed.

Mr. Eddy stated that the
provisions of paragraph 3-b of the covering memorandum would cause too
much work for the State Department to undertake at this time, since the
State Department had a mass of biographic information that dated back to
1790, and that to reproduce this information would be a staggering
job.

Mr. Edgar explained that it was not
the intent of this paper to reproduce all biographic information
presently on file in the departments, but rather C.I.G. would start anew
from a given date, and the information contained in the central file
would be only enough to indicate the type of personality whose name
appeared on each card. This would make it possible to decide whether it
was desirable to obtain further details from the department having the
basic file on a given individual.

Mr. Heck stated that the State Department drew from a wider scope than
would be reported on standard forms, and that only one or two per cent
of the names in State Department file would be covered by standard
report forms. He suggested that each agency concentrate on an assigned
area of responsibility.

General Chamberlin said that he
was heartily in favor of a central file which could be consulted rather
than having to contact all of the agencies in each case on which
information might be desired.

General Vandenberg said that to have to go to the files of each agency on
each case would take a lot of unnecessary time.

Mr. Heck reiterated that such a central file would show only a small per
cent of the names presently on file in the State Department.

General Vandenberg stated that the central file proposed would be
starting anew, and, while he realized it would be slow in building up,
eventually it would be of benefit to all concerned.

Mr. Heck stated that he believed that if the information contained on
these cards got much beyond a name stage, it would involve too much
duplication.

General Vandenberg said that there would naturally have to be some
duplication. However, at the present time, with the volume of files in
the agencies and no central index system, no one knows exactly what we
do have.

Mr. Heck felt that this proposal would put a heavy burden on the
departmental agencies, since it would require additional people to
extract the information and put it on standard cards.

General Chamberlin suggested that
each time an agency made a summary for its own index, it send a copy to
C.I.G.

Admiral Inglis suggested that to
eliminate workload, cards for C.I.G. be prepared on each new report from
the field or whenever departmental agencies took action to prepare a
summary—as, for example, in answer to a request. He thought that on this basis the C.I.G. file
would be very useful five years from now.

General Vandenberg said that was all C.I.G. asked the agencies to do.

Mr. Edgar said that C.I.G. would be
willing to receive the standard form on new field reports, and copies of
completed summary reports which are prepared by the agencies in answer
to a request. He said that in the latter case C.I.G. would be willing to
make up the central file card.

Mr. Heck pointed out that this would mean that C.I.G. had a very
incomplete file, representing only about five per cent of the State
Department's files.

Mr. Edgar expressed the belief
that, if C.I.G. received all completed summary reports, it would have
information at least on personalities in which there is an active
interest.

Admiral Inglis agreed that would
be true in many cases, but pointed out that it would be a long time
before any reliance could be felt that C.I.G.'s list was complete.

Mr. Eddy stated that he believed
this file should be called the central index.

Mr. Edgar stated that he believed
the name of the file should indicate that it contained more than just
names.

Mr. Eddy suggested that the file
be called a “reference index file”.

Admiral Inglis recommended that
the phrase “nor does any department keep a master index of their own
biographic files”, in paragraph 2 of the covering memorandum by the
Director of Central Intelligence, be omitted.

The Enclosure to C.I.G. 17 was then discussed and amendments thereto
agreed upon by the Board.

The Intelligence Advisory Board:

a. Agreed that the phrase “nor does any department keep a master index of
their own biographic files”, at the end of paragraph 2 of the covering
memorandum of C.I.G. 17, should be deleted.

b. Concurred in the recommendation in paragraph 3-b of the covering
memorandum of C.I.G. 17, subject to insertion of the word “index”
between “reference” and “file” on the second line thereof.

c. Concurred in the Enclosure to C.I.G. 17, subject to the following
amendments:

(1) Delete the word “responsible” from the second line of paragraph
2-c.

(2) Reword the first sentence of paragraph 3-a to read as follows: “The
chief of mission of each embassy, legation or foreign post has the over-all responsibility, in
accordance with the principles of this Directive, for coordinating the
collection of biographic intelligence in his geographical area.”

(3) Delete paragraph 3-b-(7).

(4) Delete paragraph 5-b.

(Subsequently issued as C.I.G. Directive No. 16.)6

4. National Intelligence Requirements—China
(C.I.G. 19)7

Mr. Eddy suggested that this item
be postponed until the next I.A.B. meeting.

General Chamberlin agreed, since
he had not had sufficient time to study this paper. He expressed the
belief, however, that the titles of Parts I and II of the proposed
N.I.A. directive were reversed.

Mr. Edgar asked if, since the
proposed directive had the concurrence of representatives of the I.A.B.,
the Board would authorize use of the directive, pending final approval,
as a basis for the preparation by an interdepartmental group of a
collection directive.

General Chamberlin said that he
would like to know what collection responsibilities are involved before
deciding what information should be collected.

Mr. Edgar explained that it was
felt that the collection people must know what information the
researchers want before they can decide on the assignment of collection
responsibilities.

Admiral Inglis said that although
he felt the wording could be improved, he was prepared to approve the
directive as it stands.

After further discussion,

The Intelligence Advisory Board:

a. Agreed to defer consideration of C.I.G. 19 until a meeting next
Thursday, 7 November 1946.

b. Pending final approval, authorized the use of the Enclosure to C.I.G.
19 as a basis for the preparation by an interdepartmental group of a
collection directive.

5. Status of N.I.A. 68

Admiral Inglis asked what was
being done on N.I.A. 6, in view of the appointment of the Atomic Energy
Commission.

Mr. Lay explained that N.I.A. 6
was presently awaiting approval by the President, and that General
Vandenberg was taking steps to get a decision on this matter.

* Source: Central Intelligence
Agency Historical Files, HS/HC-281. Top Secret; Limited
Distribution. No drafting information appears on the source text.
The meeting was held at the Department of State.

1 See Document 170.

2 In CIG 18, “Responsibility of the Department of State for
Reporting and Collection of Information and Intelligence,” October
25, the Department of State recommended that in order to avoid
duplication of effort it should assume complete responsibility for
the overt procurement of information and intelligence in foreign
areas on all political, economic, social, and cultural matters and
such scientific information and intelligence which did not fall
within the military and naval fields. (Central Intelligence Agency
Historical Files, HS/HC-276) See the Supplement. See also the
minutes of the sixth meeting of the Advisory Committee on
Intelligence, October 8. (National Archives and Records
Administration, RG 353, Records of Interdepartmental and
Intradepartmental Committees—State Department, Lot File No. 122,
Records of the Secretary's Staff Committee 1944-47, Box 94) See the
Supplement.

3 CIG 16, October 14, which sought to
establish a procedure for intelligence estimates, was a proposal by
Rear Admiral Inglis, the
Chief of Naval Intelligence. CIG
16/1 (October 26) was a counterproposal by the Director of Central
Intelligence. (Both in Central Intelligence Agency Historical Files,
HS/HC-276) See the Supplement for both.

4 ORE-1, “Soviet Foreign and Military
Policy,” July 23, the first intelligence estimate produced by CIG's newly established Office of
Research and Evaluation is reproduced in CIA Cold
War Records: The CIA under Harry
Truman, pp. 65-76.

5 CIG 17, October 25, proposed to
establish within CIG a central
biographic reference file that would contain basic factual data on
all foreign personalities on whom supporting files were maintained
by the departmental intelligence agencies. (Central Intelligence
Agency Historical Files, HS/HC-276) See the Supplement.

6 Dated November 1. (National Archives and Records
Administration, RG 218, Records of the Joint Chiefs of Staff,
Leahy Papers, No.
130) See the Supplement.

7 CIG 19 as amended became NIA Directive No. 8, February 12, 1947.
(National Archives and Records Administration, RG 218, Records of
the Joint Chiefs of Staff, Leahy Papers, No. 132)

8 See Documents 163 and 164.

175. Letter From the Secretary of State's Special Assistant for Research and Intelligence (Eddy) to the Director of Central Intelligence (Vandenberg)175. Letter From the Secretary of State's Special Assistant for
Research and Intelligence (Eddy) to the Director of Central Intelligence (Vandenberg)Source

Washington, November 4,
1946.

My Dear General Vandenberg: I am writing in reply to your letter of
October 24, 1946, in which you request that the Department of State
reconsider its position of not releasing Policy Statements to serve as a
basis for intelligence requirements. Our desire to cooperate fully with
the Central Intelligence Group has led to a very thorough study of your
request. The problem has been taken up on the highest level where the
position of the Department has been reaffirmed, namely that it would be
unwise for the Department to furnish its Policy Statements to serve as a
basis for either Departmental or national intelligence.

Briefly, the Department's position with regard to its own Policy
Statements is that intelligence information should be available to
influence Department policy, but that current Department Policy
Statements should not be made available to influence intelligence
information. For this reason the Policy Statements are not furnished to
our own planners and researchers in this office.

The problem is not one of security of the documents, which it is quite
clear would be fully protected in CIG.
It is the conviction of the Department, however, that the security of
the essential information in the Policy Statements would not be insured
merely by protection of the documents. If, as stated in paragraph 2 of
your letter, a CIG draft of national
intelligence requirements for China were to consist of three parts, the
first part of which would be “U.S. policy towards China,” it would
follow that the mobilization of intelligence resources would be made to
fit that current policy. With the possible reorientation of that policy,
whether in China or in any other country, there would follow presumably
a reorientation of the
directives for collecting, reporting and processing intelligence.
Intelligence based upon, and shifted with, current political foreign
policy would, therefore, be a clear indication to a great many workers,
and to their contacts, of the evolution of our foreign policy in its
most delicate and crucial areas.

The Department would deplore any such development for the very good
reason that the Department's occasional Policy and Information
Statements are off-the-cuff guides to policy officers, subject to
constant revision, not considered by the Department as documents either
to be quoted or filed for future reference. The same, of course, is not
true of basic U.S. foreign policy valid throughout the world, a
knowledge of which should be available to all Departments of the
Government, such as the open door in economics, the self-determination
of sovereign states, the five freedoms of the air, etc.

Although it has been my duty to report that the Department does not feel
that it can change its decision not to release Policy Statements, I am
instructed to assure you of our desire to cooperate fully in
transmitting to you personally and less formally any information on the
Department's foreign policy which you may require from time to time.
Such information can be readily made available, upon your request, in
personal conference with one of your representatives, or in IAB meetings, where I would, as instructed
by the Department, furnish policy information required.1

Sincerely yours,

William A. Eddy2

* Source: National Archives and Records
Administration, RG 59, Records of the Department of State, Decimal
File 1945-49, 101.5/10-2446. Secret.

1 This decision was modified by the Department of
State Advisory Committee on Intelligence at its seventh meeting on
November 12. The committee decided to “make free to the Director
personally or his deputy any policy statements he might wish to
have, with the clear understanding that the documents should be seen
by no other persons in CIG.” (Ibid.,
RG 353, Records of Interdepartmental and Interdepartmental
Committees—State Department, Lot File No. 122, Records of the
Secretary's Staff Committee 1944-47, Box 94)

2 Printed from a copy that bears this
typed signature.

176. Minutes of the Tenth Meeting of the Intelligence Advisory Board176. Minutes of the Tenth Meeting of the Intelligence Advisory
BoardSource

Washington, November 7, 1946, 2:30 p.m.

PARTICIPANTS

Lt. General Hoyt S.
Vandenberg, Director of Central Intelligence, in the
Chair

Members Present

Mr. William A. Eddy,
Special Assistant to the Secretary of State for Research and
Intelligence

Maj. General Stephen J.
Chamberlin, Director of Intelligence, W.D.G.S.

Rear Admiral Thomas B.
Inglis, Chief of Naval Intelligence

Brig. General John A. Samford, Deputy Assistant Chief of Air
Staff-2

Also Present

Mr. A. Sidney Buford, Department of State

Colonel E. J. Treacy, U.S.A.

Captain R. K. Davis, U.S.N.

Colonel E. P. Mussett, U.S.A.

Mr. Donald Edgar, Central
Intelligence Group

Secretariat

Mr. James S. Lay, Jr.,
Secretary, N.I.A.

1. National Intelligence Requirements—China (C.I.G. 19)1

General Chamberlin said that he
had difficulty understanding the purpose of this paper. If it was
intended to cover over-all long-range intelligence requirements, he felt
that it was incomplete. If, however, it covered only some intermediate
objective, he did not have much to say except to suggest a few minor
changes.

Mr. Edgar explained that this paper
did not cover departmental requirements, which it was assumed would be
drawn up by the various agencies. He pointed out, however, that
uncoordinated and uncorrelated sets of instructions were going out to
the field which did not completely fill national requirements.
Therefore, the only requirements put in this paper were those which are
most important from a national viewpoint. This paper covered only China
as a trial area. It did not attempt, however, to define the ultimate
requirements for national policy intelligence.

General Chamberlin noted that only
three subjects were covered, whereas there are many others of interest
to the War Department.

General Vandenberg said that the War Department was expected to send
those out, except in those cases where C.I.G. might specifically ask for
additional information.

Mr. Edgar explained that at the
first interdepartmental meeting on coordination of the intelligence
effort, it was agreed that the first step should be to develop a
coordinated collection of intelligence requirements area by area
throughout the world. Each agency representative was asked to turn in
the requirements it considered most important. These were then
synthesized by the Office of Reports and Estimates in C.I.G. Some of the
information required was of interest to more than one department, and
when the departments agreed, these requirements were put in the paper.
If this paper is approved, the collection representatives from all
agencies will look over Part II in order to decide which field
representatives are best located to obtain the desired information and
to attempt to allocate these requirements to the various field
agencies.

General Chamberlin did not see how
coordination could be accomplished in this way unless the whole problem
was solved.

Mr. Eddy pointed out that this was
merely a test case, and that this paper might look radically different a
year from now.

Mr. Edgar noted that these
requirements would be reviewed quarterly.

General Chamberlin asked why other items of
importance, such as topographic data, were not included.

Mr. Edgar explained that no attempt
had been made to include static or basic intelligence. Also, no
scientific intelligence requirements were included because it was felt
there was nothing of interest in this area.

Admiral Inglis noted that these
requirements covered only those that are currently essential.

General Chamberlin expressed the
belief that this was intended to be an attempt to coordinate the whole
collection effort in China.

General Vandenberg said that it was impossible to do this until the
agencies had agreed on more basic issues, such as assignment of primary
responsibilities. Meanwhile, this was an attempt to move forward as far
as possible.

Admiral Inglis said that he was
willing to approve the paper as it stands, but that he was also baffled
by the wording “Essential Elements of National Intelligence”. He thought
they were all right, however, as targets for the next three months and
as a trial case.

Mr. Eddy said that he was willing
to approve the paper as it stands.

General Vandenberg said that the value of this paper would depend upon
the effort which all agencies put behind it.

General Chamberlin said that if
the three items mentioned were considered the most important, the War
Department would fulfill its part of the effort as a matter of
priority.

General Samford understood that this was an experiment in stating current
emphasis. He considered the paper all right as it is.

General Chamberlin expressed the
belief that the terminology was twisted.

Mr. Edgar explained that the first
step had been to study national policy toward China, on the theory that
intelligence should operate for the policy-makers, to show them whether
the policy was a success or needed change. It was felt that the
essential elements were stated too broadly and were therefore broken
down into collection requirements which could be turned over to the
collection representatives to draft a collection directive. He realized
that the terms used were somewhat different from military usage, but
that the four agency representatives had agreed upon the present
terminology. C.I.G., however, did not feel strongly about making a
change in the terminology. Mr. Edgar suggested, and it was agreed, that “Essential
Elements of National Intelligence” should be changed to read “Current
Essentials of National Intelligence.” General Chamberlin said that he would prefer
not to approve the paper until he had seen the collection directive
based thereon. He did agree tentatively that the paper was all right as
a basis for preparation of a further collection directive.

Admiral Inglis suggested that the
meeting of collection representatives be held to break down the
requirements into allocations to each agency. These could then be
checked with the I.A.B., and when approved each agency would issue
directives to accomplish its part of the mission.

General Vandenberg asked if a further I.A.B. meeting would be necessary
if the representatives of the agencies agreed on the collection
directive.

Admiral Inglis did not think it
would be necessary to put the paper on the agenda for another meeting,
but felt that it could be checked informally with the I.A.B. members and
issued as another C.I.G. paper.

Mr. Eddy suggested approval of the
paper with the understanding that distribution would be withheld until
assignment of collection responsibilities was agreed upon.

In answer to Mr. Eddy, Mr.
Edgar said that the directives
would be distributed to ambassadors and theater commanders through the
appropriate departments.

After further discussion,

The Intelligence Advisory Board:

a. Agreed upon the following amendments to the Enclosure to C.I.G.
19:

(1) Change “Essential Elements of National Intelligence” to read “Current
Essentials of National Intelligence” throughout the paper.

(2) In paragraph 1, line 4, change “requirements” to read
“objectives”.

b. Approved the Enclosure to C.I.G. 19, as amended, tentatively as a
basis for the preparation of a subsequent collection directive, with the
understanding that distribution would be withheld until the collection
directive had been agreed upon.

2. Establishment of a Channel Between the Central Intelligence Group and
the Joint Chiefs of Staff (C.I.G. 15)2

General Vandenberg explained that consideration of this problem had been
deferred at a previous I.A.B. meeting, and requested any further
comments.

Admiral Inglis said that the
matter had been discussed in the J.I.C. It was a complicated problem,
and it was hard to decide whether J.I.C. or I.A.B. should discuss it
further. He said that the Navy Department feels that one solution is
General Vandenberg's original proposal, which goes much farther then
Admiral Inglis' proposal in
C.I.G. 15. Admiral Inglis
circulated a sketch showing how the Navy thought General Vandenberg's
proposal might be put into effect. This involved moving the J.I.C. and
the J.I.S. into the structure of the C.I.G. It also formed a link
between the J.C.S. and the Director of Central Intelligence and between
J.C.S. subcommittees and the C.I.G. It proposed a change in the
membership of J.I.C. to service members only, plus the addition of the
Director of Central Intelligence as a member in the same manner as on
the I.A.B. With the change in membership it was suggested that the name
be changed to Joint Intelligence Board (J.I.B.). Admiral Inglis thought that in peacetime the
Director of Central Intelligence is responsible to the N.I.A., but that
this might be reversed in wartime to make him responsible to the J.C.S.
He felt that this proposal provided a necessary security wall around the
military activities of J.I.C. The J.I.S. membership would stay the same
except for the elimination of the State Department member. Liaison with
the State Department, however, would be continued, but through the
I.A.B. rather than the J.I.C.

Admiral Inglis explained that for
the preparation of intelligence estimates the proposed J.I.S. would go
both to O.R.E. and, for departmental intelligence, to the other
departments. J.I.S. would belong to the J.I.B., with lateral
communications with C.I.G.

Mr. Eddy thought that might be an
ultimate solution, but suggested as an interim stop that the J.I.S.
serve as an intelligence advisory staff to the I.A.B.

General Chamberlin said that he
had not figured out a solution to the problem yet, but that he did have
some fundamental principles which he felt should be considered. First of
all, the Joint Chiefs of Staff must remain an essentially military
agency. General Chamberlin felt,
however, that General Eisenhower would be hesitant to change any
existing arrangements for coordination with the State Department.

Admiral Inglis said that he would
like to make it perfectly clear that the Navy Department wants a link
with the State Department and considers it absolutely essential. There
is no intent, in the proposal he just outlined, to stop such
coordination. It was felt, however, that coordination with the State
Department would be adequately assured through the I.A.B.

General Chamberlin noted that the
mission of the Director of Central Intelligence goes far beyond the
scope of the J.C.S. Therefore, nothing should be done to circumscribe
C.I.G. into a lesser mission. This is a second fundamental which General
Eisenhower feels should be observed. Third, it would be bad to
circumscribe free and direct contact, especially in wartime, from the
J.C.S. to the President. Fourth, there should be nothing in the
arrangement, as far as the making of war plans is concerned, which
interpolates a civilian agency between planning agencies of the J.C.S.,
but, as General Vandenberg noted, these J.C.S. agencies should not be
denied any intelligence necessary to enable them to perform their
mission. Fifth, no agencies other than strictly military should have
access to military plans. This should be a matter of right on the part
of military agencies, for security reasons. General Chamberlin said that he was unable to
figure out an organization which observed all of those fundamental
principles. He felt, however, that there was great advantage in Admiral
Inglis' original suggestion
in C.I.G. 15, since it would at least provide a piecemeal approach to
the problem.

General Vandenberg said that the principles enunciated by General
Chamberlin were also the
objectives for which the C.I.G. was striving. He pointed out that the
C.I.G. proposal provided a watertight compartment for the military. He
observed, however, that allied to that consideration is the fact that
the war planners must have the best intelligence and that it must be
constantly supplied to them. The intelligence agency, therefore, should
work right along with the planners. Specifically, General Vandenberg
noted that Admiral Inglis' new
proposal established a watertight military compartment, but placed it next to the C.I.G.,
where it could draw on all available intelligence.

General Chamberlin noted that
there were some subjects covered by J.I.C. subcommittees which C.I.G.
should not have.

Admiral Inglis said that some
could be put under the J.I.B. and others, such as the Joint Intelligence
Study Publishing Board and the Publications Review Subcommittee, could
be integrated into C.I.G.

Mr. Eddy said that he was willing
to accept Admiral Inglis' new
proposal as an ultimate objective. He thought, however, that it would be
possible to proceed immediately to liquidate the J.I.C. subcommittees
and then follow that with Admiral Inglis' proposal.

General Vandenberg felt that it would be difficult to justify the initial
step proposed in C.I.G. 15 until a broad plan had been presented for
approval. He thought that the broad plan should first be approved in
principle and then the initial step approved for immediate
implementation. He noted that if the process stopped after the initial
step had been taken, C.I.G. would be accountable but not
responsible.

Admiral Inglis said that one
difficulty which had been discovered in his proposal in C.I.G. 15 was
that personnel assigned to J.C.S. subcommittees may not be assigned
additional duties without the approval of the J.C.S. He agreed with
General Vandenberg that the ultimate objective should be presented at
the same time that the initial step is submitted for approval.

Mr. Eddy felt that the question of
the ultimate objective involved very broad considerations. He pointed
out that there were three policy-forming groups—namely, the State
Department in the political field, the J.C.S. in the military field, and
the State-War-Navy Coordinating Committee in politico-military matters.
He thought that the relationship of those groups should be carefully
considered and presented in any ultimate solution. He felt that it might
be premature to attempt to outline the ultimate objective.

General Vandenberg thought that it might be possible to show the end
objective in broad terms, how far it was now possible to go, and why the
initial step was being taken.

Mr. Eddy felt that this would
require considerable time-consuming staff work to prepare. Therefore, he
would like to see the first step taken as soon as possible.

General Vandenberg suggested that if there was general agreement, Admiral
Inglis' new proposal could be
used as the ultimate objective and the proposal in C.I.G. 15 as the
initial step. He suggested that people from ICAPS and the agencies be designated to write up such a
proposal for consideration by the N.I.A. and the J.C.S.

General Chamberlin stated that he
could not say at this time that he approved the end result suggested by
Admiral Inglis. He thought a way
should be found to get the intelligence from C.I.G. without
interpolating C.I.G. into the J.C.S. He explained that he was not
opposed to General Vandenberg personally, but was in general doubtful of
the wisdom of mixing up in the J.C.S. the head of an agency who reported
to civilian authority.

Admiral Inglis asked if, in case
of war, it would not be desirable to have the Director of Central
Intelligence and the Central Intelligence Group under the command of the
J.C.S.

General Chamberlin said that in
case of war he thought that the C.I.G. should be brought into the J.C.S.
organization and made responsible for the whole intelligence effort. He
granted that this would involve abolishing the J.I.C.

Admiral Inglis expressed the
belief that the J.C.S. would not agree to abolish the J.I.C. any more
than they would to the abolition of the Joint War Plans Committee. He
noted that at present the Director of Central Intelligence reported to
the N.I.A. His proposal was that the Director of Central Intelligence be
assigned additional duties to serve the J.C.S. If at any time the
Director of Central Intelligence was not agreeable to the J.C.S., the
J.C.S. could easily cancel the agreement.

Mr. Eddy said that he agreed with
this proposal, but noted that it must be submitted to the N.I.A. and the
J.C.S.

General Vandenberg agreed because he felt that they would want to know
what lay behind the initial step.

Mr. Eddy thought that would be
desirable, but felt that if they could not agree on the ultimate
objective, the initial step should be recommended as improving liaison
between C.I.G. and J.I.C.

General Vandenberg said that he would like to wait a week or so to see if
staff members could not write something which would be agreeable to the
I.A.B.

General Chamberlin said that he
could not see what progress would be made, because he was fundamentally
opposed to the principles involved in Admiral Inglis' new proposal.

General Vandenberg said that he felt it was the responsibility of the
I.A.B. to recommend approval of some plan. He suggested, therefore, that
if there was disagreement within the I.A.B., both a majority and a
minority report be submitted to the N.I.A. He noted that nothing was
being done about this situation at the present time. He wanted to stop
unnecessary duplication, and felt that the solution of this problem was
one of the best ways to avoid it.

General Chamberlin believed that
the Director of Central Intelligence should not be on the J.I.B.

Admiral Inglis felt that if the
Director of Central Intelligence is made responsible for furnishing
intelligence, he must know the purpose which the intelligence is to
serve.

General Chamberlin felt there was
some way to provide for a lateral communication with the Director of
Central Intelligence in order to obtain intelligence which would then go
up through the J.I.B. He thought that the initial stop proposed in
C.I.G. 15 was worth trying.

General Vandenberg said that this would put either the Director of
Central Intelligence or the J.I.C. in an untenable position if it lasted
for long. He said that he would agree to that arrangement for a short
period, but that there must be a limit placed on its duration.

Admiral Inglis felt that the
proposal in C.I.G. 15 was all right as a first step, but that it would
not solve the problem. It would not tie C.I.G. in close enough with the
J.I.C., and it would not eliminate all of the duplication.

General Chamberlin said that he
could understand General Vandenberg's objections. He thought, therefore,
that General Vandenberg's suggestion for preparation of a staff paper
was best. It would then be possible to see what points could be agreed
on, and to put up a minority report on those points that are not agreed.
He said that he thought it was a responsibility of the J.I.C. to get
intelligence from the C.I.G. He hoped to see a solution. He thought that
the J.I.S. should work with the C.I.G. to get intelligence, provided
security of military information was not jeopardized.

General Vandenberg felt that this would lead to the same difficulty that
the J.I.C. is now encountering with the Joint War Plans Committee, in
not knowing what is wanted. He felt strongly that if C.I.G. was asked
for intelligence without being familiar with what was involved, it would
put out intelligence without giving it proper weight or considering the
ramifications or including all of the intelligence that might be
available.

General Chamberlin did not think
that C.I.G. should be taken into military planning.

General Vandenberg pointed out that Admiral Inglis' new proposal would provide a watertight military
compartment within C.I.G.

Admiral Inglis said that there
must be a watertight compartment somewhere. The question is just where
it should be established.

After further discussion,

The Intelligence Advisory Board:

Designated the following individuals as representatives to work with the
Interdepartmental Coordinating and Planning Staff of C.I.G. in drafting
proposed recommendations to the N.I.A. and the J.C.S. on the
relationship between C.I.G. and the J.C.S., including, if necessary, a
majority and minority report:

For Mr. Eddy:Mr. Merritt B. Booth

Mr. A. Sidney Buford

For General Chamberlin:Colonel E. J. Treacy, Jr.

Colonel L. L. Williams

Colonel J. K. Dickey

For Admiral Inglis:Captain R. K. Davis

Captain F. S. Habecker

For General McDonald:Colonel E. P. Mussett

Colonel L. C. Sherman

For Secretariat, J.I.C.:Captain R. U. Hyde

3. Assignment of Functions in the Field of Static
Intelligence to the Central Intelligence Group (C.I.G. 133 and C.I.G.
13/14 )

General Vandenberg said that ICAPS was
now trying to solve the basic issues in the subject papers. Therefore,
even if this specific study were cancelled as proposed in C.I.G. 13/1,
this would not mean that further action on the subject would not be
taken.

Admiral Inglis said that he was
willing to concur in C.I.G. 13/1, but that he wanted the record to show
that the Navy will go just as far as other participating departments in
collaborative efforts in this field.

General Chamberlin said that he
would like to state some principles which he felt should govern the
solution of this problem. First of all, he felt that each department
should be supreme in its field of primary responsibility. For example,
in its field of primary responsibility he did not think that the War
Department could assign its functions to another agency because the War
Department is charged by law with performing them. General Chamberlin thought, therefore, that the
first thing to do was to assign areas of primary responsibility to each
department. Then matters which are not in the field of these primary
responsibilities should be assigned to C.I.G. He thought that those
assignments should carry into the field of collection, but that they
should not draw a narrow corridor which would prevent any field
representative from getting useful information.

General Vandenberg said that he thought everyone agreed to these
principles, but he questioned whether they had been transmitted to the
agency representatives who were working with ICAPS.

General Chamberlin said that the
implementation of those principles should be carefully timed to cause a
minimum of interruption in the performance of necessary functions. He
expressed the belief that the War Department now had the best balanced
intelligence agency, and was fully engaged in the preparation of Strategic Intelligence Digests
(S.I.D.). He hoped to obtain permission to complete these S.I.D.'s as a
basis for assignment of responsibilities. Even after responsibilities
had been assigned, he felt that each department must have a unit which
is capable of presenting the whole picture to the officials of that
department. He therefore would like to see the War Department preserve a
strong Military Intelligence Service to fulfill the requirements of the
Chief of Staff. For example, the War Department was working on war
potential, which covers a very wide field. On this matter, the War
Department was getting advice from other departments, but nevertheless
was ultimately responsible for that field. He hoped that this statement
of fundamentals would indicate the reason why he was voting as he
had.

Admiral Inglis agreed that the
principles were fine, but required definition. For example, what is
military intelligence? He felt that while it was granted that the War
Department was responsible for military intelligence, it should also be
granted that the War Department must get intelligence elsewhere in order
to complete the picture. This meant looking to other departments over
which the War Department had no authority.

General Chamberlin said that he
was perfectly willing to trust the State Department, Navy Department,
and Air Forces for the intelligence in their fields of primary
responsibility.

Admiral Inglis thought, then, that
if it was granted that the War Department must obtain intelligence from
agencies other than those under its command, it then became a question
of which agency or agencies were best qualified and most efficient to
produce the intelligence required. That was the principle Admiral
Inglis had in mind in C.I.G.
13. He thought it would be possible to pool items of common interest in
C.I.G. Then each agency would make available all that it received in
those fields, and would draw off from C.I.G. what it needed. Admiral
Inglis noted that General
Eisenhower and Admiral Nimitz had directed General Craig and Admiral
Inglis to join M.I.D. and
O.N.I. in all possible fields. He said that an effort had been made to
accomplish this, but that nothing had happened. Now with C.I.G. formed,
he thought it might be possible to turn over some of these functions of
common interest to C.I.G.

General Chamberlin did not recall
having seen the directive to which Admiral Inglis referred, but said that he was nevertheless
willing to follow the principles which he had enunciated.

Mr. Eddy said that he was in
sympathy with the committee report, C.I.G. 13/1. He would like, however,
to see the responsibility and functions of the Joint Intelligence Study
Publishing Board transferred to C.I.G. He said that if that
recommendation were made, he would vote for it.

General Vandenberg expressed appreciation for Mr. Eddy's suggestion, but felt that it was
first necessary to settle the broader questions involved. If action was blocked after
such piecemeal steps had been taken, it would not help the over-all
intelligence picture.

General Samford thought that the guiding principle was that the functions
required by each agency staff must be performed in that staff.
Everything else he was willing to centralize.

General Chamberlin said that an
example was the question of war potential in Russia. He noted that the
War Department was now engaged in a comprehensive study of that subject,
and he wondered whether it was intended that this project should be
stopped.

Admiral Inglis thought that was an
excellent example, since it involved intelligence of interest to all
three departments. While G-2 was responsible for furnishing that data to
the Chief of Staff, Military Attaches and other War Department sources
were not adequate to get what was needed. The same thing is true in the
Navy and State Departments. No one agency is competent to get all that
information; each must rely on the other. Each now has a collecting
agency feeding in that type of material. Admiral Inglis said that his idea was that when
this information was received, instead of each agency having about a
hundred people picking the brains of other agencies, fifty from each
department could be transferred into C.I.G., where, with half the
people, they would receive all departmental source material and do a
better job.

General Chamberlin agreed that
this was all right in theory, but that it would cause delay. For
example, the War Department has already written hundreds of pages on all
countries, and he did not think that work should be interrupted.

Admiral Inglis said that his
example was something that could be worked up to. He did not think that
any project should be interrupted until it could be taken over
efficiently by C.I.G.

General Chamberlin agreed, and
said that he thought that 30 June 1947 would be a date on which his
projects could be turned over to some other agency.

Admiral Inglis recommended that
the procedure be worked out step by step and extend over a period of
time.

General Vandenberg felt that each agency, when it transferred a function
to C.I.G., should still have a feeling of responsibility and an interest
in seeing that the people who were working on the project were also
transferred, in order to ensure the best possible product.

Admiral Inglis said that 30 June
1947 was an agreeable date for turning over to C.I.G.

General Chamberlin said that he
would be willing to furnish surplus personnel available on that date. He
pointed out, however, that G-2 had already let out some 700 individuals
and was about down to its minimum requirements for military
intelligence. In fact, there were fields of military intelligence which G-2 is not now covering.
Therefore, when the S.I.D.'s are completed, G-2 would have to turn those
people to the performance of some other G-2 function.

Admiral Inglis felt that there
were two additional principles that should be recognized: First, each
agency, in fulfilling its responsibilities, must collaborate with other
agencies to complete the picture. Second, each agency has a
responsibility for the successful performance of C.I.G.

General Chamberlin said that he
felt a responsibility, as a member of the I.A.B., for the manner in
which C.I.G. grows. On the other hand, he felt that one responsibility
of C.I.G. was to build strong organizations in the departments to
fulfill their primary functions.

General Vandenberg agreed, but noted that C.I.G. has no control over that
matter at the present time.

After further discussion,

The Intelligence Advisory Board:

Approved the recommendation in the Enclosure to C.I.G. 13/1, with the
understanding that the basic issues involved are under continuing study
by ICAPS and agency
representatives.

* Source: Central Intelligence
Agency Historical Files, HS/HC-281. Top Secret; Limited
Distribution. The meeting was held at the New War Department
Building.

1 CIG 19 as amended became NIA Directive No. 8, February 12, 1947.
(National Archives and Records Administration, RG 218, Records of
the Joint Chiefs of Staff, Leahy Papers, No. 132) See the Supplement.

2 Dated
September 18. (Central Intelligence Agency Historical Files,
HS/HC-276) See the Supplement. For a summary of this long-running
issue during Vandenberg's tenure as Director of Central
Intelligence, see Darling, The Central
Intelligence Agency: An Instrument of Government, to 1950,
pp. 154-160.

3 Dated September 17. (Central Intelligence Agency
Historical Files, HS/HC-276) See the Supplement.

4 See footnote
7, Document 170.

177. Memorandum From the Commanding General of the Manhattan Engineer District, Department of War (Groves) to the Atomic Energy Commission177. Memorandum From the Commanding General of the Manhattan Engineer
District, Department of War (Groves) to
the Atomic Energy CommissionSource

Washington, November 21,
1946.

SUBJECT

Foreign Intelligence Set-up

1. In accordance with General Marshall's instructions, I established a
special organization to collect information on the capabilities of enemy
powers to use atomic energy for military purposes. The reason for these
instructions, I believe, was a feeling that existing intelligence
agencies had proven themselves unable to function satisfactorily. At first, personnel from other
existing sections of my office were used part time on this foreign
intelligence work; in 1944-45 some special overseas operations were
fostered, field commanders and staffs were briefed and selected officers
were assigned to duty with overseas theaters. By 1945 a full time
Foreign Intelligence Section was required; late that year the Section
was organized in substantially its present form.

2. It is vital to the security of the United States that foreign
intelligence in the field of atomic energy be maintained and
strengthened. The Central Intelligence Group which was organized in 1946
is the operating agency of the National Intelligence Authority and is
now responsible for the coordination and direction of all foreign
intelligence activities of the government. The CIG must be able to evaluate the capabilities of other
nations to use atomic energy in the military field, and the best nucleus
upon which to build the organization is unquestionably this Foreign
Intelligence Section.

3. To continue the functions of the Foreign Intelligence Section in any
other way except under the control of CIG would be very difficult. This Section has never had
complete facilities or personnel to do its own collection; it has
assembled intelligence material collected by other agencies, and
correlated data from the Manhattan District. Its primary purpose is to
secure a maximum of information and to interpret that information as to
what is going on in the atomic energy field in foreign nations, with
particular emphasis on the rate of progress of other nations in catching
up with the United States' position and on determining estimates of
resources of uranium where such information cannot be accurately
obtained through the normal channels of Manhattan District. As a
dissemination agency this Section has been prepared to act only as it
was deemed necessary to supply information to other agencies. In the
event it should find any indication of a foreign nation being in advance
of us technically, it would of course promptly convey such information
to those portions of the Manhattan Project to whom it would be of
interest. Overseas its mission has been limited to liaison with Military
Attaches, with Headquarters, United States Forces, European Theater
(USFET) and with British
Intelligence. Through the Intelligence link, and only through that link,
can the very productive cooperation with British Intelligence continue.
I have long thought that the C.I.G. has the best resources for this
intelligence collection and dissemination and for procuring and
retaining personnel capable of serving the Atomic Energy Program in the
future. It would be a mistake to use the present limited Manhattan
resources based upon informal liaison with the State, War and Navy
Departments or any organization set up with the A.E.C. This is
especially true since the C.I.G. already controls the Strategic Services
Unit and is assured of cooperation with British Intelligence.

4. The experience of my Foreign Intelligence Section and the mission and
operation of the C.I.G. logically place them together, but future
cooperation between C.I.G. and the A.E.C. will be absolutely necessary
in the best interests of the country. The specialized Foreign
Intelligence Section would be the best instrument to provide this
coordinated effort. Continued access to the Commission sites and
discussions between individuals already recognized on the working level
are important in order to avoid an inordinate number of middle men and
inefficient delays. Security demands that the liaison have the
appropriate authority and control.

5. I feel that:

a. The Foreign Intelligence Section should be an integral part of the
C.I.G.

b. The Foreign Intelligence Section should be the routine channel of
liaison between the C.I.G. and the A.E.C.

c. The C.I.G. should collect and furnish all available information with
respect to ore deposits and discoveries, mining activities, scientific
development or other subjects from foreign countries needed in the work
of the A.E.C. as desired by that latter body.

d. Representatives of the Foreign Intelligence Section in the C.I.G.
should be permitted to visit sites in the United States, to consult with
individuals and to receive technical papers of the A.E.C. as may be
arranged.

L. R. Groves1
Major General, U.S.A.

* Source: Central Intelligence Agency
Historical Files, HS/HC-208. Secret. The source text is a copy
transcribed for the CIA Historical Staff on January 14, 1954.

1 Printed from a copy
that bears this typed signature.

178. Minutes of the 11th Meeting of the Intelligence Advisory Board178. Minutes of the 11th Meeting of the Intelligence Advisory
BoardSource

Washington, November 26, 1946, 10 a.m.

PARTICIPANTS

Lt. General Hoyt S.
Vandenberg, Director of Central Intelligence, in the
Chair

Members Present

Mr. William A. Eddy,
Special Assistant to the Secretary of State for Research and
Intelligence

Maj. General Stephen J.
Chamberlin, Director of Intelligence, W.D.G.S.

Rear Admiral Thomas B.
Inglis, Chief of Naval Intelligence

Brig. General George C.
McDonald, Assistant Chief of Air Staff-2

Also Present

Brig. General John A. Samford, Deputy Assistant Chief of Air
Staff-2

Mr. A. Sidney Buford, Department of State

Mr. George R. Fearing, Department of State

Colonel E. J. Treacy, U.S.A.

Captain R. K. Davis, U.S.N.

Colonel E. P. Mussett, U.S.A.

Mr. Donald Edgar, Central
Intelligence Group

Secretariat

Mr. James S. Lay, Jr.,
Secretary, N.I.A.

Mr. J. S. Earman, Assistant
Secretary, N.I.A.

1. Coordination of Collection Activities (C.I.G.
18/2)1

General Vandenberg gave a brief description of the contents of C.I.G.
18/2. He also stated that at this time he would like to make it a matter
of record in the minutes that certain collection activities assigned to
the Central Intelligence Group, namely, those covered by Special
Operations, F.B.I.S. and information gained from business concerns and
individuals who have traveled abroad, would not be governed by this
paper.

General Chamberlin stated that
this was the finest piece of work turned out so far and that as
suggested by General Vandenberg we should get away from detail. General Chamberlin felt, however, that the
paper should assign fields of primary responsibility for all activities,
rather than being confined only to coordination of collection. He
believed that the general assignment of responsibilities contained in
paragraph 2 a of the proposed C.I.G. Directive should be taken out and
made into a N.I.A. Directive.

Mr. Lay explained that the
preparation of a S.I.D. on the U.S.S.R. is in fact now an inter-agency
operation under C.I.G. coordination.

General Chamberlin suggested that
the word “area” in paragraph 1 b of the proposed N.I.A. Directive be
changed to “country.”

Mr. Edgar explained that the word
“area” was used since it was not at all impossible that certain
countries by name would not be covered, hence the responsibility for
coverage would necessarily have to be given to the coordinator covering
that area in which such countries might be located.

General Chamberlin said that we
must realize that Ambassadors are political officers sent out without
intelligence training. He therefore felt that we should define certain
broad principles by which the Ambassadors should be guided.

Admiral Inglis stated that this
was a fine paper. He said, however, that he had not had time enough to
study the paper as thoroughly as he wished, but would agree to it in its
broad principles.

General Vandenberg then asked Admiral Inglis if it could be approved for use as a guide.

Admiral Inglis answered that he
would like to request another week to study this paper and suggested
that an ad hoc committee be appointed to consider the paper further, in
view of the fact that he had some changes to recommend.

General Vandenberg stated that he felt that there should be no further
delay and that those parts of the paper that were highly controversial
could be taken out and resubmitted at a later date for further
consideration.

Mr. Eddy agreed with General
Vandenberg's suggestion and stated that he was in agreement that an ad
hoc committee be appointed. He further stated that ICAPS had prepared a very fine paper. Mr.
Eddy said that the collection
of intelligence in the field presented a separate problem from that of
the over-all policies governing coordination of intelligence activities.
Mr. Eddy went on to say that the
intelligence scene in Washington differed from that in the field in view
of possible reduction in one Department and increases in others.

General Chamberlin stated that he
believed the assignment of basic responsibilities should be the same for
Washington as the field.

Mr. Eddy stated that he did not
quite agree with this and that he felt that there should be an over-all
policies and objectives directive and a separate collection directive
for the field.

Admiral Inglis stated that he
believed that there should first be an N.I.A. Directive on collection
policies.

Mr. Eddy suggested that General
Chamberlin's over-all written
suggestions,2 which
were previously passed to the I.A.B. members, be turned over to ICAPS for consideration and that we go
ahead on the collection direction.

General Chamberlin stated that he
felt that the broad principles of the paper should cover all
contingencies.

Mr. Eddy stated that he felt that
the collection directive should be separate.

General Chamberlin stated that he
felt that the first place to tackle this problem was on the evaluation
level here in Washington rather than in the field.

Mr. Eddy stated that he believed
that collection in the field could be covered separately, particularly
since there may be changes in Washington which in a great many instances
would not affect the collection activities in the field.

Admiral Inglis suggested that the
collection problem be considered now and the over-all problem be
considered at a later date.

General Chamberlin stated that he
was ready to vote on both problems, taking into consideration his
suggestions.

Admiral Inglis stated that he
could not go along with General Chamberlin's suggestion since he felt that Navy had not
had enough time to study the problem. He suggested that an ad hoc
committee be appointed to work on C.I.G. 18/2 and that ICAPS undertake another study on the
ultimate responsibilities of the production of intelligence.

General Chamberlin agreed to go
along on getting out the collection directive if agreement could not be
reached on the whole problem.

Mr. Edgar stated that he hoped that
S.I.D. would not be turned over all at once, in order to give C.I.G. a
chance to build up a staff, since he did not feel it would be right to
begin recruiting a staff at the present time, and have them sit around
until June with nothing to do.

General Chamberlin stated that as
they completed a chapter it would be turned over to C.I.G.

After further discussion,

The Intelligence Advisory Board:

a. Agreed to have ICAPS reconsider
C.I.G. 18/2 in the light of General Chamberlin's written suggestions and the general
discussion in the meeting.3

b. Agreed that ICAPS prepare a
companion document covering the coordination of the production and
dissemination of intelligence.4

c. Agreed that an I.A.B. ad hoc committee composed of Colonel Fearing,
Colonel Ennis, General Samford and Captain Davis will review the
revision of C.I.G. 18/2 and subsequently the directive which will be
prepared by ICAPS for the coordination
of the production and dissemination of intelligence.

d. Agreed that the revision of C.I.G. 18/2 be submitted to the I.A.B. and
that the directive for the coordination of the production and
dissemination of intelligence be submitted when prepared to the
I.A.B.

2. Production of Political-Psychological Study on
U.S.S.R. (C.I.G. 20)5

General Vandenberg briefly explained the recommendations contained in
this paper. He stated that there appeared to be two courses of action
open:

a. A specialist or specialists in this particular field could be
contracted to prepare such a study which would be disseminated as
intelligence information, the contents of which would be the views of
the individuals preparing the study, only.

b. A specialist or specialists in this particular field could be
contracted to prepare such a study under C.I.G. (ORE) guidance. An ORE
evaluation would be placed on the study prior to dissemination.

He further stated that C.I.G. preferred course a.

Admiral Inglis stated that he did
not quite understand what was meant.

General Vandenberg explained that the study would be prepared and
presented to the interested agencies over the signature of the person
preparing the study and that there would be no evaluation whatsoever by
C.I.G. The study in short would be presented for “what it was worth.” He
also stated that this study then could be used as a basis on which the
agencies could expand their own thoughts on what was presented.

Mr. Eddy thought it might be
better to have a group work on this study.

Admiral Inglis stated that at the
present time he felt that there were only a limited number of people who
could prepare such a study, and furthermore that such a study, if
prepared by Dr. Ladislas Farago, would be what he thought and not a
result of his being given access to the files of the agencies. He
particularly pointed out that Dr. Farago was a Hungarian by birth and
great care should be exercised relative to the classified material given
to him in the event he was selected to make a study.

General Vandenberg felt that for the timely completion of the study it
would be better to have one person prepare it.

Mr. Eddy suggested that possibly
one man could be found to go along with whoever might be selected to
make the study.

General Vandenberg agreed and asked Mr. Eddy if he could find some one.

The Intelligence Advisory Board:

a. Approved the recommendations in C.I.G. 20 pending the securing of a
person and possibly an assistant to conduct this study.

3. Exploitation of Enemy Document Repositories
(C.I.G. 21)6

General Vandenberg briefly outlined the recommendations contained in
C.I.G. 21 and stated that in view of the fact that the priority on such
a plan is questionable and that C.I.G. is not prepared to undertake this
program it be held in abeyance until the document situation is
sufficiently clarified for constructive C.I.G. recommendations.

Admiral Inglis stated that this
was just the reason why he had made the recommendations contained in
this paper at the present time since he was afraid that the documents
might soon be lost.

General Vandenberg replied that C.I.G. is at the present time awaiting a
reply from the Navy relative to the transfer of the Washington Document
Center to C.I.G.

Admiral Inglis stated that he
thought that this reply had been made and that he would take action to
see why C.I.G. had not received an answer from the Navy.

General McDonald stated that
there were a lot of documents still in Berlin and that he believed that
microfilms of the documents were presently in this country.

General Chamberlin stated that he
felt that quite a few of these documents in Berlin were still there in
view of the War Crimes Trials.

Admiral Inglis stated that there
are literally, not carloads nor tons, but shiploads of captured enemy
documents.

General Chamberlin stated that he
was well aware of this fact and that in view of his personnel situation
he could only contribute a limited amount of help.

General Vandenberg suggested that a committee be appointed to look into
all the problems involving the present document situation.

General McDonald stated that a
representative of the Library of Congress had looked through some of the
captured documents in the possession of the Air Forces.

General Vandenberg suggested that it might be well to appoint an
inter-agency group to look over the problems arising from this
paper.

General McDonald felt that it was
dangerous to delay too long in considering the document question.

General Vandenberg asked Admiral Inglis whether he felt we should wait or appoint a
committee to consider the problems which had arisen from this
discussion.

Admiral Inglis stated that he felt
that we should appoint a committee and go ahead.

General Vandenberg questioned whether it would be well to have a
representative of the Library of Congress as a member of this
committee.

Admiral Inglis stated we should be
very careful about the person selected from the Library of Congress and
that we should make certain that the selectee was secure.

General Vandenberg stated that C.I.G. would select an individual from the
Library of Congress who would be agreeable to all agencies and that we
should make certain that he had been cleared before being put to
work.

The Intelligence Advisory Board:

a. Agreed to appoint a committee consisting of Mr. Kilgour, State
Department, Colonel St. Clair, G-2, Colonel Robert Taylor, A-2, Captain
Murphy, Navy, and a representative from the Library of Congress to
consider the document situation.

b. Agreed to let C.I.G. 21 go over until a report had been received from
the above-appointed committee.7

* Source: Central Intelligence
Agency Historical Files, HS/HC-281. Secret. No drafting information
appears on the source text. The meeting was held at the New War
Department Building.

1 CIG 18/2, November 21, was a report
of CIG's Interdepartmental
Coordinating and Planning Staff, submitted for IAB approval, which delineated
responsibilities for the collection of foreign intelligence
information. It allocated collection of political, cultural,
sociological, economic, and “international” information to the
Department of State; military information to the War Department;
naval information to the Navy Department; and scientific information
to “each agency in accordance with its respective interests.”
(Ibid., HS/HC-276) See the Supplement. The subject had been put on
the IAB agenda at the request of the
Department of State, which had proposed a “basic delineation of
responsibilities” in the collection field. See CIG 18, October 25, and the enclosed
October 18 memorandum from Eddy to Vandenberg in the Supplement. (Central
Intelligence Agency Historical Files, HS/HC-276)

2 Not found.

3 See Documents 179 and 181.

4 See Document 318 and footnote references
thereto.

5 CIG 20, November 21, was a proposal
by the Chief of Naval Intelligence for a “comprehensive
political-psychological study” on the USSR. (Central Intelligence
Agency Historical Files, HS/HC-276) See the Supplement.

6 In CIG 21, November 21, the Chief of Naval Intelligence
recommended that CIG “arrange for
and coordinate the search of all repositories of captured enemy
documents for the purpose of extracting, cataloging and abstracting
all documents relating to political-social-psychological warfare.”
(Central Intelligence Agency Historical Files, HS/HC-276) See the
Supplement.

7 The
Committee's report is in CIG 21/1,
April 10, 1947. (Central Intelligence Agency Historical Files,
HS/HC-276) See the Supplement.

179. Minutes of the 12th Meeting of the Intelligence Advisory Board179. Minutes of the 12th Meeting of the Intelligence Advisory
BoardSource

Washington, December 17, 1946, 2:30 p.m.

PARTICIPANTS

Lt. General Hoyt S.
Vandenberg, Director of Central Intelligence, in the
Chair

Members Present

Mr. William A. Eddy,
Special Assistant to the Secretary of State for Research and
Intelligence

Maj. General Stephen J.
Chamberlin, Director of Intelligence, WDGS

Rear Admiral Thomas B.
Inglis, Chief of Naval Intelligence

Brig. General John A. Samford, Deputy Assistant Chief of Air
Staff-2

Also Present

Mr. A. Sidney Buford, Department of State

Colonel E. J. Treacy, U.S.A.

Captain R. K. Davis, U.S.N.

Colonel James E. Briggs, Central Intelligence Group

Colonel Wm. M. Adams, Central Intelligence Group

Secretariat

Mr. J. S. Earman, Acting
Secretary, N.I.A.

1. Coordination of Collection Activities1 (C.I.G. 18/3)

General Vandenberg stated that he understood that there was some
confusion as to why C.I.G. 18/3, as circulated, only includes the texts
of the proposed N.I.A. Directive and omits the proposed text of the
C.I.G. Directive. He stated that C.I.G. 18/2, as circulated on November
21,2 included both a proposed N.I.A.
Directive and a proposed C.I.G. Directive, but the transmitting letter
carefully specified that I.A.B. approval was requested only for the
N.I.A. Directive. Therefore, in consideration of the State Department's
urgent request for early consideration of the N.I.A. Directive, it was
circulated in C.I.G. 18/3 with the amendments proposed by the I.A.B. ad
hoc committee.3 He said that at the same time the
completed draft of the C.I.G. Directive was circulated to the ad hoc
committee members since there had not been time to present this cleaned
up text to them; however, the ad hoc committee had approved this text in
pencil form at its last meeting. General Vandenberg pointed out that
C.I.G. 18/2 has only minor changes from C.I.G. 18/2 in the N.I.A.
Directive section and that at the last I.A.B. meeting general approval
of the N.I.A. Directive had
been given and no specific requests for changes therein had been made.
He said that he believed that the I.A.B. would be able to approve
without extensive discussion the text as presented in C.I.G. 18/3,
particularly since his proposals for implementation, as contained in the
ad hoc committee's final draft, include all suggestions made by the
agencies' ad hoc representatives and were concurred in by them at their
final meeting. General Vandenberg recommended that in paragraph 1 c of
the proposed N.I.A. Directive the words “unproductive duplication and
uncoordinated overlap shall be discontinued so …” be allowed to
remain.

Mr. Eddy stated that he would like
to recommend that paragraphs 2 a and c of the proposed C.I.G.
implementing Directive should be included in the proposed N.I.A.
Directive since paragraph 2 a included allocations by subject and
paragraph 2 c reserved the right of every agency to repeat even on
secondary interest to its own agency anything it desired.

General Vandenberg then asked how A-2 and O.N.I. felt about the State
Department's recommendation as indicated above.

General Chamberlin stated that
after some discussion in the Intelligence Division, WDGS, they were not sure whether the
meaning of paragraph 2 c of the proposed C.I.G. Directive was
understood. He went on to state that all G-2 reports were submitted on duplicating pads and
questioned whether or not G-2's
representatives in the field should merely pass over to the proper
agency at the post or the Embassy whatever information they might
have.

Mr. Eddy then stated that this was
his understanding.

General Chamberlin stated that he
would object to any interpretation to indicate that, for example, the
State Department's representative report directly to him or his
representative (General Chamberlin's) report directly to the State
Department.

Mr. Eddy then stated that those
reports would be passed on to the representatives in the field and a
copy sent to the State Department.

General Chamberlin then said that
he would like to indicate that all the information passed in from the
field, except radiographic forms, from the MA's come on a duplicating
pad and not as copies.

General Vandenberg then stated that there was no intention to have any
such interpretation as indicated by General Chamberlin.

General Chamberlin stated that he
had no desire to make any change in the paragraph but that he wanted to
be sure that somebody would not object to the Intelligence Division
following its usual procedures of sending the duplicating pad to the
Intelligence Division in Washington since the information contained
therein was given immediately to the agency concerned.

Mr. Eddy then stated that in this
paragraph they wanted the men in the field who came across intelligence
not of primary interest to them, but of secondary interest, to pass that
information to the field representative of the agency primarily
concerned. Nothing, however, should prevent a representative from
reporting to his own department chief for staff purposes.

General Vandenberg then stated that what Mr. Eddy had just said was the principle that was being
enunciated in the directives and he would be the first to protest if the
agencies were to stop sending information that was not of primary
interest to them to C.I.G.

Admiral Inglis then stated that to
clarify this paragraph we should be rather careful of the wording.

General Chamberlin then stated
that he had this comment to make after reading these directives—The
C.I.G. and N.I.A. Directives uniformly violate the basic principle that
in assigning a task, the task should be described in sufficiently clear
language for an agency to understand. The agency should be permitted to
instruct its subordinates in its own language and that he did not
propose to send a C.I.G. Directive to his own people.

General Vandenberg then stated that the implementation of C.I.G.
Directives by the agencies concerned was “their own business.”

Admiral Inglis then suggested the
following change in the language of the paragraph in question: “That we
delete the word ‘directly’ in the second line of sub-paragraph c and
insert in the third line before the word ‘representative’ the word
‘field’ and then in the last line instead of ‘copies’ insert
‘information to.’ It would then read: 'Intelligence information and
material, regardless of the collector, shall wherever possible be
transmitted to the agency most concerned through the field
representative of that agency. However, the collector may also send
information to his own agency.”

Mr. Eddy stated that he did not
believe that he could approve the rewording of paragraph 2 c as
indicated by Admiral Inglis.

General Chamberlin then stated
that the Intelligence Division distributed to no one outside of the War
Department unless a request was received through the Reading Panel and
that no automatic distribution was made to the State Department's
representative on the Reading Panel unless he (State Department's
representative) requested it.

Mr. Eddy then stated that he
thought the purpose was to get information to the agency primarily
concerned and most interested.

General Chamberlin then stated
“providing the agency is interested.”

Mr. Eddy then went on to state
that he would not expect reports on military and naval matters to appear
in the State Department's Reading Panel which had been collected by a Vice-Consul where
there was no military or naval representative present. Mr. Eddy further stated that he concurred
in that a report prepared by military or naval personnel should have
dissemination made in Washington; however, that political intelligence
should be screened by the State Department, and military and air
intelligence, for example, should be passed to the man in the field who
represented that service. When such reports come to the Department's
Reading Panel concerned that Department can then send these reports
wherever they may deem necessary. The reporting officer's obligation is
then the same as formerly—“He sends a copy of his information to his own
agency.”

General Samford then asked whether the use of the word “copy” meant it
was identified by being outside the agency's primary field.

Mr. Eddy stated that before, when
the State Department had an opportunity to get naval information, the
Vice-Consul would send that information to the Naval Attache, since he
(the Vice-Consul) couldn't interpret it and there would be confusion if
they were to send it to the State Department.

Admiral Inglis stated that that
was the very reason why he had recommended the re-wording of paragraph 2
c in order to avoid describing how a copy of a report was to be sent to
G-2 or O.N.I.

Mr. Eddy stated that in Washington
it is recognized as a report that is to be produced or distributed and
be available in the department of primary interest.

Admiral Inglis then stated that he
supposed that this fact would be written across the face of the report;
that it was a naval subject, and that the Military Attaché, for example,
had picked it up and given the information to the Naval Attaché. Admiral
Inglis went on to state that
the Military Attaché could, for example, write across the face of the
report “I have given this information to the Naval Attaché.”

General Chamberlin stated that he
did not want to change his system since his people were accustomed to
put in reports on duplicating pads and as these reports came in they
were placed on a mimeograph machine and the number of copies indicated
by the Reading Panel were run off. Thus copies are available for State,
Navy, A-2 and C.I.G.

Mr. Eddy then stated that he
foresaw difficulties in the future if the State Department, for example,
disseminated widely and also had Reading Panels and disseminated reports
from military and naval observers, and some dissemination was made the
other way around. Mr. Eddy went
on to state that he felt that distribution of reports should be made by
the Department having primary interest.

General Chamberlin then stated
that there could be very easily inserted a statement in the report which
would indicate to whom the report had been submitted.

Mr. Eddy suggested that paragraph
2 c could possibly read “… field representatives of the agency most
concerned. However, the collector may send copies to his own
agency.”

General Chamberlin stated that he
did not object to that wording. However, he wanted to be sure that
everyone knew of the kind of copy used by the Intelligence Division,
namely, a repeating pad. He went on to state that the Intelligence
Division made distribution within its own agency and that they could
attempt to keep from distributing to other agencies unless such
agencies' representatives on the Reading Panel insisted on having the
information.

Mr. Eddy questioned whether or not
there were “other people” on the Reading Panel.

General Chamberlin stated that the
only agencies outside of the War Department having representatives on
the Intelligence Division Reading Panel were the State and Navy
Departments, and occasionally C.I.G.

Mr. Eddy then suggested that
paragraph 2 c of the proposed C.I.G. Directive read: “Intelligence
information material regardless of the collector shall wherever possible
be transmitted immediately to the field representative of the agency
most concerned. However, the collector may send copies to his own
agency.”

Mr. Eddy then distributed a
proposed change in the wording of the first page of the proposed N.I.A.
Directive. Mr. Eddy, after some
discussion of this proposal, stated that political and economic
intelligence had been bracketed in the State Department for a number of
years. Furthermore, modern economics are no more political, as related
to political, that we used to study in school. It now pertains to
industrial establishments, in addition to protection for most of our
American trade. The State Department is quite prepared to have economic
intelligence not allocated, but recognized as a vital interest.

General Chamberlin stated that
this was difficult for him to go along with and that he could say
frankly that he thought it was splitting a field that should never be
split. He went on to say that the field of intelligence covered not only
collection but also production of intelligence, and it was his feeling
and had been all along that the Intelligence Advisory Board should get
down to the fundamental principles and solve the overall
responsibilities for those departments for the whole intelligence field,
as suggested at the last meeting of the Intelligence Advisory Board.
General Chamberlin then said that
apparently the Intelligence Advisory Board was not in complete agreement
along these lines so he was willing to go along with this splitting of
the collection field, before the Intelligence Advisory Board tackled the fundamental
principles since he thought that this, perhaps, was a forward step.

General Vandenberg said that he agreed with the ultimate objective as
stated by General Chamberlin and
that this was a forward step. He went on to say that the Intelligence
Advisory Board was going to have to cooperate and bite this problem off
piece by piece. General Vandenberg further said that there are many
things that the Intelligence Advisory Board can not now agree upon.
However, there were some things on which there could be agreement by one
or two of the members giving room.

General Samford stated that he thought it would be better to keep the
allocation by subject, which was a step forward, in the proposed C.I.G.
Directive, instead of placing it in the proposed N.I.A. Directive.

General Vandenberg said that he agreed with General Samford's statement,
but if, as we go along, we find that we need something else done,
amendments could be made. Further, that he would rather make amendments
than make the original directives too broad.

Mr. Eddy stated that he wished to
propose that paragraph 1 b of the proposed N.I.A. Directive be changed
to read as follows: “The American Ambassador or Minister, or the ranking
U.S. Foreign Service Officer of each Diplomatic Mission or Foreign
Service Post shall be responsible for insuring proper implementation of
a coordinated collection program in that area. In areas where a U.S.
Commander has the predominant responsibility, he is the Senior U.S.
Representative responsible for insuring proper implementation of a
coordinated collection program in that area.”

Captain Davis then stated that the Navy had a comment to make. The 7th
Fleet, for instance, operates outside the governing principles of this
entirely. That thought was interchecked in C.I.G. 18/2 and was in line
as recommended. He asked if something similar to the following could not
be put back—“Where foreign service establishments and a senior U.S.
military commander both have jurisdiction in an area, each will be
responsible for the activities of the personnel under his administrative
control.”

General Vandenberg then stated that this could be accomplished by the
agencies' writing their people their understanding of this Directive in
the areas in question. He suggested that instructions by the home
offices of the agencies be coordinated with ICAPS and the representatives of the agencies in order that
the instructions be written in unison. General Vandenberg went on to say
that this coordination could well be centered in ICAPS since that was where the agencies
and C.I.G. come together.

Mr. Eddy suggested that there
would be another sentence added to paragraph 1 b of the proposed N.I.A.
Directive to read as follows: “This does not apply to the intelligence personnel directed
by the Joint Chiefs of Staff or Theatre Commanders.”

General Chamberlin stated that he
was somewhat confused about the words “Senior U.S. representative” and
said that he was perfectly agreeable to using the words “Senior
Diplomatic representative.”

General Vandenberg then suggested that paragraph 1 b of the proposed
N.I.A. Directive read as follows: “The senior U.S. representative in
each foreign area where the United States maintains a foreign service
mission shall be responsible for the coordination of all collection
activities within his area, and for the proper implementation of the
requirements and responsibilities of the respective agencies.”

Mr. Eddy stated that “If you don't
care about any recognition in the occupied areas, I don't differ from
that.”

General Vandenberg stated that it was up to the agencies to send out the
proper instructions. However, he recommended that in any border line
cases that the Intelligence Advisory Board get together on such cases
before the instructions were sent to the field.

Mr. Eddy then stated that this
recommendation was all right with the State Department.

Captain Davis stated that the Navy would like to have it in the minutes
that this would not specifically apply to the operating forces.

General Chamberlin suggested that
paragraph 1 b of the proposed N.I.A. Directive be changed to read as
follows: “For the coordination of all collection activities in his area
within the spirit of the principles enunciated herein.” He further
stated that he believed that it was a mistake to charge the Ambassadors
with the implementation of someone else's directive and authorize them
in the line of command of that particular department since the
Ambassadors were charged with coordination.

Mr. Eddy said that he felt that
General Chamberlin's restriction
should be in the heading and not in any one sub-paragraph since it
applies only to the limits of this Directive within the limits of
principle.

General Chamberlin stated that he
would hesitate to give the Ambassadors authority to do anything they
might desire. He further stated that his statement above was binding on
them (the Ambassadors) since the Ambassadors should coordinate
collection of intelligence in accordance with the agreement reached by
the Intelligence Advisory Board.

General Vandenberg repeated his suggestion that paragraph 1 b of the
proposed N.I.A. Directive read as previously indicated.

General Chamberlin then stated
that he wanted it very definitely understood that his agreement with
this paragraph confines the responsibility of the implementation of the
coordination measures, not the implementation of the intelligence
collection.

General Vandenberg stated that he thought that General Chamberlin's understanding had to be
accepted since he (General Chamberlin) had certain responsibilities as does the
Chief of Naval Intelligence.

General Chamberlin then suggested
another change that he had in mind which might help to clarify paragraph
1 f of the proposed N.I.A. Directive, which change reads as follows:
“After the words ‘transmission to’ insert ‘respective home offices in
Washington.’ Paragraph 1 f would then read: ‘… abroad are individually
responsible for the collection and for the appropriate transmission to
their respective home offices in Washington …’”

General Chamberlin further stated
that the above change was suggested since he wanted to be sure that
Military Attaches would not transmit information direct to the State and
Navy Departments here in Washington.

General Vandenberg stated that he did not feel that this change was
necessary since the Intelligence Division's instructions to its MA's
could prevent any such action.

General Chamberlin stated that the
reason he made this point was because it might violate another Directive
which was on its way for consideration.

Mr. Eddy noted that if General
Chamberlin's suggested change
above was adopted, it would prevent certain coordination in the
field.

After further discussion it was decided to leave paragraph 1 f of the
proposed N.I.A. Directive as originally written.

General Chamberlin asked if he was
correct in judging that this was authority given by the National
Intelligence Authority to the Ambassadors, not the State Department, as
the senior representative.

Mr. Eddy stated that he thought
that it was broader than that and that it was a matter of the
President's representative abroad.

General Chamberlin then stated
that he just wanted to be sure that it was authority given to the
Ambassadors in view of their position.

Mr. Eddy went on to state that the
Ambassador's Charge d'Affaires represented him just as a Deputy
Commander and that the Charge d'Af-faires had all the Ambassador's
authority in his absence.

Captain Davis then stated that he wanted to indicate in the minutes that
as far as the Army and Navy are concerned that the allocations contained
in the proposed N.I.A. Directive were a little broad and that he would
like to bring forth allocations made in the joint letter between the
Army and Navy in August, 1945.4 Captain Davis asked whether or not these allocations
would still in fact be in effect.

General Vandenberg stated that the allocations had purposely been left
broad.

General Chamberlin stated that he
thought that the agreement mentioned by Captain Davis would still
stand.

General Vandenberg stated that he could not say that this agreement was
still in effect and that it was between the Army and Navy. General
Vandenberg commented—“I can not agree or disagree.”

The Intelligence Advisory Board adjourned without approving C.I.G.
18/3.

Note:

Subsequently, the Intelligence Advisory Board, by voting slip, approved
C.I.G. 18/3, (which has been published as N.I.A. Directive No. 7)5 with the following
changes:

Paragraph 2 c of the proposed C.I.G. Directive to read “Intelligence
information and material regardless of the collector shall, wherever
possible, be transmitted immediately to the field representative of the
agency most concerned. However, the collector may also send copies to
his own agency.” inserted as paragraph 1 b of N.I.A. Directive No.
7.

Insertion of sub-paragraphs 2 a and c, as amended, of the proposed C.I.G.
Directive into N.I.A. Directive No. 7, as paragraph 1 a and b,
respectively.

Paragraph 1 b of the proposed N.I.A. Directive to read as follows: “The
Senior U.S. representative in each foreign area where the United States
maintains a foreign service post shall be responsible for the
coordination of all collection activities in his area and the proper
implementation of that coordination within the spirit of the principles
enunciated herein.” inserted in N.I.A. Directive No. 7 as paragraph 1
c.

Paragraph 1 c of the proposed N.I.A. Directive was amended as follows:
“In order to avoid unproductive duplication and uncoordinated overlap
all collection facilities will be utilized to their maximum within
budgetary limitations for the production of that full flow of
intelligence material which is the major need of all departments.” and
inserted in N.I.A. Directive No. 7 as paragraph 1 d.

* Source: Central Intelligence
Agency Historical Files, HS/HC-281. Confidential. The meeting was
held at the New War Department Building.

1 Not found.

2 See footnote
1, Document 178.

3 Appointed by the Board at its
meeting on November 26.

4 Not
found.

5 Issued January 2, 1947, as NIA Directive No. 7, Document 181. The IAB sometimes used the “voting slip” procedure—in
effect, a “mail ballot—” to decide questions, especially those
already discussed extensively at meetings of the Board. Before the
procedure was used in this instance, however, there appears to have
been another meeting of the IAB on
December 20, see Document 180 and the
minutes of the ninth meeting of the Advisory Committee on
Intelligence in the Supplement. (National Archives and Records
Administration, RG 353, Records of Interdepartmental and
Intradepartmental Committees—State Department, Lot File No. 122,
Records of the Secretary's Staff Committee 1944-47, Box 94) No
minutes of the December 20 meeting have been found, however, and the
numbered sequence of IAB meetings
does not reflect a session on that date. The CIG implementing document was issued as CIG Directive No. 18, Document 183.

180. Memorandum From the Chairman (Eddy) to the Members of the Advisory Committee on Intelligence180. Memorandum From the Chairman (Eddy) to the Members of the
Advisory Committee on IntelligenceSource

Washington, December 24,
1946.

I enclose a copy of the National Intelligence Authority Directive
“Coordination of Collection Activities” as agreed by the Intelligence
Advisory Board at its meeting with the Directive of Central Intelligence
December 20, 1946.1

So far as the text is concerned, it is identical with the draft submitted
to the ACI2 at the special meeting
December 20, 1946, with the following exceptions:

(1) Paragraph 1b now reads “shall wherever possible be transmitted
immediately to the field representative” instead of the former phrase
“shall wherever possible be transmitted directly to the agency most
concerned.” This change makes it clearer that the intelligence is to be
handed over in the field, and eliminates the ambiguity of the earlier
reading which might have been construed to mean that a Military Attaché,
for example, should send a political report to the Department of State,
or that a Vice Consul should send a piece of military intelligence
directly to the War Department.

(2) Paragraph 1c has been entirely rewritten. In the draft submitted to
the special ACI meeting it will be
recalled that this paragraph read as follows: “The American Ambassador
or Minister, or the ranking U.S. Foreign Service Officer, of each
Diplomatic Mission or Foreign Service Post shall be responsible for
insuring proper implementation of a coordinated collection program in
that area. In areas where a U.S. Commander has the predominant
responsibility, he is the Senior U.S. Representative responsible for
insuring proper implementation of a coordinated collection program in
that area.” The effort to define the Senior U.S. Represent-ative abroad
as being always either the Senior Foreign Service Officer or a U.S.
Commander of an Occupied Area was objected to by the intelligence
agencies of the armed forces as not covering the ground. They pointed
out that it would leave undefined the responsibilities of the
intelligence personnel of the 7th Fleet or of other military and naval
areas which overlap at points with the territory of foreign service
missions. I pointed out that we were not concerned with such
intelligence personnel who, of course, performed their duties to the
Fleet or Theater Commander, but
were only concerned with coordination of intelligence in areas where
there is a foreign service post. It was agreed, therefore, to restrict
the NIA Directive to areas where the
United States maintains a foreign service post, whether Embassy,
Legation, Consulate General, Consulate or Vice Consulate. There was no
dissent from the well known fact that in all such areas the U.S.
diplomatic or consular representative is the Senior U.S. representative
for that area.

It will be recalled that the interest of the Department is largely
confined to 1a, 1b and 1c of the enclosed Directive, around which all of
the argument centered. Paragraphs d to g represent no change from
earlier texts of paragraphs prepared and insisted upon by other
intelligence agencies.

As a result of the very controversial and sometimes stormy meeting I
should like to attempt at this point to assess the gains made by this
agreement and, at the same time, to anticipate disappointment which will
be inevitable, in my opinion. The gains are that we have now a clear
recognition by the members of the National Intelligence Authority
(including CIG, G-2, ONI and A-2) of the
fields of primary responsibility for collecting and reporting of
positive intelligence abroad. This allocation set forth in 1a is further
supported in 1b by a clear recognition of the property right of each
Department to receive and transmit intelligence within its field of
responsibility, no matter who first may have come into possession of
such intelligence.

On the other hand, no intelligence agency at the meeting was willing to
deny to its field representatives the right to transmit to his own
superiors in Washington copies of any and all intelligence collected by
him, without regard to what the subject matter might be. While,
therefore, the information and, presumably, the official report, is made
by the field representative of the Department most concerned, copies may
continue to go to other Departments. I inquired closely about this
matter and discovered that in the War Department, for example, all
reports from the Attaches are sent in on “mats” capable of reproduction
like our hectographs. It would appear, therefore, that these “copies”
will not differ in material form or number from original reports within
the field of the War Department's primary interest. I was advised at the
meeting that if the Department of State does not wish to see these
copies, which will be required by the War Department for internal
distribution for staff purposes, the Department of State has only to
instruct its representatives at the Reading Panel to ignore Service
reports on political matters and not burden the Department of State's
eyes or files therewith!

Furthermore, I was told in emphatic terms, and it was recorded in the
IAB Minutes,3
that the armed services recognize the Senior Foreign Service Officer at each foreign service
post as “the Senior U.S. Represent-ative” by virtue of his seniority on
the spot and in accordance with diplomatic precedence. They do not
consider that this Directive permits the Department of State in
Washington to police the collection activities abroad of the field
personnel of the armed forces, each of whom, they insist, will continue
to receive orders from his own Department. The implication of this
position to me is clear: that any dissatisfaction with duplication of
effort or with uncoordinated collection and reporting in the field, will
have to be remedied by action taken on the spot by the Ambassador,
Minister or Senior Foreign Service Officer, and not by protests to the
other intelligence agencies in Washington. The Senior Foreign Service
Officer has been recognized as “responsible for the coordination of all
collection activities in his area and for the proper implementation of
that coordination.” I hope this will suffice to secure the proper
division of functions, but if it does not it will obviously be useless
to attempt to regulate activities of the other Departments around an
NIA table. In the event that a
foreign service mission is unable to secure the proper local cooperation
it may be necessary to refer the matter directly to a meeting of the
Secretaries of State, War and Navy for action on the highest level.

William A. Eddy4

* Source: National Archives and Records
Administration, RG 353, Records of Interdepartmental and
Intradepartmental Committees—State Department, Lot File No. 122,
Records of the Secretary's Staff Committee 1944-47, Box 94.
Confidential.

1 Not printed. For the
directive as issued, see Document
181.

2 Not found.

3 No minutes of the December 20 IAB meeting have been found.

4 Printed from a copy that bears this
typed signature.

181. National Intelligence Authority Directive No. 7181. National Intelligence Authority Directive No. 7Source

Washington, January 2,
1947.

COORDINATION OF COLLECTION ACTIVITIES

1. The following over-all policies and objectives are established by the
National Intelligence Authority for the interdepartmental coordination
of collection activities so that measures may be taken promptly to
effect sound and efficient utilization of the various departmental
overseas collecting and reporting services:

a. There shall be an allocation within certain broad categories of agency
responsibility for collection in the field, as follows:

Political—State Department

Cultural—State Department

Sociological—State Department

Military—War Department

Naval—Navy Department

Economic—Each agency in accordance with its respective needs

Scientific—Each agency in accordance with its respective needs

b. Intelligence information and material regardless of the collector,
shall, wherever possible, be transmitted immediately to the field
representative of the agency most concerned. However, the collector may
also send copies to his own agency.

c. The senior U.S. representative in each foreign area where the United
States maintains a foreign service post shall be responsible for the
coordination of all collection activities in his area and the proper
implementation of that coordination within the spirit of the principles
enunciated herein.

d. In order to avoid unproductive duplication and uncoordinated overlap
all collection facilities will be utilized to their maximum within
budgetary limitations for the production of that full flow of
intelligence material which is the major need of all departments.

e. There shall be free and unrestricted interdepartmental flow of
intelligence information and intelligence to meet the recognized
secondary need of each department for intelligence usually prepared or
obtained by other departments. At present this Directive is interpreted
to apply only to those departments represented by the permanent members
of the Intelligence Advisory Board.

f. Common sense shall be applied in the implementation of these
established over-all policies and objectives to insure the full
utilization of individual initiative and favorable contacts by
collecting agents.

g. No interpretation of these established over-all policies and
objectives shall negate the basic principle that all departmental
representatives abroad are individually responsible for the collection
and for the appropriate transmission to Washington of all intelligence
material of possible usefulness to their departments and to the
effective accomplishment of the national intelligence mission.

* Source: National Archives and Records
Administration, RG 218, Records of the Joint Chiefs of Staff,
Leahy Papers, No.
132. Confidential.

182. Memorandum From the Chief of the Interdepartmental Coordinating and Planning Staff, Central Intelligence Group (Edgar) to the Assistant Director for Reports and Estimates (Huddle)182. Memorandum From the Chief of the Interdepartmental Coordinating
and Planning Staff, Central Intelligence Group (Edgar) to the Assistant
Director for Reports and Estimates (Huddle)Source

Washington, January 13,
1947.

SUBJECT

Program for ORE

As you know, I consider ORE as the heart
of CIG and believe that our reputation
with the President and the agencies will depend more on the intelligence
produced by ORE than on any other
activity.

1. Current Intelligence. I have therefore been somewhat concerned with
the findings of the adequacy survey conducted by OCD.1 Although there are several parts of the
OCD report that I know you will heed
in your continuing effort to improve the ORE output, I invite special attention to the comment
attributed to the Aide to Admiral Leahy:

“It appears that the concept of the summaries has changed somewhat since
their beginning. Originally they were intended primarily to keep the
President informed and secondarily for the information of the
Secretaries of State, War and Navy. Now, in view of the dissemination
given to the summaries, it seems they are designed as much for the
information of planners as for the President.”

I see in this some small feeling of pique which we must overcome
promptly.

2. I believe that you, while making plans to correct this situation,
should also review your whole allocation of production responsibility.
This request is based on past performance and on those future
requirements which I foresee as a result of my conversation with NIA and IAB
members, both in regular meetings and in personal talks.

3. I therefore request your prompt consideration of and comment on the
following proposals:

A. that you designate certain members of your staff as current
intelligence officers who will have as their sole or principal
responsibility the production of current intelligence.

4. Although the work of the current intelligence officers must be closely
integrated with the work of the strategic intelligence researchers, I
think you will agree that two distinct types of personality and
abilities are required for the two types of work.

5. I am not yet sure in my own mind whether these current intelligence
officers should be centralized in a special unit where they will, with
the assistance of an editor, produce the current intelligence daily
digest; or whether they should be decentralized in the several branches
with the editor centralized close to the Assistant Director.

6. With this specialization, the CIG
should be able to concentrate on meeting the complaints recorded in the
adequacy survey.

7. My reading of that survey leads me to believe that in trying to meet
the needs of several levels requiring foreign intelligence with one
series of reports, all of which are receiving almost identical
distribution, we are not fully meeting the requirements of any. We
appear to be overwriting for some and underwriting for others.

8. I propose that we prepare a special daily for the President, so
written that it should reach the President regularly, in its original
form, and without the need for any preliminary annotations by aides.
This will require very special selection and writing.

9. I propose that we supplement this for NIA members with additional items which although not worthy
currently of Presidential notice should be brought to the attention of
the NIA members.

10. Current Intelligence Summaries. The recent NIA allocation of collection responsibilities places on
CIG the job of meeting the several
agencies' requirements for intelligence secondary to their own but
necessary to the development of their staff intelligence. I believe this
can be met if CIG revises its weekly in
such a way that it will become a Current Intelligence Summary of the
preceding period. Well done, these should go far toward meeting the
G-2, A-2, and ONI requirements at the working level for foreign
intelligence outside their specialized fields.

11. Strategic Intelligence. CIG has
received much praise for its ORE No.
1.2

B. that ORE issue situation reports on
the several strategic areas of the world.

12. Since the area branches are divided according to such areas, each
branch should produce a Strategic Intelligence Estimate on a monthly
basis. Each new issue should supersede the previous issue, the latter
being recalled for destruction. Strategic Intelligence Estimates should
also be prepared by the Functional Branches for their several subjects.
If well done and kept currently up to date, these estimates should come
to be regarded as forming a
handbook for the reference purposes of policy officers and intelligence
chiefs. To my knowledge no such handbook now exists.

13. Special Estimates. The above publications should be supplemented from
time to time by special estimates as and when special developments so
warrant. In most cases special estimates should be written for special
recipients.

14. Nothing is more indicative of poor planning and lack of appreciation
of recipients' needs than the indiscriminate distribution of
intelligence reports. Overwriting places a burden on aides to
interpolate explanations; underwriting demands the marking up of reports
to indicate “must reading” and “skip reading”. I desire that CIG do this editorial work at the time of
initial preparation in so far as it may be possible.

15. Basic Intelligence.

C. that you create a working group in ORE, drawn from present personnel of the several branches to
prepare an outline for the development of National Intelligence Digests.
If possible this group should be balanced among geographic areas,
functional subjects, and IAB
agencies.

16. Discussions in the IAB indicate that
some form of responsibility in this field will fall to CIG in the near future. The Defense
Project3 group
is revising its outline as a proposed outline for all areas. I desire
that CIG give sufficient advance study
to this matter so that when I require a CIG recommendation it will be forthcoming promptly. The
group should consider all obtainable outlines, whether prepared by
IAB or other U.S. Government or
private agencies or by foreign governments or private enterprises.

17. In collecting and integrating these outlines, collection should be
made of the related handbooks so that when once approved the outline can
be fleshed out in part and initially at least with this material.

18. I believe that if the above program is adopted by ORE, I should receive fewer queries from
the agencies as to when CIG is going to
produce intelligence. In proposing this program I do not want you to
believe that I am placing overemphasis on publication. Much of the work
of ORE must continue to be laying that
groundwork which prepares for emergencies. And I believe that ORE will be called upon more and more to do
oral briefings. But I do consider that the above program is a minimum
essential to our reputation.

* Source:
Central Intelligence Agency Historical Files, HS/HC-804, Item 29.
Confidential. The source text is a copy transcribed for the CIA
Historian on July 16, 1952. This copy gives no indication of the
sender but the document appears to be identical to one described in
Darling, The Central Intelligence Agency, p. 141. This memorandum is
referred to as a draft in a memorandum from Montague to the
Assistant Director for Reports and Estimates, January 29. (Central
Intelligence Agency Historical Files, HS/HC-450) See the
Supplement.

1 Memorandum from Olsen to
DCI, December 9, 1946. (Central
Intelligence Agency Records, Job 80-01731R, Box 43, Folder 1)
Edgar also commented on
this OCD survey in a memorandum to
the Executive to the DCI, January 2.
(Ibid., Folder 5)

2 See footnote
4, Document 174.

3 An early effort to produce a
digest of basic intelligence on the Soviet Union and a forerunner of
later efforts to produce basic intelligence “encyclopedias.” For the
early history of the Defense Project, see Darling, The Central Intelligence Agency, pp. 84-86.

183. Central Intelligence Group Directive No. 18183. Central Intelligence Group Directive No. 18Source

Washington, January 23,
1947.

COORDINATION OF COLLECTION ACTIVITIES

Memorandum by the Director of Central
Intelligence

1. To implement the overall policies and objectives established by the
National Intelligence Authority for the interdepartmental coordination
of collection activities1 the following program
is announced:

A. Responsibilities.

1. There has been made the following allocation within broad categories
of agency responsibility for collection in the field:

Political—State Department

Cultural—State Department

Sociological—State Department

Military—War Department

Naval—Navy Department

Economic—Each agency in accordance with its respective needs

Scientific—Each agency in accordance with its respective needs

2. In preparing reports under these allocations, reporting agents will
take full cognizance of the collateral or secondary needs of other
agencies for such information. Determination of these needs may be made
by consultation with appropriate collecting agents or by references to
pertinent agency collection directives.

3. Intelligence information and material, regardless of the collector,
shall wherever possible be transmitted immediately to the local field
representative of the agency most concerned. However, the collector may
also send copies to his own agency.

4. There shall be free and unrestricted interdepartmental flow of
intelligence information and intelligence to meet the recognized
collateral or secondary need of each department for intelligence usually
prepared or obtained by other departments. This directive shall be
interpreted to apply only to those departments represented on the
Intelligence Advisory Board by permanent members.

B. Designation and Duties of the Coordinating
Official.

1. In all areas where the United States maintains a foreign service
establishment, the senior U.S. representative will be responsible for
the coordination of all
collection activities within his area to the end that the announced
intelligence objectives of the Government as a whole shall be most
efficiently and expeditiously accomplished.

2. Field collection shall generally follow but not be limited by the
allocated responsibilities of the respective departments or agencies.
The coordinating authority, in the implementation of the respective
collection programs, shall take full advantage of the individual
abilities and contacts of his staff members.

3. To implement this program each coordinating authority shall, wherever
practicable and within the limits of security requirements:

(a) Establish a central intelligence file for the use of all authorized
personnel.

(b) Insure that unproductive collection duplication is avoided; and that
the information obtained is properly channeled.

(c) Insure whenever one or more of the departmental intelligence agencies
are not represented at a foreign post or whenever the appropriate
representative is unable for any reason to carry out his mission, that
the reporting responsibility is allocated to the extent possible to
other members of the staff. When such delegation is other than
temporary, the responsible officer will advise the agency concerned
through his parent agency of his action and the reason therefor.

C. Responsibilities of Collecting Agents.

1. Field representatives of each intelligence department or agency,
whether permanently attached to the establishment or on temporary duty
in the area, will be directed by their department or agency to:

(a) Cooperate in the coordination measures prescribed by the responsible
officer as set forth in paragraph B above.

(b) Promptly bring to the attention of the proper representatives of
other departments or agencies any intelligence information or material
of concern to them.

(c) Collect information and prepare intelligence reports other than
within their own categories when specifically directed by their agency
or by the senior U.S. representative.

(d) Make available to the senior U.S. representative all collection
directives and instructions which are received from their
departments.

2. Nothing in this directive shall be interpreted as authorizing any
officer to delay, suppress, or make substantive changes in any
intelligence report without the concurrence of the officer submitting
the report. Intelligence information and material which may have no
significance to field representatives in a single area or which may
appear to be at complete variance with the overall trend may have great
significance and form a definite part of a picture being developed by
the individual department or by the Central Intelligence Group. Any
dissenting opinion or commentary will either be incorporated in the
report, or submitted separately as promptly as possible.

3. Subject to the limitations of security, reports will bear the
following information:

(a) Name of collector and name of reporter.

(b) The CIG index number (when
established).

(c) Local distribution given the report.

2. In order further to assure the most effective accomplishment of the
national intelligence mission through the avoidance of conflicting or
duplicating instructions to the field, agency directives implementing or
affecting the above procedures or policies as well as directives
assigning collection missions in the unallocated fields of economics or
scientific information will be coordinated with CIG prior to issuance.

3. Any existing instructions or directives in conflict with the
provisions of this directive will be rescinded or appropriately
amended.

* Source: National Archives and Records
Administration, RG 218, Records of the Joint Chiefs of Staff,
Leahy Papers, No.
130. Confidential.

1 See Document 181.

184. Memorandum From the Chief of the Intelligence Staff, Central Intelligence Group (Montague) to the Assistant Director for Reports and Estimates (Huddle)184. Memorandum From the Chief of the Intelligence Staff, Central
Intelligence Group (Montague) to the Assistant Director for Reports and
Estimates (Huddle)Source

Washington, January 29,
1947.

SUBJECT

The Mission of ORE

1. The true primary mission of ORE is
clear in the light of the President's Letter and of N.I.A. Directives
No. 1 and No. 2.1 It is to
produce strategic and national policy intelligence through the
correlation, evaluation, and final synthesis of all intelligence
information and finished departmental intelligence available in the
State, War and Navy Departments and other Federal agencies. By
“strategic and national policy intelligence” should be understood that
intelligence required at the highest policy making and planning level as
a basis for the determination of national policy and strategy in the
broadest sense. It relates to those issues which are of collective
concern to the State, War, and Navy Departments, or, conversely, which
are not the exclusive concern of any of them. In this concept ORE has no occasion to duplicate or compete with
departmental intelligence agencies—rather it is charged to make full use
of them and of their product—but ORE
does have the function of final evaluation and final synthesis. The
departmental agencies are tributary to it. Its own contribution is the
added value provided by authoritative final interpretation and synthesis
for the benefit, primarily, of the high authorities whom it serves, and
incidentally of the contributing agencies. It must be supported and
manned in such a way as to assure that it does speak with recognized
authority.

2. Since the inception of N.I.A. Directive No. 52 this clear concept
has been confused. That paper introduced considerable ambiguity
regarding a research function in ORE. No
new authority was required to expand the staff provided to perform the
supplemental research found necessary to accomplish the mission
indicated in paragraph 1. The initial draft of the Directive, however,
had reference to basic research, and so alarmed the departmental
agencies by its implications regarding duplication and eventual
supercession of their activities that ever since there has had to be
resort to all sorts of expedient explanations intended to allay these
fears. There is reason to suppose that the confusions and contradictions
introduced in the course of these explanations result from their
expediency and lack of candor. Their general tenor is to give verbal
assurance against duplication of functions while at the same time
justifying the establishment of duplicate research facilities. To this
end it is said that ORE will not conduct
research in fields of primary interest to any department, but will
conduct research ab initio in certain undefined fields not of primary
interest to anyone. These “gaps” cannot be defined because they do not
exist. If, however, this doctrine were taken literally, it would reduce
ORE to the status of a drudge
performing miscellaneous tasks in the service of the departmental
agencies, inverting the order indicated in N.I.A. Directives No. 1 and
2. Never, during the last six months, has there been any indication that
C.I.G. understood, or was even aware of, the mission indicated in the
preceding paragraph, although that is the primary mission of C.I.G. in
the terms of its basic charter, the President's letter.

3. Until this dichotomy is resolved there can be no firm basis for
planning the organization, recruitment, and work program or ORE, nor any stability in our relationships
with departmental agencies. Hitherto the cart has been put before the
horse—we have been required to devise an organization and a T/O to
accomplish we know not what, and are now called upon to state the
qualifications required in personnel in ignorance of the tasks they may
have to perform. It is impossible to determine such qualifications, or
to induce the most highly qualified personnel to accept positions in ORE, until this situation has been
clarified and stabilized. In any case, no coherent program of research
can be based on the concept indicated in paragraph 2. The departmental
agencies are as confused as we as to where they stand, and react
accordingly. In short, the failure of ICAPS to establish a clear concept of the mission of ORE and of its functional relationship to
the departmental agencies is preventing the development of ORE as an
effective instrument for the accomplishment of any purpose.

Ludwell L. Montague3

* Source: Central Intelligence Agency
Historical Files, HS/HC-450. Confidential. The source text is a
transcript prepared for the CIA Historian on December 16,
1952.

1 Documents 71, 141, and 142.

2 Document 160.

3 Printed from a copy that bears this
typed signature.

185. Minutes of the 9th Meeting of the National Intelligence Authority185. Minutes of the 9th Meeting of the National Intelligence
AuthoritySource

Washington, February 12, 1947, 11 a.m.

PARTICIPANTS

Members Present

Secretary of State George C.
Marshall, in the Chair

Secretary of War Robert P.
Patterson

Secretary of the Navy James
Forrestal

Fleet Admiral William D.
Leahy, Personal Representative of the
President

General Hoyt S.
Vandenberg, Director of Central Intelligence

Also Present

Assistant Secretary of War Howard C.
Petersen

Mr. William A. Eddy,
Special Assistant to the Secretary of State for Research and
Intelligence

Mr. H. Freeman Matthews, Department of State

Captain Robert L. Dennison, USN

Mr. James S. Lay, Jr.,
Central Intelligence Group

Secretariat

Mr. J. S. Earman, Acting
Secretary

Coordination of Intelligence Activities Relating to
Foreign Atomic Energy Intelligence Developments and
Potentialities (N.I.A. 6)1

Secretary Patterson gave a brief
report on the present status of N.I.A. 6. He stated that the Atomic
Energy Commission desired to retain three people to go over information contained in the files to
be transferred to the Central Intelligence Group. He said that these
three people were to search these files for information pertaining to
uranium deposits and such information was to be retained by the
Commission. Secretary Patterson
suggested that C.I.G. take up the matter of the transfer of the
personnel with Mr. Lilienthal.

After some discussion,

The National Intelligence Authority:

Agreed to the transfer of the personnel mentioned in N.I.A. 6 and
directed the Director of Central Intelligence to work out the details
with Mr. Lilienthal. (Transfer subsequently completed on 18 February
1947)

Report by the Director of Central
Intelligence

At Secretary Marshall's request, General Vandenberg stated that his last
report2 was rather comprehensive in pointing out the
accomplishments of C.I.G. since its inception. However, this time he
wished to report some of the difficulties encountered by C.I.G. He said
that before taking up these difficulties he wished to point out a few
accomplishments recently effected by C.I.G.

General Vandenberg said that when it was first agreed that the C.I.G take
over the activities of the Federal Bureau of Investigation in the South
American field, there was some doubt as to whether C.I.G could ably
accomplish this assignment. He mentioned that he had received a
letter3 from Ambassador
Pawley which commended the smooth transfer of these activities
accomplished by the C.I.G. representative attached to his staff. General
Vandenberg also mentioned that Mr. Dawson of the State Department had
also stated that the C.I.G.'s representatives who had replaced the
F.B.I. personnel were of a particularly high type. General Vandenberg
brought out the point that C.I.G. had a roving mission to check these
newly assigned personnel in South America and their reports indicated
that they were carrying out their functions in an exemplary manner.

General Vandenberg then gave a brief report on C.I.G.'s monitoring of
foreign broadcasts and stated C.I.G. was now preparing to negotiate a
new agreement with the British Broadcasting Corporation for better
exchange of material and the future transfer of C.I.G.'s Cairo
Monitoring Station covering the Middle East from Cairo to Cyprus.

[2 paragraphs (19 lines of source text) not
declassified]

General Vandenberg pointed out that C.I.G. was coordinating the
exploitation of documents collected in the Far East and that plans are
now being completed for similar exploitation of documents from
Europe.

General Vandenberg stated he would now like to mention some of the
principal difficulties being encountered by C.I.G. in its operations. He
said that what he believed to be essential coordination to reduce
duplication had been retarded by an uncertainty as to the directive
authority of the Director of Central Intelligence. He said that the
President specified that the Director of Central Intelligence shall “plan for the coordination of such of the
activities of the intelligence agencies of the departments as relate to
the national security and recommend to the
National Intelligence Authority the establishment of such overall
policies and objectives as will assure the most effective accomplishment
of the national intelligence mission.” (Paragraph 3 of President's
letter of 22 January 1946, emphasis added)

General Vandenberg further stated that the National Intelligence
Authority specified that: “Recommendations approved by this Authority
will where practicable govern the intelligence activities of the
separate departments represented herein. The members of the Intelligence
Advisory Board will each be responsible for insuring that approved
recommendations are executed within their respective departments.”
(NIA Directive No. 1, par. 4)

General Vandenberg said that the National Intelligence Authority
specified that: “The Director of Central Intelligence is hereby authorized and directed to act for this Authority
in coordinating all federal foreign activities related to the national
security to insure that the overall policies and objectives established
by this Authority are properly implemented and executed.” (NIA Directive No. 5, par. 3, emphasis
added)

General Vandenberg pointed out that it was the feeling of the agencies
(Intelligence Advisory Board) that the current interpretation of
coordination was “by mutual agreement.” This placed the Director of
Central Intelligence only in the position of an executive secretary to
the I.A.B. and that he did not believe this was what was contemplated by
the N.I.A. General Vandenberg then pointed out that in some instances it
had taken six to eight months to get agreement on a paper. He stated
that in order to rectify this he recommended that the Director of
Central Intelligence be considered as having authority similar to that
given to the Joint Research and Development Board—“The Joint Research
and Development Board shall operate within its jurisdiction as an agency
of the Secretaries of War and Navy and the necessary authority its
hereby delegated by the Secretaries of War and Navy to the Board so that
its decisions, orders and directives shall be considered as emanating
from them and shall have full force and effect as such.” (JRDB 1/1,
6 June 1946, as amended 3 July 1946)4

General Vandenberg suggested that as an alternative to the above
recommendation that C.I.G. forward its implementing directives to the
N.I.A. members for subsequent issuance from their offices. However, such
a practice would be cumbersome and involve a great loss of time on the
part of all concerned.

General Vandenberg stated that the production of strategic and national
policy intelligence has been hindered further by an uncertainty among
the agencies as to its definition. In order to clarify this situation,
C.I.G. had developed the following definition, which he requested the
N.I.A. approve: “Strategic and national policy intelligence is that
composite intelligence, interdepartmental in character, which is
required by the President and other high officers and staffs to assist
them in determining policies with respect to national planning and
security in peace and in war and for the advancement of broad national
policy. It is in that political-economic-military area of concern to
more than one agency, must be objective, and must transcend the
exclusive competence of any one department.”

General Vandenberg stated it was his understanding that those persons who
developed the plan for the creation of a Central Intelligence Group had
in mind that the C.I.G. would replace the Joint Intelligence Committee.
This, so far, had not taken place, nor had any working relationship been
achieved; further, that J.I.C. continues to have responsibilities
paralleling those of C.I.G., and until this is resolved, complete
coordination, effectiveness, and efficiency in the national intelligence
mission cannot be attained. General Vandenberg recommended that J.I.C.
be abolished, and that C.I.G. provide the necessary intelligence to the
Joint Chiefs of Staff. He said, however, he believed that some members
of the J.C.S. had stated that if this were done, it would lower the
original concept of a Central Intelligence Group. General Vandenberg
said it was difficult for him, in appearing before appropriation
committees, to defend C.I.G.'s request for funds since he was constantly
confronted with the question as to the amount of overlap in
intelligence. It was his understanding that one of the principal tasks
expected of the Director of Central Intelligence was the reduction of
such overlap to an absolute minimum.

General Vandenberg stated he would also like to point out that when
C.I.G. went to the intelligence agencies of the War and Navy Departments
for information, there was constant friction as to whether J.I.C. or
C.I.G. should have priority. In short, two agencies were asking for the same type of
intelligence but requested in a slightly different manner. This
duplication was unnecessary and occupied the time of personnel which
should be engaged in more productive intelligence activities.

Secretary Forrestal then asked
whether the question of dissolution of the J.I.C. and the assignment of
its duties to C.I.G. had been taken up with the Joint Chiefs of
Staff.

General Vandenberg answered that he believed it had through the I.A.B.
members.

Mr. Eddy stated that he thought
that it was important now to abolish J.I.C. and to have all
interdepartmental intelligence under the C.I.G.

After some discussion,

The National Intelligence Authority:

a. Agreed that while they believed that the J.I.C. should be abolished
and its functions assumed by C.I.G., they desired to withhold decision
until such time as it had been discussed with the Joint Chiefs of
Staff.

b. Noted that Admiral Leahy
would take up this matter with the Joint Chiefs of Staff.

At Secretary Marshall's request, General Vandenberg then reread his first
recommendation.

Secretary Patterson stated that he
saw no alternative to the N.I.A approving this recommendation. He added,
however, that a proviso should be inserted in the recommendation to
allow any aggrieved agency to appeal to the N.I.A. through that agency's
respective Secretary.

General Vandenberg said it was realized that each agency has the inherent
right to appeal through its respective Secretary any objection to a
specific directive.

Admiral Leahy stated that he
recommended approval, but that he was in agreement with Secretary
Patterson's proviso.

Secretary Patterson raised the
question as to whether General Vandenberg's recommendation would involve
C.I.G. entering into the field of operational intelligence of the
agencies.

General Vandenberg stated that this was not the intent.

Mr. Eddy asked, if authority was
delegated by the N.IA. to the Director of Central Intelligence that his
directives shall be considered as emanating from them, would such
authority be interpreted to allow the Director of Central Intelligence
to draft personnel from other agencies to perform specific jobs.

General Vandenberg stated that C.I.G. had no intention of interpreting
this authority as indicated by Mr. Eddy.

Secretary Patterson asked if
C.I.G. was contemplating recommending that some of the intelligence
manuals now published by the intelligence agencies of the State, War and
Navy Departments be discontinued.

General Vandenberg stated he would like to have an opportunity to look
over these publications before answering this question.

Secretary Forrestal stated he
believed that the proviso to be added to General Vandenberg's
recommendation under discussion should read along the following lines:
“Provided in cases of objection to specific actions, any aggrieved
agency may have access to that agency's Secretary and through him to the
N.I.A.”

Mr. Eddy stated he assumed that
any directives, before being issued by C.I.G., would normally have had
prior discussion by the Intelligence Advisory Board.

General Vandenberg concurred.

The National Intelligence Authority:

Approved the recommendation that “The Director of Central Intelligence
shall operate within his jurisdiction as an agent of the Secretaries of
State, War and the Navy, and the necessary authority is hereby delegated
by the Secretaries of State, War and the Navy to the Director of Central
Intelligence so that his decisions, orders and directives shall be
considered as emanating from them and shall have full force and effect
as such, provided any aggrieved agency may have access to that agency's
Secretary and through him to the N.I.A.”

At Secretary Marshall's request, General Vandenberg then repeated his
recommended definition of “Strategic and national policy
intelligence.”

After some discussion, in which General Vandenberg pointed out the reason
why an approved definition of this term was needed,

The National Intelligence Authority:

Approved the following definition: “Strategic and national policy
intelligence is that composite intelligence, interdepartmental in
character, which is required by the President and other high officers
and staffs to assist them in determining policies with respect to
national planning and security in peace and in war and for the
advancement of broad national policy. It is in that
political-economic-military area of concern to more than one agency,
must be objective, and must transcend the exclusive competence of any
one department.”

Secretary Marshall stated that in a recent conversation Congressman Taber
was concerned from a security standpoint with reference to
appropriations for intelligence activities. Secretary Marshall further
stated that Mr. Taber had said that it appeared to him that too many people had to be consulted in
considering such appropriations. Secretary Marshall went on to state
that he believed the best way to maintain proper security was for the
President or the Secretary of State to control these funds, and that a
request should be made for a flat appropriation.

General Vandenberg stated he had appeared recently before a joint
committee, which he was told before appearance would consist of four or
five people. However, upon arrival he found there were actually
twenty-two people present. He went on to state a subsequent meeting had
been called and he would continue to be careful of the information
presented. However, he agreed that security of intelligence operations
could best be protected by funds which should be concealed and
appropriated in a lump sum controlled by one person.

* Source: Central Intelligence
Agency Historical Files, HS/HC-245. Top Secret. No drafting
information appears on the source text. The meeting was held at the
Department of State. Also reproduced in CIA Cold
War Records: The CIA under Harry
Truman, pp. 113-121.

1 Document 162. NIA 6 as approved was issued as NIA Directive 9, April 18; Document
194.

2 See Document
169.

3 Not found.

4 Not
found.

186. Memorandum From the Secretary of State's Special Assistant for Research and Intelligence (Eddy) to Secretary of State Marshall186. Memorandum From the Secretary of State's Special Assistant for
Research and Intelligence (Eddy) to Secretary of State MarshallSource

Washington, February 15,
1947.

SUBJECT

Comment on the Central Intelligence Group

I

A central agency for national intelligence under civilian control is
needed continuously in time of peace in addition to intelligence
services in the several Departments. Its functions should include the
following:

A. Interdepartmental intelligence required by interdepartmental agencies
such as the Joint Chiefs of Staff, the State-War-Navy Coordinating
Committee, and other agencies and commissions of the national Government
whose responsibilities extend beyond the province of any one
Department.

B. Intelligence on matters which may be of secondary interest to any one
Department, and which would, therefore, otherwise be neglected, but
which may be of prime interest for national policy.

C. Under-cover intelligence and espionage abroad which should not
compromise the official representatives of the United States of America.
Espionage, which is certainly needed, and which involves the employment
of unofficial agents, both American and foreign, should be operated by
an agency outside the Departments and with funds not subject to
departmental accounting.

II

The Central Intelligence Group (CIG),
with the passage of requested legislation, should be able to perform the
valuable services described above since:

A. The CIG operates under the National
Intelligence Authority (NIA) which
reports directly to the President. The NIA is composed of the Secretary of State, as Chairman, the
Secretary of War, the Secretary of the Navy, and a personal
representative of the President, thus representing a balance between
civilian and military needs.

B. The NIA, controlling as it does both
its executive agency, the CIG, and
through its individual members, the intelligence services of the
Departments represented, is well constituted to promote the efficient
coordination of all national intelligence.

III

The CIG has already made a good beginning
and should be directed to confine itself to the following fields:

A. Interdepartmental intelligence and other special assignments made by
the NIA.

B. Coordination of intelligence reports produced by the several
Departments and by its own special operations to make the total
available intelligence accessible to those who guide our national
policy.

C. Avoid entering the field of departmental intelligence where
duplication would be wasteful. Only the Army and the Navy are
technically equipped to direct their operational intelligence services;
and only the Department of State, through its Foreign Service, attempts
to cover the world with expert political and economic reports for its
daily political and economic operations.

D. Operate an under-cover espionage service with freedom to use for this
purpose special agents and special funds. Of all the great nations of
the world, the United States of America has lacked an efficient
espionage service which, in many critical parts of the world, is the
only way to acquire indispensable information.

IV

The CIG budget. The present plans of the
CIG contemplate a total budget of
something less than $40,000,000. for the fiscal year 1948. With the extent of CIG's operations at present unpredictable,
it is not practicable to verify or deny their need for such a sum, with
the single exception, however, of the Office of Reports and Estimates,
for which it is believed a total personnel of 500 would be more than
adequate, instead of the 852 requested. The budget appears to be a
reasonable request on the understanding that it is a permissive maximum,
to be used on projects expressly approved in each case by the NIA.

It would seem the part of wisdom to publish only the administrative
budget for the CIG and to have the funds
required for secret and special operations segregated in a special fund
entrusted to the President, or, if that is inadvisable, to the Secretary
of State, with knowledge of that fund and an accounting of it confined
to a very few Congressional leaders.

William A. Eddy

* Source: National Archives and Records
Administration, RG 59, Records of the Department of State, Decimal
File 1945-49, 101.61/2-1547. Top Secret. Marshall annotated this
memorandum “Hold. G.C.M.”

187. Memorandum of Conversation187. Memorandum of ConversationSource

Washington, February 19,
1947.

SUBJECT

CIG Meeting, 19 February in General
Vandenberg's Office

PARTICIPANTS

General Vandenberg

Mr. Eddy

Mr. Edgar

Mr. Huddle

Mr. Cullen

Mr. Evans

Mr. Eddy and I met with Messrs.
Edgar, Huddle, Cullen. The
General indicated the need for agreement on the mutual functions of
ORE and OIR in view, among other things, of budget. He pointed out
that he and General Chamberlain
had both faced the question “what do we know about Russian strength now
and five years from now, etc., in case of war?” This involved questions
of military strength, and in the course of developing his remarks he
showed clearly that he did not think it affected us very much in the
State Department and, therefore, was primarily a matter of CIG development. At this inconclusive point
he asked if his colleagues had anything to say.

Edgar started off by saying there
was one clear point of agreement which was that CIG should undertake the gathering and formulation for all
consumers of basic intelligence. Mr. Eddy at once commented that we of course were concerned
with the political, social, and economic sides of that enterprise and
had responsibilities. In the course of discussion the following points
were made:

The General spoke from time to time in terms of the Department's
contributing materials but CIG doing the
compilation on these basic matters.

We presented the concept that the Departments prepared their
contributions on these and other matters of joint interest while CIG coordinated in the sense of insuring
the complementary nature of the outlines in advance and being equipped
with overall experts and evaluators who would fuse the contributions and
work them into a whole.

Edgar raised the familiar point
that these evaluators could not evaluate without covering all the
intelligence involved in the matter. We countered by saying that really
high quality people could undoubtedly act as would our own Review
Section in evaluating and appreciating intelligence through acquaintance
with top-flight materials, through understanding of style, presentation,
and internal evidence. Such top-flight evaluators and re-writers are
what we most particularly hoped to find in CIG so that they might from a national point of view
stimulate our own work and planning and help to point out oversights and
omissions in our general plans. To this there was no objection and some
appreciation by the General.

The conversation turned to the defense project.1 The General made it clear that he was most
anxious to secure control of the defense project. Edgar requested that we propose at the
next opportunity that the project be transferred to CIG. It was, I think, agreed that Mr.
Eddy would at least support
the proposal, if not make it at the IAB.

In regard to timing the control of CIG
over SID,2 Mr. Eddy indicated that the contemplated
date was 1 July. It was discussed whether, as the old SID were completed, CIG should not take over responsibility piecemeal for continuing the SID project under the new outline. I made
it clear that the new SID outline was
prepared and contributed to by us as an outline for the particular
purposes of G-2 and not as a national
outline; furthermore, that no commitments for the implementation of the
outline had been made except in the old defense project agreement.

At one point Captain Cullen mentioned the great desirability of close
contacts between ORE and OIR. Mr. Eddy emphasized the importance of this and proposed that
Mr. Huddle and I should develop
contacts at all working levels between our staffs. To this the General
explicitly assented, while at the same time injecting a phrase to show
that he thought ICAPS should
participate in such contacts.

The General at one point indicated that his great desire to establish
CIG control over the SID type of enterprise was to insure proper
allocation of responsibilities among departments and notably allocation
of political and economic responsibility of State. (I take this
statement to be associated in the General's mind with the problem of
reporting from the field; it does not3
modify, I believe, the thought in his mind that all compilations of
SID material shall be performed in
CIG.)

Mr. Eddy explained in general
terms the area of responsibility of the Department by pointing out that
this area of responsibility was unchanged since the time before CIG existed and comprised essentially the
processing and interpretation of reporting by Foreign Service officers
from the field. Centering about this fundamental responsibility the
division of appropriate functions properly related to the State
Department's concerns from those additional or nationally oriented
concerns of CIG could be developed.

* Source:
National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Records of the
Department of State, Decimal File 1945-49, 101.5/2-1947. Drafted by
Allan Evans. The memorandum was covered by a brief handwritten
transmittal note from Evans to Eddy and had attached a paper, possibly a draft,
entitled “Relations With Other Government Intelligence Agencies,”
dated June 14, 1946. See the Supplement.

1 See footnote 3, Document
182.

2 Strategic Intelligence Digest, the publication in which the work of
the Defense Project was issued.

3 The
word “not” has been inserted by hand in the source text.

188. Memorandum From the Secretary of State's Special Assistant for Research and Intelligence (Eddy) to the Under Secretary of State (Acheson)188. Memorandum From the Secretary of State's Special Assistant for
Research and Intelligence (Eddy) to the Under Secretary of State (Acheson)Source

Washington, February 28,
1947.

SUBJECT

Directorship of the Central Intelligence Group

I have been unable to confirm officially the report that Lt. General
Hoyt S. Vandenberg will
resign as Director of Central Intelligence and will be succeeded by Rear
Admiral Roscoe H.
Hillenkoetter.1
Whether or not such a move takes place, I would like to call to your
attention certain matters which I feel are important in the selection of
any Director of Central Intelligence. If the reported new appointment
has not been finally decided upon by the President, perhaps you might
like to discuss this question with the Secretary. I hasten to add that
my remarks should not be construed as an attack on, or support for, any
individual. I am concerned with what I consider to be an important basic
principle, that the Director of Central Intelligence should be a
civilian.

In the thirteen months of its existence, the Central Intelligence Group
already has had two directors, each a Service representative. Should
there be a continuation of the policy of selecting directors from one of
the Services, there is always danger that demands of the appointee's
department may result in similar early shifts in the directorship.
Necessity for continuity of leadership can hardly be overestimated,
especially in a new and growing organization like the Central
Intelligence Group.

The nature of the Central Intelligence Group requires that its director
be, as far as possible, untouched by any departmental bias or influence.
Under such circumstances a
Service director will always and inevitably be torn between absolute
objectivity and natural allegiance to his own Service.

Continuity and objectivity of leadership can best be assured by a
director drawn from civilian ranks and not subject to demands from or
allegiance to any single department. This seems especially true in the
light of the proposed National Security Act of 1947. Under its
provisions the National Intelligence Authority would be dissolved and
its functions assumed by a National Security Council. Since the
composition of the Council is weighted on the side of the Armed Forces,
it is important that the national, as opposed to the military, character
of its central intelligence agency be emphasized in the form of a
civilian director.

William A. Eddy

* Source: National Archives and Records
Administration, RG 59, Records of the Department of State, Decimal
File 1945-49, 101.61/2-2847. Confidential.

1 Admiral
Leahy noted in his
diary that the NIA had discussed the
question of a successor to Vandenberg (so he could move on to the
future Air Force) at its meeting on February 12. (Library of
Congress, Manuscript Division, Papers of William D. Leahy, Leahy Diary, 1947, p. 12;
February 12, 1947) The discussion was not recorded in the minutes;
see Document 185. Leahy's brief entry does not
mention the names of any potential successors. On February 17,
Leahy wrote in his
diary that he had obtained the approval of all NIA members and the President for Rear
Admiral Roscoe H.
Hillenkoetter to replace Vandenberg. (Library of
Congress, Manuscript Division, Papers of William D. Leahy, Leahy Diary, February 17, 1947,
p. 13) In a note written some years later, Ludwell Montague, the
chief of CIG's Intelligence Staff
(and at that time on detail to the CIG from the Department of State) recalled that as of
February 27 or 28, Eddy's
office was not aware Hillenkoetter had been definitely selected and
that Eddy's deputy had
approached him for his views on a State Department nomination of
Allen Dulles to succeed
Vandenberg. (Memorandum for the record, April 7, 1970; Central
Intelligence Agency Historical Files, HS/HC-400, Item 8)

189. Central Intelligence Group Paper189. Central Intelligence Group PaperSource

Washington, March 12,
1947.

CIG 24

ACTION BY THE INTELLIGENCE ADVISORY BOARD ON MATTERS SUBMITTED TO THE
NATIONAL INTELLIGENCE AUTHORITY

Memorandum by the Secretary

Pursuant to a request by the Chief of Naval Intelligence, the enclosed
paper, which is to be placed on the agenda of the Intelligence Advisory
Board, is circulated herewith.

J.S. Earman1

Acting Secretary, N.I.A.

Enclosure

ACTION BY THE INTELLIGENCE ADVISORY BOARD ON MATTERS SUBMITTED TO THE
NATIONAL INTELLIGENCEAUTHORITY

The Problem

To establish procedure for the Intelligence Advisory Board in considering
matters submitted to the National Intelligence Authority for action.

Facts

N.I.A. Directive No. 1,2 paragraph 3, requires
that all recommendations be referred to the Intelligence Advisory Board
for concurrence or comment prior to submission to the National
Intelligence Authority. However, no procedure has been established to
accomplish this action by the Intelligence Advisory Board.

Discussion

It is believed that the requirements of N.I.A. Directive No. 1, paragraph
3, can be satisfactorily met by formal or informal procedure, depending
upon the importance of the particular matter under consideration. If
members of the Intelligence Advisory Board were furnished copies of the
agenda for the N.I.A. meeting, together with copies of papers or a
statement of the problems up for consideration, they could then, with
respect to each item, express their concurrence, submit comments, or
request a formal meeting to discuss the matter. Such procedure would
insure that the secretaries had the views of the heads of their own
intelligence agencies when acting on all matters presented to them.

Conclusion

It is concluded that a procedure should be established for the
Intelligence Advisory Board in considering matters being submitted to
the National Intelligence Authority for action.

Recommendation

It is recommended that the following procedure be adopted for securing
the concurrence or comments of the Intelligence Advisory Board on all
matters being submitted to the National Intelligence Authority:

(a) The agenda for the National Intelligence Authority meeting be
referred by the Director of Central Intelligence to the Intelligence
Advisory Board, together with
copies of all papers to be considered or a statement of subjects to be
discussed.

(b) Members of the Intelligence Advisory Board informally express
concurrence or submit comments on all items on the agenda to the
Director of Central Intelligence for submission by him to the National
Intelligence Authority.

(c) In case of important matters on the agenda any member of the
Intelligence Advisory Board may request a formal meeting of that
committee for the purpose of discussing such subject prior to its
submission to the National Intelligence Authority.

* Source: Central Intelligence Agency Historical Files, HS/HC-276.
Confidential. For the background on this paper, see Document 185.

1 Printed from a copy that bears
this typed signature.

2 Document 141.

190. Letter From the Director of Central Intelligence (Vandenberg) to the Chairman of the Joint Research and Development Board (Bush)190. Letter From the Director of Central Intelligence (Vandenberg) to the
Chairman of the Joint Research and Development Board (Bush)Source

Washington, March 13,
1947.

JRDB 49/3

Dear Dr. Bush: Pending the arrival
of the Chief of the Scientific Branch, I am most anxious that the
Central Intelligence Group afford you every service possible on an
interim basis.

I have, therefore, issued a memorandum to my offices which sets up the
functional operation within CIG in this
respect. This system will, I believe, provide the close cooperation
envisioned by our agreement. A copy of this memorandum is attached
hereto.1

I have designated Colonel Whitely as Acting Chief of the Scientific
Branch and have directed him to report to you, and to make himself
available to you and your Board for all intelligence requirements, or
other intelligence matters which you may desire. I hope you will feel
free to refer all intelligence requirements or other matters to us
through Colonel Whitely.

If, in any way, I personally, or my Assistant Director for Reports and
Estimates can be of further assistance to you at any time, please call
on us direct.

Sincerely,

Hoyt S. Vandenberg2

Lieutenant General, USA

Enclosure3

Memorandum by the Deputy Director of Central Intelligence (Wright)

Washington, March 13, 1947.

SUBJECT

Operations—Intelligence Relationship of CIG with JRDB

REFERENCE

“Program for JRDB-CIG Cooperation in the Field of
Scientific Intelligence,” dated 10 January 1947

1. In accordance with Program for JRDB-CIG Cooperation, which
was jointly approved by the Director of Central Intelligence and the
Chairman, JRDB, the following policies
for the functional operation within CIG
in its relations with JRDB are
announced.

2. The Chief or Acting Chief of the Scientific Branch, ORE, under supervision of the Assistant
Director for Reports and Estimates, is the Intelligence Advisor to the
Chairman, JRDB. In performing this
function he will:

a. Report to the Chairman, JRDB, as
advisor and make himself and the facilities of his branch and the CIG as a whole fully available to him.

b. Be the principal liaison and operational contact between JRDB and CIG.

c. Arrange with the control the working relationships of appropriate
offices of CIG with offices,
individuals, or committees of JRDB.

d. Coordinate closely with JRDB to
develop and pass to OCD for appropriate
processing, JRDB requirements,
requests, information, and intelligence, except those matters subject to
special handling or which cannot be accomplished within the framework of
ORE.

e. Receive from OCD, for processing with
JRDB, CIG requirements and collection requests which may be
susceptible of collection from JRDB
sources.

In performing the above functions, he will follow the functional
organization of CIG and will be guided
by the operational policies announced by the Director.

3. On matters concerning JRDB the other
offices of CIG will regard the deal with
the Chief of the Scientific Branch, ORE,
as they would with the Chief of
intelligence of a departmental agency. Contact with operational
personnel of JRDB will be arranged
through the Chief of the Scientific Branch, ORE.

4. The Assistant Director, OSO, and the
Assistant Director, ORE, will recommend
to the Director any special arrangements necessary to the security
requirements of OSO.

5. Nothing in this directive negates the control of the Scientific Branch
by the Assistant Director, ORE, for the
purpose of producing national intelligence in the scientific field, and
general requirements related thereto or abridges the normal relationship
of the Assistant Director, ORE, with the
appropriate officers of JRDB.

E.K. Wright4
Brigadier General, USA

* Source: Central Intelligence Agency Historical
Files, HS/HC-804, Item 46, Job 84-B00443R, Box 7. Secret. The source
text is a transcript made for the CIA Historian on July 29,
1952.

1 Dated January 10. See the
Supplement. Also attached was a March 13 memorandum by Wright,
printed as an enclosure.

2 Printed from a copy that bears this typed
signature.

3 Secret. Addressed to the CIG Assistant Directors for Reports and
Estimates, Collection and Dissemination, Operations, and Special
Operations and the Chief, Intelligence Coordinating and Planning
Staff. The source text is a transcript made for the CIA Historian on
July 29, 1952.

4 Printed from a copy
that bears this typed signature.

191. Memorandum by the Deputy Director of Central Intelligence (Wright)191. Memorandum by the Deputy Director of Central Intelligence
(Wright)Source

Washington, March 28,
1947.

SUBJECT

Establishment and Functions of the Nuclear Energy Group,
Scientific Branch, Office of Reports and Estimates

CIG-A-605

1. The Assistant Director for Reports and Estimates will establish
immediately a Nuclear Energy Group within the Scientific Branch of his
office.

2. In carrying out its mission, the Chief, Nuclear Energy Group, will
follow the functional organization and procedure of CIG so far as security restrictions
incident to his relations with the Atomic Energy Commission will
permit.

3. The mission of the Nuclear Energy Group, Scientific Branch, ORE, will be:

a. To conduct and coordinate the necessary research and evaluation of
intelligence information and intelligence pertaining to the development
of nuclear energy by foreign nations.

b. To establish CIG requirements for
intelligence information and intelligence pertaining to foreign
developments in nuclear energy.

c. To prepare estimates of the nuclear energy capabilities and intentions
of foreign nations for coordination with and incorporation in
intelligence of national interest.

d. To represent exclusively the Director of Central Intelligence on all
contacts with the Atomic Energy Commission.

e. As the AEC may specify, to be the
point of contact on nuclear intelligence matters between the Atomic
Energy Commission and other governmental intelligence agencies.

f. To receive from the Atomic Energy Commission all requirements for
foreign intelligence on nuclear energy which are required by that
Commission. All such requirements received from the Atomic Energy
Commission, their processing, and the intelligence produced will be
subject to such special security restrictions as the Commission and the
Director of Central Intelligence may find necessary.

4. In order to promote technical coverage and effect the required special
security, the Chief, Nuclear Energy Group, is authorized:

a. To monitor and control all nuclear energy intelligence information and
intelligence received by CIG. In so
doing, he will place a representative in the Reading Center of the
Office of Collection and Dissemination. Except as otherwise personally
directed by the Director of Central Intelligence, he is solely
responsible for final determination of dissemination of nuclear energy
intelligence. He himself will disseminate such special nuclear energy
intelligence as security restrictions make necessary.

b. To review and approve all collection directives prepared by OCD which relate to nuclear energy.

c. To coordinate directly, when essential for technical or security
reasons, with U.S. governmental agencies other than the AEC and IAB
agencies.

d. To maintain such direct relationship with the Office of Special
Operations as both intelligence operations and special security
require.

e. To maintain, when essential for technical or security reasons, direct
contacts with industries, institutions and individuals which have
special significance to the Nuclear Energy Group, coordinating such
contacts with the Office of Operations so as to avoid duplication of
effort and provide maximum coverage in this field.

f. To coordinate with the Security Branch, OCD, on establishment of special policies and routine
safeguards on nuclear energy intelligence.

E.K. Wright1
Brig Gen

* Source: Central Intelligence Agency Historical
Files, HS/HC-100, Item 5. Secret. Addressed to the CIG Assistant Directors for Reports and
Estimates, Collection and Dissemination, Operations, and Special
Operations and the Chief, Interdepartmental Coordinating and
Planning Staff.

1 Printed from a copy
that indicates Wright signed the original.

192. Circular Instruction From the Department of State192. Circular Instruction From the Department of StateSource

Washington, April 9,
1947.

COORDINATION OF INTELLIGENCE COLLECTION ACTIVITIES

Sirs:

Reference is made to the Department's confidential circular instruction
dated January 31, 1947, FSS No. 670, entitled “Establishment of the
NIA, the IAB and the CIG”,1 and to its confidential circular instruction,
dated February 3, 1947, FSS No. 671, entitled “NIA Directive on Coordination of Collection
Activities”2 and its enclosure.3 To implement the
overall policies and objectives established by the above circular
instructions, the following measures will be taken by the Officers in
Charge of Foreign Service Missions and Posts:

A. The Officer in Charge of each American Mission will assume
responsibility for the coordination of all intelligence collection
activities at all Foreign Service posts within continental limits of the
country to which he is accredited, to the end that the announced
intelligence objectives of the government as a whole shall be most
efficiently and expeditiously accomplished. The senior officer at each
Consular Office outside of the continental limits of each country to
which a diplomatic officer is accredited will assume responsibility for
coordinating all intelligence collection activities at his post and
within his Consular District. For example, the senior officer at the
Consulate General at Singapore will carry out such duties, reporting
directly to the Department.

B. Each coordinating officer shall, wherever practicable and within the
limits of security requirements:

1. Establish a central intelligence file for the use of all authorized
personnel.

2. Insure that intelligence reports are promptly and adequately prepared
by foreign service personnel to meet his needs, the needs of the
Department, and the National Intelligence Requirements which may be
issued from time to time.

3. Insure that unproductive collection duplication is avoided.

4. Insure, whenever one or more of the intelligence agencies of the War
or Navy Departments are not represented at a Foreign Service post or
whenever the appropriate representative of such agency is unable for any
reason to carry out his mission, that the reporting responsibility is
allocated to the extent possible to other members of the staff. When
such delegation is for a period in excess of thirty days a report of
such action, including the reason therefor, will be made to the
Department as soon as practicable. A report of any such allocation of
reporting responsibility now in effect should be submitted to the
Department not later than May 15, 1947.

5. Insure that intelligence information and material, regardless of
collector, shall whenever possible be transmitted immediately to the
local field representative of the agency most concerned (see paragraph 1
(a) and (b) of enclosure to Circular Instruction No. 671), if such field
representative is attached to the Foreign Service post. If a field
representative of the agency concerned is not attached to the post, such
intelligence information and material will be transmitted directly to
the Department.

6. Insure that in preparing reports under the allocations cited in
paragraph 1 (a) of enclosure to Circular Instruction No. 671, reporting
officers take full cognizance of the collateral or secondary needs of
the Department of State, War and Navy Departments as determined in
consultation with the appropriate collecting officers or by reference to
pertinent agency collection directives.

7. Insure that, in the implementation of the respective collection
programs, full advantage is taken of the individual abilities and
contacts of his staff members.

C. Each coordinating officer will issue appropriate instructions to all
personnel of the Foreign Service or of the Department assigned to or on
temporary duty in his area to the end that such personnel will:

1. Cooperate in the coordination measures prescribed above or as may be
directed by the coordinating officer.

2. Promptly bring to the attention of the proper representatives of other
departments or agencies intelligence information or material of concern
to the latter.

3. Collect information and prepare intelligence reports other than within
their own spheres of responsibility when specifically directed.

Nothing in this instruction shall be interpreted as authorizing any
officer to delay, suppress, or make substantive changes in any
intelligence report without the concurrence of the officer submitting
the report. Intelligence information and material which may have no
significance to field representatives in a single area or which may
appear to be at complete variance with the overall trend may have great
significance and form a definite part of a picture being developed by
the Departments or the Central Intelligence Group. Any dissenting
opinion or commentary will either be incorporated in the report, or be
submitted separately as promptly as possible.

Instructions similar to the above are being issued by the War and Navy
Departments, whose representatives will be directed to comply with the
coordination measures indicated above, and to make available to the
coordinating officer all collection directives and instructions received
from their respective departments.

Very truly yours,

For the Acting Secretary of State:

William R. Eddy

* Source: National Archives and Records
Administration, RG 59, Records of the Department of State, Decimal
File 1945-49, 101.5/4-947. Confidential. Drafted by P.G. Strong and
T.M. Nordbeck. Addressed to American diplomatic and consular
officers “except Germany, Austria, Japan and Korea.”

1 Not printed. (Ibid., 101.5/1-3147) See the
Supplement.

2 Not printed. (National
Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Records of the
Department of State, Decimal File 1945-49, 101.5/2-347) See the
Supplement.

3 Document 181.

193. Circular Instruction From the Department of State193. Circular Instruction From the Department of StateSource

Washington, April 15,
1947.

WITH FURTHER REFERENCE TO NATIONAL INTELLIGENCE AUTHORITY DIRECTIVE ON
“COORDINATION OF COLLECTION ACTIVITIES” (FOREIGN SERVICE SERIAL NO. 671,
FEBRUARY 3, 1947)

Sirs:

Reference is made to the Department's Foreign Service Serial No.
671,1 February 3, 1947, and the
preceding instruction (No. 670)2
concerning the national
Intelligence Authority directive on “Coordination of Collection
Activities”. Your attention is likewise invited to the Department's
circular instruction of April 93 on the same
subject.

With particular reference to the situation in the other American
Republics, there is enclosed for your confidential information a
memorandum prepared in the Department when the subject of the duties and
activities of Attachés and of liaison between Attaches and Ambassadors
was under preliminary discussion last year. While this paper has not
been circulated to the War and Navy Departments, and hence is not an
official directive, it was considered by the State Department
representatives during the discussions leading to the acceptance by
State, War, Navy and CIG of the National
Intelligence Authority directive of December 20, 1946.4 It is
being made available to our Diplomatic Missions in the other American
Republics solely for information and as representing the view prevailing
in the offices of the Department primarily concerned with Latin America.
With respect to point 3 of the memorandum “Reporting on Non-Military and
Non-Naval Matters”, the solution reached, subsequent to the preparation
of the memorandum, is as set forth in the NIA directive of December 20, 1946, paragraph 1(a).

The objective sought both by the memorandum and by the NIA directive is the same, namely the
achievement under the direction of each Chief of Mission of a smoothly
functioning and properly coordinated flow of intelligence.

The Department will be interested in receiving comments from the field
concerning the arrangements established at each Mission under the
aforesaid National Intelligence Authority directive, the receipt of
which provides a favorable opportunity for each Chief of Mission to
review the situation, to evaluate the operations hitherto undertaken,
and to see to it that our objectives are being attained. It is
especially important that Chiefs of Mission eliminate the duplication
and resultant confusion which in the past attended reporting activities
and information collecting activities at some of the posts in the Latin
American area.

This instruction is not being sent to Consulates, but Chiefs of Mission
are authorized in their discretion to make it available.

Very truly yours,

For the Secretary of State:

Ellis O. Briggs

Enclosure5

Department of State Memorandum

Washington, July 9, 1946.

DUTIES AND ACTIVITIES OF ATTACHES

1) Liaison Between Attaches and Ambassadors.

Generally speaking it should be the purpose and duty of Ambassadors to
see to it that all representatives of other Departments and agencies,
including especially Military and Naval Attaches, are fully informed of
the overall work of the mission and of the various developments and
projects being undertaken by the elements composing the chancery. The
Chief of Mission should preside over regular meetings to be attended by
his principal officers. At the discretion of the Chief of Mission, he
may designate a responsible officer of the political section to act as
day-to-day liaison with attaches and officers representing other
agencies. The Ambassador himself should, however, have at least one
regular meeting per week with the principal members of his staff,
including attaches, and should be accessible to them when they desire to
take up matters with him.

2) Military and Naval Attaches Responsible for
Their Own Reports.

Although Military and Naval Attaches are responsible for their own
reports to the War and Navy Departments respectively, they should make
copies available to the Chief of Mission prior to transmission, so that,
if any difference of opinion arises which is not susceptible of
adjustment through discussion, the Chief of Mission can simultaneously
transmit his own report, together with a copy of the Attaché's report,
and call attention to the difference of views and the reasons therefor.
In such circumstances the Attaché shall endorse on his own report
wherein the Embassy is not in agreement.

3) Reporting on Non-Military and Non-Naval
Matters.

An examination should be undertaken by the War and Navy Departments of
the reporting schedule of Attaches with a view to determining to what
extent there is duplication of reports prepared by the chancery. The
State Department is of the opinion that Attache reporting should be
reduced in respect of political, social, economic, and related non-military and non-naval
matters. For such time as Attaches may still be required to report on
such matters, the chancery should be the primary source of information.
The personnel of the chancery will always include officers trained in
political and economic reporting, plus in many instances specialists in
the fields of particular interest in a given country (petroleum in
Venezuela, and sugar in Cuba, for example). Their services are of course
available to Military and Naval Attaches in assisting them to prepare
reports.

4) Sources of Attachés' Information Should be Made
Available to the Chief of Mission on his Specific Request (Except re
Information on Military or Naval Matters).

The Ambassador is the personal representative of the President, in
addition to being the ranking representative of the United States
Government abroad. He must have unquestioned authority over all
representatives of all other agencies of our Government abroad. Since
the Ambassador is responsible for the success of United States
representation as a whole, and for interpreting to the President and the
Department of State developments affecting relations between the country
to which he is accredited and the United States, there may be times when
in his considered judgment, he must (except with regard to information
on subjects that are exclusively military or naval in character as noted
above) be in a position to ascertain under appropriate safeguards of
secrecy the source of an Attaché's information, in order appropriately
to evaluate it. On the specific request of the Ambassador, the source of
such non-military/naval information should accordingly be made available
to him.

* Source: National Archives and Records
Administration, RG 59, Records of the Department of State, Decimal
File 1945-49, 101.5/4-1547. Confidential. Addressed to American
Diplomatic Officers in the other American Republics. Drafted by
Briggs on February 27.

1 See footnote
2, Document 192.

2 See footnote 1, Document 192.

3 Document 192.

4 Reference is to Document
181. December 20, 1946, was the date of the meeting at
which agreement was reached on the directive; see footnote 5, Document 179.

5 Confidential.

194. National Intelligence Authority Directive No. 9194. National Intelligence Authority Directive No. 9Source

Washington, April 18,
1947.

COORDINATION OF INTELLIGENCE ACTIVITIES RELATED TO FOREIGN ATOMIC ENERGY
DEVELOPMENTS AND POTENTIALITIES

1. Pursuant to the President's letter of 22 January 1946, designating
this Authority as responsible for planning, developing and coordinating
all Federal foreign
intelligence activities so as to assure the most effective
accomplishment of the intelligence mission related to the national
security, the following policies and procedures relating to Federal
intelligence activities in the field of foreign atomic energy
developments and potentialities affecting the national security are
announced:

a. The Director of Central Intelligence, subject to the direction and
control of this Authority, is hereby authorized and directed to
coordinate the collection by agencies subject to N.I.A. coordination of
all intelligence information related to foreign atomic energy
developments and potentialities affecting the national security, and to
accomplish the correlation, evaluation, and appropriate dissemination
within the Government of the resulting intelligence. The Director of
Central Intelligence is further authorized to arrange with other
intelligence agencies of the Government to utilize their collection
facilities in this field.1

For the National Intelligence Authority:

J.S. Earman
Acting Secretary, N.I.A.

* Source: National Archives and Records
Administration, RG 218, Records of the Joint Chiefs of Staff,
Leahy Papers, No.
132. Top Secret.

1 On July 25 the NIA
agreed to a proposal from the Chairman of the Atomic Energy
Commission that the AEC become a
permanent member of the Intelligence Advisory Board. On August 5 the
Chairman of the AEC designated Rear
Admiral John E.
Gingrich, the AEC's
Director of Intelligence, as the Commission's representative on the
IAB. (Memorandum from
Hillenkoetter to Leahy,
et al., August 12; ibid., No. 131) See the Supplement.

195. Memorandum by the Acting Secretary of the National Intelligence Advisory Board (Earman)195. Memorandum by the Acting Secretary of the National Intelligence
Advisory Board (Earman)Source

Washington, April 21,
1947.

IAB 1

COORDINATION OF INTELLIGENCE PRODUCTION

1. Circulated herewith for consideration of the Intelligence Advisory
Board at its next meeting are:

a. Recommendations contained in the report of the ad hoc committee
appointed to draft a proposed N.I.A. Directive on “The Coordination of
Intelligence Production” (Enclosure A).

b. Minority report from the ad hoc committee member representing the
Assistant Chief of Air Staff-2 (Enclosure B).

For the Intelligence Advisory Board:

J.S. Earman

Acting Secretary, N.I.A.

Enclosure A

Memorandum for the Secretary of the Intelligence
Advisory Board (Lay)

Washington, April 18, 1947.

SUBJECT

Proposed N.I.A. Directive on the Coordination of Intelligence
Production

1. The Ad Hoc Committee has prepared the attached draft of a proposed
N.I.A. Directive on the Coordination of Intelligence Production. It has
the unanimous concurrence of the committee except for paragraph 2 c (4)
on which there is attached a minority report from the A-2 member.

2. The proposed compilations of basic intelligence will be called
National Intelligence Surveys (NIS).
That on the Soviet Union, for example, would be the National
Intelligence Survey of the USSR.

3. In the establishment of arrangements for the production, continuing
revision, and dissemination of the NIS
due consideration should be given, in the interests of economy and
efficiency, to the necessity of closely coordinating the NIS with the overall intelligence
requirements of the individual intelligence agencies.

4. An essential preliminary to the initial planning for the production of
NIS will be consultation with the
JIC and the ID, WDGS, with a view to gaining their consent
to merging their respective productions, JANIS and SID, with NIS.

5. It is contemplated that in working out the details for producing,
maintaining current, and disseminating the NIS careful consideration will be given to the intelligence
needs of the JCS and all other agencies
with responsibilities involving national security. These needs should be
automatically determined in the course of pursuing the following program
to initiate the production of NIS:

a. Adoption of an outline of the complete contents.

b. Formulation of the procedure for producing, maintaining current, and
disseminating NIS.

c. Establishment of priorities by section and country for production of
NIS.

d. Allocation of production and maintenance responsibilities by agreement
of CIG and the agencies represented on
IAB.

6. Recommendations

a. That IAB concur in the attached draft
of a proposed N.I.A. Directive.

b. That IAB go on record as desiring that
members of JIC consent to merge JANIS with NIS as mentioned in paragraph 4 above.

c. That IAB recommend to the Director of
Central Intelligence that he request the Director of Intelligence,
WDGS, to consent to merge SID with NIS as mentioned in paragraph 4 above; and,

d. That IAB and JIC appoint an Ad Hoc Committee with represent-atives from
CIG, ORI (SD), ID (WDGS), ONI
(Navy), A-2 (AAF), JIS, and JTS to plan,
with the aid of as many subcommittees as necessary, the program to
initiate the production of NIS outlined
in 5a, b, c, d above, the committee to make specific recommendations to
the Director of Central Intelligence regarding the following:

(1) The integrating of the JANIS and
SID production into the program to
be produced under the name of National Intelligence Surveys, and

(2) The future production and priorities for the integrated program for
NIS taking into consideration past
production of JANIS's and SID's.

Donald Edgar, Chairman1

Mr. Allan Evans

Colonel R.F. Ennis

Captain R.K. Davis, USN

Colonel E.P. Mussett

Enclosure

Proposed N.I.A. Directive

COORDINATION OF INTELLIGENCE PRODUCTION

1. The following overall policies and objectives are established for the
coordination of the production of intelligence.

2. In order that all facilities of the Government may be utilized to
their capacity and the responsibilities of each agency may be clearly
defined in accordance with its mission, dominant interest, and
capabilities, the whole field of intelligence production is divided into
the following four categories, and responsibilities are allocated as
indicated:

a. Basic Intelligence

(1) Basic intelligence is that factual intelligence which results from
the collation of encyclopedic information of a more or less permanent or
static nature and general interest which, as a result of evaluation and
interpretation, is determined to be the best available.

(2) An outline of all basic intelligence required by the Government shall
be prepared by the CIG in collaboration
with the appropriate agencies. This outline shall be broken down into
chapters, sections, and subsections which shall be allocated as
production and maintenance responsibilities to CIG and those agencies of the Government which are best
qualified by reason of their intelligence requirements, production
capabilities, and dominant interest to assume the production and
maintenance responsibility.

(3) When completed, this outline and tentative allocations of production
and maintenance responsibilities shall be submitted for NIA approval and publication as an annex to
this directive. It is expected that as the result of constant
consultation with the agencies by the Director of Central Intelligence,
both the outline and the allocations will be revised from time to time
to insure the production of the basic intelligence required by the
agencies and the fullest possible use of current agency capabilities.
Changes in the outline or allocations shall be effected by agreement
between the Director of Central Intelligence and the agencies
concerned.

(4) This basic intelligence shall be compiled and continuously maintained
in National Intelligence Surveys to cover foreign countries, areas, or
broad special subjects as appropriate. It will be distributed to the
agencies in such form as the agencies agree will meet their
requirements.

(5) The Director of Central Intelligence shall be responsible for
coordinating production and maintenance and for accomplishing the
editing, publication, and dissemination of these National Intelligence
Surveys and shall make such requests on the agencies as are necessary
for their proper development and maintenance.

(6) Departments or agencies to be called on for contributions to this
undertaking may include agencies other than those represented
permanently in the IAB.

b. Current Intelligence

(1) Current intelligence is that spot information or intelligence of all
types and forms of immediate interest and value to operating or policy
staffs, which is used by them without the delays incident to complete
evaluation or interpretation.

(2) The CIG and the several agencies
shall produce and disseminate such current intelligence as may be
necessary to meet their own internal requirements or external
responsibilities.

(3) Interagency dissemination of current intelligence shall be based on
interagency agreement including N.I.A. Directive No. 1 and the principle
of informing all who need to know.

c. Staff Intelligence

(1) Staff intelligence is that intelligence prepared by any department or
agency through the process of correlation and interpretation of all
intelligence material available to it in order to meet the specific
requirements and responsibilities of the department or agency
concerned.

(2) Each intelligence agency has the ultimate responsibility for the
preparation of such staff intelligence as its own department shall
require. It is recognized that the staff intelligence of each of the
departments must be broader in scope than any allocation of collection
responsibility, recognition of production capabilities, or dominant
interest might indicate. In fact, the full foreign intelligence picture
is of interest in varying degrees at different times to each of the
departments.

(3) Any agency, either through the Director of Central Intelligence or
directly, may call upon other appropriate agencies for intelligence
which does not fall within its own field of dominant interest. Such
requests shall be made upon the agencies in accordance with their
production capabilities and dominant interest.

(4) The division of interests agreed to in N.I.A. Directive No. 7 shall
serve as a general delineation of dominant interests, subject to
refinement and adaptation to the purposes of intelligence production
through a continuous program of coordination by the Director of Central
Intelligence.

(5) As a part of the coordination program, the Director of Central
Intelligence will seek the assistance of the IAB intelligence agencies in minimizing the necessity for
any agency to develop intelligence in fields outside its dominant
interests.

(6) The CIG and the agencies shall, for
purposes of coordination, exchange information on projects and plans for
the production of staff intelligence.

(7) It shall be normal practice that staff intelligence of one agency is
available to the other intelligence agencies permanently represented on
the IAB.

d. Strategic and National Policy Intelligence

(1) Strategic and national policy intelligence as defined by the NIA shall henceforth be known by the short
title “National Intelligence.”

(2) The production and dissemination of national intelligence shall be
the responsibility of the Director of Central Intelligence.

(3) The Director of Central Intelligence shall plan and develop the
production of national intelligence in coordination with the IAB agencies in order that he may obtain
from them within the limits of their capabilities the departmental
intelligence upon which national intelligence is based.

(4) The Director of Central Intelligence shall by agreement with the
pertinent agency or agencies receive such estimates, reports, and
periodic briefs or summaries prepared by the individual departments or
agencies in their fields of dominant interest or in accordance with
their production capabilities as may be necessary in the production of
mutually undertaken intelligence reports or estimates.

3. The research facilities required by any agency to process its own
current and staff intelligence shall be sufficient to satisfy its
individual needs after taking full cognizance of the facilities of the
other agencies. Each agency shall endeavor to maintain sufficient
research facilities, not only to accomplish the intelligence production
tasks allocated to it directly under the foregoing provisions but also
to provide such additional intelligence reports or estimates within its
field of dominant interest as may be necessary to satisfy the
requirements of the other agencies under such allocations.

4. Implementation. Assumption of responsibilities as allocated herein
shall be effected progressively and rapidly under the coordination of
the Director of Central Intelligence.

Enclosure B

Memorandum for the Director of Central Intelligence
(Vandenberg)

Washington April 17, 1947.

SUBJECT

Proposed NIA Directive on the
Coordination of Intelligence Production

1. The AC/AS-2 member of the Ad Hoc Committee is in general accord with
the majority report of the Committee as presented, but dissents from that report with respect
to paragraph 2 c (4) of the proposed directive.

2. Dominant interest is inseparable from mission, and the mission of each
intelligence agency is determined by and must always be responsive to
the requirements of the department or agency which it serves. There is
no reason for attempting to delineate dominant interests, and
consequently no reason for including paragraph 2 c (4) in the
directive.

3. It is further considered that dominant interests should not and can
not be defined by the assignment of collection responsibilities.
Dominant interests flow from the mission of the particular department or
agency, which is not necessarily true of agreed collection assignments;
collection assignments may be based on capabilities, dominant interest
never.

4. Also, in including paragraph 2 c (4) under the heading “Staff
Intelligence” there is a danger that, in spite of its broad definition,
staff intelligence will tend to become confused with intelligence in
fields of dominant interest and consequently its production would be
narrowed and restricted.

5. For these reasons, the AC/AS-2 representative is of the opinion that
paragraph 2 c (4) should be deleted from the proposed directive.

6. However, if this deletion should not be favorably considered by the
Intelligence Advisory Board, the following paragraph is submitted as a
substitute for paragraph 2 c (4) and in desire to reach an accord. This
proposed substitute accomplishes the purpose desired, and is not open to
the objections noted above.

a. Proposed paragraph 2 c (4). For the purposes of par (3) above, the
following division of interests agreed to in NIA Directive No. 7 subject to refinement through a
continuous program of coordination by the Director of Central
Intelligence, shall serve as a general delineation of dominant
interests, subject to refinement and adaptation to the purposes of
intelligence production through a continuous program of coordination by
the Director of Central Intelligence.

Political, Cultural, Sociological Intelligence—State Department

Military Intelligence—War Department

Naval Intelligence—Navy Department

Air Intelligence—Army Air Forces

Economic and Scientific Intelligence—Each agency in accordance with its
respective needs

E.P. Mussett
Colonel, Air Forces

* Source: Central Intelligence Agency
Historical Files, HS/HC-280. Secret. Prepared for the Intelligence
Advisory Board.

1 Printed from a copy that bears these typed
signatures.

The National Security Act of 1947The National Security Act of 1947: Document List

Introduction

Document 196: Memorandum From the General Counsel of the Central Intelligence Group (Houston) to the Director of Central Intelligence (Vandenberg)

Washington, June 13, 1946.

Source: Central Intelligence Agency Historical Files, HS/HC-803, Item 13. No classification marking. The source text was a transcript prepared for the CIA Historian on June 6, 1952.

Document 197: Memorandum for the File

Washington, July 17, 1946.

Source: Truman Library, Papers of Clark M. Clifford, National Military Establishment: CIA. No classification marking.

Document 198: Minutes of the Fourth Meeting of the National Intelligence Authority

Washington, July 17, 1946, 10:30 a.m.

Source: Central Intelligence Agency Historical Files, HS/HC-245. Top Secret. The meeting was held at the State Department.

Document 199: Memorandum From the Director of Central Intelligence (Vandenberg) to the National Intelligence Authority

Washington, July 30, 1946.

Source: Central Intelligence Agency Historical Files, HS/HC-804, Item 2, Job 84-B00443R, Box 7. Confidential. The source text is a transcript prepared for the CIA Historian on September 4, 1952.

Document 200: Memorandum From the Director of Central Intelligence (Vandenberg) to the National Intelligence Authority

Washington, August 21, 1946.

Source: Central Intelligence Agency Historical Files, HS/HC-804, Item 2, Job 84-B00442R, Box 7. Confidential. The source text is a transcript made for the CIA Historian on September 4, 1952.

Document 201: Memorandum From the Director of Central Intelligence (Vandenberg) to the President's Special Counsel (Clifford)

Washington, December 2, 1946.

Source: Truman Library, Papers of Clark M. Clifford, National Military Establishment: CIA. No classification marking.

Document 202: Draft Central Intelligence Group Memorandum

Washington, undated.

Source: Central Intelligence Agency Records, Job 90-00610R, Box 1, Folder 3. Secret. The source text, attached to a copy of Document 201, may be the document referred to in Vandenberg's office diary for December 9, 1946, which notes: “went to see Mr. Clifford at the White House with the article for the President's ‘State of the Union’ speech to find out if he approved our project of advocating immediate legislation.” (Central Intelligence Agency Records, Job 80-01731R, Box 31, Folder 1) Vandenberg also alluded to the possible inclusion of a recommendation for intelligence legislation in the State of the Union message in his January 8 conversation with Clifford; see Document 203.

Document 203: Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, January 8, 1947.

Source: Truman Library, Papers of George M. Elsey, Central Intelligence. No classification marking. Drafted on January 9 by Elsey.

Document 204: Memorandum From the Chief of the Legislative Liaison Division of the Central Intelligence Group (Pforzheimer) to the Director of Central Intelligence (Vandenberg)

Washington, January 23, 1947.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 263, Records of the Central Intelligence Agency, Troy Papers, CIG and NSA of '47. No classification marking.

Document 205: Memorandum for the Record

Washington, undated.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 263, Records of the Central Intelligence Agency, Troy Papers, Legislation 1947. Confidential. The source text is undated; the date is from a handwritten date on the copy reproduced in CIA Cold War Records: The CIA under Harry Truman, pp. 105-109.

Document 206: Letter From the Deputy Director of Central Intelligence (Wright) to the President's Administrative Assistant (Murphy)

Washington, January 27, 1947.

Source: Central Intelligence Agency Records, Job 90-00610R, Box 1, Folder 3. No classification marking.

Document 207: Memorandum From the Deputy Director of Central Intelligence (Wright) to the President's Special Counsel (Clifford)

Washington, January 28, 1947.

Source: Central Intelligence Agency Records, Job 90-00610R, Box 1, Folder 3. No classification marking. The memorandum bears no signature but appears to be from Wright.

Document 208: Memorandum From the Chief of the Legislative Liaison Division, Central Intelligence Group (Pforzheimer) to the Deputy Director of Central Intelligence (Wright)

Washington, March 5, 1947.

Source: Central Intelligence Agency Records, Job 90-00610R, Box 1, Folder 3, CIG Enabling Act, 1947. No classification marking. Attached to the source text is a handwritten note addressed to Pforzheimer which reads, “Noted. Concur. Wright.”

Document 209: Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, March 10, 1947.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Records of the Department of State, Decimal File 1945-49, 101.61/3-1047. No classification marking. Drafted by Sandifer.

Document 210: Memorandum From George M. Elsey to the President's Special Counsel (Clifford)

Washington, March 14, 1947.

Source: Truman Library, Papers of George M. Elsey, Central Intelligence. No classification marking. Elsey was Clifford's assistant. Also reproduced in CIA Cold War Records: The CIA under Harry Truman, p. 127.

Document 211: Memorandum From the Secretary of State's Special Assistant for Research and Intelligence (Eddy) to Acting Secretary of State Acheson

Washington, April 17, 1947.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Records of the Department of State, Decimal File 1945-49, 101.5/5-547. Confidential. Drafted by Eddy.

Document 212: Letter From Secretary of State Marshall to Senator Chan Gurney

Washington, May 5, 1947.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Records of the Department of State, Decimal File 1945-49, 101.5/5-547. No classification marking. Drafted by Marshall. A note on the source text reads: “Delivered by hand 5/6/47.”

Document 213: Memorandum From the Chief of the Legislative Liaison Division, Central Intelligence Group (Pforzheimer) to the Director of Central Intelligence (Hillenkoetter)

Washington, May 9, 1947.

Source: Central Intelligence Agency Records, Job 90-00610R, Box 1, Folder 2. No classification marking. Attached to this memorandum is an undated draft (see the Supplement) of Document 214. It omits one sentence that is in the signed version. Also in the Supplement is a second May 9 memorandum from Pforzheimer to Hillenkoetter, transmitting a draft of the memorandum to Hillenkoetter, which is identical to the signed copy. (Central Intelligence Agency Records, Job 90-00610R, Box 1, Folder 2) Rear Admiral Roscoe H. Hillenkoetter was sworn in as Director of Central Intelligence on May 1.

Document 214: Memorandum From the National Intelligence Authority to the Director of Central Intelligence (Hillenkoetter)

Washington, May 14, 1947.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Records of the Department of State, Decimal File 1945-49, 101.5/5-1947. Confidential. The source text was an information copy sent by the NIA secretary to Eddy and the other members of the Intelligence Advisory Board. These instructions apparently were drafted in CIG for the signature of the principals. For a similar but more detailed memorandum, which probably is the forerunner of the text printed, see the memorandum from Pforzheimer to Hillenkoetter, May 9, in the Supplement. (Central Intelligence Agency Records, Job 90-00610R, Box 1, Folder 2)

Document 215: Memorandum for the Record

Washington, May 26, 1947.

Source: Central Intelligence Agency Records, Job 90-00610R, Box 1, Folder 2. Confidential. The memorandum is unsigned but appears to have been drafted by Pforzheimer.

Document 216: Memorandum From the Chief of the Legislative Liaison Division, Central Intelligence Group (Pforzheimer) to the Director of Central Intelligence (Hillenkoetter)

Washington, May 29, 1947.

Source: Central Intelligence Agency Records, Job 90-00610R, Box 1, Folder 2. Confidential.

Document 217: Letter From the Director of Central Intelligence (Hillenkoetter) to the Chairman of the Senate Armed Services Committee (Gurney)

Washington, June 3, 1947.

Source: Central Intelligence Agency, Historical Files, HS/HC-805, Item 10. Secret. The source text is a transcript prepared for the CIA Historian on September 11, 1952.

Document 218: Memorandum for the Record

Washington, June 19, 1947.

Source: Central Intelligence Agency Records, Job 90-00610R, Box 1, Folder 2. No classification marking.

Document 219: Central Intelligence Group Memorandum

Washington, July 21, 1947.

Source: Central Intelligence Agency Records, Job 90-00610R, Box 1, Folder 5. No classification marking. The source text is neither addressed nor signed and contains no drafting information. It appears that it was drafted in the office of the CIG's General Counsel. At the time that this memorandum was written, the differing House and Senate versions of the national security legislation had gone to conference.

Document 220: Memorandum From the Director of Central Intelligence (Hillenkoetter) to the National Intelligence Authority

Washington, September 11, 1947.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 218, Records of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, Leahy Papers, No. 129. Confidential. The source text carries a handwritten annotation “Approved by Adm Leahy 20 Sept 1947.” Another copy of this memorandum is in CIA Cold War Records: The CIA under Harry Truman, pp. 137-138.

Document 221: Memorandum From the Director of Central Intelligence (Hillenkoetter) to the Intelligence Advisory Board

Washington, September 18, 1947.

Source: Central Intelligence Agency Historical Files, HS/HC-806, Item 6. Confidential. Addressed to Eddy, Chamberlin, Inglis, McDonald, and Gingrich. The source text was transcribed on October 1, 1952, for the CIA Historian.

Document 222: Memorandum From the Director of Central Intelligence (Hillenkoetter) to the National Security Council

Washington, September 19, 1947.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Records of the Department of State, Records of the Bureau of Intelligence and Research: Lot 62 D 42, IAC. Confidential.

Document 223: Memorandum From the Director of Central Intelligence (Hillenkoetter) to the National Security Council

Washington, September 19, 1947.

Source: Truman Library, Papers of Harry S. Truman, President's Secretary's Files, Intelligence File. Confidential.

Document 224: Memorandum From Acting Secretary of State Lovett to Director of Central Intelligence Hillenkoetter

Washington, September 23, 1947.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Records of the Department of State, Decimal File 1945-49, 101.61/9-1147. Confidential. Drafted by William A. Eddy on September 18. Attached was a vote slip form, signed by Lovett and addressed to the secretary of the NIA, indicating Department of State approval of the September 11 memorandum subject to Lovett's comments. Under the provisions of the National Security Act of 1947, the Central Intelligence Group became the Central Intelligence Agency on September 19, and Hillenkoetter became the Agency's first Director of Central Intelligence on September 20.

Document 225: Minutes of the First Meeting of the National Security Council

Washington, September 26, 1947.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 273, Records of the National Security Council, NSC Minutes, 1st Meeting. Secret. The meeting was held at the White House.

Document 226: Memorandum From the Executive Secretary of the National Security Council (Souers) to the National Security Council

Washington, October 10, 1947.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Records of the Department of State, Records of the Bureau of Intelligence and Research: Lot 62 D 42, IAC. Confidential. Addressed to the Secretaries of State, Defense, Army, Navy, and Air Force, and the Chairman of the National Security Resources Board.

Document 227: Memorandum From Director of Central Intelligence Hillenkoetter to the Intelligence Advisory Board

Washington, October 10, 1947.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Records of the Department of State, Records of the Bureau of Intelligence and Research: Lot 62 D 42, IAC. Confidential. Addressed to Armstrong, Chamberlin, Inglis, McDonald, and Gingrich.

Document 228: Memorandum From the Secretary of State's Acting Special Assistant for Research and Intelligence (Armstrong) to Acting Secretary of State Lovett

Washington, October 16, 1947.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Records of the Department of State, Records of the Bureau of Intelligence and Research: Lot 62 D 42, IAC. Confidential.

Document 229: Memorandum for Director of Central Intelligence Hillenkoetter

Washington, October 22, 1947.

Source: Central Intelligence Agency Records, Job 90-00610R, Box 1, Folder 9. Confidential. No drafting information appears on the source text. From the context, however, it appears that it may have been written by Pforzheimer.

Document 230: Memorandum From the Secretary of the Army (Royall) to the Executive Secretary of the National Security Council (Souers)

Washington, November 26, 1947.

Source: Truman Library, Papers of Harry S. Truman, Records of the National Security Council. Confidential. Sent through the Secretary of Defense. Attached to the source text is a November 28 note on the stationery of the Office of the Secretary of Defense addressed to Souers from John H. Ohly, indicating that Forrestal had not seen Royall's memorandum but that a copy was being held for him.

Document 231: Memorandum From the General Counsel of the Central Intelligence Agency (Houston) to Director of Central Intelligence Hillenkoetter

Washington, April 7, 1948.

Source: Central Intelligence Agency Records, Job 90-00610R, Box 1, Folder 17. Secret.

Document 232: Memorandum for the Record

Washington, April 8, 1948.

Source: Central Intelligence Agency Records, Job 90-00610R, Box 1, Folder 7. No classification marking.

Document 233: Memorandum From the President's Assistant (Steelman) to President Truman

Washington, April 24, 1948.

Source: Truman Library, Papers of Harry S. Truman, President's Secretary's Files. No classification marking.

Document 234: Memorandum From the General Counsel of the Central Intelligence Agency (Houston) to Director of Central Intelligence Hillenkoetter

Washington, May 7, 1948.

Source: Central Intelligence Agency Historical Files, HS/HC-808, Item 10. No classification marking. The source text is a copy transcribed for the CIA Historian on September 10, 1952.

Document 235: Memorandum From the General Counsel of the Central Intelligence Agency (Houston) to Director of Central Intelligence Hillenkoetter

Washington, September 2, 1948.

Source: Central Intelligence Agency Historical Files, HS/HC-208, Item 31. No classification marking.

Document 236: Letter From Director of Central Intelligence Hillenkoetter to the Director of the Bureau of the Budget (Webb)

Washington, December 15, 1948.

Source: Truman Library, Papers of Harry S. Truman, Records of the National Security Council, File CIA, Memos for Director, 1948. No classification marking.

Document 237: Memorandum From the Assistant General Counsel, Central Intelligence Agency (Pforzheimer) to Director of Central Intelligence Hillenkoetter

Washington, January 6, 1949.

Source: Central Intelligence Agency Records, Job 90-00610R, Box 1, Folder 17. Confidential.

Document 238: Memorandum From the Secretary of State's Special Assistant for Research and Intelligence (Armstrong) to Acting Secretary of State Lovett

Washington, January 11, 1949.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Records of the Department of State, Decimal File 1945-49, 101.5/12-2948. No classification marking. Drafted by Fisher Howe and approved by EUR, OFS, CON, ODA, ORP, L/A, and C/L.

Document 239: Letter From Director of Central Intelligence Hillenkoetter to the Speaker of the House of Representatives (Rayburn)

Washington, February 11, 1949.

Source: Central Intelligence Agency Records, Job 90-00610R, Box 1, Folder 17. No classification marking. A similar letter was sent to Senator Millard Tydings, chairman of the Senate Armed Services Committee, on the same date. (Ibid.) See the Supplement.

Document 240: Memorandum From the General Counsel (Houston) and the Legislative Liaison Officer of the Central Intelligence Agency (Pforzheimer) to the Executive of the Central Intelligence Agency (Shannon)

Washington, September 27, 1949.

Source: Central Intelligence Agency Historical Files, HS/HC-84, Item 3. Confidential. The source text is a transcript prepared for the CIA Historian on September 9, 1952.

IntroductionIntroduction

One of General Vandenberg's early concerns as Director of Central
Intelligence was to secure a statutory basis for the existence of the
Central Intelligence Group. During the concerted effort to establish a
national foreign intelligence system in the months immediately following
World War II, there was a tendency to think in terms of creating the
system by Executive order or Presidential directive, both because it was
more expeditious and because it minimized controversy. The Joint Chiefs
of Staff plan (Document 13) clearly envisaged a
Presidential directive; the McCormack plan appeared to do so; and when the
Secretaries of State, War, and Navy reached agreement in January 1946,
they also recommended action by Presidential directive. (Secretary of
State Byrnes apparently believed
that the Reorganization Act of 1945 gave the President the authority he
required.)

The Joint Chiefs' plan, however, envisaged that legislation would
eventually be sought and so did its latter day variant, the Three
Secretaries' proposal, although the reference to future legislation had
been eliminated by the time the proposal became the Presidential letter
of January 22. (Document 71) Admiral Souers had
made a strong recommendation for legislation in his final report to the
National Intelligence Authority (Document
154), citing both the practical disabilities of operating as a
non-statutory agency (e.g., inability to sign contracts, recruit
personnel directly, or expend funds) and arguing that the CIG needed “the necessary authority and
standing to develop, support, coordinate and direct an adequate Federal
intelligence program.”

Vandenberg was already well aware of the problem when he was the Army
representative on the Intelligence Advisory Board, but when he began his
tenure as Director of Central Intelligence, with plans for a major
expansion of CIG's size and scope, he
faced these difficulties as practical issues. Broken down into component
parts, there were actually two problems, or two phases of the same
problem. One was his strong desire to put the CIG on a statutory basis. From Vandenberg's perspective,
statutory authority was one important way (perhaps the most important
way) to strengthen the position of the DCI, a thought presumably reinforced by Vandenberg's
initial skirmish with the Departmental intelligence chiefs over the
definition of his authority.

There was also a more urgent reason for legislation. The Independent
Offices Appropriation Act of 1945 (58 Stat. 361, Sec. 213) provided in
effect that no agency could
be in existence for more than one year without Congressional
appropriation. There was thus a serious possibility that under the terms
of the act, the State, War, and Navy Departments would be unable to
transfer funds to the CIG after January
1947.

In the interim, as long as the Presidential directive of January 22 was
the basic charter of the intelligence system, there was a pressing need
to streamline the cumbersome administrative arrangements that it
created. If Vandenberg were to proceed with his ambitious plans for the
Central Intelligence Group, these arrangements would be impediments to
rapid and effective action.

Vandenberg moved quickly and energetically on all these fronts. Within 3
days of becoming Director of Central Intelligence, he had received a
legal opinion from his general counsel on the CIG's administrative authority. It confirmed for him what
he presumably already knew: “the essential problem is that CIG has no power to expend government
funds.” (Document 196)

By early July 1946, Vandenberg's legal advisers had prepared a draft bill
for submission to the White House. (See the Supplement) It provided both
for fiscal and other authorities the CIG
lacked and for clear primacy over the Departmental intelligence
agencies.

In a July 12 memorandum to Vandenberg, Clark
Clifford, the President's Special Counsel, complained
about “the failure of the bill to define in clear terms the sense in
which the word ‘intelligence' is used. For example, ‘intelligence,'
‘foreign intelligence,' ‘intelligence relating to the national
security,' 'strategic and national policy intelligence,' ‘the national
intelligence mission,' and ‘intelligence affecting the national
security,' are used indiscriminately as though they were
synonymous.”

In addition, Clifford thought the
proposed bill was “self-contradictory,” and feared that “the failure to
distinguish between ‘intelligence' and ‘foreign intelligence’” would
“lead to the suspicion that the ‘National Intelligence Authority' and
the ‘Central Intelligence Agency' will attempt to control, with the
powers granted to them in this bill, the F.B.I. and other intelligence
activities.” (See the Supplement)

At a meeting on July 16, however, Vandenberg's legal counsel, Lawrence
Houston, and NIA Secretary James Lay persuaded Clifford “that the original concept of
the Central Intelligence Group should now be altered; experience had
shown that it would be ineffective if it remained only a small planning
staff and that it must now become a legally established, fairly
sizeable, operating agency. Mr. Clifford stated that he would discuss this new concept
with Admiral Leahy and the
President.” (Document 197)

In the meantime, Vandenberg tackled the problem at his first formal
meeting with the National Intelligence Authority on July 17, 1946,
declaring frankly that he needed his own funds and that the CIG must be established on a statutory basis, and sketching some of
his own plans for expansion. Vandenberg got a mixed reception from the
NIA but on the whole, the outcome
was favorable for his purposes. Admiral Leahy told him that the President opposed introduction
of a bill to obtain an independent budget and status for the NIA, but that the NIA could draft one “with a view to the possibility of
presenting it to the next Congress. Admiral Leahy stated that in the meantime
he felt that General Vandenberg should be given, so far as practicable,
all the assistance that he requires.” (Document
198)

The upshot was that the NIA agreed that
Secretary of State Byrnes should
try to find a solution to Vandenberg's problems in consultation with the
Director of the Bureau of the Budget, and report back to the Authority.
The result of Byrnes' inquiries
was a complicated procedure, attached to Document
199 and the annexed correspondence in the Supplement, in which
the Secretaries of State, War, and Navy in effect delegated certain
fiscal authority to the Director of Central Intelligence, giving him
working control over the funds that their Departments transferred to the
Central Intelligence Group. The new arrangement eased the administrative
burdens on the CIG and made the
procedures under which it operated considerably less burdensome.
Although in one sense a technical administrative matter, the arrangement
was of broader significance, as the first step toward making the CIG autonomous.

Toward the end of 1946, the time seemed propitious for a renewed attempt
along the legislative route, and Vandenberg submitted new draft
legislation to the White House at the beginning of December 1946. (Document 201) By that time, however, it was
becoming evident that a statutory enactment concerning the Central
Intelligence Group and the national intelligence structure was more
likely to occur as part of a bill on armed forces unification than as a
separate measure. There was no necessary connection between the two
subjects, but there had long been a tendency in some quarters to regard
national intelligence organization less as an issue in its own right
than as one of the many components of the complex problem of unifying
the military services.

On June 15, 1946, President Truman, in a letter to the chairmen of the Senate and House
committees on military and naval affairs, reported that the Secretaries
of War and Navy had reached agreement on 12 principles on which
unification legislation could be based. Among them was the establishment
of a Central Intelligence Agency which would operate under a Council of
National Defense, an early designation for what later came into
existence as the National Security Council. (Public
Papers of the Presidents of the United States: Harry S. Truman, 1946 (Washington: U.S. Government Printing Office 1962), pages
303-305) At that point there were still some questions on which the
military departments had not yet reached agreement, but in January 1947
the Secretaries of War and the Navy reported to the President that they had resolved their remaining
differences and reiterated their earlier support for unification
legislation that would include provision for a Central Intelligence
Agency. (Patterson and Forrestal to the President, January 16,
1947, in Senate Report 239, 80th Congress, 1st Session, National
Security Act of 1947, page 5) Truman transmitted their letter to the Congress under
cover of a brief letter of his own in which he noted that
“Representatives of my office and of the armed services are engaged in
drafting a bill to be submitted to the Congress for its consideration.”
(Truman to President pro
tempore of the Senate and Speaker of the House of Representatives,
January 18, 1947; Public Papers of the Presidents of
the United States: Harry S.
Truman, 1947, pages 101-102)

Ever cautious about separate legislation on intelligence, the White House
working group drafting the armed forces unification bill included the
establishment of a Central Intelligence Agency as one of its provisions.
The bill that was finally sent forward was much briefer and less
comprehensive than Vandenberg and his colleagues in the CIG would have liked; their preference was
for an “enabling act” that would spell out in detail the special powers
and authorities of the Director of Central Intelligence, e.g.,
provisions governing unvouchered funds, exemption from laws and
regulations relating to the expenditure of government funds, exemption
from laws requiring publication of data on personnel, and procurement
authority. But the White House continued to fear that a Central
Intelligence Agency might prove controversial in the Congress and
resisted efforts to expand the scope of the bill, hoping to keep the
intelligence provisions as inconspicuous as possible and preferring that
more detailed enabling legislation be submitted to Congress at a later
date.

There was no Department of State representation on the White
House-chaired drafting group that prepared the legislation, but the
fourth draft of the bill, at least, was sent to the Department for
comment. In a long memorandum to the President dated February 7, 1947,
Secretary of State Marshall strongly criticized the provisions for
establishing a National Security Council and expressed reservations
about the provisions establishing a Central Intelligence Agency.
Concerning the latter, he wrote:

“The Secretary of State is at present Chairman of the National
Intelligence Agency [sic] composed of four members. The new agency would
be responsible to the National Security Council which itself is subject
to the objections already set forth and on which the Secretary of State
is numerically subordinated to the heads of the military establishments.
The Foreign Service of the Department of State is the only collection
agency of the government which covers the whole world, and we should be
very slow to subject the collection and evaluation of this foreign
intelligence to other establishments, especially during times of peace.
The powers of the proposed
agency seem almost unlimited and need clarification.” (The full text of
the memorandum is printed in Foreign Relations,
1947, volume I, pages 712-715.)

Only one possibly related document has been found: a brief May 5, 1947,
letter from Marshall to Senator Chan Gurney (Chairman of the Senate
Armed Services Committee, which handled the National Security bill in
the Senate) simply confirming that “The legislation regarding the CIG reflects the unchanged status of the
agreement reached in February by the Secretaries of War and Navy and
myself.” (Document 212) No other documents
that shed light on the Department of State position and the apparent
changes it underwent were found.

The House and Senate hearings and then the floor debate went on from
February, when the White House submitted the bill, to late July, when
both houses passed and the President signed the National Security Act of
1947. The provisions of the bill relating to intelligence attracted
considerable attention, and issues such as whether the Director of
Central Intelligence should be a military officer or a civilian were
extensively debated. (For a detailed account of the Congressional
consideration, see Troy, Donovan and the CIA ,
chapter XVI.) As finally enacted, Section 102 abolished the National
Intelligence Authority, established the Central Intelligence Agency, and
briefly spelled out the powers and responsibilities of the new
organization and certain restrictions on it. The National Security Act
of 1947 entered into force on September 19, 1947, and the Central
Intelligence Agency came into being as a statutory body the next
day.

The Central Intelligence Agency submitted enabling legislation the
following year, but the 80th Congress failed to complete action before
it adjourned. The bill was resubmitted in the next Congress, where it
was enacted as the Central Intelligence Agency Act of 1949 and signed by
the President on June 20, 1949. (Public Law 110, 81st Congress, 1st
Session; 63 Stat. Ch. 227)

On September 26, 1947, the National Security Council met in its first
session. In approving its own procedures, it authorized the Director of
Central Intelligence “to attend all meetings of the Council as an
observer and adviser.” (NSC Action No.
1; National Security Council, Policies of the
Government of the United States of America Relating to the National
Security, volume 1, 1947-1948, page 46) At the same
organizational meeting, the NSC approved
an “Initial Directive to the Central Intelligence Agency” endorsing
recommendations that the Director of Central Intelligence had made in a
September 19 memorandum to the Council. This action continued the
National Intelligence Directives in force for the time being and
instructed Hillenkoetter to submit to the Council within 60 days
“proposed authorizations supplanting the former directives.” In the same
action, the Council authorized the Director of Central Intelligence to submit to the Bureau of the
Budget a budget estimate for fiscal year 1949. (Document 222 and NSC Action
No. 3; Policies of the Government of the United States
of America Relating to the National Security, page 53)

The Council took no action on Hillenkoetter's proposal for an advisory
committee, although it soon approved an amended version prepared by
Souers, which created a successor to the Intelligence Advisory Board.
(Document 226) The Council also failed to
act on Hillenkoetter's proposal, made in a memorandum to the NIA on September 11 (Document 220) for a subcommittee of the NSC composed of the Secretaries of State
and Defense “to act similarly to the National Intelligence Authority to
furnish the active direction of the Central Intelligence Agency.” Acting
Secretary of State Lovett, however, endorsed the idea in a September 23
memorandum to Hillenkoetter, while suggesting that the oversight group
include, in addition to the two secretaries, a personal representative
of the President, similar to the arrangement that had existed in the
National Intelligence Authority. (Document
224)

196. Memorandum From the General Counsel of the Central Intelligence Group (Houston) to the Director of Central Intelligence (Vandenberg)196. Memorandum From the General Counsel of the Central Intelligence
Group (Houston) to the
Director of Central Intelligence (Vandenberg)Source

Washington, June 13,
1946.

SUBJECT

Administrative Authority of CIG

1. On 22 January the President directed the NIA to plan, develop and coordinate Federal foreign
intelligence activities, to assure the most effective accomplishment of
the intelligence mission related to national security. He further
directed the respective Departments to assign persons and facilities,
which persons shall collectively form the CIG under the Director thereof to assist NIA. The mission of the Director of CIG is to correlate, evaluate and
disseminate intelligence, making full use of the staff and facilities of
intelligence agencies; to coordinate activities of such agencies and recommend over-all policies
and objectives for the national intelligence mission; and to perform for
“said intelligence agencies such special services of common concern as
the National Intelligence Authority determines can be more efficiently
accomplished centrally”.

2. The above appears to give the complete administrative authority of
CIG. As outlined, it is purely a
coordination function with no substance or authority to act on its own
responsibility in other than an advisory and directing capacity. Thus,
it has no power:

(A) To take personnel actions;

(B) To certify payrolls and vouchers;

(C) To authorize travel;

(D) To procure supplies directly for itself or enter into contracts.

All the above are fundamental technicalities which apply equally to
vouchered and unvouchered funds.

3. Thus, the essential problem is that CIG has no power to expend Government funds. The Secretary
of War could give the Director, CIG,
unvouchered funds to spend at the latter's discretion, but even so the
certification of the voucher would have to be done by the Secretary. A
good example of the problem is the case of a civilian employee now
assigned to CIG full time. The
classification sheet and personnel action papers are headed not “CIG”, but “State, War and Navy
Departments,” and actual payment is made on the payroll of one or the
other of these Departments as may be appropriate. The case in question
is paid on War Department Contingencies payroll. If necessary or
expedient for one reason or another, he could be cut off War Department
and be put on either State or Navy payrolls. A body serving CIG could be built up in this way, but it
would still be in the form of facilities furnished by the Departments,
just as Army officers are assigned for duty with the Director but remain
on the Army finance records for pay and administration. A time element
is injected by Public Law 358, which in brief provides that no funds may
be made available to any agency or instrumentality which remains in
existence for more than one year without a specific appropriation from
Congress during that year. Consequently, after 22 January 1947,
Departments could not even furnish unvouchered funds to the Director,
CIG, and it would be questionable
whether the Departments could furnish personnel and supplies paid for
out of vouchered funds.

Lawrence R. Houston1

* Source: Central Intelligence Agency Historical
Files, HS/HC-803, Item 13. No classification marking. The source
text was a transcript prepared for the CIA Historian on June 6,
1952.

1 Printed from a copy that bears this
typed signature.

197. Memorandum for the File197. Memorandum for the FileSource

Washington, July 17,
1946.

On 16 July Mr. Clifford met Mr.
Houston and Mr. Lay from the Central Intelligence
Group, in his office and discussed with them a proposed bill for the
establishment of the Central Intelligence Agency. Commander Elsey was
also present.

The basis of the discussion was the draft bill1 which had been submitted by General Vandenberg
to Mr. Clifford for comment, and
Mr. Clifford's memorandum in
reply of 12 July 1946.2

Mr. Clifford pointed out that it
was not the President's original intention that a new agency be
created3 and he remarked that it
appeared that the proposed bill was departing from the President's
intention by establishing a separate and sizeable government agency. Mr.
Clifford also remarked that
the President had intended that his letter of 22 January 1946 would
provide a workable plan for the Central Intelligence Group. Mr.
Clifford than asked if
experience had shown that the plan outlined in the President's letter
was not workable.

Mr. Houston and Mr. Lay discussed at some length the
administrative difficulties which the Central Intelligence Group has had
due to its being a step-child of three separate departments. They stated
that experience showed that enabling legislation was necessary in order
that the Central Intelligence Group could operate as an integrated
organization. They also informed Mr. Clifford that experience had shown that the Central
Intelligence Group should become an operating agency with a large staff
of Intelligence experts.

After lengthy discussion, it was agreed by all present that the original
concept of the Central Intelligence Group should now be altered;
experience had shown that it would be ineffective if it remained only a
small planning staff and that it must now become a legally established,
fairly sizeable, operating agency. Mr. Clifford stated that he would discuss this new concept
with Admiral Leahy and the
President.4

There followed a detailed examination of the draft bill in light of the
comments and criticisms made in Mr. Clifford's memorandum of 12 July. Mr. Houston and Mr. Lay agreed that all of Mr. Clifford's points were well taken and they agreed to
rewrite the bill incorporating his suggestions.

It was apparent during this part of the discussion5 that neither Mr. Houston nor Mr. Lay had given much thought to the words which they had
used in drafting the bill. Both stated that large parts of it had been
extracted from other proposed legislation or other documents relating to
Intelligence. In their hasty preparation of the draft in this
scissors-and-paste method, they had failed to grasp the essential point
that the National Intelligence Authority should be a planning group and
the Central Intelligence Agency an operating group.

Mr. Clifford pointed out to them
the probable opposition which a proposed bill would arouse if great care
and thought were not given to the choice of words used.

Mr. Houston and Mr. Lay will prepare a new bill and send
it to Mr. Clifford for comment.

G.M.E.

* Source:
Truman Library, Papers of Clark M.
Clifford, National Military Establishment: CIA. No
classification marking.

1 Not printed. (Ibid.) See the Supplement. A later
draft is printed as an enclosure to Document
201.

2 Not printed. (Truman
Library, Papers of Clark M.
Clifford, National Military Establishment: CIA) See
the Supplement.

3 This phrase which read, “Mr.
Clifford pointed out that
it was the President's original intention that a new agency not be
created” was amended by hand.

4 No record of Clifford's proposed discussion with
Truman and Leahy has been
found.

5 The phrase “during this part of the discussion”
originally read “during the lengthy part of the discussion”; it was
amended by hand.

198. Minutes of the Fourth Meeting of the National Intelligence Authority198. Minutes of the Fourth Meeting of the National Intelligence
AuthoritySource

Washington, July
17, 1946, 10:30 a.m.

PARTICIPANTS

Members Present

Secretary of State James F.
Byrnes, in the Chair

Secretary of War Robert P.
Patterson

Acting Secretary of the Navy John L.
Sullivan

Fleet Admiral William D.
Leahy, Personal Representative of the
President

Lt. General Hoyt S.
Vandenberg, Director of Central Intelligence

Also Present

Dr. William L. Langer,
Special Assistant to the Secretary of State for Research and
Intelligence

Mr. John D. Hickerson, Department of State

Colonel Charles W. McCarthy, USA

Captain Robert L. Dennison, USN

Secretariat

Mr. James S. Lay, Jr.,
Secretary, National Intelligence Authority

1. Report by the Director of Central Intelligence

Secretary Byrnes asked General
Vandenberg to give the members a report on present and future matters
concerning the Central Intelligence Group.

General Vandenberg invited attention to the conclusions contained in the
“Progress Report on the Central Intelligence Group” by Admiral Souers,
former Director of Central Intelligence.1 General Vandenberg
explained that at the present time each intelligence agency is working
along the lines of primary interest to its department. It is his belief
that C.I.G. should find out what raw material received by one department
is of interest to the others. In order to do this, C.I.G. must be in a
position to see and screen all raw material received. For example, as
regards a given steel plant, State is studying what products are made
there and the rate of production. War Department, however, is interested
in the construction and physical details of the plant, the railroads
serving it, and other data required for target information. State
Department, if it broadened the base of its studies, might well be able
to furnish at least part of that type of economic intelligence. It is
the job of C.I.G., therefore, to find out the needs of all the
departments and to meet them, either by recommending that one department
expand its activities or by performing the necessary research in C.I.G.
In order to do this, an adequate and capable staff is urgently required
in C.I.G. It is extremely difficult administratively to procure the
necessary personnel under the present arrangement. General Vandenberg
therefore feels that he must have his own funds and be able to hire
people. This means that C.I.G. must be set up as an agency by enabling
legislation.

Secretary Byrnes expressed the
understanding that the N.I.A. was intentionally established as it is in
an effort to avoid the necessity for an independent budget.

Secretary Patterson agreed, and
explained that this was designed to conceal, for security reasons, the
amount of money being spent on central intelligence.

Secretary Byrnes thought that it
would be difficult to explain to Congress the need for intelligence
funds without jeopardizing security.

General Vandenberg thought that such considerations should be balanced
against the added administrative difficulties they caused. He expressed
the belief that the important thing was that the Central Intelligence
Group should be an effective and efficient organization.

Admiral Leahy said that it was
always understood that C.I.G. eventually would broaden its scope. It was
felt, however, that the Departments initially could contribute
sufficient funds and personnel to get it started. He is about convinced
that N.I.A. should now attempt to get its own appropriations. These
appropriations, however, should be small, since the three departments
should continue to furnish the bulk of the necessary funds.

Secretary Patterson thought that
the administrative problems could be worked out under the present
arrangements.

Secretary Byrnes believed that the
major problem was to find a way for the departments to give C.I.G. the
money it needed.

Secretary Patterson stated that he
was perfectly willing to direct Army Intelligence to furnish the
necessary funds to C.I.G. and then let the Director of Central
Intelligence pick his own personnel with those funds. He opposed a
separate budget because he does not want to expose these intelligence
operations.

Secretary Byrnes agreed that we
could not afford to make such disclosures in this country.

General Vandenberg pointed out that each personnel action must be handled
at present by 100 people in each department. This means that knowledge
of C.I.G. personnel is exposed to 300 people in the three departments.
He feels that handling personnel actions within C.I.G. itself would
improve security.

Admiral Leahy agreed that it
was undesirable that so many people in the departments should have
knowledge of C.I.G. He felt that if each department gave C.I.G. funds,
personnel actions could be taken by C.I.G. itself without exposing them.

General Vandenberg pointed out that this would still require defending
three separate appropriations acts before the Senate and the House of
Representatives.

Dr. Langer agreed that the funds
would have to be defended before the Congress in any case.

Secretary Byrnes recalled that
members of Congress had offered to include the State Department
intelligence budget under such terms as “investigations abroad” or as an
added amount in any other budget account. He felt that since Congress
was apparently willing to do this, the funds might easily be hidden in
this manner within departmental budgets.

Dr. Langer thought that Admiral
Leahy's suggestion would
be very effective. It might be possible to give N.I.A. an independent
budget for the more overt activities, and hide other funds in
departmental appropriations. This would serve as ideal cover for covert
activities. Moreover, he believed that an independent appropriation for
C.I.G. would make General
Vandenberg more effective in supporting departmental intelligence
budgets.

Admiral Leahy felt that this
problem must be approached very carefully. He believed that no one was
better qualified to advise N.I.A. on this than Secretary Byrnes, with
his Congressional background. Admiral Leahy stated that the President authorized him to make
it clear that the President considered the responsible agency in the
present arrangement to be the N.I.A. The President stated that the
Director of Central Intelligence is not responsible further than to
carry out the directives of the N.I.A. Admiral Leahy said there were some
indications that the Director of Central Intelligence, with the
Intelligence Advisory Board, might tend to assume greater control over
intelligence activities than was intended. Admiral Leahy reiterated that the President
holds the Cabinet officers on N.I.A. primarily responsible for
coordination of intelligence activities.2

Secretary Sullivan compared the
Director of Central Intelligence to an executive vice president who
carries out the instructions and policies of the N.I.A.

Admiral Leahy stated that with
regard to a bill to obtain an independent budget and status for N.I.A.,
the President considers it inadvisable to attempt to present such a bill
before the present Congress. The President feels that there is not
enough time for the N.I.A. to give this question sufficient study. The
President feels, however, that a bill might be drafted and be under
study by the N.I.A. with a view to the possibility of presenting it to
the next Congress. Admiral Leahy stated that in the meantime he felt that General
Vandenberg should be given, so far as practicable, all the assistance
that he requires.

General Vandenberg pointed out that C.I.G. is not an agency authorized to
disburse funds. Therefore even with funds from the departments, it would
require disbursing and authenticating officers in all three departments,
plus the necessary accounting organization in C.I.G. He felt that this
was requiring four fiscal operations where one should suffice.

Admiral Leahy suggested, and
Secretary Byrnes agreed, that
this might be taken care of by the wording of an appropriations act.

Dr. Langer questioned this
possibility unless C.I.G. was given status as a disbursing agency.

Secretary Byrnes thought this
status could be given the agency by the President under the authority of
the Emergency Powers Act.

General Vandenberg said that he understood that this solution was decided
against because it might indicate that N.I.A. was a temporary expedient
which would terminate with the end of the President's war powers.

Secretary Byrnes was sure that it
could be done by the President under his reorganization authority and
without reference to the Emergency Powers Act. Secretary Byrnes undertook to talk with the
Bureau of the Budget on this matter and report back to the N.I.A.

Admiral Leahy was convinced
that C.I.G. must have funds for which it does not have to account in
detail.

Dr. Langer questioned whether
General Vandenberg was not more concerned over the cumbersome
arrangement for handling personnel actions in all three departments.

General Vandenberg stressed the fact that without money there could be no
personnel actions. For example, he noted that the State Department does
not have sufficient funds to pay personnel required for C.I.G. General
Vandenberg agreed, however, that personnel actions were extremely
difficult under present arrangements. For example, it takes an average
of six weeks to obtain security clearance from the Departments, and he
does not feel that he should employ anyone without such clearance.
General Vandenberg stressed the fact that his greatest interest was in
getting C.I.G. into operation by whatever means possible. He felt that
time was of the essence during this critical period.

Secretary Byrnes believed that the
only way at present to avoid the administrative difficulties was to
arrange to have each department transfer the necessary funds to C.I.G.

General Vandenberg pointed out the difficulty of obtaining funds from the
Departments. For example, although the State Department requested about
$330,000 for N.I.A., only $178,000 is being made available. While he
appreciated the need of the State Department for the other funds, this
case exemplified the fact that C.I.G. could never be certain of
receiving the funds which it requested and defended unless they were
appropriated directly to C.I.G.

Dr. Langer believed that this
situation would not recur in the future, but he did agree that State's
contribution to C.I.G. was not adequate. He did not see, however, how
this could be increased except through a deficiency bill.

Secretary Sullivan asked why
additional funds might not be secured from the President's emergency
fund.

General Vandenberg stated that total funds available to C.I.G. for the
fiscal year 1947 were $12,000,000, which left a shortage for effective
operations of $10,000,000. He asked whether it might be possible to
obtain permission to spend available funds at an accelerated rate in
anticipation of the submission of the deficiency bill.

Secretary Byrnes thought that such
permission could not be obtained. He noted that what General Vandenberg
had stated was that C.I.G. had $12,000,000 and wanted $22,000,000.

Dr. Langer questioned whether any
mechanism was to be available for reviewing this proposed budget.

General Vandenberg stated that he had the details available. He noted,
however, that comprehensive review meant that this information must be
widely disclosed to personnel in three departments.

Secretary Sullivan felt that since
the President's remarks indicated that he held N.I.A. responsible, they
must know the details regarding any C.I.G. budget request.

At Secretary Byrnes' request,
General Vandenberg then made a brief report on C.I.G. activities. He
noted that C.I.G. was taking over Foreign Broadcast Intelligence Service
and all clandestine foreign intelligence activities. In addition,
however, C.I.G. is receiving daily requests to take over functions now
being done by various State, War and Navy Committees. One example is the
suggestion that C.I.G. centralize the handling of codes and ciphers to
improve their security. Another example is the concern of the War
Department about exchange of information with the British. The
State-War-Navy Coordinating Committee has a subcommittee covering this
exchange but it handles only about 20 or 30 percent of the information
actually exchanged. This subcommittee confines itself purely to secret
matters, whereas the Army Air Forces believe that a central clearing
house should be established where the bargaining value of this
information may also be taken into account.

Dr. Langer pointed out that the
SWNCC subcommittee deals only with
technical military information. He feels, however, that the problem also
involves such matters as the transfer of non-military information and
the declassification of material. Unless these matters are centralized,
each department will continue, as at present, going its own way.

General Vandenberg reported that he has already set up an Office of
Special Operations. He has also established an Interdepartmental
Coordinating and Planning Staff, but only on a skeleton basis because of
his need for additional personnel.

Secretary Patterson felt that all
of General Vandenberg's present problems should be solved if the
Secretary of State can obtain help from the Bureau of the Budget.

General Vandenberg stated his problems, briefly, were that he needed
money, the authority to spend it, and the authority to hire and fire.

Secretary Byrnes felt there were
really two problems: First, to find ways to handle the money now
available, and second, to get whatever additional funds are required. He
thought it would be difficult to get additional funds fifteen days after
the fiscal year had begun. He questioned whether present funds should
not be sufficient since the understanding was that C.I.G. was primarily
continuing functions which have been previously performed.

General Vandenberg explained that C.I.G. was now undertaking certain new
functions and also expanding some existing ones. In answer to questions,
General Vandenberg stated that he proposed to have about 1900 people in
secret intelligence and a total of something less than 3000 in C.I.G. by
the end of the fiscal year.

Dr. Langer stated that he agreed
with almost everything that General Vandenberg had said, but that he was
impressed with the imposing size of the proposed organization. He
thought there should be a definite review of the program before a
request for an additional $10,000,000 is approved.

General Vandenberg pointed out that there is a clear need for additional
appropriations for intelligence in view of changing conditions. During
the war there were American forces all over the world who were procuring
information and intelligence in connection with military operations.
These operations were not considered as intelligence activities,
however, and the funds required for them were not charged to
intelligence. These operations are now shrinking rapidly. It is
necessary therefore, to have intelligence agents all over the world to
get the same information which during the war was handed to intelligence
agencies on a silver platter.

Secretary Patterson agreed with
this statement. He noted that in each theater of operations G-2
activities were merely a part of the Army's operations and were not
considered to be part of the intelligence organization directed from
Washington.

General Vandenberg then discussed briefly his proposed organization chart
for the Central Intelligence Group. He noted that there would be an
Interdepartmental Coordinating and Planning Staff to assist in the
coordination of all intelligence activities related to the national
security. There would then be four offices to conduct C.I.G. operations,
namely, Special Operations,
Collection, Research and Evaluation, and Dissemination.

After further discussion,

The National Intelligence Authority:

a. Noted General Vandenberg's report on the Central Intelligence Group.

b. Noted that the Secretary of State would discuss with the Bureau of the
Budget the solution of the problems mentioned by General Vandenberg, and
would report back to the Authority.3

c. Noted the organization of the Central Intelligence Group which General
Vandenberg was planning to put into effect.

* Source: Central Intelligence
Agency Historical Files, HS/HC-245. Top Secret. The meeting was held
at the State Department.

1 Document 154.

2 The
membership of the National Intelligence Authority and the periodic
meetings of the Secretaries of State, War, and Navy were the same
except that Leahy and the
Director of Central Intelligence did not participate in the Three
Secretaries meetings. The first part of this meeting was a session
of the NIA; the second a meeting of
the Three Secretaries. John D. Hickerson of the Department of State
was responsible for preparing a record of the Secretaries' meeting,
but he also took notes on the NIA
meeting. In Hickerson's minutes, Leahy reported that “the President stated that the
National Intelligence Authority has the responsibility for
collection of intelligence; the President expects to look to the
National Intelligence Authority for the performance of this task and
to hold them responsible for it. The Director of C.I.G. carries out
the orders of the National Intelligence Authority and the President
expects to deal only with the NIA in
regard to intelligence and to hold NIA responsible for the work done by the C.I.G.”
(Minutes of the Meeting of the Three Secretaries, July 17; National
Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Records of the
Department of State, Diplomatic Branch Reference File, Minutes of
Meetings of the Committee of Three 1944-1947) See the
Supplement.

3 For the
results of Byrnes' efforts,
see Documents 199 and 200 and their enclosures.

199. Memorandum From the Director of Central Intelligence (Vandenberg) to the National Intelligence Authority199. Memorandum From the Director of Central Intelligence (Vandenberg) to the
National Intelligence AuthoritySource

Washington, July 30,
1946.

SUBJECT

Establishment of a Special Working Fund for the Central
Intelligence Group

REFERENCE

Minutes of N.I.A. 4th Meeting1

1. At the fourth meeting of the National Intelligence Authority, the
Secretary of State undertook to discuss with the Bureau of the Budget
the solution of the problems mentioned at that meeting by General
Vandenberg. One of these problems was to devise a means whereby any
funds made available for C.I.G. activities authorized by N.I.A. will be
transferred by the State, War, and Navy Departments to the Director of
Central Intelligence, and expended under the supervision of the N.I.A.
by him without the cumbersome
and duplicative administrative procedures now required.

2. The Secretary of State discussed this matter with the Director of the
Bureau of the Budget, and personnel from the Central Intelligence Group
subsequently explored the problem in detail with representatives of the
Bureau of the Budget, the Treasury Department, and the General
Accounting Office. The Bureau of the Budget and the Treasury Department
have definitely indicated a willingness to cooperate, and the General
Accounting Office has promised to give the matter sympathetic
consideration. All three agencies have indicated that the transmittal of
the enclosed letter is now in order, and that it will be considered
expeditiously.

3. It is therefore recommended that the National Intelligence Authority
approve the transmittal of the enclosed letter, and that it be signed by
the Cabinet members as indicated therein.

Hoyt S. Vandenberg2

Lieutenant General, USA

Enclosure3

Letter From the National Intelligence Authority to Secretary of the
Treasury Snyder and the
Comptroller General (Warren)

Washington, July 30, 1946.

Dear Sir: In accordance with the Presidential directive of 22 January
1946, the National Intelligence Authority has, through a series of
directives to the Director of Central Intelligence, established over-all
policies for foreign intelligence activities related to the national
security, and has directed that the Central Intelligence Group engage in
certain centralized intelligence activities which are of common interest
to the Departments herein concerned. To implement properly the wishes of
the President, the National Intelligence Authority has found it
necessary to provide the Director of Central Intelligence with
administrative and operational facilities which involve expenditure of
funds and furnishing of personnel and equipment. This threefold method
of supply has become so cumbersome as to impair seriously the
administration of the Central Intelligence Group, and is becoming an
important threat to the security of its operations.

We desire, therefore, under the provisions of Section 214 of the
Independent Offices Appropriation Act, 1946, to make available to the
Central Intelligence Group, from the appropriations of the three
Departments mentioned, amounts authorized by Congress for the support of
intelligence activities and such other funds as it is in our discretion
to use for this purpose. To administer these funds, it is proposed to
establish a special working fund, as provided for in Section 601 of the
Act of June 30, 1932 (47 Stat. 417). This fund will be, for record
purposes, in the War Department, but, with the approval of the Secretary
of War, its administration and fiscal supervision will be solely by
officers of the Central Intelligence Group. Upon the establishment of
such a working fund, it is proposed, in addition to committing such
funds of our respective Departments for administration by the Central
Intelligence Group, to delegate to the Director of Central Intelligence
or his authorized representatives the necessary authorities for the
administration of those funds, for personnel actions, for procurement of
equipment and supplies, and for the certification of vouchers. We are
informed that the Bureau of the Budget is in full accord with the
establishment of such a working fund.

We therefore request, on behalf of the Departments we represent and in
our capacity as members of the National Intelligence Authority, that you
establish such a working fund under the provisions of Section 601 of the
Act of June 30, 1932 (47 Stat. 417). All officials of our Departments
and of the Central Intelligence Group are prepared to give you complete
cooperation.4

* Source: Central Intelligence Agency
Historical Files, HS/HC-804, Item 2, Job 84-B00443R, Box 7.
Confidential. The source text is a transcript prepared for the CIA
Historian on September 4, 1952.

1 See Document 198.

2 Printed from a copy that indicates
Vandenberg signed the original.

3 Confidential. The source text is
marked “copy” and may be a transcript made for the CIA Historian,
although it is not so marked.

4 Printed from a copy that
indicates the original was signed by the Secretaries of State, War,
and Navy and by Admiral Leahy, the President's Personal Representative on
the NIA.

200. Memorandum From the Director of Central Intelligence (Vandenberg) to the National Intelligence Authority200. Memorandum From the Director of Central Intelligence (Vandenberg) to the
National Intelligence AuthoritySource

Washington, August 21,
1946.

SUBJECT

Delegation of Authority to Utilize Special Working Fund

REFERENCE

Letter from N.I.A. to the Secretary of the Treasury and the
Comptroller General dated 30 July 19461

In the reference letter, the National Intelligence Authority requested
the establishment of a special working fund to administer funds made
available by the State, War and Navy Departments to the Central
Intelligence Group. The N.I.A. stated that “Upon the establishment of
such a working fund, it is proposed, in addition to committing such
funds of our respective Departments for administration by the Central
Intelligence Group, to delegate to the Director of Central Intelligence
or his authorized representatives the necessary authorities for the
administration of those funds, for personnel actions, for procurement of
equipment and supplies, and for the certification of vouchers.”

The special working fund has now been established and the enclosed letter
is designed to provide the additional authorizations which the N.I.A.
proposed in the above quotation. This letter has been coordinated with
representatives of the Treasury Department and the Comptroller General,
and has been agreed to by them in principle.

It is requested that each member of the National Intelligence Authority,
in turn, sign the enclosed letter and transmit to the next addressee,
returning the letter to the undersigned when all the signatures have
been affixed. Sufficient copies are also attached to enable each member
to detach one copy for file.

Hoyt S. Vandenberg2

Lieutenant General, USA

Enclosure3

Letter From the National Intelligence Authority to the Comptroller
General (Warren)

Washington, September 5, 1946.

Dear Sir: In our letter of 30 July 1946, we requested that you establish
a working fund to assist in carrying out the President's wishes in regard to foreign intelligence
activities. We proposed in that letter to authorize the Director of
Central Intelligence to direct the administration and fiscal supervision
of such a working fund upon its establishment. With approval of the
Treasury Department and the Comptroller General, Working Fund, War,
General, 1947, has been constituted and has been assigned the symbol
number 2175900.

In order to comply with the Presidential Directive of 22 January 1946
that the Director of Central Intelligence perform such services of
common concern as the National Intelligence Authority determines can be
more effectively accomplished centrally, we now on behalf of the
Departments we represent, and in our capacity as members of the National
Intelligence Authority, authorize the Director, subject to policies
established by the National Intelligence Authority, to control,
supervise and administer this working fund with full powers in respect
thereto as would otherwise have been exercised by us over the funds
contributed to the working fund by our respective Departments, including
the powers and authority granted by the Military Appropriation Act,
1947, and the Naval Appropriation Act, 1947, approved July 8, 1946
(Public Law 492-79th Congress), pertaining to certificates of
expenditures and determinations of propriety of expenditures.

The Director of Central Intelligence and his authorized representatives
shall arrange with your Departments such procedures, practices and
controls as are necessary to meet your requirements, and the Working
Fund, War, General, 1947 shall be subject only to the immediate control
of the Director in accordance with policies established by the National
Intelligence Authority.

Dean Acheson4
Acting Secretary of State
Robert P. Patterson
Secretary of War
Forrestal
Secretary of the Navy
William D. Leahy
Personal Representative of the President on
N.I.A.

* Source: Central Intelligence Agency
Historical Files, HS/HC-804, Item 2, Job 84-B00442R, Box 7.
Confidential. The source text is a transcript made for the CIA
Historian on September 4, 1952.

1 See the enclosure to Document
199.

2 Printed from a copy that bears this typed
signature.

3 Confidential. It appears that this
is not a draft but a copy of the signed original.

4 Printed from a copy that bears these
typed signatures.

201. Memorandum From the Director of Central Intelligence (Vandenberg) to the President's Special Counsel (Clifford)201. Memorandum From the Director of Central Intelligence (Vandenberg) to the
President's Special Counsel (Clifford)Source

Washington, December 2,
1946.

SUBJECT

Proposed enabling legislation for the establishment of a Central
Intelligence Agency

Transmitted herewith is a proposed draft of enabling legislation for the
Central Intelligence Agency.1 It is somewhat more detailed and
comprehensive than the draft submitted last July.

The current draft has been expanded in the light of the experiences of
the last ten months and the administrative facilities available.
However, it does not materially change the interdepartmental
relationships conceived in the original Presidential letter of January
22, 1946.

Section 1 (a) of the current draft consists of Findings and Declaration.

Section 1 (b) Consists of the Purpose of Act.

Section 2 consists of Definitions, as it was felt, in line with your
Memorandum to General Vandenberg of July 12, 1946,2 that a definition of terms was desirable.

Section 3 (a) sets forth the Organization of the National Intelligence
Authority, and delineates its powers. This is also in line with your
Memorandum of July 12.

Section 3 (b) sets forth the Organization of the Central Intelligence
Agency. The salaries have been set on a level established by the Atomic
Energy Act of 1946.3 It was felt that this was necessary in order to
attract the highest calibre of personnel to the Agency. In addition
subsection (5) has been included in order to avail ourselves of
experienced, retired personnel of the Armed Forces. The language is
similar to that of Public Law 718 (79th Congress),4
which made similar provisions for the Veterans' Administration.

Section 3 (c) establishes the Intelligence Advisory Board.

Section 4 sets forth the Functions of the Central Intelligence
Agency.

Section 5 has been omitted. It is thought to include, at a later date, a
section on Control of Information, somewhat similar to Section 10 of the
Atomic Energy Act of 1946.
This has been delayed, pending receipt of information as to the position
to be taken by the Department of Justice on revisions to the Espionage
Laws recommended by the War and Navy Departments and the Federal Bureau
of Investigation.

Section 6 contains the General Authority, including a provision for
termination of employment of personnel in the interests of the United
States. This is similar to a provision in the Department of State
Appropriation Act, 1947 (Public Law 470, 79th Congress, p. 14).5

Section 7 is the section on Appropriations.

Section 8 is the section on Separability of Provisions.

Section 9 is the Short Title.

There is also included herewith a copy of your Memorandum for General
Vandenberg, dated July 12, 1946, Subject: Proposed Bill for the
establishment of a Central Intelligence Agency, and a Memorandum to the
Director of Central Intelligence containing comments addressed to your
Memorandum.6

For the Director of Central Intelligence:

E.K. Wright

Colonel, GSC

Executive to Director

Enclosure

A BILL FOR THE ESTABLISHMENT OF A NATIONAL INTELLIGENCE AUTHORITY AND A
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
States of America in Congress assembled,

Declaration of Policy

Sec. 1. (a) Findings and Declaration.

In enacting this legislation, it is the intent of Congress to provide a
comprehensive and continuous program which will effectively accomplish
the national intelligence
mission of the United States by supplying the President of the United
States, the Secretaries of State, War, and the Navy, and such other
governmental officials as shall be appropriate, with foreign
intelligence of the highest possible calibre. To accomplish this
mission, a central intelligence agency is required by the United States.
This agency shall insure the production of the foreign intelligence
necessary to enable the appropriate officials of the Government to be
informed fully in their dealings with other nations, and to enable these
officials to formulate national policies and plans which this Government
is to pursue in order to avert future armed conflicts and assure the
common defense and security of the United States. The accomplishment of
this service is the national intelligence mission of the United States.

Experience preceding, during, and following two World Wars has proven
that the uncoordinated decentralization of the collection, research, and
dissemination of foreign intelligence information among many departments
and agencies of the Government is unsatisfactory. In an attempt to
remedy this situation in times of national crises, emergency means have
repeatedly been adopted. These experiences have shown the need for a
permanent, centralized, intelligence agency so that all the foreign
intelligence sources and facilities of the Government may be utilized to
the fullest extent in the production of foreign intelligence, and so
that their greatest potentialities may be realized most efficiently and
economically, with a resultant elimination of unproductive duplication
and unnecessary overlapping of functions in the accomplishment of the
national intelligence mission of the United States.

Accordingly, it is hereby declared to be the policy of the people of the
United States that in order to strengthen the hand of the Government in
formulating national policies and conducting relations with other
nations, and subject at all times to the paramount objective of assuring
the common defense and security, the foreign intelligence activities,
functions, and services of the Government be fully coordinated, and,
when determined in accordance with the provisions of this Act, be
operated centrally for the accomplishment of the national intelligence
mission of the United States.

Section 1. (b) Purpose of Act.

It is the purpose of this Act to carry out the policies set forth in
Section 1 (a) by providing for the execution, among others, of the
following major programs relating to intelligence:

(1) A program for the centralized operation of such foreign intelligence
activities of the Federal Government as the National Intelligence
Authority determines can so be performed most effectively, efficiently,
and economically.

(2) A program for the planning and development of all foreign
intelligence activities of the Federal Government, and including the
coordination of those
activities of the departments and agencies of the Government designed
for the production of foreign intelligence.

(3) A program for the collection of foreign intelligence information by
any and all means deemed effective.

(4) A program of evaluation, correlation, and interpretation of the
foreign intelligence information collected, in order to produce
intelligence for the President and the appropriate departments and
agencies of the Federal Government.

(5) A program for dissemination to the President and the appropriate
departments and agencies of the Federal Government of the intelligence
produced.

(6) A program for the full administration and implementation of the
above.

Definitions

Sec. 2. As used in this Act.

(1) The term “foreign intelligence” shall be construed to mean the
product of the timely evaluation, correlation, and interpretation of
foreign intelligence information.

(2) The term “foreign intelligence information” shall be construed to
mean all data pertaining to foreign governments or areas, which may
affect the foreign policy or the national defense and security of the
United States.

(3) The term “research” shall be construed to mean a process of
evaluation (selection), correlation (synthesis), and interpretation
(analysis) of intelligence information for the production of
intelligence.

(4) The term “evaluation” shall be construed to mean a process of
systematic and critical examination of intelligence information for the
purpose of determining its usefulness, credibility, and accuracy.

(5) The term “correlation” shall be construed to mean a process of
synthesis of intelligence information with all available related
material.

(6) The term “interpretation” shall be construed to mean a process of
determining the probable significance of evaluated intelligence
information.

Organization

Sec. 3 (a) National Intelligence Authority.

(1) There is hereby established a National Intelligence Authority
(hereinafter called the Authority) of five members. The Secretary of
State, the Secretary of War, and the Secretary of the Navy shall be
members of the Authority. The President shall designate a fourth member
of the Authority to serve as his personal representative thereon. The
Secretary of State, the Secretary of War, the Secretary of the Navy, and
the personal representative of
the President shall constitute the sole voting members of the Authority.
The Director of Central Intelligence, hereinafter provided for, shall
sit as the fifth member of the Authority, as a non-voting member
thereof. The Secretary of State shall serve as Chairman of the
Authority.

(2) The members of the Authority shall hold their positions thereon by
virtue of their respective offices. The members of the Authority shall
serve without compensation for this service and shall perform this
serv-ice in addition to such other activities, public or private, as
they may engage in.

(3) In the absence of the Secretaries of State, War, or the Navy, the
appropriate Acting Secretary shall sit as a member of the Authority. If
the personal representative of the President is absent, the Secretaries
(or Acting Secretaries) of State, War, and the Navy shall constitute a
quorum of the Authority.

(4) The Authority shall hold such meetings, conduct such hearings, and
receive such reports as may be necessary to enable it to carry out the
provisions of this Act. The Authority shall meet at least once each
month.

(5) The Authority shall be served by a Secretariat, consisting, of a
Secretary and such other technical, administrative, and clerical
assist-ance as the Authority shall deem necessary. The Central
Intelligence Agency, hereinafter provided for, shall be responsible for
furnishing the Secretariat with personnel. The Secretariat of the
Authority shall also serve as the Secretariat of the Intelligence
Advisory Board, hereinafter provided for, performing the same duties for
this Board as for the Authority.

(6) The Authority shall determine policies and objectives for, and
supervise and direct, the Central Intelligence Agency, hereinafter
provided for, in the planning, development, and coordination of the
foreign intelligence activities of the departments and agencies of the
Government, as well as in the conduct of those foreign intelligence
operations performed centrally, in such manner as to assure the most
effective accomplishment of the national intelligence mission.

(7) The Authority shall have the right to transfer responsibilities and
authorities in the field of foreign intelligence between departments and
agencies of the Government.

(8) Policies approved by the Authority in relation to the foreign
intelligence activities of the United States, insofar as they affect the
national defense and security, shall govern the intelligence activities
of the various departments and agencies of the Government.

(9) If the decisions of the Authority on matters set forth in Sec. 3 (a)
(6) and (7) of this Act are not unanimous, the Authority shall refer the
matter to the President, whose decision shall be final.

Sec. 3 (b) Central Intelligence Agency.

(1) There is hereby established a Central Intelligence Agency
(hereinafter called the Agency), with a Director of Central Intelligence
who shall be the head thereof, to be appointed from civilian or military
life by the President, by and with the advice and consent of the Senate,
to serve at the pleasure of the President. The Director shall receive
compensation at the rate of $17,500 per annum.

(2) There shall be a Deputy Director of the Central Intelligence Agency,
appointed from civilian or military life by the President, by and with
the advice and consent of the Senate, to serve at the pleasure of the
President. The Deputy Director shall receive compensation at the rate of
$15,000 per annum. The Deputy Director shall be authorized to sign such
letters, papers, and documents, and to perform such other duties as may
be directed by the Director of Central Intelligence, and to act as
Director in the absence of that officer, or in the case of a vacancy in
the office of Director.

(3) The functions of the Agency, as outlined in Sec. 4 of this Act, shall
be performed by the appropriate offices of the Agency. Each office shall
be under the direction of an Assistant Director, who shall be appointed
by the Director of Central Intelligence, and shall receive compensation
at the rate of $14,000 per annum. The Assistant Directors shall be not
less than four (4) and not exceed six (6) in number.

(4) Any officer of the Department of State, or of the Foreign Service of
the United States, and any commissioned officer of the United States
Army, the United States Navy, or the United States Army Air Forces, may
be assigned to or detailed for duty with the Agency; and such service
shall in no way affect any status, office, rank, or grade he may occupy
or hold in the Department of State, the Foreign Service of the United
States, the United States Army, the United States Navy, or the United
States Army Air Forces, or any emolument, perquisite, right, privilege,
or benefit incident to or arising out of any such status, office, rank,
or grade, notwithstanding the provisions of Title 10 U.S. Code, Sec. 576
and Public Law 724, 79th Congress, approved August 13, 1946,7 and entitled “An Act to
improve, strengthen, and expand the Foreign Service of the United States
and to consolidate and revise the laws relating to its administration,”
or any other law pertaining to such pay and allowances. Any such officer
of the Department of State, the Foreign Service of the United States, or
commissioned officer on the active list shall receive, while serving in
a position established in Sec. 3 (b) of this Act, the State Department,
the Foreign Service, or the pay and allowances payable to an officer of
his grade and length of service, and shall be paid, from any funds
available to defray the
expenses of the Agency, annual compensation at a rate equal to the
difference between the salary set forth for such position in Sec. 3 (b)
of this Act and the amount of such State Department, Foreign Service, or
military pay and allowances.

(5) Notwithstanding section 2 of the Act of July 31, 1894 (28 Stat. 205),
as amended (5 U.S.C. 62), or section 6 of the Act of May 10, 1916 (39
Stat. 120), as amended (5 U.S.C. 58, 59), the Director of Central
Intelligence may appoint to, and employ in, any civilian office or
position in the Agency, and pay, any retired commissioned officer, or
retired warrant officer, of the Army, Navy, Marine Corps, Coast Guard,
Coast and Geodetic Survey, and Public Health Service. The retired
status, office rank, and grade of retired commissioned officers, or
retired warrant officers, so appointed or employed and, except as
provided in section 212 of the Act of June 30, 1932 (47 Stat. 406), as
amended (5 U.S.C. 59a), any emolument, perquisite, right, privilege, or
benefit incident to or arising out of any such status, office, rank, or
grade, shall be in no way affected by reason of such appointment to or
employment in, or by reason of service in, or acceptance or holding of,
any civilian office or position in the Agency or the receipt of the pay
thereof.

Section 3. (c) Intelligence Advisory Board.

(1) The Director of Central Intelligence shall be advised by an
Intelligence Advisory Board, (hereinafter called the Board), consisting
of the heads (or their representatives) of those civilian and military
intelligence agencies of the Government having functions related to the
national defense and security, as determined, from time to time, by the
National Intelligence Authority.

(2) Members of the Board shall serve without compensation for this
service and shall perform this service in addition to such other
activities, public or private, as they may engage in.

(3) The Intelligence Advisory Board shall be served by a Secretariat, as
provided for in Section 3 (a) (5) of this Act.

(4) Any recommendation of the Agency which is approved unanimously by the
Director of Central Intelligence and the Board, and which they have the
existing authority to execute, may be put into effect without action by
the Authority.

(5) Any recommendation of the Agency which does not receive such
unanimous concurrence shall be submitted to the Authority for decision,
together with the dissenting opinions.

Functions

Sec. 4. Functions of the Central Intelligence Agency.

(a) In order to assure the most effective accomplishment of the national
intelligence mission of the United States, the Agency shall, under the
supervision and direction of the Authority:

(1) Develop and recommend to the Authority establishment of over-all
policies, plans, requirements, objectives, and procedures to assure the
most effective accomplishment of the national intelligence mission and
to implement the provisions of this Act;

(2) Coordinate such of the foreign intelligence activities of the
departments and agencies of the Government as relate to the national
defense and security;

(3) Collect foreign intelligence information originating outside the
continental limits of the United States by any and all means deemed
effective;

(4) Give timely evaluation, correlation, and interpretation to foreign
intelligence information;

(5) Disseminate national intelligence to the President and appropriate
departments and agencies of the Government;

(6) Operate such foreign intelligence services as the Authority
determines can best be performed, or be more efficiently or economically
accomplished, centrally;

(7) Administer the personnel and logistical needs of the Agency,
including the procurement, training, and supervision of the Agency's
personnel, its budgetary requirements and disbursement of funds, and the
provision of administrative and logistical support for the foreign
activities of the Agency;

(8) Be responsible for fully protecting sources and methods used in the
collection of foreign intelligence information received by the Agency;

(9) Provide for the internal security of the Agency, including the
complete security of its policies, plans, requirements, objectives,
procedures, operations, and personnel;

(10) Formulate and promulgate integrated security policies and procedures
pertaining to the safeguarding of classified information and matter of
the various departments and agencies of the Government, in the interest
of the national defense and security; and

(11) Perform such other functions and duties relating to foreign
intelligence as the President or the Authority may direct.

(b) The responsibility and authority of the departments and agencies of
the Government to collect, evaluate, correlate, interpret, and
disseminate departmental intelligence shall not be affected, except to
the extent that the Authority may relieve them of such responsibility
and authority pursuant to the provisions of Sec. 3 (a) (8) of this Act.

(c) As required in the carrying out of the provisions of this Act, there
will be made immediately available on a continuing basis to the Agency
all intelligence, information, and such facilities as may be necessary,
in the possession of the various departments and agencies of the
Government.

(d) To the extent recommended by the National Intelligence Authority, the
intelligence operations of the departments and agencies of the
Government shall be open to inspection by the Agency in connection with
its planning functions.

(e) The Agency shall have no police, subpoena, or law enforcement powers
or functions, nor shall it have any functions concerning the internal
security of the United States except as specifically authorized by Secs.
4 (a) (8) (9) and (10) of this Act.

General Authority

Section 6. In the performance of its functions, the Central Intelligence
Agency is authorized to:

(1) Procure necessary services, supplies and equipment without regard to
the provisions of Section 3709, Revised Statutes (41 U.S.C. 5), as
amended, upon certification by the Director, or an official designated
by him for that purpose, that such action is necessary in the interest
of the common defense and security or upon a showing that advertising is
not reasonably practicable, and partial and advance payments may be made
under contracts for such purpose;

(2) Pay quarters and cost of living allowances or in lieu thereof a
salary differential to employees having permanent station outside the
continental limits of the United States;

(3) Transfer to and receive from funds available to other departments or
agencies of the Government such sums as may be authorized by the Bureau
of the Budget, either as advance payment or reimbursement of
appropriation, for the performance of any of the functions or activities
authorized in this Act, and any other department or agency of the
Government is authorized to transfer to or receive from the Agency such
sums without regard to any provisions of law concerning transfers
between appropriations. Sums transferred to the Agency in accordance
with this paragraph may be expended for the purposes and under the
authority of this Act without regard to limitations of other
appropriations;

(4) Order to the continental United States on leave of absence any
officer or employee of the Agency upon completion of two (2) years
continuous service abroad, and pay travel expenses incident thereto of
employees and their dependents to their place of residence in the United
States and return. Such leave will not exceed sixty (60) calendar days,
and will be exclusive of time actually and necessarily spent in travel
and awaiting transportation;

(5) Reimburse other Government departments and agencies for services of
personnel assigned to the Agency, and other departments and agencies are
hereby authorized so to assign or detail any officer or employee for
duty with the Agency;

(6) Exchange funds without regard to Section 3651 Revised Statutes (31
U.S.C. 543);

(7) Authorize couriers designated by the Director to carry firearms when
engaged in transportation of confidential documents and materials
affecting the national defense and security;

(8) Establish advisory boards to advise with and make recommendations to
the Agency on administration, legislation, operations, policies,
research, and other matters;

(9) Make such studies and investigations, obtain such information, and
hold such hearings as the Agency may deem necessary or proper to assist
it in exercising any authority provided in this Act, or in the
administration or enforcement of this Act, or any regulations or
directives issued thereunder; and

(10) Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 6 of the Act of August 24,
1912 (37 Stat. 555), or the provisions of any other law, the Director of
Central Intelligence may, in his absolute discretion, terminate the
employment of any officer or employee of the Agency whenever he shall
deem such termination necessary or advisable in the interests of the
United States, but such termination shall not affect the right of such
officer or employee to seek or accept employment in any other department
or agency of the Government if declared eligible for such employment by
the United States Civil Service Commission.

Appropriations

Section 7. Appropriations:

(a) There are hereby authorized to be appropriated such sums as may be
necessary and appropriate to carry out the provisions and purposes of
this Act.

(b) Within the limits of such appropriations, the Director is authorized
to employ persons and means and made expenditures, at the seat of
government and elsewhere, for personal services, rent, travel expenses,
preparation and transportation of the remains of officers and employees
who die abroad or in transit, while in dispatch of their official
duties, to their former homes in this country or to a place not more
distant for interment, and for ordinary expenses of such interment;
rental of news-reporting services; purchase of or subscription to law
books, books of reference, periodicals, newspapers, commercial and trade
reports; purchase or rental and operation of photographic, reproduction,
cryptographic, duplication and printing machines, equipment and devices,
and radio-receiving and radio-sending equipment and devices including
telegraph and teletype equipment; purchase, maintenance, operation,
repair and hire of motor-propelled or horse-drawn passenger- carrying
vehicles and other vehicles, aircraft, and vessels of all kinds;
printing and binding; purchase, maintenance, and cleaning of firearms.

(c) The Acts appropriating such sums may appropriate specified portions
thereof which may be expended, (A) without regard to the provisions of
law and regulations relating to the expenditure of Government funds or
the employment of persons in the Government service; (B) for objects of
a confidential nature, such expenditures to be accounted for solely on
the certificate of the Director and every such certificate shall be
deemed a sufficient voucher for the amount therein certified.

Separability of Provisions

Section 8. If any provision of this Act, or the application of such
provision to any person or circumstances, is held invalid, the remainder
of this Act or the application of such provision to persons or
circumstances other than those as to which it is held invalid, shall not
be affected thereby.

Short Title

Section 9. This Act may be cited as the “Central Intelligence Agency Act
of 1947”.

* Source: Truman
Library, Papers of Clark M.
Clifford, National Military Establishment: CIA. No
classification marking.

1 Not printed.
(Ibid.) See the Supplement.

2 See footnote 2, Document
197.

3 Approved August 1, 1946;
60 Stat. 755.

4 Approved August 10, 1946; 60 Stat. 978.

5 Approved June 29, 1946; 60 Stat. 339.

6 Memorandum, Houston to Vandenberg, July 16,
1946. (National Archives and Records Administration, RG 263, Records
of the Central Intelligence Agency, Troy Papers) See the
Supplement.

7 60 Stat. 999.

202. Draft Central Intelligence Group Memorandum202. Draft Central Intelligence Group MemorandumSource

Washington, undated.

MATERIAL PROPOSED BY DIRECTOR OF CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE FOR INCLUSION IN
THE PRESIDENT'S “STATE OF THE UNION” MESSAGE TO CONGRESS, JANUARY 1947

The vital and urgent need of this nation for effective foreign
intelligence has been amply demonstrated both by our pre-war and
war-time experiences. This need has been recognized in the Congress by a
number of bipartisan committee
recommendations. During this atomic age in which the United States has
pledged its fullest energies to the establishment and maintenance of a
just and lasting peace, our statesmen who are charged with this heavy
responsibility must not be asked to steer the ship of state over an
uncharted course. The difficult and far-reaching decisions they are
called upon to make must be based upon a clear knowledge and
understanding of present and probable future developments in other
countries if we are to live with them in peace and security. We have
also learned from bitter experience that responsibility must be placed
on one agency to ensure that this essential information pertaining to
our interests in foreign lands is collected, interpreted and distributed
to appropriate officials in cooperation with existing facilities such as
the Foreign Service. Therefore, in line with the apparent desires of the
Congress and in view of the demonstrated urgency, I directed last
January the establishment of a National Intelligence Authority composed
of the Secretaries of State, War and the Navy and my personal
representative, Fleet Admiral Leahy, to plan, develop and coordinate all Federal
foreign intelligence activities. To assist this Authority, there was
created a Central Intelligence Group under a Director of Central
Intelligence who was charged with performing those intelligence services
of common concern which could be more efficiently accomplished
centrally, including coordination of departmental intelligence
activities, and the production and dissemination to appropriate
Government officials of strategic and national policy intelligence. This
organization during its year of existence has clearly proved itself an
effective and essential instrument of Government. To realize its full
capabilities, however, this agency should have the benefit of permanent
authorization from the Congress. I therefore urgently recommend that
Congress give early consideration to the passage of enabling legislation
for the National Intelligence Authority and a Central Intelligence
Agency so that never in the future will our national interests or
security be placed in jeopardy for lack of accurate and timely
intelligence concerning foreign developments.

[Here follows the text of Document 201.]

* Source: Central Intelligence Agency Records, Job
90-00610R, Box 1, Folder 3. Secret. The source text, attached to a
copy of Document 201, may be the document
referred to in Vandenberg's office diary for December 9, 1946, which
notes: “went to see Mr. Clifford at the White House with the article for the
President's ‘State of the Union’ speech to find out if he approved
our project of advocating immediate legislation.” (Central
Intelligence Agency Records, Job 80-01731R, Box 31, Folder 1)
Vandenberg also alluded to the possible inclusion of a
recommendation for intelligence legislation in the State of the
Union message in his January 8 conversation with Clifford; see Document 203.

203. Memorandum of Conversation203. Memorandum of ConversationSource

Washington, January 8,
1947.

Lt. General Vandenberg, Director of Central Intelligence, discussed with
Mr. Clifford the proposal of
Central Intelligence Group that legislation be introduced to authorize
the establishment on a statutory basis of the National Intelligence
Authority and the Central Intelligence Group.

It had been Vandenberg's understanding since last June when he first
submitted a proposed bill to Mr. Clifford for comment, that the White House favored such
legislation. He had also been led to believe that the President might
include a recommendation along these lines in the State of the Union
message.

Mr. Clifford told him on 8 January
that such a recommendation had been included in the early drafts of the
message but that both Admiral Leahy and the President felt that it was undesirable and
unnecessary to bring this matter to the attention of the Congress at the
present.

General Vandenberg stated that he believed that the NIA favored such legislation. Vandenberg
will lay the matter before NIA and
report its decision to Dr. Clifford.

G.M.E.
Commander, U.S.N.R.

* Source:
Truman Library, Papers of George M.
Elsey, Central Intelligence. No classification
marking. Drafted on January 9 by Elsey.

204. Memorandum From the Chief of the Legislative Liaison Division of the Central Intelligence Group (Pforzheimer) to the Director of Central Intelligence (Vandenberg)204. Memorandum From the Chief of the Legislative Liaison Division of
the Central Intelligence Group (Pforzheimer) to the Director of Central Intelligence
(Vandenberg)Source

Washington, January 23,
1947.

SUBJECT

Proposed Bill for National Defense Act of 1947

1. The following recommendations are made for changes and additions to
the First Rough Draft of the proposed bill for merger of the Armed
Forces:1

a. The title of the draft bill should be amended to read as follows:

“To promote the national defense by providing for three functionally
balanced mil departments unified under a Sec of Nat Defense, to
establish a Central Intelligence Agency, and for further integration,
under a Council of Nat Def, with all other departments and agencies of
the Gov concerned with the national defense.”

This will serve to include the establishment of a Central Intelligence
Agency as one of the purposes of the bill (page 1).

b. The Declaration of Policy (section 2, page 1) should be amended to
include reference to the need of centralizing intelligence, and the
intent of Congress to provide for such centralization as set forth in
Section 1(a) of the proposed CIG
Enabling Act.2 This should include
detailed reference to the major programs relating to intelligence as
outlined in Section1(b) of the proposed CIG Enabling Act.

c. A section of “Definitions” should be included in an appropriate place
in the draft so that such terms as “foreign intelligence”, “foreign
intelligence information”, and similar phrases which have a particular
meaning with reference to intelligence are not misconstrued. This is in
accordance with Section 2 of the proposed CIG Enabling Act.

d. After Section 101(b) (page 2) there should be added a section
substantially as follows:

“The Director of Central Intelligence shall serve as the Advisor to the
Council on all matters pertaining to national intelligence. In this
capacity he shall attend all meetings of the Council but shall take no
part in the decisions thereof.”

e. Section 102(a) (page 4) does not specifically create a Central
Intelligence Agency, nor does it spell out chain of command and the
authority which shall exercise policy guidance and control. In addition,
the personnel provisions are felt to be inadequate in that they do not
provide for direct employment by the agency of personnel of its own
choosing. It is felt that Section 3(b) of the proposed CIG Enabling Act is generally preferable as
establishing more clearly the nature of the agency. However, this
section would have to be amended to make clear that the Director of
Central Intelligence would report to the Council of National Defense but
would receive policy guidance and control from a committee of the
Council consisting of the Secretary of State, the Secretary of National Defense, and the
President's Personal Representative, if any.

f. Section 102(b) (page 5) should be eliminated in its entirety. This
section defines the duties of the agency in terms which are extremely
loose and lacking in detail. In its place should be put the provisions
of Section 4(a) of the proposed CIG
Enabling Act. The latter sections delineate the functions of the agency
in far greater detail with less chance of misinterpretation or evasion.
In addition, Section 4(a) gives the agency the right to supervise its
personnel, its budgetary requirements and disbursements of funds, and
specifically provides for administrative and logistical support for the
foreign activities of the agency. Also Section 4(a) was written to set
forth the functions of CIG in accordance
with the offices into which CIG has been broken down. The draft
submitted by the White House does not include any specific provision for
the collection of foreign intelligence information.

g. The first sentence of Section 102(c) (page 7) permits other agencies
to continue general intelligence activities. This should be amended to
limit them strictly to departmental intelligence as provided by Section
4(b) of the proposed CIG Enabling Act.
The remainder of Section 102(c), which provides that the agency shall
have no police power, etc., should be qualified to the extent of
permitting it to control its own security in accordance with Sections
4(a), (8), (9), (10) and 4 (e) of the proposed CIG Enabling Act.

h. Sections 102(d) and (e) (page 7) deal with the relationship of the
Central Intelligence Agency with other intelligence agencies of the
Government, and the use of their facilities. It is felt that the
language of Sections 4(c) and (d) of the proposed CIG Enabling Act is preferable in that it
provides for the full availability of both information and facilities on
a continuing basis whereas the proposed draft from the White House is
somewhat weaker.

i. The Director of Central Intelligence should be eliminated from the
provisions of Section 404 (page 28) of the proposed draft inasmuch as
these provisions tend to limit his powers of appointment of personnel to
exempted positions and on unvouchered funds, and particularly his power
to discharge employees for security reasons.

j. The draft act proposed by the White House nowhere provides for the
authorities which are essential to the operations of the Central
Intelligence Agency. These include special procurement authorities,
authorization for transfers between appropriations, certain special
personnel practices, the right to exchange funds, and certain other but
necessary powers. The proposed bill does not provide for appropriations
for the Central Intelligence Agency nor for the special expenditures
which should be authorized in these appropriations, particularly
expenditures of a confidential nature to be accounted for on the
certification of the Director, and expenditures otherwise made without
regard to provisions of law and
regulations relating to Government funds. The above special powers and
authorizations should be added to the proposed bill as Sections 407 and
408 in the general form proposed by the CIG Enabling Act, Sections 6 and 7.

Walter L. Pforzheimer

* Source: National
Archives and Records Administration, RG 263, Records of the Central
Intelligence Agency, Troy Papers, CIG and NSA of '47. No classification marking.

1 Not found.

2 See the enclosure to Document 201.

205. Memorandum for the Record205. Memorandum for the RecordSource

Washington, undated.

SUBJECT

Proposed Legislation for C.I.G.

Sometime shortly after 1600 hours on 22 January 1947, a copy of the
proposed National Defense Act of 19471 was delivered to the Director of Central Intelligence
for comment on those sections applicable to him. Immediate review of the
intelligence sections indicated that they had been lifted virtually
verbatim from S-2044, the Merger Bill introduced into the 79th Congress
by Senator Thomas. These provisions are considered unsatisfactory to
C.I.G. in many respects. The salient features of disagreement are
included in the Memorandum from the undersigned to the Director of
Central Intelligence, dated 23 January 1947, subject: Proposed Bill for
National Defense Act of 1947.2

A conference with the Director established the policy that an attempt
should not be made to remove from the Defense Act all but a bare mention
of the Central Intelligence Agency, and introduce a separate CIG Bill. The Director also indicated his
desire to have included a provision that he would serve as the advisor
to the Council on National Defense on matters pertaining to
intelligence, and that in this capacity he would attend all meetings of
the Council. It was agreed that the Director should take no part in the
decisions of the Council as this was a policy making body, and it had long been
agreed that Central Intelligence should not be involved in policy
making.

At 1000 hours, 23 January 1947, a conference was held in the office of
Mr. Charles S. Murphy, Administrative Assistant to the President, at
which General Vandenberg, Vice Admiral Forrest Sherman, Major General
Lauris Norstad, the undersigned, and Mr. Houston were present. Mr. Murphy stated that the subject
was new to him, as he had first entered the picture on 20 January 1947
and was charged with the over-all drafting of the White House version of
the National Defense Act. He stated that he did not know that a proposed
CIG enabling act had been submitted
to Mr. Clifford's office. He
suggested (concurred in by all present) that the draft of the proposed
CIG enabling act be substituted for
the intelligence sections of the proposed National Defense Act as an
initial working basis.

In connection with paragraph 1 (a) of the memorandum for the Director
from the undersigned, dated 23 January 1947, it was pointed out that no
mention of CIA had been made in the title of the proposed bill. This was
due to the fact that a considerable number of boards and councils were
created by this bill and none of them were being named in the title.
Therefore, it would not seem appropriate to mention CIA in the title. In
this General Vandenberg concurred.

The proposed draft of the National Defense Act of 1947 was modified by
the undersigned, with the assistance of Mr. Houston, to include the changes discussed at the
meeting, and to incorporate the necessary. provisions of the proposed
CIG enabling act. Copies of the
revised act3 were
personally handed to Admiral Sherman and General Norstad by Lt. Botsford
shortly after 1700, 23 January 1947. A copy was also handed to Mr.
Murphy by the undersigned at 1715. A copy of NIA Directive #5 was shown to Mr. Murphy. It was not left
with him, due to the absence of any security in his office. Mr. Murphy
suggested the addition of a paragraph providing for the dissolution of
NIA and CIG, and the transfer of its personnel, property, and
records to the Agency. This was concurred in on 24 January 1947 by the
undersigned, after one or two minor changes.

On 25 January, the undersigned talked with Mr. Murphy, and was informed
that all but the barest mention of CIA would be omitted, as the drafting
committee thought that the material submitted by CIG was too controversial and might hinder the passage of
the merger legislation.

It had been felt by the drafting committee that the substantive portions
of the proposed CIG draft were too
controversial and subject to attack by other agencies. It was further
felt that the General Authorities were rather controversial from a
Congressional point of view, but that CIG might justify them in their own bill
if they had the time to present them adequately. It was further felt
that if detailed intelligence legislation was included in the merger
bill CIG might not have time to present
their picture to the Congress in detail in the course of the hearings.

The undersigned asked Mr. Murphy whether the elimination of CIA from
merger legislation constituted permission to submit our own enabling act
as a companion measure. He stated that he could not comment on this, as
he was authorized (with his drafting committee) only to draft the merger
bill, and could not approve or pass on other matters. Authority to draft
and introduce a CIA Enabling Act would have to come from other
sources.

The above information was transmitted to the Deputy Director (Colonel Wright), who cabled General
Vandenberg of the developments.

Colonel Wright spoke with
Admiral Leahy, to request
information as to whether Murphy's position granted us a green light on
our own legislation. The Admiral was inclined to agree. He felt that we
should delete from the draft the phrase “Subject to existing law” (Sec.
302 (b)), as it would only serve to complicate things. He further felt
that we should then let the draft go through.

It was determined to request that the position of Deputy Director be
included in the draft, the phrase mentioned in the preceding paragraph
be deleted, and an attempt made to include a clause which would
designate the Director as the Intelligence Advisor to the Council.

In connection with paragraph 1 (b) of reference memorandum, it was agreed
to make some mention of centralized intelligence in the declaration of
policy in the proposed bill. This suggestion had strong support from
Admiral Sherman, although it was initially thought by the others present
that it might prove cumbersome.

In connection with paragraph 1 (c) of reference memorandum, it was felt
that this suggestion was non-controversial and that the appropriate
definitions would be acceptable.

In connection with paragraph 1 (d) of reference memorandum, General
Vandenberg stated that he was strongly opposed to the Central
Intelligence Agency or its director participating in policy decisions on
any matter. However, he felt that he should be present at meetings of
the Council. To this General Norstad voiced serious exceptions, as he
felt that the Council was already too big. He thought that the Director
should not even be present as an observer, as this had proven to be
cumbersome and unworkable at meetings of the Joint Chiefs of Staff.
Admiral Sherman suggested, however, that the Director should normally be
present at meetings of the Council, in its discretion. General
Vandenberg concurred in this, as did General Norstad, and it was
accepted with the additional proviso that the Joint Chiefs of Staff
would also attend meetings at the discretion of the Council.

General Vandenberg indicated the difficulties which he had had in having
to go to the N.I.A. on so many problems. He felt that the difficulties
of his position would be multiplied, as he would have to ask policy
guidance and direction from the Council on National Defense, which
consists of many more members than the N.I.A. He was assured that the
intent of the act was that the CIA would operate independently and come
under the Council only on such specific measures as the Council may,
from time to time desire to direct. It would not be necessary for the
agency to ask continual approval from the Council. With this
interpretation, General Vandenberg withdrew the opposition voiced in the
last sentences of paragraph 1 (e) of reference memorandum.

The Director pointed out the difficulties of operation of clandestine
methods in the absence of detailed legislation, empowering him to
operate on unvouchered funds, select certain types of personnel, and
discharge employees for any question of possible disloyalty. It was
agreed that these provisions would be included in the proposed draft
from CIG. It was requested further that
this draft be submitted by the evening of 23 January 1947, in order to
meet necessary deadlines.

It was the final sense of the meeting that the Director of Central
Intelligence should report to the Council on National Defense. As
General Vandenberg indicated that it would be necessary to report
somewhere; that neither the President nor he was anxious to have another
agency “free wheeling” around the government. However, it was thought
that the agency should have sufficient power to perform its own
functions without it being necessary to have specific approval from the
Council on each action.

On 27 January 1947, the undersigned drafted a letter, for the Deputy
Director's signature, to Mr. Charles Murphy.4 This letter set forth
the views of the Central Intelligence Group on the draft of the proposed
section on central intelligence, submitted by the White House on 25
January 1947. After studying the memorandum of 27 January 1947, Mr.
Murphy called the undersigned and requested a concurrence on eliminating
paragraph 302 (b) of his draft of 25 January 1947, on the ground that in
view of our objections (as expressed in paragraph 2 of our memorandum of
27 January 1947), nothing would be lost by the total elimination of this
paragraph. After consultation with Colonel Wright, this concurrence was given by the
undersigned. Concurrence was also given to the lowering of the proposed
salary for the Deputy Director, as set forth in paragraph 1 of our
memorandum of 27 January 1947, from $14,000 per annum to $12,000 per
annum, as the $14,000 figure was greatly in excess of the figure
received by the Assistant Secretaries of the various departments. In addition, Mr. Murphy agreed
to urge strongly a point raised by paragraph 3 of our memorandum of 27
January 1947 designating the Director of Central Intelligence as the
Intelligence Advisor of the Council of National Defense (to be renamed
the National Security Council) and allowing the Director to sit as a
non-voting member thereof.

On 28 January 1947, Mr. Murphy requested the undersigned to come to his
office, and there handed him the Third Draft (dated 27 January 1947) of
the proposed National Security Act of 1947.5 Mr. Murphy indicated that most of our requests
had not been complied with, and that the Army and Navy had seen fit to
overrule his recommendations in that connection. The salary of the
Director was lowered from $15,000 to $14,000 on the basis that, in all
probability, the incumbent would be a military or naval officer whose
salary should not be greatly in excess of that of the Chief of Staff of
the Army or Chief of Naval Operations; that the figure had been set on
the basis of the same salary being paid to the Director of Military
Applications of the Atomic Energy Commission; that the Army-Navy
conferees did not want the salary merely a “juicy plum” for some officer
for whom a berth was being sought.

The paragraph establishing the position of Deputy Director, which Mr.
Murphy had urged, was eliminated as being too controversial, as was the
paragraph regarding the position of the Director as the Intelligence
Advisor of the Council. The Army-Navy conferees felt that the position
of the Director as the Intelligence Advisor was inherent in the position
itself, and that it would not be proper to provide by law that the head
of an agency under the Council should sit on the Council.

Mr. Murphy stated that his role was simply that of a consultant on
drafting in the Army and Navy. He further stated that the Drafting
Committee would present their final version to Mr. Clark M. Clifford, Special Counsel to
the President, at a meeting on the afternoon of 29 January 1947. He
further stated that any comments which we might care to make to the
White House on the proposed draft would be acceptable to him, and that
his feelings would not be hurt.

After examination of the proposed Third Draft by Colonel Wright and the undersigned,
it was determined that same was not satisfactory to C.I.G. Therefore, a
memorandum was dispatched (under date of 28 January 1947) to Mr.
Clifford, setting forth
C.I.G.'s comments on the proposed draft.6

Walter L. Pforzheimer
Chief, Legislative Liaison Division

* Source:
National Archives and Records Administration, RG 263, Records of the
Central Intelligence Agency, Troy Papers, Legislation 1947.
Confidential. The source text is undated; the date is from a
handwritten date on the copy reproduced in CIA
Cold War Records: The CIA under Harry Truman, pp. 105-109.

1 Not
found.

2 Document 204.

3 Not found.

4 Document 206.

5 Not found.

6 Document 207.

206. Letter From the Deputy Director of Central Intelligence (Wright) to the President's Administrative Assistant (Murphy)206. Letter From the Deputy Director of Central Intelligence
(Wright) to
the President's Administrative Assistant (Murphy)Source

Washington, January 27,
1947.

My Dear Mr. Murphy: In the absence of General Vandenberg, I wish to offer
the following comments on the proposed draft of Section 302 of the
National Defense Act of 1947, insofar as it affects the Central
Intelligence Group.

1. Paragraph 302 (a) should provide for a Deputy Director of Central
Intelligence to be appointed from civilian or military life by the
President by and with the advice and consent of the Senate. The Deputy
Director should receive compensation at the rate of $14,000.00 per
annum. It is felt desirable to include this in the legislation in order
to provide continuity of action in the absence of the Director or should
there be a vacancy in that office. The Deputy Director should be a man
of such caliber and stature as adequately to serve as an operating
deputy to the Director.

2. It is felt that the phrase “subject to existing law” should be
eliminated from paragraph 302 (b) of the proposed draft as it appears to
add nothing to the meaning of the Section. This is particularly true as
many of the functions and authorities of this Agency are excepted from
existing law. In this connection we have the concurrence of the Personal
Representative of the President on the National Intelligence Authority.
It is therefore felt preferable that section 302 (b) read as follows:

“Under the direction of the National Security Council, the Central
Intelligence Agency shall perform foreign intelligence functions
“relating to the national security.”

3. It is urged that a paragraph substantially as follows should be
included in the proposed bill:

“The Director of Central Intelligence shall serve as the Advisor to the
Council on all matters pertaining to national intelligence and in this
capacity he may attend meetings of the Council at its discretion but
shall take no part in the decisions thereof.”

In this connection attention is called to paragraph 2 of the Presidential
letter of January 22, 1946 which states as follows:

“The Director of General Intelligence shall be designated by me, shall be
responsible to the National Intelligence Authority, and shall sit as a
non-voting member thereof.”

In line with paragraph 302 (e) (2) which specifically transfers the
functions of the Director of Central Intelligence it would appear that
his functions as a non-voting member of the National Intelligence
Authority should be transferred to the Director of the Central
Intelligence Agency in connection with his relationships to the National
Security Council.

E.K. Wright1
Colonel, GSC

* Source: Central
Intelligence Agency Records, Job 90-00610R, Box 1, Folder 3. No
classification marking.

1 Printed from a copy
that bears this typed signature.

207. Memorandum From the Deputy Director of Central Intelligence (Wright) to the President's Special Counsel (Clifford)207. Memorandum From the Deputy Director of Central Intelligence
(Wright) to
the President's Special Counsel (Clifford)Source

Washington, January 28,
1947.

SUBJECT

Comments on the Proposed “National Security Act of 1947”

1. The Central Intelligence Group is in receipt of the Third Draft of the
proposed National Security Act of 1947, dated 27 January 1947.1 The Central Intelligence
Group has addressed comments to an earlier draft of this legislation,
insofar as it affected this agency.2 These comments have
served the dual purpose of:

(a) Setting forth a working basis for a Central Intelligence Agency under
the Merger; and,

(b) Eliminating from the proposed National Security Act any and all
controversial material, insofar as it referred to central intelligence,
which might in any way hamper the successful passage of the Act.

2. It seems proper to mention, however, that, in the course of securing
the objective outlined in the previous paragraph, the drafters3 of the proposed National Security Act have reached the conclusion that the
Act should not include the full text of the proposed Central
Intelligence Group Enabling Act, which was transmitted by this agency to
you under date of 2 December 1946.4 It was felt that this
text presented certain controversial issues which should not be included
in the Merger Bill. It was the conclusion of the drafters that the
proposed National Security Act should include a section creating a
Central Intelligence Agency substantially as set forth in Section 302 of
the Third Draft, and that the Agency should then secure its additional
necessary powers and authority by means of separate legislation. In this
position we have concurred.

3. However, the drafters have found it necessary to eliminate from the
proposed draft certain provisions which the Central Intelligence Group
considers vitally necessary.

4. It was urged upon the drafters that there be included a paragraph
substantially as follows:

“The Director of Central Intelligence shall serve as the Advisor to the
Council on all matters pertaining to national intelligence, and in this
capacity, will attend meetings of the Council at its discretion but
shall take no part in the decisions thereof.”

It was felt that this paragraph was necessary in that Section 302 (c) (2)
specifically transferred the functions of the Director of Central
Intelligence to the new agency, and these functions included (as set
forth in the Presidential Directive of 22 January 1946) the following:

“The Director of Central Intelligence shall be designated by me, shall be
responsible to the National Intelligence Authority, and shall sit as a
non-voting member thereof.”

It would appear that the Director's functions as a non-voting member of
the National Intelligence Authority should be transferred to the
Director of the Central Intelligence Agency in connection with his
relationships to the National Security Council. This position was
concurred in by the Administrative Assistant to the President, charged
with the drafting of this legislation, but was eliminated at the
insistence of the other members of the Drafting Committee as too
controversial.

5. As now written, it is feared that the necessary freedom of operation
for a Central Intelligence Authority might well be handicapped by the
present wording of Section 302 (a). It is therefore urged that this
paragraph be changed to read substantially as follows:

“There is hereby established a Central Intelligence Agency with a
Director of Central Intelligence, who shall be the head thereof, to be
appointed from civilian or military life by the President, by and with
the advice and consent of the
Senate. The Director shall receive compensation at the rate of $15,000 a
year. The Central Intelligence Agency shall coordinate the nation's
foreign intelligence activities and shall operate centrally those
foreign intelligence functions which can be most efficiently performed
centrally.”

In view of the fact that Section 302 (e) (1) specifically transfers the
functions of the National Intelligence Authority to the National
Security Council, and as these functions and relationships have been
efficiently developed over a period of time, it would appear that the
proposed language quoted above would be preferable to that presently
contained in the Third Draft.

7. [sic] The Central Intelligence Group further
urged upon the Drafting Committee that provisions be made in this
legislation for the specific position of a Deputy Director to be
appointed from civilian or military life by the President, by and with
the advice and consent of the Senate. The Deputy Director should receive
compensation at the rate of $12,000 per annum. It was felt desirable to
include this in the legislation in order to provide continuity of action
in the absence of the Director or should there be a vacancy in that
office. The Deputy Director should be a man of such caliber and stature
as adequately to serve as an operation deputy to the Director. This
position was concurred in by the Administrative Assistant to the
President but was overruled by the other members of the Drafting
Committee.

* Source: Central
Intelligence Agency Records, Job 90-00610R, Box 1, Folder 3. No
classification marking. The memorandum bears no signature but
appears to be from Wright.

1 Not found.

2 Document 206.

3 The team responsible for drafting the
National Security Act of 1947 included Clark Clifford and Charles Murphy of the White
House; Vice Admiral Forrest P. Sherman, the Deputy Chief of Naval
Operations; and Major General Lauris Norstad, Director of Plans and
Operations, War Department General Staff. (Central Intelligence
Agency, Draft Legislative History of the Central Intelligence
Agency, p. 26)

4 Document 201.

208. Memorandum From the Chief of the Legislative Liaison Division, Central Intelligence Group (Pforzheimer) to the Deputy Director of Central Intelligence (Wright)208. Memorandum From the Chief of the Legislative Liaison Division,
Central Intelligence Group (Pforzheimer) to the Deputy Director of Central
Intelligence (Wright)Source

Washington, March 5,
1947.

SUBJECT

Comments by Mr. Allen
Dulles on Proposed CIG Enabling Act

Mr. Allen Dulles has submitted,
under date of 10 February 1947, his comments on the draft, dated 2
December 1946, of the proposed CIG
Enabling Act.1 The undersigned submits the following remarks in
connection with Mr. Dulles'
comments.

1. Dulles: “Section 1(a). The use
of the term ‘national intelligence mission’ seems to me somewhat
awkward. Possibly instead of ‘mission’ the word ‘objectives’ would be
more appropriate.”

Comment: Either term would appear to be
acceptable, but the word “objectives” can be substituted for “mission”
if it is thought that it is less awkward or ambiguous.

2. Dulles: “Section 3(a).
Consideration should be given to according to the Director of
Intelligence the right to vote in the National Intelligence Authority,
both for reasons of prestige and also to permit matters to be referred
to the President under Subsection (9) in case by any chance there should
be a difference of opinion between the Director and the other members of
the Authority.”

Comment: This suggestion can not be adopted.
Under the proposed merger bill, the Director will not sit on the
National Security Council and therefore cannot vote. Provisions could be
included, however, under Subsection 3(a)(9), if it is thought desirable,
to allow the Director to appeal an adverse decision by the Council to
the President. However, such a course of action would be extremely
difficult, as it would involve the President's over-ruling at least two
Cabinet members.

3. Dulles: “Section 3(a)(6). The
reference to the conduct of foreign intelligence operations ‘centrally’
does not have much meaning. I presume it means the operations which are
to be carried on by the Central Intelligence Agency and I think this
should be so stated.”

Comment: This phrase has been amended to read “as
well as in the conduct of those foreign intelligence operations
performed by the Central Intelligence Agency” rather than “performed
centrally.”

4. Dulles: “Section 3(a)(4). In a
moment of crisis it might be necessary to call a meeting of the
Authority and it might be wise to provide the machinery to do this in
the Act itself. I would favor giving the Director the right to call a
meeting as well as any other members of the Authority.”

Comment: The Enabling Act will be amended to
allow the Director to request an immediate meeting of the Council when
this is warranted by the urgency of the situation.

5. Dulles: “Section 3(b)(2). It is
vitally important that the Deputy Director be a man who has the complete
confidence of the Director. The relatively large salary would make this
job an attractive political plum and there should be some safeguard
against this. Possibly it could be provided that the Deputy Director
should be appointed by the Central Intelligence Authority from among a
list furnished by the Director.”

Comment: This comment may be equally true of the
offices of Director and Deputy Director. If the Director were a
civilian, the Deputy Director would in all probability be a military or
naval officer, and confirmation by the Senate would be preferable in
view of the advanced salary this officer will receive. Public opinion is
probably the only safeguard in
preventing the offices of Director and Deputy Director from becoming
political plums.

6. Dulles: “Section 3(b)(4). I
question whether the enumeration here is broad enough. You might wish to
avail of the services of someone in the civil service or from some other
department of the government other than the armed forces and the State
Department. Possibly also there is a danger in the provision for
payment. If this clause means that in certain cases the person has to be
transferred to, or a part of his pay assumed by, the CIG, it might
disclose information and connections which you did not wish to have
known. Your salary list will probably become public property sooner or
later.”

Comment: This Section was included to provide for
special cases. Anyone else would be carried, either on Central
Intelligence Agency rolls or on the rolls of some other Department on a
reimbursement basis. In either case his Civil Service status would be
established without the necessity of special legislation. The objection
raised in the second portion of this comment should be met by normal
CIG security provisions.

7. Dulles: “Section 3(b)(5). The
right to employ retired officers might well be extended to include any
retired civil servant as well as those who retire from the armed forces.
I doubt the wisdom of Section 3(c)(4) as this might some day be
interpreted as preventing any action by the Agency unless there is
unanimous approval by the Board.”

Comment: The normal retired civil servant (65 or
70) is generally considered too old for employment in the Agency. If he
resigns from the Civil Service, he could be reinstated under the present
procedures. The comment on Section 3(c)(4) is academic, in view of the
fact that Section 3(c) deals with the Intelligence Advisory Board and
has been eliminated in its entirety.

8. Dulles: “Section 4(a)(6). I
suggest deleting ‘centrally’ and inserting ‘by the Agency.’”

Comment: Agreed, as in Comment 3 above.

9. Dulles: “Section 4(a)(8). This
should be rephrased as it imposes an impossible legal responsibility. It
might read somewhat as follows: ‘be responsible for taking measures to
protect,’ etc.”

Comment: Concurred in.

10. Dulles: “Section 4(a)(9). Same
comment as above with regard to the word ‘complete.’”

Comment: Concurred in.

11. Dulles: “Section 4(a)(8), (9)
and (10). This might be a good place to insert a provision to provide an
‘Official Secrets Act,’ in the case of all employees of the Agency as
well as all government employees of any department who make any
unauthorized disclosure or who are responsible therefor in the case of any information
or documents coming into their possession and originating with the
Central Intelligence Agency.”

Comment: This matter is in abeyance pending final
determination of the position of the Department of Justice on an
Official Secrets Act.

12. Dulles: “Section 6(3). The
provision that transfers of funds from other departments to the Agency
is subject to authorization by the Bureau of the Budget may be essential
from an accounting angle but introduces a serious security problem and
it would be better if the power to authorize could be left to the
Central Intelligence Authority. It is unwise that outsiders should know
the amount of funds so transferred.”

Comment: Procedures have been developed in
conjunction with the Bureau of the Budget whereby specially cleared
personnel of the Bureau of the Budget will handle these transfers,
subject to careful security procedures.

13. Mr. Dulles suggests
consideration of three special subjects for eventual legislation. In
connection with his suggestion regarding intelligence training schools,
it is felt that Paragraph 4(a)(1) of the proposed bill should include
the establishment of over-all policies and objectives for intelligence
training schools, including the training of intelligence officers for
duties in the field of collection and dissemination. The Central
Intelligence Agency may wish to take some part in the shaping of the
intelligence courses at the National War College, the Armed Forces Staff
College and the Air University, etc.

In connection with Mr. Dulles'
suggestion as to eventual legislation in the field of cryptography,
query whether the Director wishes to include at this time a provision
for the Central Intelligence Agency to coordinate the cryptographic
practices of the government. In connection with the suggestion regarding
an Official Secrets Act, see comment on Paragraph 11 above.

Walter L. Pforzheimer2

* Source: Central
Intelligence Agency Records, Job 90-00610R, Box 1, Folder 3, CIG Enabling Act, 1947. No
classification marking. Attached to the source text is a handwritten
note addressed to Pforzheimer which reads, “Noted. Concur.
Wright.”

1 Neither Dulles' comments nor the draft has
been found.

2 Printed from a copy that bears this
typed signature.

209. Memorandum of Conversation209. Memorandum of ConversationSource

Washington, March 10,
1947.

SUBJECT

Legislative Interests of Central Intelligence Group

PARTICIPANTS

Mr. Walter L. Pforzheimer,
Chief, Legislative Liaison Division, Central Intelligence
Group

Mr. Durward V. Sandifer, AA/L

Mr. Pforzheimer called at my office
by arrangement made by Mr. Donald
Edgar. Mr. Pforzheimer, who is in charge of legislative relations
for the Central Intelligence Group wanted to discuss problems of mutual
interest. He took up particularly the following problems:

1. The National Security Act Provisions for a Central Intelligence
Agency. Mr. Pforzheimer said that
they had considerable doubts about the provision in the National
Security Act placing the proposed Central Intelligence Agency under the
National Security Council. He thought that this was administratively
unworkable, and suggested that it would probably not be satisfactory to
the Department of State as the Secretary of State would be in a minority
on the National Security Council. His agency is considering a proposal
for the establishment of a supervisory committee consisting of the
Secretary of State, the Secretary of National Defense, and a civilian
appointee, who would supervise the Central Intelligence Agency and make
recommendations to the Security Council. Unanimous recommendations would
be binding on the Security Council and, in the event of a difference of
opinion, the matter would be referred to the President.

The Central Intelligence Group is working on enabling legislation for the
establishment of a Central Intelligence Agency. Mr. Pforzheimer said that at a later date he
would supply me with copies of the drafts they were working on.

2. Central Intelligence Group Personnel. Mr. Pforzheimer said that the proposed Central Intelligence
Agency would have its own personnel and would not rely on personnel
supplied by the State, War, and Navy Departments. Considerable action in this direction has
already been taken. There are only a few persons who are with the
Central Intelligence Group at the present time who are still on the
State Department payroll.

DVS

* Source:
National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Records of the
Department of State, Decimal File 1945-49, 101.61/3-1047. No
classification marking. Drafted by Sandifer.

210. Memorandum From George M. Elsey to the President's Special Counsel (Clifford)210. Memorandum From George M.
Elsey to the President's Special Counsel (Clifford)Source

Washington, March 14,
1947.

SUBJECT

Central Intelligence Group

1. C.I.G. is up to its old tricks again. It has submitted “informally”
the draft of a proposed bill to be submitted to Congress very similar to
the two previous drafts which Vandenberg has sent to you in recent
months and which you filed without further action.

2. Mr. George Schwarzwalder of Donald Stowe's group, called to request
advice and information on what Budget should tell C.I.G. I suggested
that C.I.G. be informed that there was no necessity for such legislation
in view of the sections concerning Intelligence which are included in
the Unification Bill.

3. The Budget concurs in that position and will inform C.I.G. that it is
inappropriate to propose legislation at this time in view of the
President's support of the Unification Bill.

Respectfully,

George M. Elsey1

* Source: Truman Library, Papers of George M. Elsey, Central
Intelligence. No classification marking. Elsey was Clifford's assistant. Also reproduced in CIA Cold War Records: The CIA under Harry Truman, p.
127.

1 Printed from a copy that bears this
typed signature.

211. Memorandum From the Secretary of State's Special Assistant for Research and Intelligence (Eddy) to Acting Secretary of State Acheson211. Memorandum From the Secretary of State's Special Assistant for
Research and Intelligence (Eddy) to Acting Secretary of State AchesonSource

Washington, April 17,
1947.

SUBJECT

Comment on National Security Act of 1947, Title II, Section 202,
“Central Intelligence Agency”

In connection with the hearings on national intelligence to which you
have instructed me to accompany you Monday, April 21, I enclose copy of
the National Security Act of 1947,1 wherein
Title II, Section 202, sets forth the plan for the Central Intelligence
Agency, concerning which I submit the following comments:

1. It is my conviction that the proposals in Title II, Section 202, would
render more difficult the promotion of peaceful foreign relations by
subordinating the political and economic intelligence activities of the
Department of State to a Central Intelligence Agency completely
dominated by the Armed Forces; and that it would further have the
ultimate, if not the immediate, effect of placing the reporting
activities of the Foreign Service under military control in time of
peace as well as in time of war.

2. The National Intelligence Authority would be abolished and replaced by
the National Security Council. (Section 202,(c) (1)) Whereas the
Secretary of State is at present Chairman of the NIA composed of four
members, he would be reduced on the National Security Council to an
equality with one of the three subdivisions of the Armed Forces
establishment, and civilian political intelligence would, therefore,
have one representative out of six or more (see Title II, Section 201
(a)).

3. The Central Intelligence Group would be abolished and would be
replaced by the Central Intelligence Agency (Section 202, (c)(2)). This
CIA would be dominated by the military, with no indication that a
representative of the Secretary of State would be accredited even as an
adviser to the new Director of Central Intelligence, to whom it is
proposed to give the salary and prerequisites of a 4-star general. The
extended discussion of his right to retain his military salary and
allowances, together with a supplement to bring the total to $14,000,
makes it quite clear that there is an expectation to appoint to this
elevated office an officer on active duty in the armed forces who will
serve the primary interests of the five military members of the National
Security Council rather than the civilian and peacetime interests of the
Department of State.

4. In this connection it should be pointed out that the Foreign Service
is the only collection agency of the U.S. Government which effectively
covers the world. For every Military or Naval Attachà's office abroad,
there are dozens of Foreign Service Officers and specialists, and for
every Embassy or Mission with a Military or Naval Attachà there are many
Consulates General, Consulates or Vice Consulates with no military or
naval staff. It is, therefore, clear that at present our Government is
served with foreign intelligence chiefly by the Foreign Service trained
to preserve political and economic good relations with the rest of the
world. Under the proposed act this world-wide coverage and personnel
would be forced into the service of the military, directly or
indirectly, with a consequent damage to our peace-time policy that would
be difficult to estimate. The provisions of this act might have merit if
made effective upon the declaration of war, but in time of peace the
National Intelligence Service should be under genuinely civilian control
and its estimates of political and economic situations abroad should be
subject, as at present, to preview by the Department of State, which has
the responsibility for foreign policy.

William A. Eddy2

* Source: National Archives and Records
Administration, RG 59, Records of the Department of State, Decimal
File 1945-49, 101.5/5-547. Confidential. Drafted by Eddy.

1 See footnote 1, Document 220.

2 Printed from a copy that bears this
typed signature.

212. Letter From Secretary of State Marshall to Senator Chan Gurney212. Letter From Secretary of State Marshall to Senator Chan GurneySource

Washington, May 5,
1947.

Dear Senator: This is to confirm the message I asked General Carter1 to pass on to you Friday
afternoon.2

The legislation regarding the CIG
reflects the unchanged status of the agreement reached in February by
the Secretaries of War and Navy and myself.3

Faithfully yours,4

* Source: National Archives and Records
Administration, RG 59, Records of the Department of State, Decimal
File 1945-49, 101.5/5-547. No classification marking. Drafted by
Marshall. A note on the source text reads: “Delivered by hand
5/6/47.”

1 Brigadier General Marshall Carter, Secretary
Marshall's Special Assistant.

2 Presumably Friday, May
2.

3 No documents concerning this agreement, and no other references to
it, have been found.

4 Printed from
an unsigned copy.

213. Memorandum From the Chief of the Legislative Liaison Division, Central Intelligence Group (Pforzheimer) to the Director of Central Intelligence (Hillenkoetter)213. Memorandum From the Chief of the Legislative Liaison Division,
Central Intelligence Group (Pforzheimer) to the Director of Central Intelligence
(Hillenkoetter)Source

Washington, May 9,
1947.

SUBJECT

CIG Enabling Legislation

1. CIG enabling legislation should be
drafted to meet one of the three alternatives set forth below:

a. If the Senate Armed Services Committee or the House Committee on
Expenditures in the Executive Departments specifically demands detailed
CIG enabling legislation prior to
reaching an affirmative decision on Section 202 of the National Security
Act of 1947 (S. 758 and H.R. 2319)

b. If definite indications are received that there is no possibility that
unification legislation (S. 758 and H.R. 2319) will be enacted into law
at his session, or

c. If the National Security Act of 1947 is enacted into law.

2. If situation “a” occurs, the legislation will include no preamble. The
first section will amend Section 202 of the National Security Act of
1947 as presently drafted, to enumerate the duties of the National
Security Council in the language of the President's Executive Directive
regarding the powers of the National Intelligence Authority. The Act
should be further amended to include provision for a Deputy Director,
and to allow the Director to appoint retired officers of the armed
services without regard to those provisions of the law regarding dual
compensation. This will permit retired officers to accept civilian
employment at CIG without loss of
retired pay while on duty here. The functions of the agency should be
more clearly delineated in line with the President's Executive
Directive. There should also be included those general authorities and
appropriation languages which it is considered necessary to have over
and beyond normal procedures. This includes special language regarding
the transfer of funds by the Departments, permission for use of
unvouchered funds, and absolute right of the Director to terminate the
employment of any member of the organization.

3. If situation “b” occurs, it will be necessary to have a short preamble
setting forth the purpose of the legislation. It will also be necessary
specifically to establish the National Intelligence Authority with the
same terms of reference as presently set forth in the President's
Executive Directive. It will also be necessary to establish the office
of Director of Central Intelligence and the agency itself. The remaining
functions are the same as in situation “a”, as set forth above.

4. If situation “c” occurs, it will require the same provisions as
situation “a” above.

It is understood that situation “c” is preferable and in accordance with
our present agreement with the Bureau of the Budget.

* Source: Central Intelligence Agency Records, Job
90-00610R, Box 1, Folder 2. No classification marking. Attached to
this memorandum is an undated draft (see the Supplement) of Document 214. It omits one sentence that is
in the signed version. Also in the Supplement is a second May 9
memorandum from Pforzheimer to
Hillenkoetter, transmitting a draft of the memorandum to
Hillenkoetter, which is identical to the signed copy. (Central
Intelligence Agency Records, Job 90-00610R, Box 1, Folder 2) Rear
Admiral Roscoe H.
Hillenkoetter was sworn in as Director of Central
Intelligence on May 1.

214. Memorandum From the National Intelligence Authority to the Director of Central Intelligence (Hillenkoetter)214. Memorandum From the National Intelligence
Authority to the Director of Central Intelligence (Hillenkoetter)Source

Washington, May 14,
1947.

SUBJECT

Enabling Legislation

You are hereby directed to prepare drafts of enabling legislation for the
Central Intelligence Group. This legislation should be drafted to
encompass the principles of the President's Executive Directive of 22
January 1946, and subsequent Directives of the National Intelligence
Authority.

These drafts should be drawn to meet each of the following possible
situations:

a. That the Senate Armed Services Committee or the House Committee on
Expenditures in the Executive Departments specifically demand detailed
CIG enabling legislation prior to
reaching an affirmative decision on Section 202 of the National Security Act of 1947 (S. 758
and H.R. 2319),

b. That definite indications are received that there is no possibility
that unification legislation (S. 758 and H.R. 2319) will be enacted into
law at this session, and

c. That the National Security Act of 1947 is enacted into law.

Upon completion of these drafts, they will be presented to the
Intelligence Advisory Board for comment, prior to submission to this
Authority. Upon approval of the drafts by this Authority, they will be
submitted to the President with the recommendation that they be
forwarded to the Director of the Bureau of the Budget for formal comment
and approval.

G.C. Marshall1
Secretary of State
Robert P. Patterson
Secretary of War
Forrestal
Secretary of the Navy
William D. Leahy
Personal Representative of the President

* Source: National Archives and Records
Administration, RG 59, Records of the Department of State, Decimal
File 1945-49, 101.5/5-1947. Confidential. The source text was an
information copy sent by the NIA
secretary to Eddy and the
other members of the Intelligence Advisory Board. These instructions
apparently were drafted in CIG for
the signature of the principals. For a similar but more detailed
memorandum, which probably is the forerunner of the text printed,
see the memorandum from Pforzheimer to Hillenkoetter, May 9, in the
Supplement. (Central Intelligence Agency Records, Job 90-00610R, Box
1, Folder 2)

1 Printed from a copy
that indicates Marshall, Patterson, Forrestal, and Leahy signed the original.

215. Memorandum for the Record215. Memorandum for the RecordSource

Washington, May 26,
1947.

At the request of Senator Gurney on 24 May, I went up and talked with him
this morning. He stated that he was “holding his breath” on Section 202
of the National Security Act, which was coming up for discussion and
decision this morning. He stated that General Donovan had been very active on the
Hill in opposition to Section 202 and had talked with Senator Gurney,
among others, about it.

Senator Gurney then asked me to read two letters and a memorandum from
Donovan to him, dated early
in May 1947, which included an early top secret JCS paper on the subject, and also General Donovan's letter to Harold Smith, Director of the Budget
Bureau, written in 1945.1 Senator Gurney stated that General
Donovan had told him that the
clandestine operations should remain with the Army and Navy, and read a
sentence in General Donovan's
letter which he felt supported this. I told him that my interpretation
of that statement was that General Donovan contended that departmental intelligence
functions of G-2 and ONI should be
retained in the services, but then read him several paragraphs from
Donovan's memorandum which
specifically stated that clandestine operations should be placed in the
Central Intelligence Agency and in no other departments of the
Government. This cleared up Senator Gurney's apprehension on the point.

I then commented on Donovan's
suggestion that the Agency should be placed under the Secretary of
National Defense, indicating that this would not be fair to the State
Department components. I pointed out that placing us under the Secretary
of National Defense would contain us within the military establishment,
which was not the design at all. Senator Gurney agreed on this point.

Senator Gurney asked whether the Admiral2 had
talked with Mr. Cheston and I stated that I thought the Admiral was
attempting to make an appointment to see him. I pointed out that General
Vandenberg had written General Donovan requesting an appointment, but that Donovan had not answered our letter.
Senator Gurney felt that Donovan should have answered the letter, and
that this in some measure took the original burden off us in that
connection.

Another suggestion in the Donovan
correspondence was that Section 202 be deleted in the bill and that the
whole matter be thrashed out at the time detailed legislation is
submitted. I indicated that it was my feeling that there could be no
harm in passing Section 202, as it merely gives legislative status to
our present existence, adding that if General Donovan and his associates wished to
make a fight on our detailed functions, that would be appropriate at the
time our enabling legislation comes up.

* Source:
Central Intelligence Agency Records, Job 90-00610R, Box 1, Folder 2.
Confidential. The memorandum is unsigned but appears to have been
drafted by Pforzheimer.

1 None of these
documents has been found.

2 Director of Central Intelligence, Admiral Hillenkoetter.

216. Memorandum From the Chief of the Legislative Liaison Division, Central Intelligence Group (Pforzheimer) to the Director of Central Intelligence (Hillenkoetter)216. Memorandum From the Chief of the Legislative Liaison Division,
Central Intelligence Group (Pforzheimer) to the Director of Central Intelligence
(Hillenkoetter)Source

Washington, May 29,
1947.

SUBJECT

Unification Bill in the House

1. Reference is made to our conversation, in which you requested
information on a report that the House leadership would not take up
unification legislation this session.

2. The following confidential information was secured for me from the
Chairman of the Rules Committee, Mr. Allen:

a. The unification bill is considered controversial; and once the Party
has secured its basic program, (taxes, appropriations, labor
legislation, etc.) the House leadership does not contemplate going into
further controversial matters.

b. While there has been no definite decision or vote on the matter,
current thinking is to let the measure ride for this session and not
bring it up.

c. A few Congressmen—notably Wadsworth of New York—are eager to bring it
out and may be able to force it through the Rules Committee.

3. As Mr. Gamble, (R., N.Y.), told me the other day, Chairman Hoff-man of
the House Committee on Expenditures in the Executive Departments is
perfectly willing to go ahead with the hearings and report out a
measure. However, he takes the position that the President himself has
delayed action by sending up the two reorganization bills, both of which
must be acted upon within 60 days or automatically become law. The
Committee, having virtually completed hearings on these two measures, is
now faced with a third reorganization bill, (the one on housing), which
was sent up this week, and which therefore will delay the merger
hearings further.

Walter L. Pforzheimer1

* Source:
Central Intelligence Agency Records, Job 90-00610R, Box 1, Folder 2.
Confidential.

1 Printed from a copy that bears this
typed signature.

217. Letter From the Director of Central Intelligence (Hillenkoetter) to the Chairman of the Senate Armed Services Committee (Gurney)217. Letter From the Director of Central Intelligence (Hillenkoetter) to the
Chairman of the Senate Armed Services Committee (Gurney)Source

Washington, June 3,
1947.

My Dear Senator Gurney: Through your courtesy, there has been
communicated to me for comment the contents of a letter, dated 2 June
1947, which was written to you by Mr. Charles S. Cheston.1 I had a
very pleasant meeting with Mr. Cheston on Memorial Day, and we reached
substantial agreement on all matters connected with the Central
Intelligence Group.

As he noted in his letter to you, there were three points about which Mr.
Cheston felt some concern. I would like to review briefly my position on
them.

Mr. Cheston had two arguments for his position that the Central
Intelligence Agency should be headed by a civilian. The principal
argument was concerned with a lack of permanency and continuity in the
position of Director. The second was that the Director must be in such a
position that he cannot be influenced by any one Department, through
fear or favor. We both agreed that there would be no objection to the
Director being an officer of the armed services, provided that he serves
in a retired status and in a civilian capacity. However, the proposed
legislation should specifically provide for this contingency, for the
absence of a specified period of service as Director would work an undue
hardship upon an officer required to forego his military career to
accept this position for an uncertain period of time. This could be
remedied by establishing a specific term for the Director. The question
of tenure of office seems to have been omitted from the proposed
legislation in order that the President might have a free hand in
nominating a Director of his own choosing, as he does in the case of
other executive positions in the Government.

I informed Mr. Cheston that, were the bill passed and were I appointed to
the post of Director of the new Agency, I would be willing to retire
from active service and consider the position of Director as a career
job. I feel sure that Mr. Cheston understands that in such a case it
must be a career job—that is, for a specified period. It would be
manifestly unfair for me to retire now, with the idea of making the
position of Director my career, and then, perhaps, after the next
election, be relieved of my post because of a desire to fill it with a
political or personal appointee. If I were thus relieved, I would be without a career in the
Central Intelligence Agency and foreclosed from returning to the Navy.

The second point raised in Mr. Cheston's letter is “that the Agency
should have its own independent budget.” With that point I am in no
disagreement. As I have explained to him, we do, in effect, have our own
independent budget at the present time, and no other Department or
Agency has control over the funds which the Congress allocates to us in
that budget.

The third point is that the Director should report to an individual
rather than to a Committee. As I previously stated before the Senate
Appropriations Committee, I feel that this is a matter to be determined
by the Congress rather than by me. On purely theoretical grounds, it
would, of course, be best to report to one individual rather than to a
group. However, I can work with a Council equally well, and see no great
difference in either solution that Congress may determine. There may be
some question as to the wisdom of having the Director of Central
Intelligence report to the Secretary of National Defense. This, in
effect, might be considered as placing the Agency within the military
establishment, which would not, in all probability, be satisfactory to
the State Department. They have a great interest in the operations of
the Agency, and their contributions in the intelligence field are
particularly important in time of peace, when the Foreign Service can
operate throughout the world.

As General Donovan stated in his
memorandum to you of 7 May 1947,2 intelligence “must serve the diplomatic as well as the
military and naval arms.” This can best be done outside the military
establishment. As General Donovan
stated further, on page ten of his memorandum, “Since the nature of its
work requires it to have status, it should be independent of any
Department of the Government, (since it is obliged to serve all and must
be free of the natural bias of an operating Department.)”

In view of Mr. Cheston's remarks and my views expressed above, it is my
opinion that there is no necessity to change the wording of Section 102
of S. 7583 to restrict the position of Director to
a civilian only. It is my feeling that Section 102 should be left in its
present form.

I very much appreciate your having given me the opportunity to express my
views to you on this subject.

Sincerely yours,

R.H. Hillenkoetter4

* Source: Central
Intelligence Agency, Historical Files, HS/HC-805, Item 10. Secret.
The source text is a transcript prepared for the CIA Historian on
September 11, 1952.

1 Not found. Cheston had been an Assistant Director
of OSS in 1943-45.

2 Not
found.

3 The Senate version of the national
security legislation.

4 Printed from a
copy that indicates Hillenkoetter signed the original.

218. Memorandum for the Record218. Memorandum for the RecordSource

Washington, June 19,
1947.

I talked this morning with Congressman James Wadsworth, (R., N.Y.),
regarding our position before the Committee on Expenditures. I told him
we were somewhat concerned regarding the feeling of certain members of
the Committee and some witnesses appearing before it that we were or
might become an incipient Gestapo, or interested in domestic
intelligence of any sort. I told him that we were considering addressing
a letter to the Chairman, suggesting that a provision be included in the
bill substantially in the form that it appears in the Presidential
Directive, prohibiting any police or internal security or law
enforcement powers. Mr. Wadsworth thought that it would be an excellent
idea and endorsed it, although he thought that the feeling was not very
general.

I then explained to Mr. Wadsworth our position on enabling legislation;
and, while he stated that certain other agencies created by the bill had
their functions spelled out, he seemed receptive to withholding any
statement of functions and general authorities which we need until the
proper time for our enabling act.

I also explained to him the FBIB situation and the unfavorable publicity
which we had received in this connection, indicating that I thought Mr.
Busbey might raise the problem in executive session, and that we wished
to have him in possession of the facts. He was most sympathetic with the
problem, stated that he felt we should not be under Civil Service at
all, and agreed that the Director should have the right to fire at will.

I subsequently spoke with Mr. Clare Hoffman, Chairman of the Committee,
(in the absence of his son, the General Counsel), and Mr. Hoffman stated
that he would be pleased to receive any amendment we cared to offer,
introduce it, and give it every consideration.

Walter L. Pforzheimer
Chief, Legislative Liaison Division

* Source:
Central Intelligence Agency Records, Job 90-00610R, Box 1, Folder 2.
No classification marking.

219. Central Intelligence Group Memorandum219. Central Intelligence Group MemorandumSource

Washington, July 21,
1947.

MEMORANDUM OF THE INTELLIGENCE PROVISIONS OF THE HOUSE AND
SENATE VERSIONS OF THE NATIONAL SECURITY ACT OF 1947

1.(a). The provisions of Section 102 of S. 758 relating to the Central
Intelligence Agency are thoroughly acceptable and workable.

(b). However, if Section 102 of S. 758 is adopted by the Conferees, it
would be preferable if it were also to include Section 105 (e) of H.R.
4214. It gives the Director the right to terminate the employment of any
employee of the Agency. This provision is extremely important at the
present time, in order that any possible subversives may be removed at
once.

2. Section 105 of H.R. 4214 as originally introduced is also thoroughly
acceptable and workable. It is, in fact, preferable to Section 102 of S.
758. It is to be preferred for the following reasons:

(a) The salary of the Director is placed at $14,000, which is more in
keeping with the relative importance of the position within the national
security structure.

(b) It authorizes the Director to terminate the employment of any
employee.

(c) It more clearly delineates the functions of the Agency instead of
relying on the provisions of the Executive Order of 22 January 1946.

3. By amendment, the House of Representatives has changed Section 105 (a)
of H.R. 4214 to provide that the Director of Central Intelligence shall
be selected only from civilian life. Previous versions had provided that
the Director be selected from civilian or military life. It is hoped
that the Conferees will restore the provision permitting the President
to select the Director either from civilian or military life. In this
connection, the provisions of S. 758, attached as Tab “A”,1 or the provisions of H.R. 4214 as originally
introduced, attached as Tab “B” herewith, are both thoroughly
acceptable. In addition, as an alternative, a possible compromise is
submitted as Tab “C”, attached hereto.

4. The provision requiring that the Director may be appointed only from
civilian life appears to place an unfortunate restriction upon the
Presidential powers of
appointment. The President should be allowed to exercise his discretion
in appointing the best available Director, either from civilian or
military life, depending upon the qualifications of personnel available
at the time of appointment. The necessity of Senate confirmation of the
Director would eliminate the possibility of a poor selection; and the
Senate in its discretion would probably reject appointees from the armed
services if they were continually rotated for short tours of duty. If at
some time in the future we were plunged into another war, the most
qualified appointee might well be a reserve officer who had entered on
active duty from civilian life. The proposed restriction would prevent
his appointment by the President. Such a limitation would have prevented
the appointment of the Director of Strategic Services during the past
war.

5. The main argument advanced in the House of Representatives against a
military Director was that the people “are afraid, in this particular
instance, over the possibility that there might be some sort of a
Gestapo set up in this country… . You might have a military officer who
would like to do that; … if you require a civilian to be the head of
this Agency, then you will not have any danger within the Agency of
military influences or military dictatorship. It is felt that this
argument is an excessive interpretation of the facts. The Agency deals
only with foreign intelligence. It would have none of the publicity
necessary for building its Director into a public figure of such stature
that he might aspire to dictatorship. The Director of Central
Intelligence, heading a small organization, would never be in a position
to build up that great popular following upon which dictatorship must be
predicated.

The New York Herald Tribune, commenting
editorially on the above quotation, on 21 July 1947, stated that it
“reflects the ancient American misunderstanding and suspicion of the
military and military affairs, which throughout our history has always
made sound military policy so difficult for the civil arm.”

* Source: Central Intelligence Agency Records, Job 90-00610R, Box 1,
Folder 5. No classification marking. The source text is neither
addressed nor signed and contains no drafting information. It
appears that it was drafted in the office of the CIG's General Counsel. At the time that
this memorandum was written, the differing House and Senate versions
of the national security legislation had gone to conference.

1 None of the tabs is printed; see the
Supplement.

220. Memorandum From the Director of Central Intelligence (Hillenkoetter) to the National Intelligence Authority220. Memorandum From the Director of Central Intelligence (Hillenkoetter) to the
National Intelligence AuthoritySource

Washington, September 11,
1947.

SUBJECT

National Security Act of 19471

1. Upon the coming into effect of the National Security Act of 1947, the
National Intelligence Authority automatically ceases to exist and the
Central Intelligence Agency comes under the National Security
Council.2 Inasmuch as no date
has been set for a meeting of the National Security Council to carry on
the work of the National Intelligence Authority, the following
suggestions and recommendations are made:

a. At the first meeting of the National Security Council, it is
recommended that all directives of the National Intelligence Authority
and the Central Intelligence Group be continued in full force and effect
until the National Security Council has had an opportunity to study the
problem and to make amendments and changes that they may consider
desirable.

b. In order that the National Security Council make an early approach to
this problem, it is recommended that the Director of the Central
Intelligence Agency be directed to submit, within sixty days, his
proposal for National Security Council directives to bring former
directives of the National Intelligence Authority and the Central
Intelligence Group into line with the National Security Act of 1947.

c. In consideration of the size of the National Security Council, as
compared to the National Intelligence Authority, it is recommended that
a subcommittee be established to act similarly to the National
Intelligence Authority to furnish the active direction of the Central
Intelligence Agency. This subcommittee should be composed of a minimum
number of members and, as a suggestion, could be either the Secretary of
State and the Secretary of National Defense, or the Secretary of State,
Secretary of National Defense, and the three Secretaries of Army, Navy
and Air Force. Personally, I believe the first suggestion is better
since the Secretary of State has equal representation with the military.
If the second suggestion is followed, there may be some complaints from
State that the military is overshadowing them.

2. The Director of the Central Intelligence Group sat as a non-voting
member of the National Intelligence Authority, and, while I believe it
presumptuous and awkward on my part to suggest that he so sit with the
National Security Council, still it would be of utmost assistance if he
could attend all meetings of the National Security Council in some
capacity, either as observer, counsel or advisor, in order to keep
informed of what the thoughts of the National Security Council may be.
In addition, by being present, the Director of the Central Intelligence
Agency would also be available for such direct questions as may be
propounded.

3. If you will indicate your approval or disapproval of the suggestions
and recommendations above, I shall go ahead and have formal statements
prepared to be furnished to the National Security Council at its first
meeting.

R.H. Hillenkoetter
Rear Admiral, USN

* Source: National Archives and Records
Administration, RG 218, Records of the Joint Chiefs of Staff,
Leahy Papers, No.
129. Confidential. The source text carries a handwritten annotation
“Approved by Adm Leahy 20
Sept 1947.” Another copy of this memorandum is in
CIA Cold War Records: The CIA under Harry Truman, pp. 137-138.

1 For a
photographic copy of the National Security Act of 1947, approved
July 26, see ibid., pp. 131-135.

2 On September 19, after the act
had come into effect, Hillenkoetter addressed a briefer version of
this memorandum to the NSC; see Document 222.

221. Memorandum From the Director of Central Intelligence (Hillenkoetter) to the Intelligence Advisory Board221. Memorandum From the Director of Central Intelligence (Hillenkoetter) to the
Intelligence Advisory BoardSource

Washington, September 18,
1947.

SUBJECT

Interdepartmental Coordination and Planning

1. The National Security Act of 1947 has required a careful
reconsideration of the organization of the Central Intelligence Group,
its relationship to the intelligence agencies of the Government, and its
transformation into the Central Intelligence Agency.

2. Notice has already been given by the Director of Central Intelligence
to the National Intelligence Authority and to the Intelligence Advisory
Board of his intention, under authority of Section 303(a) of the
National Security Act of 1947, to create an Intelligence Advisory
Committee to be composed of intelligence representatives of the
Departments of State, Army, Navy, and Air and the Atomic Energy
Commission, as the successor of the Intelligence Advisory Board. The
purpose of the Committee will
be to advise the Director of Central Intelligence in carrying out his
functions and those of the Central Intelligence Agency.

3. After consultation with the Intelligence Advisory Board, the Director
of Central Intelligence has determined to continue under the new regime
the existence of his Interdepartmental Coordinating and Planning Staff
(ICAPS) with the duties and
responsibilities with which it has hitherto been charged. Although its
personnel will remain under the supervision of the Director of Central
Intelligence, it is requested that each Intelligence Advisory Committee
member consider the Interdepartmental Coordinating and Planning Staff
member assigned from his department as his principal liaison contact in
the Central Intelligence Agency on all matters pertaining to
interdepartmental coordination and planning. It is desired to utilize
these Interdepartmental Coordinating and Planning Staff members to a
greater degree than heretofore in achieving the maximum possible mutual
understanding and appreciation of each other's aims and objectives. To
this end, it is suggested that they be encouraged to maintain close
relationships with their agencies and be called into their staff
meetings and conferences on pertinent subjects. In this manner, it is
expected that they may present their agencies' views in the Central
Intelligence Agency for consideration in advance of the submission of
papers to the Intelligence Advisory Committee, as well as the Central
Intelligence Agency's aims to their agencies. It must be understood,
however, that although these Interdepartmental Coordinating and Planning
Staff members will be expected to present their agencies' views in full,
they cannot be expected in all cases to support them in the face of
conflictions in the interests of the accomplishment of the national
intelligence mission.

4. It is not contemplated to change the present composition of the
Interdepartmental Coordinating and Planning Staff. However, future
developments may require a request for additional members from the
Intelligence Advisory Board agencies.

5. The need in the past of the Intelligence Advisory Board for a policy
and planning body to consider the details of special problems and to
make specific recommendations upon which the Board might act in its
advisory capacity has been recognized. The present Intelligence Advisory
Board procedure of nominating ad hoc committees for this purpose has not
in all cases proved satisfactory. In some cases, officers assigned on a
temporary basis have not had the background knowledge required for full
understanding, and/or were not vested with sufficient authority to act
for their chiefs. This situation naturally leads to an excess of caution
detrimental to “give and take” compromise required to reach a mutual
agreement.

6. It will therefore be proposed to the Intelligence Advisory Committee
at its first meeting that it concur in the establishment of a standing
committee composed of
permanent representatives of each Intelligence Advisory Board member
plus the members of the Interdepartmental Coordinating and Planning
Staff, the Committee to be under the chairmanship of the Chief,
Interdepartmental Coordinating and Planning Staff.

7. It is not contemplated that these intelligence representatives will be
assigned on a full time basis, but that they will be ready to meet
whenever an interdepartmental problem arises with the view of attempting
to overcome those divergent views which from time to time develop in the
preparation of papers for the Intelligence Advisory Committee advisory
opinion and National Security Council approval.

8. In making assignments of these agency representatives, consideration
should be given to selection of officers with sufficient competence to
act for their Intelligence Advisory Committee members in concurrence or
dissent, except in the most controversial issues, thus reducing to a
minimum the need for detailed discussion at Intelligence Advisory
Committee meetings.

9. Subjects under discussion by the Standing Committee may at times
require the attendance at meetings of additional agency officers to
advise the permanent members, but in these cases the presence of the
permanent members are desired to arrive at decisions.

10. It is considered that the principal value of including the
Interdepartmental Coordinating and Planning Staff members on this
committee lies in preliminary discussion on controversial issues between
individual agency representatives and their corresponding
Interdepartmental Coordinating and Planning Staff member. Their
participation will also facilitate compliance by the Director with his
duty to advise and make recommendations to the National Security
Council, always with the advice of the Intelligence Advisory Committee.

11. It will also be proposed that the Secretariat of the Intelligence
Advisory Committee will be supplied from within the Central Intelligence
Agency.

R.H. Hillenkoetter1
Rear Admiral, USN

* Source: Central Intelligence Agency
Historical Files, HS/HC-806, Item 6. Confidential. Addressed to
Eddy, Chamberlin, Inglis,
McDonald, and Gingrich.
The source text was transcribed on October 1, 1952, for the CIA
Historian.

1 Printed from a
copy that bears this typed signature.

222. Memorandum From the Director of Central Intelligence (Hillenkoetter) to the National Security Council222. Memorandum From the Director of Central Intelligence (Hillenkoetter) to the
National Security CouncilSource

Washington, September 19,
1947.

SUBJECT

Appointment of an Intelligence Advisory Committee

1. The President's letter of 22 January 1946 established an Intelligence
Advisory Board consisting of the heads, or their representatives, of the
principal military and civilian intelligence agencies of the Government
having functions related to the national security, as determined by the
National Intelligence Authority, to advise the Director of Central
Intelligence. The National Security Act of 1947 makes no specific
provision for the continuance of the Intelligence Advisory Board nor for
a successor. However, Section 303 (a) of the Act authorizes the Director
of Central Intelligence (among others) to appoint such advisory
committees as he may deem necessary in carrying out his functions and
the functions of the Agency under his control (Central Intelligence
Agency).

2. Recognizing the advantages to be derived from such an advisory group,
it is the proposal of the Director of Central Intelligence to appoint an
Intelligence Advisory Committee which will to all intents and purposes
continue in existence the Intelligence Advisory Board established under
the National Intelligence Authority by the President in his letter of 22
January 1946.

3. It is therefore requested that the National Security Council

a. authorize the participation by appropriate members of the several
departments in the Director of Central Intelligence's Intelligence
Advisory Committee.

4. If the National Security Council approves this proposal, the Director
of Central Intelligence will send Enclosure 1 as an invitation to the
officers designated by them and to the Intelligence Director of the
Atomic Energy Commission.

R.H. Hillenkoetter1

Rear Admiral, U.S.N.

Enclosure

APPOINTMENT OF AN INTELLIGENCE ADVISORY COMMITTEE

1. The President's letter of 22 January 1946 establishing the National
Intelligence Authority and the Central Intelligence Group also provided:

“(7) The Director of Central Intelligence shall be advised by an
Intelligence Advisory Board consisting of the heads (or their
representatives) of the principal military and civilian intelligence
agencies of the Government having functions related to national
security, as determined by the National Intelligence Authority.”

2. The National Intelligence Authority determined in its Directive No. 1
that:

“3. The composition of the Intelligence Advisory Board will be flexible
and will depend, in each instance, upon the subject matter under
consideration. The Special Assistant to the Secretary of State in charge
of Research and Intelligence, the Assistant Chief of Staff, G-2, WDGS, the Chief of Naval Intelligence and
the Assistant Chief of Air Staff, Intelligence (or their
representatives) will be permanent members. You will invite the head (or
his representative) of any other intelligence agency having functions
related to the national security to sit as a member on all matters
within the province of his agency.”

3. The experience of three Directors of Central Intelligence has
established that there are advantages in having the several agency
intelligence chiefs available to him in an advisory capacity. As no
provision is made for the continuance of the Intelligence Advisory Board
under the National Security Act of 1947, these advantages will be lost
unless a similar advisory body is constituted.

4. Therefore under authority of Section 303 (a) of the National Security
Act of 1947, there is hereby appointed an Intelligence Advisory
Committee to be composed of the intelligence representatives of the
State, Army, Navy, and Air Departments, and the Atomic Energy
Commission:

“(a) This permanent membership will be expanded to include the heads (or
their representatives) of other agencies having intelligence or related
functions on such occasions as their participation may be desirable.”

5. The Intelligence Advisory Committee will be called upon by the
Director of Central Intelligence to advise him in those matters related
to the carrying out of his functions and the functions of the Central
Intelligence Agency as set forth in the National Security Act of 1947.

6. The Director of Central Intelligence will supply from the personnel of
the Central Intelligence Agency such secretarial assistance as the
Committee may require.

7. The Intelligence Advisory Committee shall meet on the call of the
Director of Central Intelligence. The Director of Central Intelligence
or his representative shall serve as Chairman.

8. The Secretariat will circulate to the other members of the
Intelligence Advisory Committee all communications addressed to the
Director of Central Intelligence by a member of the Intelligence
Advisory Committee. Such papers shall bear an Intelligence Advisory
Committee series number and all subsequent papers related thereto shall
carry a sub-number under the originally assigned series numbers.
Communications of the Director of Central Intelligence to the
Intelligence Advisory Committee shall be numbered in the same series.

9. The Intelligence Advisory Committee will hold itself available to
advise the Director of Central Intelligence on such recommendations as
the Director may plan to make to the National Security Council under
authority of Section 102 (d) (2) of the National Security Act of 1947.
In cases where there is disagreement between the Director of Central
Intelligence and any member of the Intelligence Advisory Committee in
matters of the substance of such recommendations, the Intelligence
Advisory Committee member will prepare a formal statement of
disagreement so that it may accompany the Director of Central
Intelligence's recommendations to the National Security Council.

10. In order to obtain the considered opinion of the several intelligence
agencies represented in the Intelligence Advisory Committee, the
Director of Central Intelligence will not as a matter of policy permit
discussion by the Intelligence Advisory Committee of matters which
members have not had opportunity to study, including all related papers,
and, where appropriate, have obtained the opinion of other members of
their departments.

11. Any recommendation two or more IAC
members believe should be submitted to the National Security Council
will be submitted by the Director of Central Intelligence in such form
as to set forth his recommendation and the comments of the Intelligence
Advisory Committee members.

12. The participation of any intelligence chief in the Intelligence
Advisory Committee shall not be construed as precluding such
intelligence chief from having access to the National Security Council
through his regularly established departmental channels.

* Source: National Archives and Records
Administration, RG 59, Records of the Department of State, Records
of the Bureau of Intelligence and Research: Lot 62 D 42, IAC. Confidential.

1 Printed from
a copy that indicates Hillenkoetter signed the original.

223. Memorandum From the Director of Central Intelligence (Hillenkoetter) to the National Security Council223. Memorandum From the Director of Central Intelligence (Hillenkoetter) to the
National Security CouncilSource

Washington, September 19,
1947.

SUBJECT

National Security Act of 1947

1. The National Security Act of 1947 established a Central Intelligence
Agency under the National Security Council. Section 102 (d) of the Act
sets forth the basic functions of that agency to be performed under the
direction of the National Security Council. Effective when the Director
of Central Intelligence takes office, the National Intelligence
Authority is abolished and the personnel, property, records and funds of
the Central Intelligence Group are transferred to the Agency. On that
date, therefore, the Agency will be prepared to perform its statutory
functions, but will be without direction from the National Security
Council as specified by the Act. The following recommendations are
therefore submitted for consideration by the National Security Council
at its first meeting:1

a. That all directives of the National Intelligence Authority to the
Central Intelligence Group be continued in full force and effect. The
Agency will function under this authorization until specifically
repealed, altered or augmented by the National Security Council, or
changed in accordance with the recommendation in paragraph b. below.

b. That the National Security Council direct the Director of Central
Intelligence to submit to the Council within sixty days, proposed
author-izations supplanting the former directives of the National
Intelligence Authority and specifying his functions and those of the
Central Intelligence Agency in accordance with the provisions of the
National Security Act of 1947.

R.H. Hillenkoetter2
Rear Admiral, USN

* Source: Truman Library, Papers of Harry S. Truman, President's
Secretary's Files, Intelligence File. Confidential.

1 At its first meeting
on September 26 the National Security Council approved both
recommendations; see Document 225.

2 Printed from a
copy that bears this typed signature.

224. Memorandum From Acting Secretary of State Lovett to Director of Central Intelligence Hillenkoetter224. Memorandum From Acting Secretary of State Lovett to Director of
Central Intelligence HillenkoetterSource

Washington, September 23,
1947.

SUBJECT

Your memorandum of 11 September 1947 regarding the National
Security Act of 19471

1. I am in agreement with your recommendation (1-a) to the effect that
all directives of the National Intelligence Authority and of the Central
Intelligence Group be continued in full force and effect until the
National Security Council has had an opportunity to study the problem
and to make any changes that they may consider desirable.

2. I also approve your recommendation (1-b) to the effect that the
Director of Central Intelligence Agency submit, within sixty days, his
proposal for National Security Council directives to bring the former
directives of the National Intelligence Authority and of the Central
Intelligence Group into line with the National Security Act of 1947. In
this connection, however, I would suggest that this report by the
Director of the Central Intelligence Agency be coordinated with the
Intelligence Advisory Board to insure the prior consideration of the
problem by the chiefs of the intelligence services of the several
Departments whose concurrence would thus be expedited.

3. With regard to recommendation (1-c) to the effect that a subcommittee
of the National Security Council be established to act similarly to the
previous National Intelligence Authority, with special responsibility to
direct the Central Intelligence Agency, it would seem to me that, in
principle, this is a very useful and practical suggestion. In view of
the fact that the Central Intelligence Agency will be the only
inter-departmental intelligence agency authorized to coordinate
peacetime political and economic intelligence with the intelligence
program of the Armed Forces, it would seem to me very important that the
Department of the Government, responsible for foreign affairs, the
protection of our foreign commercial interests, and the maintenance of
friendly diplomatic relations with all other countries, should be fully represented. The Armed
Forces, for their part, have a further coordinating, and common
intelligence agency, in the Joint Intelligence Committee of the Joint
Chiefs of Staff.

I would, therefore, suggest that the proposed subcommittee to direct the
Central Intelligence Agency be composed of the Secretary of State and
the Secretary of National Defense, with a personal representative of the
President, if that should be the President's desire. It will be recalled
that the National Intelligence Authority included the Secretary of State
as Chairman, and a personal representative of the President.

4. With regard to the recommendation contained in paragraph 2, it would
seem to me essential that the Director of Central Intelligence be
present as a non-voting member at all meetings of the subcommittee of
the National Security Council established to direct the Central
Intelligence Agency. It would seem to me also desirable that he attend
meetings of the National Security Council as an adviser or observer.

For the Secretary of State:

Robert A. Lovett2

* Source: National Archives and Records
Administration, RG 59, Records of the Department of State, Decimal
File 1945-49, 101.61/9-1147. Confidential. Drafted by William A. Eddy on September 18.
Attached was a vote slip form, signed by Lovett and addressed to the secretary of the NIA, indicating Department of State
approval of the September 11 memorandum subject to Lovett's
comments. Under the provisions of the National Security Act of 1947,
the Central Intelligence Group became the Central Intelligence
Agency on September 19, and Hillenkoetter became the Agency's first
Director of Central Intelligence on September 20.

1 Document 220.

2 Printed from a copy that indicates
Lovett signed the
original.

225. Minutes of the First Meeting of the National Security Council225. Minutes of the First Meeting of the National Security
CouncilSource

Washington, September 26,
1947.

PARTICIPANTS

Members Present

The President of the United States, presiding

James Forrestal, Secretary of
Defense

Robert A. Lovett, Acting
Secretary of State

Kenneth C. Royall, Secretary
of the Army

John L. Sullivan, Secretary
of the Navy

W. Stuart Symington,
Secretary of the Air Force

Arthur M. Hill, Chairman,
National Security Resources Board

Others Present

Sidney W. Souers, Executive Secretary, National Security
Council

Rear Admiral Roscoe H.
Hillenkoetter, Director of Central Intelligence

DECISIONS1

1. Policies and Procedures Governing the Activities of the National
Security Council

The National Security Council:

Approved the following policies and procedures governing the activities
of the Council:

a. The permanent membership of the Council shall be restricted to those
officials whose membership is mandatory under the Act.

b. The Director of Central Intelligence is authorized to attend all
meetings of the Council as an observer and adviser. Attendance by other
officials shall be by approval of the presiding officer, requested
through the Executive Secretary.

c. There will be no set schedule of meetings. Meetings will be arranged
by the Executive Secretary after approval by the presiding officer.

d. The affairs of the Council will be conducted with the utmost secrecy.

2. National Security Council Staff (Memorandum for NSC, same subject, transmitted as Tab A to
Agenda for 1st Meeting)2

The National Security Council:

a. Approved the functions, plans and arrangements for the National
Security Council Staff outlined in the reference memorandum.

b. Adopted a resolution authorizing its Executive Secretary to control,
supervise, and administer funds which have been or hereafter may be made
available to the National Security Council, with full powers with
respect thereto, subject to policies established by the Council. (Copy
of resolution on record in the office of the Executive Secretary.)

3. Proposed Initial Directive to the Central Intelligence Agency
(Memorandum for NSC from Director of
Central Intelligence, subject: “National Security Act of 1947”, dated 19
September 1947, transmitted as Tab B to Agenda for 1st Meeting.)3

The National Security Council:

a. Approved the recommendations by the Director of Central Intelligence
in the reference memorandum.

b. Authorized the Director of Central Intelligence to submit to the
Bureau of the Budget a budget estimate for the fiscal year 1949 (amount
on record in the office of the Executive Secretary).

4. Review of the World Situation as it Relates to the Security of the
United States (CIA 1)4

The Council noted and discussed the report by the Director of Central
Intelligence on the above subject.

5. Initial Study Assignment to the National Security Council Staff
(Memorandum for NSC, same subject,
transmitted as Tab C to Agenda for 1st Meeting)

The Council approved the recommendation of the Executive Secretary in the
reference memorandum.

Sidney W. Souers5
Executive Secretary

* Source: National Archives and
Records Administration, RG 273, Records of the National Security
Council, NSC Minutes, 1st Meeting.
Secret. The meeting was held at the White House.

1 Decisions 1-5 below
correspond to NSC Action Nos. 1-5.
(Ibid., Record of Actions, Box 55)

2 None of the tabs is
printed.

3 Document 222.

4 Dated September 26.
(Central Intelligence Agency Records) Reproduced in CIA Cold War Records: The CIA under Harry Truman, pp.
139-148.

5 Printed from a
copy that bears this typed signature.

226. Memorandum From the Executive Secretary of the National Security Council (Souers) to the National Security Council226. Memorandum From the Executive Secretary of the National Security
Council (Souers)
to the National Security CouncilSource

Washington, October 10,
1947.

SUBJECT

Appointment of an Intelligence Advisory Committee

The enclosed memorandum by the Director of Central Intelligence
(Enclosure A)1 is submitted herewith for
consideration by the designated members of the National Security
Council.

The Executive Secretary recommends that Enclosure A be approved subject
to the deletion of paragraph 112 of
the Appendix3 thereto.
This paragraph would require the Director of Central Intelligence to
submit to the National Security Council any recommendation which two or
more Intelligence Advisory Committee (IAC) members believe should be submitted. This is
considered an inappropriate channel for reaching the National Security
Council by such IAC members. The proper
channel for IAC members, which is recognized by the wording of paragraph
12 of the Appendix, is through the heads of their respective departments
or agencies who, with the exception of the Atomic Energy Commission, are
members of the National Security Council. The Atomic Energy Commission,
if it agrees with the recommendation of its Intelligence Director, can
of course submit such recommendation to the National Security Council
for consideration. Unless the proper channel is used (and paragraph 11
is deleted) there is danger that the National Security Council will
receive recommendations by IAC members
with which their respective departmental heads do not concur.

For convenience in indicating action on Enclosure A, a return memorandum
form, to be completed by each addressee, is attached hereto as Enclosure
B.4

Sidney W. Souers

* Source: National Archives and Records
Administration, RG 59, Records of the Department of State, Records
of the Bureau of Intelligence and Research: Lot 62 D 42, IAC. Confidential. Addressed to the
Secretaries of State, Defense, Army, Navy, and Air Force, and the
Chairman of the National Security Resources Board.

1 Not printed; see the
Supplement. Enclosure A is Hillenkoetter's September 19 memorandum
to the NSC on the Intelligence
Advisory Committee (Document 222) with a
few changes in wording.

2 Paragraph 11
was taken from paragraph 3 of NIA
Directive No. 11, Document 325.

3 The appendix is the same as the
enclosure to Document 222.

4 Not printed.

227. Memorandum From Director of Central Intelligence Hillenkoetter to the Intelligence Advisory Board227. Memorandum From Director of Central Intelligence Hillenkoetter to the
Intelligence Advisory BoardSource

Washington, October 10,
1947.

SUBJECT

The Successor to the Intelligence Advisory Board

1. The Director of Central Intelligence has received inquiries from two
members of the former Intelligence Advisory Board requesting
clarification of his memorandum of 18 September 19471 as it pertains to the
Intelligence Advisory Committee. With the thought that there may be
uncertainty in the minds of other members of the former Intelligence
Advisory Board, the following clarification is being given general
distribution.

2. The National Intelligence Authority and the Central Intelligence Group
ceased to exist, under the provisions of Section 102 (f) of the National
Security Act of 1947, when the Director of Central Intelligence first
appointed under Section 102 (a) of that Act took office on 20 September
1947. It is the opinion of this Agency that as of 20 September 1947 the
provisions of the President's letter of 22 January 1946 lapsed and were
superseded by those of the National Security Act of 1947. No specific
mention of an Intelligence Advisory Board or Committee is included in
the National Security Act of 1947.

3. The Director of Central Intelligence desires to continue to have
available to him for advice and guidance a body similar to the former
Intelligence Advisory Board. The members of the former Board having
concurred in that desire, the Director is undertaking to establish a
similar body. Positive action must be taken to accomplish this for the
reasons set forth in paragraph 2 above.

4. An advisory board, having functions similar to those exercised under
paragraph 7 of the President's letter, can be established under Section
303 (a) of the National Security Act of 1947. This Section authorizes
the Director of Central Intelligence to appoint such advisory committees
as he may deem necessary to carry out the functions of the agency.

5. Accordingly, the Director of Central Intelligence has submitted a
memorandum2 to the National Security
Council informing it of his desire to create an Intelligence Advisory
Committee under the authority granted him by Section 303 (a) of the National Security Act of 1947,
to be composed of intelligence representatives of the several
departments and requesting the departmental heads who are members of the
National Security Council to designate their representatives and
authorize their participation.

6. The action of the National Security Council in continuing in full
force and effect all directives of the National Intelligence Authority
was for the sole purpose of providing for the continued functioning of
the Central Intelligence Agency as successor to the Central Intelligence
Group.

7. Papers are being prepared for submission to the Intelligence Advisory
Committee for its first meeting, setting forth in further detail the
proposals contained in paragraphs 6 and 11 of the memorandum of the
Director of Central Intelligence, dated 18 September 1947 on the subject
“Interdepartmental Coordinating and Planning.”

R.H. Hillenkoetter
Rear Admiral, USN

* Source: National Archives and Records
Administration, RG 59, Records of the Department of State, Records
of the Bureau of Intelligence and Research: Lot 62 D 42, IAC. Confidential. Addressed to
Armstrong, Chamberlin, Inglis, McDonald, and Gingrich.

1 Document 221.

2 See footnote 1, Document 226.

228. Memorandum From the Secretary of State's Acting Special Assistant for Research and Intelligence (Armstrong) to Acting Secretary of State Lovett228. Memorandum From the Secretary of State's Acting Special Assistant
for Research and Intelligence (Armstrong) to Acting Secretary of State LovettSource

Washington, October 16,
1947.

While suggesting concurrence in proposal 1b in the attached
memorandum1 for the Executive Secretary, National
Security Council, I think it advisable to call your attention to the
fact that in earlier discussions on procedures as between the
Intelligence Advisory Board and the National Intelligence Authority, Mr.
Eddy joined with other IAB members in favoring the procedure set
forth in “paragraph 11” of the memorandum of the Director of Central Intelligence, which Admiral
Souers now proposes to delete.2
I believe, however, that Admiral Souers' objection to such a channel as
called for in “paragraph 11” has considerable merit and that that
procedure would not be entirely consistent with the National Security
Act and the responsibilities it establishes for the Director of Central
Intelligence. Moreover, I believe that the Department would lose no
advantage by acceding to Admiral Souers' views.

W. Park Armstrong,
Jr.

* Source: National Archives and Records
Administration, RG 59, Records of the Department of State, Records
of the Bureau of Intelligence and Research: Lot 62 D 42, IAC. Confidential.

1 Attached is a vote slip form
(October 20; see the Supplement) on which NSC members were to indicate approval or disapproval of
Hillenkoetter's September 19 memorandum to the NSC (see footnote 1, Document 226) recommending establishment of
an Intelligence Advisory Committee to succeed the Intelligence
Advisory Board.

2 The NSC Executive Secretary recommended
approval subject to deletion of paragraph 11 of the appendix.
Paragraph 11 required the Director of Central Intelligence to submit
to the NSC any recommendation that two or more members of the
Intelligence Advisory Committee believed should be submitted.

229. Memorandum for Director of Central Intelligence Hillenkoetter229. Memorandum for Director of Central Intelligence HillenkoetterSource

Washington, October 22,
1947.

SUBJECT

Testimony Regarding Civilian Director of the Central Intelligence
Agency

A memorandum was submitted to the Senate Armed Services Committee from
Mr. Allen W. Dulles, dated 25
April 1947.1 Mr. Dulles
stated that the Agency

“should be predominantly” civilian rather than military, and “under
civilian leadership… . If previously a military man, he should not look
forward to resuming a position in one of the armed services. The same
should be true of his top staff… . They should, if military, divest
themselves of their rank as soldiers, soldiers, or airmen, and, as it
were, ‘take the cloth’ of the intelligence service.”

This testimony is substantially the same as that given orally by Mr.
Dulles before the House
Committee on Expenditures in the Executive Departments.

Col. John P. Oliver, Legislative Officer for the Reserve Officers
Association of The United States, together with Lt. Col. Richard
Rivvell, appeared before the Senate Armed Services Committee and urged
that the Director should be civilian,

“because he should represent all aspects of the Government, not merely
those concerned with the military, naval or air elements of our armed
forces.”

They further felt that, if the Director should be a member of the armed
forces, he should be required to serve as a civilian. After conferences
with General Vandenberg and Admiral Hillenkoetter, undertaken at the
request of Senator Saltonstall, the opposition of the Reserve Officers
Association was withdrawn.

In a memorandum submitted by Mr. Charles S. Cheston, formerly Assistant
Director, OSS, a demand was made that there should be a civilian
Director, on the grounds of the need for specially trained personnel in
the fields of political, economic and technological intelligence and
international relations, the need of continuity of leadership, and the
necessity of freeing the Central Intelligence Agency from the rigidity
of the military system.

Peter Vischer testified in closed session in favor of having a civilian
Director. In addition, two members of the Committee have stated that he
introduced into the record a copy of NIA
Directive No. 5 (Classification; Top Secret), which led at least two
members of the Committee to ask you how it was possible for Vischer to
have obtained a copy of this document. You will also recollect that
Vischer was the source of most of the adverse material appearing in the
press, particularly the articles in the Times-Herald by Walter Trohan
and John O'Donnell.

General Kroner was Deputy G-2 of the War Department and Chief of the
Military Intelligence Service in the early days of the war. He did not
take a position on whether the Director should be a civilian.

In July, it was discovered that an article adverse to Central
Intelligence was being prepared for Harper's Magazine by Fletcher Pratt.
This information was furnished me by a Colonel of the Marine Corps at
Quantico, Virginia, who stated that Pratt had been invited to Washington
by G-2 specifically to do this article, and that “the red carpet had
been rolled out for him.” Immediately following his meeting in
Washington, Pratt went to Quantico and spent an evening or week-end with
my informant. The Colonel tried to dissuade him from writing so biased
an article, and took a pro-CIG view.
However, Pratt indicated he needed the money which Harper's was paying
for the article and that he was convinced of the accuracy of the accusations against CIG that he had heard in the War
Department. He did not think it worth his while to hear the other side
of the story. The Colonel told me it was his impression that the War
Department was out to “get” CIG and that
the comments expressed to Pratt had been extremely bitter.

* Source: Central Intelligence Agency
Records, Job 90-00610R, Box 1, Folder 9. Confidential. No drafting
information appears on the source text. From the context, however,
it appears that it may have been written by Pforzheimer.

1 Not printed. (Central
Intelligence Agency, Historical Files, HS/HC-400) See the
Supplement.

230. Memorandum From the Secretary of the Army (Royall) to the Executive Secretary of the National Security Council (Souers)230. Memorandum From the Secretary of the Army (Royall) to the Executive
Secretary of the National Security Council (Souers)Source

Washington, November 26,
1947.

SUBJECT

Appointment of an Intelligence Advisory Committee

1. Reference is made to your memorandum, same subject, dated 10 October
1947.1

2. While I agree that it is desirable to create a committee to succeed
the Intelligence Advisory Board, it does not appear to me that such is
accomplished by the Intelligence Advisory Committee which the Director
of Central Intelligence proposes to appoint under section 303 (a) of
Public Law 253.

3. The Intelligence Advisory Board was responsible to the National
Intelligence Authority. The Director of Central Intelligence was
required (paragraph 3, N.I.A. Directive No. 1) to refer all
recommendations to the Board prior to his submission of them to the
Authority. The Board therefore performed two very important functions:
(1) it furnished advice to the Director of Central Intelligence and (2)
it insured the full interdepartmental coordination of all matters before
they were submitted to the National Intelligence Authority.

4. I therefore recommend that the Director of Central Intelligence draft
a charter which will provide for a committee as successor to the Intelligence Advisory Board
which will perform for the National Security Council those functions
which the Intelligence Advisory Board performed for the National
Intelligence Authority.

Kenneth C. Royall

* Source: Truman Library, Papers of Harry S. Truman, Records of the
National Security Council. Confidential. Sent through the Secretary
of Defense. Attached to the source text is a November 28 note on the
stationery of the Office of the Secretary of Defense addressed to
Souers from John H. Ohly, indicating that Forrestal had not seen
Royall's memorandum but
that a copy was being held for him.

1 Document 226.

231. Memorandum From the General Counsel of the Central Intelligence Agency (Houston) to Director of Central Intelligence Hillenkoetter231. Memorandum From the General Counsel of the Central Intelligence
Agency (Houston) to
Director of Central Intelligence HillenkoetterSource

Washington, April 7,
1948.

SUBJECT

Proposed Legislation

1. The General Counsel of the House Military Affairs Committee has
informed us by telephone that the Committee may be interested in four
particular questions concerning the need for our proposed legislation.
They are listed below with information which should serve to form
general answers:

(a) How Has CIA Functioned Without the Authorization Contained in the
Proposed Legislation?

CIA began to function as CIG on 22
January 1946. Through the remainder of that fiscal year, its operations
were small, and administrative support came from the departments from
which personnel were assigned and from the Strategic Services Unit of
the War Department, which had been assigned the task of liquidating the
affairs of OSS and preserving for future
use such assets as might be of use for whatever agency was to control
the national intelligence. The funds transferred from OSS to SSU
were adequate for this support.

In the budget hearings in the Spring of 1946, funds for the support of
CIG were earmarked in certain
portions of the appropriations for State, War, and Navy. A majority of
the funds were in the War Department appropriation in the provision for contingencies. At
the request of the NIA and with the
concurrence of the Treasury Department and the Bureau of the Budget, the
Comptroller General authorized the establishment of a Working Fund to
which the earmarked portions of the appropriations were transferred for
expenditure by CIG. A similar
arrangement was followed for the fiscal year 1948. Administration under
this procedure was extremely difficult because of varying limitations in
the different appropriation acts. Only through the splendid cooperation
of the Comptroller General's Office and the other departments and
agencies concerned were interim procedures devised for proper
administration of these funds. Even with such cooperation, continual
problems of administration were encountered, and operations were
hampered by restrictions on the use of funds. It was partly due to the
Agency's needs and partly due to the suggestion of the Comptroller
General's Office that this legislation was drafted to provide a proper
legal basis for administration of the Agency's functions.

(b) What Features of This Bill Have No Precedent in Existing Law for Any
Other Branch of the Government?

Section 6(a) (page 8, line 11, et seq.) is believed to be without exact
precedent in permitting free transfer of funds to and from the Agency
and permitting expenditures of funds transferred to the act under the
authority of the proposed legislation without regard to limitations of
the original appropriation. It is believed that this Section is
necessary to preserve the security of funds made available to the Agency
while providing a clear basis for their expenditure.

Section 6(f) (page 9, line 19, et seq.) provides in the interest of
security an exception from the disclosure required by law of the size of
the Agency and the functions of its officers. It is believed that this
provision is without precedent but is again an essential security
measure. Section 7(a)(1) (page 10, line 18, et seq.), setting forth the
purposes for which sums made available to the Agency may be expended has
a novel feature in that it will, in effect, be permanent appropriation
language for the Agency. This is required because it is proposed that
there will be no specific annual appropriations to the Agency in the
interest of security and that by these provisions there will be language
on which Agency expenditures may be based and on which audits can be
made. All other features of the bill have one or more known precedents.

(c) How Does CIA Propose To Obtain Appropriations Without Disclosing the
Amount and the Source?

We believe that in the past the system of earmarking certain funds in
regular appropriations for subsequent transfer to the CIG Working Fund has prevented disclosure
of the amount and source of funds available to the Agency. With the transfer
authorities of Section 6(a) mentioned above and appropriation Sections,
this process can be greatly simplified. With these, the earmarked sums
may be placed in any limitation of any appropriation, and any number of
such sums may be authorized.

CIA will prepare its regular budget for review by certain designated
Bureau of the Budget officers, who will suggest how that budget should
be split among appropriations of other agencies. Normally, they can be
placed in blocks of a few million dollars in the largest limitations of
the National Defense appropriations or other large items where the
increase would not be noticeable. These proposals would then be
discussed in Executive Session with the appropriation subcommittees, and
if approved, would then be reported as a part of the normal
appropriation. Arrangements for the secure transfer can be made with the
appropriate administrative officers of the departments concerned and the
General Accounting Office.

(d) What Safeguards Are Provided in the Spending of Money by CIA?

All proposed expenditures are reviewed by a Projects Review Committee,
which makes recommendations thereon to the Director. All vouchered
expenditures are audited within CIA by representatives of the General
Accounting Office especially detailed for that purpose. For unvouchered
expenditures, the Director has appointed Special Funds' officers as his
personal representatives for their administration. Recognizing, however,
that he has sole ultimate responsibility for the propriety of
unvouchered expenditures, he has laid down detailed rules and
regulations outlining the purposes for expenditure and the controls and
approvals which will apply. He has appointed Certifying Officers who are
responsible for auditing all unvouchered expenditures to see that they
come within these regulations. If there is doubt as to compliance with
regulations, the Certifying Officer may refer any question to the Office
of the General Counsel for review and recommendation to the Director.
Any exceptions or unusual circumstances require personal action by the
Director. As a further safeguard, the Director has appointed an
Executive for Inspection and Security with a staff of auditors and
fiscal experts, who make periodic general inspections of all books and
accounts and such special investigations as the Director may require.

All officers of the Agency involved in the expenditure of unvouchered
funds are informed that misuse of such funds may subject them to
personal liability or prosecution under applicable law.

Lawrence R. Houston1

* Source: Central Intelligence Agency
Records, Job 90-00610R, Box 1, Folder 17. Secret.

1 Printed from a copy that bears this
typed signature.

232. Memorandum for the Record232. Memorandum for the RecordSource

Washington, April 8,
1948.

The Director and Mr. Pforzheimer
appeared before Sub-Committee No. 3 of the House Armed Services
Committee in connection with H.R. 5871. Present were Mr. Paul W. Shafer
of Michigan, Mr. Lyndon Johnson of Texas, Mr. Leroy Johnson of
California, Mr. Franck R. Havenner of California, and Mr. J. R.
Blandford, counsel to the Sub-Committee. The hearing was in Executive
Session with a reporter present except during those times when the
discussion was off the record.

A point of discussion arose as to whether debate on the floor would not
force out certain classified information regarding the matters for which
this legislation seeks to provide and the suggestion was offered by
Representative Lyndon Johnson substantially in the following terms:

“Notwithstanding any provisions of existing law the President, after
approval of the Comptroller General, the Director of the Bureau of the
Budget and the Chief of Staff to the President, is hereby authorized to
exempt CIA from such advertising, purchasing, accounting, disbursing,
contract or other provisions of present law which requirements of
security may dictate.”

(After discussion with Mr. Webb,
the Director of the Bureau of the Budg-et, the Sub-Committee was
informed that this proposed language was too broad and would protect
nobody if enforced.)

The question of authority for the Director to issue visas up to fifty
people per annum was considered, and the Sub-Committee ruled that it was
too controversial to include in the present measure and that after the
passage of H.R. 5871 it should be offered as a new bill.

After further discussions on the provisions of the bill, the
Sub-Committee unanimously approved H.R. 5871 with certain textual
changes suggested by the Director.

Walter L. Pforzheimer

* Source:
Central Intelligence Agency Records, Job 90-00610R, Box 1, Folder 7.
No classification marking.

233. Memorandum From the President's Assistant (Steelman) to President Truman233. Memorandum From the President's Assistant (Steelman) to President TrumanSource

Washington, April 24,
1948.

The Congressional Record for April 21, Pages
4836-7 contains a thirty minute speech by Congressman Devitt of
Wisconsin on “We must create a joint committee on intelligence.”

Mr. Devitt is very critical of the Central Intelligence Agency. He
advocates a concurrent resolution proposing that 18 Members constitute a
committee which would constantly study and evaluate the operations of
all Government intelligence services.

At the close of the speech he stated as follows:

“I have spoken informally with Admiral Hillenkoetter, Director of the
Central Intelligence Agency, of my intention to introduce this
resolution today, and he has expressed his approbation of it. He told me
that while he believes there is much merit to the independent position
of his agency in the field of government, he feels somewhat at a loss
for the lack of some specific committee of the Congress to whom he can
turn for confidential guidance and counsel and to whom he can resort for
needed changes in the legislative operations of his agency.” Perhaps
someone should have a talk with Admiral Hillenkoetter about this
matter.

JRS

* Source: Truman Library, Papers of Harry S. Truman, President's
Secretary's Files. No classification marking.

234. Memorandum From the General Counsel of the Central Intelligence Agency (Houston) to Director of Central Intelligence Hillenkoetter234. Memorandum From the General Counsel of the Central Intelligence
Agency (Houston) to
Director of Central Intelligence HillenkoetterSource

Washington, May 7,
1948.

SUBJECT

National Security Act of 1947

1. The following notes are submitted in connection with a discussion of
problems arising in operation under the National Security Act of 1947:

a. From an administrative point of view, the primary difficulty
experienced was lack of detailed enabling legislation to support CIA's
unusual administrative problems. It was thought, and properly so, that
so much detail should not be put in legislation of the broad policy
nature of the National Security Act. This problem has now been met by
submission to the Congress of detailed enabling legislation. It is
believed that this Bill, as submitted, will have the support of all the
executive departments and substantial support in Congress.

b. It has been generally agreed in past discussions that it would be
desirable, if feasible, to have CIA's basic authorization provide for a
Deputy Director as well as a Director. Such a provision was discussed
again in connection with the CIA enabling act, and it was decided that
in view of the current attitude towards military appointments, no such
provision would be submitted. A check indicates that no practical
difficulties have arisen, or are expected to arise, for lack of
statutory authority for a Deputy Director.

c. In its performance of the intelligence functions outlined in the
National Security Act, the primary difficulty experienced by CIA has
been in certain weakness of language in paragraph 102(d) concerning the
meaning of coordination of intelligence activities. Where the Act states
“it shall be the duty of the Agency … to advise the National Security
Council … (and) to make recommendations to the National Security Council
for the coordination of such intelligence activities”, it has been
strongly argued that this places on the Director a responsibility merely
to obtain cooperation among the intelligence agencies. This weakness of
language and the ensuing controversy might have been eliminated by the
insertion after the phrase, “it shall be the duty of the Agency”, the
following words: “and the Director is hereby empowered”, or some other
such phrase indicating the
intent of Congress that the Director was to have a controlling voice in
the coordination, subject to the direction of the National Security
Council.

d. The collection functions of CIA are provided for only in the general
provision, “to perform, for the benefit of existing intelligence
agencies, such additional services of common concern as the National
Security Council determines can be more efficiently accomplished
centrally and to perform such other functions and duties related to
intelligence affecting the National Security as the National Security
Council may from time to time direct”. It is known that Congress
intended by these phrases to insure control of clandestine intelligence
by CIA but considered that security aspects prevented its being spelled
out in the language of the law. Lack of such specific direction may be
considered a weakness in the National Security Act of 1947 that deserves
further consideration by the Congress.

Lawrence R. Houston1

* Source: Central Intelligence Agency
Historical Files, HS/HC-808, Item 10. No classification marking. The
source text is a copy transcribed for the CIA Historian on September
10, 1952.

1 Printed from a copy that bears this
typed signature.

235. Memorandum From the General Counsel of the Central Intelligence Agency (Houston) to Director of Central Intelligence Hillenkoetter235. Memorandum From the General Counsel of the Central Intelligence
Agency (Houston) to
Director of Central Intelligence HillenkoetterSource

Washington, September 2,
1948.

SUBJECT

Comments on Civilian versus Military Head for Central
Intelligence

1. The written record arguing the question of a civilian as against a
military head for CIA is voluminous. But it boils down to very few
points, of which the most important appears to be general recognition of
the necessity for continuity of control. The lesser points are fear of
pressures and influences from service relationships and a fear that
career considerations would
hamper independence of action. There is also, in some comment, evidence
of a prejudice in favor of civilians and against giving additional
important posts to military personnel—the prejudice that talks of the
so-called “military mind”. This last point would seem rather
unimportant, in view of the fact that military background has not
generally been considered a handicap in the appointment of the Secretary
of State, the President of Columbia University, the Ambassador to
Moscow, and the incumbents of many other important diplomatic and
industrial positions.

2. The need for continuity of direction is obviously a most important
point on which there appears to be no disagreement. The usual argument
is that a civilian once appointed has no limit to his tenure and may, as
in the oft-cited case of Mr. Hoover and the FBI, stay in office indefinitely. A counterpoint to this
argument is the claim that a military man normally rotates positions in
short tours of duty or, in any case, could be reassigned by his service
at any time. The critics point out the rapid turnover in the early
history of CIG-CIA. I believe the
argument loses its validity when the terms of the National Security Act
are studied. By that Act, an officer of any of the services who is
appointed as Director is in effect separated from the service for all
purposes except pay and allowances. It would be impossible for anyone in
the Military Establishment from the Secretary of Defense on down to
order or otherwise arrange his transfer. Section 102(b) provides that a
commissioned officer appointed as Director shall be subject to no
supervision, control, restriction, or prohibition (military or
otherwise) other than would be operative with respect to him if he were
a civilian. Strictly construed, such an officer could not be transferred
even by the President acting in his capacity as Commander-in-Chief. Of
course, the President could remove him in the same way he could remove a
Cabinet officer, but this applies equally to a civilian Director. It
appears, therefore, that under the Act as presently drawn, the tenure of
a military Director is exactly as indefinite as that of a civilian, and
he could continue in office in the same manner that Mr. Hoover continues
as head of the FBI.

3. The argument that the military Director would be subject to influences
and pressures due to service relationships has, of course, some
validity. Everyone is influenced by his background and associations. A
civilian Director is influenced by his political, social, and economic
relationships. The answer in both situations is the same—that any
Director appointed should be of such caliber that the pressures and
influences, whether civilian or military, are minimized. A practical
aspect which is important arises from the fact that although CIA is
essentially a civilian Agency serving the Executive in general, its
relations with the military are necessarily close, and a Director from
the services would normally have their trust and would understand better
the problem involved in
exercising the control over the military intelligence activities which
his position requires. Again, however, this is less a question of
background and relationships than it is of the ability of the Director.

4. The argument concerning the influence of career considerations on the
Director's decisions receives much the same answer. If the Director is a
man worthy of appointment, he would act on principle rather than on
considerations for the future. If, on the other hand, the latter
outweighed, it appears that a civilian would be just as worried about
his future in Government or business as the officer. To some extent, the
future of the officer is more assured, since by law he keeps the
perquisites of his military position—he is sure that, barring
court-martial, he may retire with pay sufficient to assure a livelihood
in the future. A civilian has no such assurance until he has been with
the Government many years. In addition, presumably the officer would be
picked from among the top ranks in the service. Aside from prestige,
therefore, there would not be many positions open to him which would
offer more in the way of economic inducement. It can, therefore, be
fairly argued that the influence of career considerations would not have
a decisive effect on a military Director of ability and principle.

5. Even granting that, as a general principle, the Director of Central
Intelligence should be a civilian, the discussion in Congress brought up
a practical aspect which is most important. Very few people have the
experience and qualifications required for the top intelligence job.
With very rare exceptions, those who have adequate experience have
obtained it in military service. It will take many years of operations
before there is a body of civilians with wide intelligence background. A
man with proper experience and qualifications would have to be an
outstanding figure and, in private life, would almost certainly be
economically successful. Considering the drawbacks of Government service
in general and of its economic rewards in particular, the appeal to such
a civilian would depend only on his willingness to make personal
sacrifice. As Mr. Allen Dulles
points out, the position requires an almost monastic devotion and idea
of service. As a practical matter, therefore, it may be necessary to
consider officers for the position. The top officers may not be the best
possible men for the job, but they may be the best men available. With
the growing importance of the directorship, it should become one of the
key posts for any officer, but particularly an intelligence officer, to
aim for. To require such a man to separate wholly from the service in
order to qualify as a civilian for the post would take away the
assurance which his retirement rights afford of a future livelihood and
its concomitant independence of action. Therefore, for no other reason
than this practical one, the way should at least be left open for the
appointment of an officer so long as the President is free to appoint a
civilian if he so desires.

6. A final point which might become important concerns possible wartime
conditions. In time of war, CIA would inevitably be tied in much more
closely with military operations. It might be advisable for the Director
to be in uniform even though he was appointed as a civilian. If the Act
restricted the directorship to civilians, commissioning would be
impossible, unless an amendment were passed. There seems, therefore, to
be little basis for the argument that the National Security Act of 1947
should be amended to restrict appointment of the Director to civilians
alone. Since the Director is under the immediate control of the National
Security Council, the arguments concerning “military dictatorship”,
“Gestapo”, and such like are ignored.

Lawrence R. Houston

* Source: Central Intelligence Agency
Historical Files, HS/HC-208, Item 31. No classification
marking.

236. Letter From Director of Central Intelligence Hillenkoetter to the Director of the Bureau of the Budget (Webb)236. Letter From Director of Central Intelligence Hillenkoetter to the
Director of the Bureau of the Budget (Webb)Source

Washington, December 15,
1948.

Dear Mr. Webb: In accordance with
the letter of the President, dated 6 November 1948, regarding proposed
agency legislative programs for the coming session, and my reply to you
of 29 November 1948,1 I am forwarding herewith the text of proposed
legislation for the Central Intelligence Agency.2

This proposed bill is substantially the same as S. 2688 (Report No. 1302)
which was passed by the Senate on 19 June 1948. A similar bill, H.R.
5871 (Report No. 1853), was unanimously approved by the Armed Services
Committee of the House of Representatives, but was not passed when lack
of time in the closing hours of the session prevented its being called
up. Bureau of the Budget approval of last year's draft was contained in
a letter to me from Mr. Elmer B. Staats, Assistant Director of the
Bureau of the Budget, dated 6 April 1948. The full concurrence of the
Comptroller General was contained in his letter to you dated 12 March
1948./1/

Reexamination of the provisions of S. 2688 indicates that while it was
satisfactory, experiences over the past few months have indicated that
certain additions to that bill would be most helpful to this Agency. We
have, therefore, included them in the accompanying draft bill. I am also
enclosing a detailed analysis3 of the new provisions, so that you may
readily see the additions to S. 2688.

Sincerely yours,

R.H. Hillenkoetter4
Rear Admiral, USN

* Source:
Truman Library, Papers of Harry S.
Truman, Records of the National Security Council,
File CIA, Memos for Director, 1948. No classification
marking.

1 Neither letter has been
found.

2 Dated December 15; see the Supplement.

3 Not printed;
see the Supplement.

4 Printed from a
copy that indicates Hillenkoetter signed the original.

237. Memorandum From the Assistant General Counsel, Central Intelligence Agency (Pforzheimer) to Director of Central Intelligence Hillenkoetter237. Memorandum From the Assistant General Counsel, Central
Intelligence Agency (Pforzheimer) to Director of Central Intelligence
HillenkoetterSource

Washington, January 6,
1949.

SUBJECT

Section 6(g) of proposed CIA legislation

1. Mr. Houston and I conferred
today with Mr. Fisher Howe, of the State Department intelligence staff,
and Mr. Robert Alexander, of the Visa Division. They have agreed to
concur in our visa section 6(g),1 and as a result of this
conference we will suggest to you certain modifications. Mr. Alexander,
however, made certain proposals which he considered preferable to ours, but this will not
prevent him from concurring in our section. He did point out, however,
that he was constantly being called into Executive session by
Congressional committees to testify on all matters concerning visas, and
that presumably the State Department would be called in this connection
in our bill. He stated that if he were called and were asked for his
opinion, he would testify that he did not agree with our approach,
although he agreed as to the necessity for such legislation, and that he
would be forced to testify as to his own opinion as to the best means to
secure our end.

2. While I believe he is under a misapprehension as to the committee
before which our legislation will come, and while I think it is doubtful
that the Armed Services Committee would ever request his testimony, once
the State Department has concurred in our legislation, I believe Mr.
Lovett should make it crystal
clear that the only testimony Mr. Alexander can give would be in direct
support of the language in which the Department has concurred and not
his personal opinion. Furthermore, if State Department testimony is
considered desirable, it appears to me that it should be given
preferably by Mr. Lovett himself
or otherwise by Mr. Armstrong. I
envisage the possibility, in the light of Mr. Alexander's past
legislative performances, that he may attempt to throw some sand in the
gears, and this should not be allowed to happen through any private
lobbying operations of his own.

Walter L. Pforzheimer

* Source: Central Intelligence Agency
Records, Job 90-00610R, Box 1, Folder 17. Confidential.

1 Regarding
discussions between Department of State and CIA officials on the
visa section of the proposed CIA legislation conferring limited
authority on the Director of Central Intelligence, see the December
29 memorandum from Howe to Armstrong (National Archives and Records
Administration, RG 59, Records of the Department of State, Decimal
File 1945-49, 101.5/4-3149); Pforzheimer's memoranda to Hillenkoetter, December
30 (Central Intelligence Agency Records, Job 90-00610R, Box 1,
Folder 17), December 31 (ibid.), and January 3 (ibid., Folder 10);
and memoranda for the files by Pforzheimer, January 3 (ibid., Folder 17) and by
Houston, January 4
(ibid.). All are in the Supplement.

238. Memorandum From the Secretary of State's Special Assistant for Research and Intelligence (Armstrong) to Acting Secretary of State Lovett238. Memorandum From the Secretary of State's Special Assistant for
Research and Intelligence (Armstrong) to Acting Secretary of State LovettSource

Washington, January 11,
1949.

SUBJECT

Attached letter re Proposed Revisions to CIA Legislation

Discussion:

1. The proposed revision of CIA enabling legislation involves two major
subjects of interest to the Department: an exception to the normal immigration procedures, and
administrative arrangements for CIA overseas personnel.

2. With respect to the immigration clause which permits the bringing into
the United States of up to 100 individuals without regard to immigration
statutes, the following is pertinent:

(a) In discussion with Admiral Hillenkoetter, it is understood that you
gave informal approval to this clause.

(b) The Visa Division has concurred in this clause of the legislation
and, in fact, in consultation with CIA representatives has suggested
improvements in the phraseology which have been adopted by the CIA
according to the attachment.

3. With respect to the administrative clauses:

(a) These were approved a year ago when almost identical legislation was
put forward by the CIA; it was, in fact, only with the immigration
clause that the Department found exception.

(b) The specific grants in powers of this legislation are being sought by
the CIA now as a result of requests by the General Accounting Office,
and are in accordance with their specifications. It is understood that
the Bureau of the Budget also concurs in the need for such modifications
to the CIA enabling legislation.

(c) On the whole, the legislation tends to legalize procedures which have
been followed in the past two years and which are intended to make the
administration of CIA overseas personnel as much like the administration
of Foreign Service personnel as is possible.

Recommendation:

That you sign the attached letter concurring in the CIA legislation.

Attachment1

Letter From Acting Secretary of State Lovett to the Director of the Bureau of the Budget
(Webb)

My Dear Mr. Webb: The Department
has received your letter of December 24,2 in which comment is requested by the Bureau of the
Budget on the “Proposed Central Intelligence Act of 1949” admitted by
the Central Intelligence Agency.

The Department perceives no objection to this proposed legislation. You
will note that one clause, 6(g), has been revised in consultation with
CIA, according to the attachment.

The Department believes that despite the extraordinary grant of powers
involved, such legislation is entirely proper and necessary for the
efficient operation of an intelligence service.

Sincerely yours,3

* Source: National Archives and Records
Administration, RG 59, Records of the Department of State, Decimal
File 1945-49, 101.5/12-2948. No classification marking. Drafted by
Fisher Howe and approved by EUR,
OFS, CON, ODA, ORP, L/A, and
C/L.

1 Drafted by Fisher Howe on January
11.

2 Not
found.

3 Printed from an
unsigned copy.

239. Letter From Director of Central Intelligence Hillenkoetter to the Speaker of the House of Representatives (Rayburn)239. Letter From Director of Central Intelligence Hillenkoetter to the
Speaker of the House of Representatives (Rayburn)Source

Washington, February 11,
1949.

Dear Mr. Speaker: There is submitted herewith the draft1 of a proposed bill “To provide for the
administration of the Central Intelligence Agency, established pursuant
to Section 102, National Security Act of 1947, and for other purposes.”

This proposed legislation is substantially the same as H.R. 5871 which
was introduced in the Eightieth Congress and unanimously reported out by
the House Armed Services Committee. However, due to lack of time, the
bill was not called up on the floor. It was also reported out
unanimously by the Senate Armed Services Committee in the Eightieth
Congress, and passed the Senate on 21 June 1948. The favorable action of
the House Armed Services Committee is reported in House Report No. 1853,
dated 4 May 1948.

The purpose of the bill is to grant to the Central Intelligence Agency
the authorities necessary for its proper administration. The bill deals
with procurement, travel, allowances and related expenses, general
authorities, and methods of expenditures of appropriated funds. Further,
it protects the
confidential nature of the Agency's functions and makes provisions for
the internal administration of the Agency. In almost all instances, the
powers and authorities contained in the bill already exist for some
other branch of the Government, and the bill merely extends similar
authorities to the Central Intelligence Agency.

This proposed bill has been resubmitted to the Bureau of the Budget, and
we have been advised that they have no objection to its presentation to
the Congress in its present form.

Sincerely yours,

R.H. Hillenkoetter2
Rear Admiral, USN

* Source: Central
Intelligence Agency Records, Job 90-00610R, Box 1, Folder 17. No
classification marking. A similar letter was sent to Senator Millard
Tydings, chairman of the Senate Armed Services Committee, on the
same date. (Ibid.) See the Supplement.

1 Not printed. The bill was enacted as the Central
Intelligence Agency Act of 1949, June 20, 1949, Public Law 110, 81st
Congress, 1st Session (63 Stat. Ch. 227). A signed copy of the act
is reproduced in CIA Cold War Records: The CIA
under Harry Truman,
pp. 287-294.

2 Printed from a
copy that indicates Hillenkoetter signed the original.

240. Memorandum From the General Counsel (Houston) and the Legislative Liaison Officer of the Central Intelligence Agency (Pforzheimer) to the Executive of the Central Intelligence Agency (Shannon)240. Memorandum From the General Counsel (Houston) and the Legislative Liaison Officer
of the Central Intelligence Agency (Pforzheimer) to the Executive of the Central
Intelligence Agency (Shannon)Source

Washington, September 27,
1949.

SUBJECT

Legal Responsibilities of the Central Intelligence Agency

1. The interpretation of an act of Congress is often extremely difficult.
At times provisions which are perfectly clear when the act is written
become subject to various interpretations in practice, making it
necessary to fall back on Congressional Committee reports and Floor
debates. This appears to be the case in connection with certain
authorities under Section 102 of the National Security Act of 1947 which
sets forth the duties of the Central Intelligence Agency. But whatever
uncertainty has arisen out of inadequate wording or subsequent
interpretations, in our opinion
the basic intent of the Congress is clear and unchanged in regard to
this Section of the law.

2. Section 102(d) of the National Security Act sets forth certain duties
for CIA to perform “under the direction of the National Security
Council”. The Agency was placed under the National Security Council,
with the approval of the former and present directors of CIA, because it
was felt that it should report to a group rather than directly to the
President. The President would be too busy to give adequate personal
attention to its needs and should not be so burdened. Rather than leave
the Agency in a vacuum it was decided that it should answer to a council
composed of the President, and the Secretaries of State and the Military
Establishment, who were to be the prime users of our material and who
should therefore set certain broad patterns and directives for the
Agency to follow.

3. While there was little specific discussion on the record, we feel it
is quite clear that Congress intended CIA to look to the National
Security Council only for broad direction, and that the day-to-day
operations of the Agency were to be in the hands of the Director.
Furthermore, there is no question but that if anything went wrong with
the Agency, or if any questions arose (as they did at the time of the
Bogota riots)1 the Congress would hold the Director
personally responsible and would look no further. It was Congressional
intent to create an independent intelligence agency to perform the
functions set forth in the Act, the agency to look to the National
Security Council only for the broadest type of guidance.

4. The first function set forth in Section 102(d) of the National
Security Act is that of advising the NSC
“in matters concerning such intelligence activities of the Government
departments and agencies as relate to national security.” We believe
Congress, by imposing this duty, intended CIA to report and give
positive advice on the inadequacies, gaps and overlaps in the entire
foreign intelligence field. The other intelligence agencies of the
Government have been loath to accept such a concept. They have looked
upon CIA as just another Government intelligence agency with no
supervisory or directive powers over their own intelligence
establishments.

5. Section 102(d)(2) of the National Security Act gives the Agency the
duty to make recommendations to the NSC
for the coordination of certain intelligence activities of certain
departments and agencies of the Government. In this, we believe the
intent of Congress was for CIA to make positive and aggressive
recommendations for improvement of all intelligence activities relative
to the national security. The recommendations which we have made in this connection
are not in fact CIA recommendations as contemplated by the law. They are
joint papers concurred in by all the intelligence agencies. Inevitably
such compromises lack teeth, and the task of obtaining clearances
consumes an undue amount of time. We feel that Congress intended CIA to
prepare these recommendations for NSC
directives in the form which it deems proper. They might then be
circulated to the standing committee for comment. If valid objections
are presented, they may be accepted if CIA feels that the purpose of the
paper is not thereby impaired. It may be that CIA would likewise include
IAC dissents in the final
recommendation to the NSC. However, that
final paper would be a CIA recommendation, as required by the law, and
not the watered-down result of compromise.

6. Section 102(d)(3) places the duty on CIA to correlate and evaluate
intelligence relating to the national security, and to provide for its
appropriate dissemination within the Government. There is no question as
to what the Congress intended in this connection. In placing upon us the
burden of correlating and evaluating intelligence relating to the
national security, it was inherent that we should receive the raw
material necessary to perform this function. In the course of the debate
in the House of Representatives on 19 July 1947, Congressman Judd
pointed out that all intelligence relating to the national security
which was developed by the various agencies of the Government must be
made available to the DCI. It was with
this thought in mind that Section 102(e) was written into the law,
providing that intelligence relating to the national security should be
made available to the Director for correlation, evaluation and
dissemination. (The special proviso that was written in, making it
necessary for the Director to make written request to the Director of
the FBI, was included, not to preclude
the Director from information from that source, but merely to make it
impossible for the Director to inspect specific operations of the FBI which are all in the field of internal
security.)

7. The intent of Congress is clearest in its determination to make
certain that CIA received all the information which it needed to perform
its functions. This is indicated by the authority to inspect
intelligence of agencies (other than the FBI) to the extent recommended by the NSC and approved by the President. The
present directive (NSCID #1), the
wording of which was reached by compromise among the agencies,
authorizes inspection by the DCI only
through arrangement with the head of the intelligence agency concerned.
This qualification vitiates the entire inspection authority.

8. The feeling that there was outside interference with CIA was evident
in connection with the Bogota hearings. The sentiment of Members of the
Congress was expressed in the statement of Congressman Clarence Brown of
Ohio, who served as the Chairman of the Special Subcommittee investigating the Bogota incident, and
who was also a member of the original Committee which established CIA.
He stated, on 16 April 1948, that:

“It may be necessary for Congress to enact additional legislation to give
the CIA the independent status it was generally presumed to enjoy.”

9. The focus brought upon the subject of intelligence was in great
measure caused by the Joint Congressional Committee Investigation of the
Pearl Harbor disaster. In connection with its report on this matter, the
Committee stated:

“Why, with some of the finest intelligence available in our history, with
the almost certain knowledge that war was at hand, with plans that
contemplated the precise type of attack that was executed by Japan on
the morning of December 7—Why was it possible for a Pearl Harbor to
occur?”

It was the intent of Congress in establishing CIA to establish an inde-
pendent agency which would be the focal point of all foreign
intelligence information, to correlate and evaluate all such information
and to disseminate the product to the necessary Government officials.
The Congress felt it had conferred the statutory authority necessary for
CIA to perform these functions, even though it left broad direction
largely to the NSC and the President. We
believe there is ample authority latent in the law, and that adequate
directives will permit CIA to fulfill the role which, even now, the
Congress believes the Agency is playing as an essential element in the
national defense and security.

Lawrence R. Houston
Walter L. Pforzheimer2

* Source: Central Intelligence Agency Historical
Files, HS/HC-84, Item 3. Confidential. The source text is a
transcript prepared for the CIA Historian on September 9,
1952.

1 (and at the time of the Korean
invasion.) [Footnote in the source text. The note was obviously
added later, perhaps when materials were being selected for the use
of the CIA Historian.]

2 Printed from a copy that bears these
typed signatures.

Psychological and Political WarfarePsychological and Political Warfare: Document List

Introduction

Document 241: Memorandum From the General Counsel of the Central Intelligence Agency (Houston) to Director of Central Intelligence Hillenkoetter

Washington, September 25, 1947.

Source: Central Intelligence Agency Historical Files, HS/HC-805, Item 12. Secret. Attached to a brief transmittal note from Houston to Hillenkoetter summarizing the contents. See the Supplement.

Document 242: Memorandum From the Secretary of the State-Army-Navy-Air Force Coordinating Committee (Moseley) to the Under Secretary of State (Lovett)

Washington, October 15, 1947.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 353, Records of Interdepartmental and Intradepartmental Committees—State Department, Records of the State-War-Navy Coordinating Committee, Box 55, File 304, 381, Psychological Warfare Pt. 1. Secret.

Document 243: Memorandum by the Army Member of the State-Army-Navy-Air Force Coordinating Committee (Pixtou)

Washington, undated.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 353, Records of Interdepartmental and Intradepartmental Committees—State Department, Records of the State-War-Navy Coordinating Committee, Box 55, File 304, 381, Psychological Warfare Pt. 1. Secret. Transmitted under an October 20 transmittal note from the committee secretariat.

Document 244: Memorandum From Director of Central Intelligence Hillenkoetter to the State-Army-Navy-Air Force Coordinating Committee

Washington, October 22, 1947.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 353, Records of Interdepartmental and Intradepartmental Committees—State Department, Records of the State-War-Navy Coordinating Committee, Box 55, File 304, 381, Psychological Warfare Pt. 1. Secret.

Document 245: Memorandum From the Executive Secretary of the National Security Council (Souers) to Secretary of Defense Forrestal

Washington, October 24, 1947.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 353, Records of Interdepartmental and Intradepartmental Committees—State Department, Records of the State-War-Navy Coordinating Committee, Box 55, File 304, 381, Psychological Warfare Pt. 1. Secret.

Document 246: Memorandum From the Assistant Executive Secretary (Lay) to the Executive Secretary of the National Security Council (Souers)

Washington, November 3, 1947.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 273, Records of the National Security Council, NSC 10/2. Top Secret.

Document 247: Memorandum From the Deputy Director (Wright) to Director of Central Intelligence Hillenkoetter

Washington, November 4, 1947.

Source: Central Intelligence Agency Historical Files, HS/HC-807, Item 4. Secret.

Document 248: Memorandum From the Deputy Director (Wright) to Director of Central Intelligence Hillenkoetter

Washington, November 4, 1947.

Source: Central Intelligence Agency Historical Files, HS/HC-807, Item 4. Secret.

Document 249: Report by an Ad Hoc Subcommittee of the State-Army-Navy-Air Force Coordinating Committee

Washington, November 7, 1947.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 353, Records of the Interdepartmental and Intradepartmental Committees—State Department, Records of the State-War-Navy Coordinating Committee, Box 55, File 304, 381, Psychological Warfare Pt. 2. Top Secret. Although dated November 7, SANACC amended and approved the report on November 13, and the last 2 pages of the source text bear the typed notation “Revised 13 November 1947.” The source text is an enclosure to two memoranda, neither printed. (Ibid.) The first is a November 13 covering note from the SANACC secretaries explaining the changes. The latter is another note by the SANACC secretaries, dated November 7, which indicates that the text amended and approved by SANACC was a revised version of the report originally submitted by the ad hoc committee on November 3 and designated as SANACC 304/10. (Ibid.) See the Supplement for SANACC 304/10.

Document 250: Memorandum of Discussion at the 2d Meeting of the National Security Council

Washington, November 14, 1947.

Source: Truman Library, Papers of Harry S. Truman, President's Secretary's Files, Subject File. Top Secret.

Document 251: Memorandum From the Deputy Director of Central Intelligence (Wright) to the Chief of the Interagency Coordinating and Planning Staff, Central Intelligence Agency (Childs)

Washington, December 2, 1947.

Source: Central Intelligence Agency Historical Files, HS/HS-74, Item 1. Top Secret.

Document 252: Memorandum From the Executive Secretary (Souers) to the Members of the National Security Council

Washington, December 9, 1947.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 273, Records of the National Security Council, NSC Minutes, 4th Meeting. Confidential. Copies sent to the President, the Secretaries of State, Defense, the Army, the Navy, and the Air Force, and the Chairman of the National Security Resources Board. For an early version of this document, see the memorandum from “REN” to Souers, November 25, and the two undated attachments (ibid.) in the Supplement.

Document 253: Memorandum From the Executive Secretary (Souers) to the Members of the National Security Council

Washington, December 9, 1947.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 273, Records of the National Security Council, NSC Minutes, 4th Meeting. Top Secret.

Document 254: Memorandum From Director of Central Intelligence Hillenkoetter to the Executive Secretary of the National Security Council (Souers)

Washington, December 15, 1947.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 273, Records of the National Security Council, NSC Minutes, 4th Meeting. Top Secret.

Document 255: Memorandum From the Executive Secretary (Souers) to the National Security Council

Washington, December 16, 1947.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 273, Records of the National Security Council, NSC Minutes, 4th Meeting. Top Secret.

Document 256: Department of State Briefing Memorandum

Washington, December 17, 1947.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Records of the Department of State, Records of the Executive Secretariat, NSC Files: Lot 63 D 351, NSC 4. Top Secret. The date is handwritten on the source text. The memorandum has neither an addressee nor a sender, but presumably it was intended for Under Secretary Lovett, who was Acting Secretary at the time. The document is a briefing paper for the NSC meeting held December 17.

Document 257: Memorandum From the Executive Secretary of the National Security Council (Souers) to Director of Central Intelligence Hillenkoetter

Washington, December 17, 1947.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 273, Records of the National Security Council, NSC Minutes, 4th Meeting. Top Secret. Central Intelligence Agency records contain a typescript copy that apparently was made from a signed copy; it is identical to the source text. (Central Intelligence Agency Historical Files, HS/CSG-773, Job 83-00036, Box 5, Folder 8) Also reproduced in CIA Cold War Records: The CIA under Harry Truman, pp. 173-175.

Document 258: Memorandum From Director of Central Intelligence Hillenkoetter to the Assistant Director for Special Operations (Galloway)

Washington, December 22, 1947.

Source: Central Intelligence Agency Historical Files, HS/CSG-917, Job 83-00036, Box 6, Folder 11. Top Secret.

Document 259: Memorandum From the Director of the Policy Planning Staff (Kennan) to the Under Secretary of State (Lovett)

Washington, February 17, 1948.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Records of the Department of State, Decimal File 1945-49, 101.6/2-1748. Top Secret.

Document 260: Office of Special Operations Directive No. 18/5 (Interim)

Washington, February 24, 1948.

Source: Central Intelligence Agency Historical Files, HS/CSG-2154, Job 83-00739R, Box 3, Folder 19. Secret. On February 24 Office of Special Operations Personnel Order No. 25 announced the designation of Thomas G. Cassady as Chief of the Special Procedures Branch. (Ibid., HS/CSG-2155, Job 83-00739R, Box 3, Folder 20) See the Supplement.

Document 261: Memorandum From the Chief of the Special Procedures Group (Cassady) to the Deputy Chief of the Special Procedures Group (Dulin)

Washington, March 11, 1948.

Source: Central Intelligence Agency Historical Files, HS/CSG-609, Job 83-00036, Box 4, Folder 10. Secret.

Document 262: Memorandum From Secretary of Defense Forrestal to the Executive Secretary of the National Security Council (Souers)

Washington, March 26, 1948.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Records of the Department of State, Policy Planning Staff Files 1947-53: Lot 64 D 563, Pol amp; Psych Warfare 1948-50, Box 11. Top Secret. On March 30 Souers sent Forrestal's memorandum to NSC members, noting that it would be on the agenda of the April 2 meeting. (Ibid.) See the Supplement.

Document 263: Office of Special Operations Directive No. 18/5

Washington, March 29, 1948.

Source: Central Intelligence Agency Historical Files, HS/CSG-2154, Job 83-00739R, Box 3, Folder 19. Top Secret.

Document 264: Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for Public Affairs (Allen) to Acting Secretary of State Lovett

Washington, March 31, 1948.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Records of the Department of State, Records of the Executive Secretariat, NSC Files: Lot 63 D 351, NSC 4, Box 4205. Top Secret.

Document 265: Memorandum From the Director of the Office of Information and Educational Exchange (Stone) to Acting Secretary of State Lovett

Washington, April 1, 1948.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Records of the Department of State, Records of the Executive Secretariat, NSC Files: Lot 63 D 351, NSC 4. Top Secret. Following his handwritten initials above the subject line Stone wrote: “(In the absence of George Allen.)”

Document 266: Memorandum for the President of Discussion at the 9th Meeting of the National Security Council

Washington, April 2, 1948.

Source: Truman Library, Papers of Harry S. Truman, President's Secretary's Files, Subject File. Top Secret.

Document 267: Memorandum From the Executive Secretary (Souers) to the Members of the National Security Council

Washington, April 26, 1948.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Records of the Department of State, Records of the Executive Secretariat, NSC Files: Lot 63 D 351, NSC 4, Box 4205. Top Secret. In a May 10 note to Lovett, Kennan referred to a report “made after the National Security Council Consultants had met with the Director of Central Intelligence to review the implementation of foreign information measures,” and he recommended that he be authorized informally to tell Souers that the Department approved the Consultants' two recommendations. (Ibid., Policy Planning Staff Files, 1947-1953, Box 11A) See the Supplement. This referenced report is probably the source text.

Document 268: Memorandum by the Chief of the Special Procedures Group, Central Intelligence Agency (Cassady)

Washington, undated.

Source: Central Intelligence Agency Historical Files, HS/CSG-909, Job 83-00036, Box 6, Folder 11. Secret. No addressee is indicated on the source text. A handwritten note on the source text reads: “Approximate Date—1 May 48.”

Document 269: Policy Planning Staff Memorandum

Washington, May 4, 1948.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 273, Records of the National Security Council, NSC 10/2. Top Secret. No drafting information appears on the source text. An earlier, similar version, April 30, is ibid., RG 59, Records of the Department of State, Policy Planning Staff Files 1944-47: Lot 64 D 563, Box 11. The Policy Planning Staff minutes for May 3 state: “There was a discussion of the Planning Staff Memorandum of April 30, 1948 on the inauguration of organized political warfare. This paper was generally approved and Mr. Kennan will present it tomorrow for discussion at a meeting of NSC consultants.” (Ibid., Box 32)

Document 270: Draft Proposed NSC Directive

Washington, May 5, 1948.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 273, Records of the National Security Council, NSC 10/2. Top Secret. No drafting information appears on the source text. For another version, see the draft NSC directive, May 4 (ibid.), in the Supplement.

Document 271: Memorandum From Director of Central Intelligence Hillenkoetter to the Executive Secretary of the National Security Council (Souers)

Washington, May 5, 1948.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 273, Records of the National Security Council, NSC 10/2. Top Secret.

Document 272: Memorandum From Director of Central Intelligence Hillenkoetter to the Executive Secretary of the National Security Council (Souers)

Washington, May 6, 1948.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 273, Records of the National Security Council, NSC 10/2. Top Secret.

Document 273: Memorandum From Director of Central Intelligence Hillenkoetter to the Executive Secretary of the National Security Council (Souers)

Washington, May 11, 1948.

Source: Central Intelligence Agency Historical Files, HS/HC-807, Item 22. Top Secret. The source text is a copy transcribed for the CIA Historian in 1953. Also reproduced in CIA Cold War Records: The CIA under Harry Truman, p. 201.

Document 274: Draft Report by the National Security Council

Washington, May 12, 1948.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 273, Records of the National Security Council, NSC 10/2. Top Secret. Transmitted under a covering note from Souers to the NSC submitting the report for consideration at an early meeting. For a May 10 draft of this report, see the Supplement. (National Archives and Records Administration, RG 273, Records of the National Security Council, NSC 10/2)

Document 275: Memorandum From the Intelligence Survey Group to the Executive Secretary of the National Security Council (Souers)

Washington, May 13, 1948.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Records of the Department of State, Records of the Executive Secretariat, NSC Files: Lot 63 D 351, NSC 4. Top Secret. The NSC appointed the Survey Group in February 1948 to evaluate the performance of the Central Intelligence Agency and the intelligence system generally. Its members were Allen Dulles, who served as chairman, Mathias F. Correa, and William H. Jackson.

Document 276: Memorandum From the Director of the Policy Planning Staff (Kennan) to the Under Secretary of State (Lovett) and Secretary of State Marshall

Washington, May 19, 1948.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Records of the Department of State, Policy Planning Staff Files 1947-53: Lot 64 D 563. A May 11 version of this memorandum (ibid.), is in the Supplement.

Document 277: Memorandum for the President of Discussion at the 11th Meeting of the National Security Council

Washington, May 20, 1948.

Source: Truman Library, Papers of Harry S. Truman, President's Secretary's Files, Subject File. Top Secret. Prepared on May 21. According to the minutes of the 11th meeting, the following persons were present: Secretary of State Marshall; Secretary of Defense Forrestal; Secretary of the Army Royall; Secretary of the Navy Sullivan; Secretary of the Air Force Symington; NSRB Chairman Hill; Under Secretary of State Lovett; DCI Hillenkoetter; NSC Executive Secretary Souers; and Assistant Executive Secretary Lay. (Ibid.)

Document 278: Memorandum From Director of Central Intelligence Hillenkoetter to the National Security Council

Washington, May 24, 1948.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 273, Records of the National Security Council, NSC 10/2. Top Secret. The memorandum was originally addressed to Souers and was readdressed for circulation to the members of the Council. The only other difference between the original and the circulated version was the addition of footnote 2 below to the latter.

Document 279: Memorandum From the Director of the Policy Planning Staff (Kennan) to the Under Secretary of State (Lovett)

Washington, May 25, 1948.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Records of the Department of State, Policy Planning Staff Files, 1947-53: Lot 64 D 563, Box 719, Pol & Psych Warfare. Top Secret.

Document 280: Memorandum of Meeting

Washington, May 28, 1948.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 273, Records of the National Security Council, NSC 10/2. Top Secret. Drafted on June 1 presumably by Blum. For background information on this meeting, see Document 279.

Document 281: Memorandum From the Executive Secretary (Souers) to the National Security Council

Washington, June 2, 1948.

Source: Truman Library, Papers of Harry S. Truman, President's Secretary's File, Subject File. Top Secret. Attached to another copy of this document is an earlier draft of the proposal with handwritten changes. (National Archives and Records Administration, RG 273, Records of the National Security Council, NSC 10/2)

Document 282: Memorandum From George H. Butler of the Policy Planning Staff to the Under Secretary of State (Lovett) and Secretary of State Marshall

Washington, June 2, 1948.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Records of the Department of State, Policy Planning Staff Files 1947-53: Lot 64 D 563. Top Secret.

Document 283: Memorandum for the President of Discussion at the 12th Meeting of the National Security Council

Washington, June 3, 1948.

Source: Truman Library, Papers of Harry S. Truman, President's Secretary's Files, Subject File. Top Secret. Prepared on June 4.

Document 284: National Security Council Memorandum

Washington, June 4, 1948.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 273, Records of the National Security Council, NSC 10/2. Top Secret. No drafting information appears on the source text but it was probably prepared by the NSC staff on the basis of the discussion at the preceding day's meeting of the Council.

Document 285: Memorandum From the Assistant Executive Secretary of the National Security Council (Lay) to Director of Central Intelligence Hillenkoetter

Washington, June 7, 1948.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 273, Records of the National Security Council, NSC 10/2. Top Secret.

Document 286: Memorandum From the Director of the Policy Planning Staff (Kennan) to the Under Secretary of State (Lovett)

Washington, June 8, 1948.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Records of the Department of State, Policy Planning Staff Files 1947-53: Lot 64 D 563, Box 719, Pol & Psych Warfare. Top Secret. The source text contains the handwritten annotation, “Contents presented orally 6/8/48.”

Document 287: Letter From Director of Central Intelligence Hillenkoetter to the Assistant Executive Secretary of the National Security Council (Lay)

Washington, June 9, 1948.

Source: Central Intelligence Agency Historical Files, HS/HC-807, Item 25. Top Secret. The source text is a copy transcribed for the CIA Historian on March 26, 1953. Also reproduced in CIA Cold War Records: The CIA under Harry Truman, pp. 203-205.

Document 288: Note by the Executive Secretary (Souers) to the National Security Council

Washington, June 15, 1948.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 273, Records of the National Security Council NSC 10/2. Top Secret. Addressed to the Secretaries of State, Defense, Army, Navy, and Air Force and the Chairman of the National Security Resources Board. The typed date on the cover sheet of June 18 has been changed by hand to June 15.

Document 289: Memorandum From the Director of the Policy Planning Staff (Kennan) to the Under Secretary of State (Lovett) and Secretary of State Marshall

Washington, June 16, 1948.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Records of the Department of State, Policy Planning Staff Files 1947-53: Lot 64 D 563, Box 719, Pol & Psych Warfare. Top Secret.

Document 290: Memorandum From the Director of the Policy Planning Staff (Kennan) to the Under Secretary of State (Lovett) and Secretary of State Marshall

Washington, June 17, 1948.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Records of the Department of State, Policy Planning Staff Files 1947-53: Lot 64 D 563, Box 719, Pol & Psych Warfare. Top Secret.

Document 291: Memorandum for the President of Discussion at the 13th Meeting of the National Security Council

Washington, June 17, 1948.

Source: Truman Library, Papers of Harry S. Truman, President's Secretary's Files, Subject File. Top Secret. Prepared on June 18. According to the minutes of the 13th meeting, the following persons were present: Forrestal, Lovett, Royall, Sullivan, Symington, Hill, Hillenkoetter, Souers, and Lay. (Ibid.)

Document 292: National Security Council Directive on Office of Special Projects

Washington, June 18, 1948.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 273, Records of the National Security Council, NSC 10/2. Top Secret. Although undated, this directive was approved by the National Security Council at its June 17 meeting and the final text, incorporating changes made at the meeting, was circulated to members by the Executive Secretary under a June 18 note. (Ibid.) See the Supplement. NSC 10/2 and the June 18 note are also reproduced in CIA Cold War Records: The CIA under Harry Truman, pp. 213-216.

Document 293: Memorandum From Director of Central Intelligence Hillenkoetter to the Chief of Naval Operations (Denfeld)

Washington, June 18, 1948.

Source: Central Intelligence Agency Historical Files, HS/CSG-605, Job 83-0036, Box 4, Folder 10. Top Secret. The source text is a transcript made for the CIA Historian in December 1952.

Document 294: Memorandum From the Director of the Policy Planning Staff (Kennan) to the Under Secretary of State (Lovett)

Washington, June 30, 1948.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Records of the Department of State, Policy Planning Staff Files 1947-53: Lot 64 D 563, Box 11A. Top Secret.

Document 295: Memorandum From the Chief of the Special Procedures Group (Cassady) to Director of Central Intelligence Hillenkoetter

Washington, June 30, 1948.

Source: Central Intelligence Agency Historical Files, HS/CSG-615, Job 83-00036, Box 4, Folder 10. Secret. Sent to Colonel Donald H. Galloway, the Assistant Director for Special Operations, for Hillenkoetter. The source text is a transcript made for the CIA Historian in December 1952.

Document 296: Memorandum From Commander Robert Jay Williams to the Chief of the Special Procedures Group (Cassady)

Washington, July 23, 1948.

Source: Central Intelligence Agency Historical Files, HS/CSG-606, Job 83-00036, Box 4, Folder 10. Secret. The source text is a transcript made for the CIA Historian in December 1952. Williams was the chief of “Project Ultimate,” which appears to be the same as the plan discussed in Document 293.

Document 297: Memorandum for the Record by the Chief of the Special Procedures Group (Cassady)

Washington, August 6, 1948.

Document 298: Memorandum of Conversation and Understanding

Washington, August 6, 1948.

Source: Central Intelligence Agency Historical Files, HS/CSG-771, Job 83-00036, Box 5, Folder 8. Top Secret. The source text is a transcript prepared for the CIA Historian on March 27, 1953.

Document 299: Memorandum for the President of Discussion at the 18th Meeting of the National Security Council

Washington, August 19, 1948.

Source: Truman Library, Papers of Harry S. Truman, President's Secretary's Files, Subject File. Top Secret. Prepared on August 20.

Document 300: Central Intelligence Agency General Order No. 10

Washington, August 27, 1948.

Source: Central Intelligence Agency Historical Files, HS/CSG-2155, Job 83-00739R, Box 3, Folder 20. Secret.

Document 301: Letter From Acting Secretary of State Lovett to Secretary of Defense Forrestal

Washington, October 1, 1948.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Records of the Department of State, Decimal File 1945-49, 101.61/10-148. Top Secret. Drafted by Kennan on September 30. Sent to Lovett for signature under cover of a September 30 note from Kennan that reads: “Mr. Wisner is going to encounter, as one of his first major obstacles, the problem of cooperation with the Army in Germany. He has asked us to give him a boost in this respect. Here it is.” (Ibid.)

Document 302: Memorandum From Acting Director of Central Intelligence Wright to the Executive Secretary of the National Security Council (Souers)

Washington, October 8, 1948.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 273, Records of the National Security Council, OCB 10/2-10/5. Top Secret.

Document 303: Memorandum From the Executive Secretary of the National Security Council (Souers) to Acting Director of Central Intelligence Wright

Washington, October 11, 1948.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 273, Records of the National Security Council, OCB 10/2-10/5. Top Secret.

Document 304: Letter From Secretary of Defense Forrestal to Acting Secretary of State Lovett

Washington, October 13, 1948.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Records of the Department of State, Decimal File 1945-49, 101.61/10-1348. Top Secret.

Document 305: Memorandum From the Director of the Policy Planning Staff (Kennan) to the Under Secretary of State (Lovett)

Washington, October 29, 1948.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Records of the Department of State, Policy Planning Staff Files 1947-53: Lot 64 D 563, Pol & Psych Warfare. Top Secret.

Document 306: Memorandum From the Assistant Director for Policy Coordination (Wisner) to Director of Central Intelligence Hillenkoetter

Washington, October 29, 1948.

Source: Central Intelligence Agency Historical Files, HS/CSG-2155, Job 83-00739R, Box 3, Folder 20. Secret. Also reproduced in CIA Cold War Records: The CIA under Harry Truman, pp. 241-242.

Document 307: Memorandum for the File

Washington, November 16, 1948.

Source: Central Intelligence Agency Historical Files, HS/CSG-453, Job 83-00036, Box 3, Folder 4. Secret.

Document 308: Memorandum From the Director of the Policy Planning Staff, Department of State (Kennan) to the Assistant Director for Policy Coordination, Central Intelligence Agency (Wisner)

Washington, January 6, 1949.

Source: Central Intelligence Agency Historical Files, HS/CSG-759, Job 83-00036, Box 5, Folder 8, Top Secret.

Document 309: Memorandum From the Assistant Director for Policy Coordination, Central Intelligence Agency (Wisner) to the Chief of the Economic Cooperation Administration Mission in France (Bruce)

Washington, April 26, 1949.

Source: Central Intelligence Agency Historical Files, HS/CSG-2065, Job 83-00739R, Box 2, Folder 12. No classification marking. The source text is annotated with somewhat confusing marginalia, which suggest that another version of this document may exist.

Document 310: Memorandum From the Assistant Director for Policy Coordination, Central Intelligence Agency (Wisner) to Members of His Staff

Washington, June 1, 1949.

Source: Central Intelligence Agency Historical Files, HS/CSG-342, Job 83-00036, Box 2, Folder 11. Secret. Addressed to “Messrs. Offie, Frank [and] Lindsay.” There is no typed or written signature on the memorandum but the level of the conversation and the context of the file in which the source text was found point to Wisner as the drafter.

Document 311: Memorandum From Robert P. Joyce of the Policy Planning Staff to the Counselor of the Department of State (Kennan)

Washington, September 7, 1949.

[Source: Central Intelligence Agency Historical Files, HS/CSG-761, Job 83-00036, Box 5, Folder 8. Top Secret. 2 pages of source text not declassified.]

Document 312: Memorandum From Secretary of Defense Johnson to Director of Central Intelligence Hillenkoetter

Washington, October 6, 1949.

Source: Central Intelligence Agency Historical Files, HS/CSG-2051, Job 83-00739R, Box 2, Folder 12. Top Secret.

Document 313: Letter From Secretary of Defense Johnson to Secretary of State Acheson

Washington, October 7, 1949.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 273, Records of the National Security Council, NSC 10/2. Top Secret. Copies were sent to the Secretaries of the Army, Navy, and Air Force, the Joint Chiefs of Staff, the Executive Secretary of the NSC, and the Director of Central Intelligence.

Document 314: Memorandum From the Assistant Director for Policy Coordination, Central Intelligence Agency (Wisner) to Joseph A. Frank of the Office of Policy Coordination

Washington, October 13, 1949.

Source: Central Intelligence Agency Historical Files, HS/CSG-2301, Job 83-00764R, Box 1, Folder 9. Top Secret.

Document 315: Memorandum From Director of Central Intelligence Hillenkoetter to Secretary of Defense Johnson

Washington, October 18, 1949.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 273, Records of the National Security Council, NSC 10/2. Top Secret. The source text indicates that a copy was sent to the Executive Secretary of the NSC.

Document 316: Memorandum From the Assistant Director for Policy Coordination, Central Intelligence Agency (Wisner) to Mr. Miller of His Staff

Washington, June 21, 1950.

Source: Central Intelligence Agency Historical Files, HS/CSG-2066, Job 83-00739R, Box 2, Folder 12. Secret.

IntroductionIntroduction

The documentation on this subject is fragmentary and episodic, and it
appears that many early records no longer exist. Very little policy
documentation on projects and operations under psychological and
political warfare programs has been found, and those documents that have
been retrieved tend to be random and scattered in their subject matter.
In addition to the paucity of early documents on this subject, it is
also possible that in many instances the written record was deliberately
kept to a minimum. Making allowance for major gaps, the main outlines of
the formative period can be traced, however, and the documentation that
has survived gives a sense of the motives and concerns of the major
participants in the debate over psychological and political warfare and
how it should be handled within the government.

When the functions of OSS were divided
after its dissolution by Executive Order 9621, the War Department
inherited the capabilities for “special operations” which had been
employed in organizing and assisting resistance movements in Europe in
World War II, and for “morale operations” or “black propaganda.” General
Magruder and his War Department superiors were concerned to maintain
intact the OSS capability in secret
intelligence until some decision could be made at the national level
about a successor organization. But there was no apparent concern to
preserve “s.o.” or “m.o.” capabilities and they were quickly liquidated;
in fact, the process was well underway before the OSS was dissolved. In the formative period
of the national intelligence structure, there was considerable
discussion and debate about clandestine intelligence gathering but no
attention seems to have been paid to covert operations.

Indeed, in September 1947 the General Counsel of CIA wrote an opinion in
which he concluded that it had not been the intent of Congress that such
activities should be conducted by the Central Intelligence Agency and
that they could not be undertaken without first obtaining Congressional
authorization and funding. (Document 241) From
this memorandum, it appears that there was some discussion at the time
about cooperation with nascent resistance movements in Western Europe
but even this, Counsel concluded, would require Congressional
authorization.

In the meantime, the subject of covert political action was coming onto
the policy agenda through another route, the growing interest in
“psychological warfare.” Since 1946, a subcommittee of the
State-War-Navy Coordinating Committee (SWNCC), later designated the State-Army-Navy-Air
Coordinating Committee (SANACC), had
been charged with developing a
plan for wartime psychological warfare and for making whatever peacetime
preparations were required to move quickly to a wartime footing in this
field. By October 1947 such a plan had been prepared, but it was noted
at the time that it related solely to planning for wartime or
threat-of-war situations and that SWNCC had not been authorized to look into peacetime
psychological warfare.

At this point, however, concerns about the situation in Western Europe
began to focus attention on peacetime “psychological operations” in
support of U.S. foreign policy. SANACC was a forum for the expression of those concerns.
Director of Central Intelligence Admiral Hillenkoetter was one of those
who urged that the subject be put on the agenda, and there were similar
urgings from Forrestal, Souers,
Harriman, and others. By the
latter part of 1947 an effort was made to distinguish between the
variety of subjects that had been bundled together under the rubric of
“psychological warfare”: overt and covert propaganda, and domestic and
international information programs.

In early November, the heads of the military services concluded at a War
Council meeting that peacetime psychological warfare should be
undertaken only in the foreign field (i.e., no domestic program) and
that it was a Department of State responsibility. Moreover, the War
Council concluded that there should be a “black” (covert) as well as a
“white” (overt) program and that the “black” program should also be run
by the Department of State, albeit with the advice and consultation of
the Director of Central Intelligence and a military representative. On
November 7, a SANACC subcommittee
made approximately the same proposal. (Document
249)

At its second meeting on November 14, 1947, the National Security Council
considered the SANACC paper.
Secretary of State Marshall distanced himself from it, expressing
concern at the use of the term “warfare” and asking whether the proposed
program would conflict with his policy of only telling the truth on the
Voice of America. The three service secretaries also backed off, stating
that they did not believe the military should be involved in such
activities. (Document 250)

The Council remanded the paper to the NSC
staff for revision, thereby separating overt foreign information
activities from “psychological warfare” and covert action. One “stream”
became NSC 4 and NSC 43, establishing Department of State responsibility for
foreign information programs, and the other “stream” became NSC 4-A (Document
253) and, somewhat later, NSC
10/2, dealing with covert action.

Also at this point began a jurisdictional battle over how much “outside”
supervision and control there would be over covert actions. As the
NSC staff worked to develop an
acceptable proposal, it became clear that the responsibility for these
operations would be lodged in the Central Intelligence Agency but that
some sort of monitoring mechanism would be created. The dividing lines were already being
drawn. As early as December 2, Deputy Director of Central Intelligence
Brigadier General Edwin
Wright wrote to the CIA representative on the NSC staff:

“All concerned must appreciate that this Agency is and must be the sole
agency to conduct organized foreign clandestine operations. To sabotage
this principle can only lead to chaos in this type of operation.

“Whatever Agency is chosen to indicate the type of Black operations to be
conducted, or the material and/or propaganda to be disseminated—the
Central Intelligence Agency must alone be the Agency to determine how
the material is disseminated. The pattern of our foreign operations will
not permit supervision of these activities by other agencies if it is to
be maintained as an efficient and secure operation and the conduct of
Black psychological operations must fit into the over-all operational
pattern.” (Document 251)

Two weeks later, George F. Kennan,
Director of the Department of State's Policy Planning Staff, was
advising the Acting Secretary, in anticipation of an NSC meeting on the issue, “that whereas it
is desirable to establish the authority for the proposed operations, the
Council should be frankly informed that before giving our consent to any
such activities we would wish to consider most carefully the need
therefor. Furthermore, we would want to examine the situation in all its
aspects in case of any suggested operation, and to judge each case
strictly on its merits.” (Document 256)

At its meeting on December 17, the NSC
approved a directive (NSC 4-A) which
“directs the Director of Central Intelligence to initiate and conduct,
within the limit of available funds, covert psychological operations
designed to counteract Soviet and Soviet-inspired activities which
constitute a threat to world peace and security or are designed to
discredit and defeat the United States in its endeavors to promote world
peace and security.” The directive also charged the Director of Central
Intelligence with responsibility for “ensuring that such psychological
operations are consistent with U.S. foreign policy and overt foreign
information activities.” (Document 257)

NSC 4-A did not settle the issue. By
March, Secretary of Defense Forrestal was seeking an NSC review of how the NSC 4
series was being applied in practice. Moreover, as a result of a SANACC subcommittee report on wartime
psychological warfare, the idea of creating a separate organization for
both peacetime and wartime psychological operations, perhaps directly
under the NSC, was being raised. The
subject was once more docketed on the agenda of the NSC which, at its meeting on April 2, 1948,
asked the NSC consultants to review
“certain aspects” of the NSC 4 series.
(Document 266) The consultants did so
later that month; their report admonished the Director of Central
Intelligence to work with “anti-Communist democratic forces in foreign
countries, particularly those
which are politically left of center” and to move faster in the
psychological operations area. (Document
267)

In the meantime, the Department of State was becoming increasingly
unhappy about CIA's performance under NSC 4-A. The Policy Planning Staff had been considering
various aspects of “political warfare,” and on May 3, 1948, approved a
paper entitled “The Inauguration of Organized Political Warfare,” which
proposed a program of support for “liberation committees,” “underground
activities behind the Iron Curtain,” and “support of indigenous
anti-Communist elements in threatened countries of the Free World.”
Organizationally, the paper proposed the establishment of a directorate
of political warfare operations within the NSC secretariat, under a director appointed by and
responsible to the Secretary of State. The director would be assisted by
a staff drawn from the State and Defense Departments (at least
“initially”) and would “have complete authority over covert political
warfare operations conducted by this Government.” The proposal did not
mention the Central Intelligence Agency except to say that the covert
operations it was conducting should be brought under the authority of
the proposed directorate. (Document 269)

The battle touched off by the Policy Planning Staff proposal is difficult
to follow in its details and ramifications because of gaps in the
documentation, but the main outline of the conflict is clearly visible.
The NSC staff seems to have adopted the
substance of the proposal, judging by the draft reports that were being
prepared and debated at this time, although it made some amendments in
the details, such as renaming the Director of Political Warfare the
“Director of Special Studies” and placing the office directly under the
NSC. Commenting on the proposal,
George Kennan wrote to Secretary
Marshall and Under Secretary Lovett on May 19:

“Organizationally, the ideal solution would be to place the Director of
Special Studies, for cover and intelligence reasons, under the Director
of CIA. S/P did not recommend this solution because, at the present
time, the CIA set-up in respect both to personalities and organization
is not favorable to such a development and it is not likely that there
will be any material change in this situation in the near future. We
therefore reluctantly decided to let the CIA sleeping dog lie and
recommend a separate organization which might at a later date be
incorporated in CIA.” (Document 276)

Allen Dulles was a new and
important participant in the “political warfare” debate that flared up
again in the spring of 1948. Dulles was chairman of the survey group appointed by the
NSC in February to evaluate the
effectiveness of the CIA. In May 1948, the survey group was more than 7
months from submitting a report but, aware of the controversy that had
broken out, Dulles and his
colleagues prepared a brief report on “Relations between Secret
Operations and Secret Intelligence.” Dulles introduced a new element
by proposing that the conduct of secret operations and the collection of
secret intelligence should be run by single director who might either be
under the Director of Central Intelligence or directly under the NSC. The argument perhaps was weighted
slightly in favor of the latter alternative by Dulles' statement that he and his
colleagues had independently decided to consider in their final report
whether secret intelligence should continue to be a CIA responsibility.
(Document 275)

It was this proposal that led Kennan to recommend to Marshall and Lovett that they should meet with
Secretary of Defense Forrestal
and present a joint invitation to Dulles to replace Hillenkoetter as Director of Central
Intelligence, or become director of secret operations/secret
intelligence under Hillenkoetter, or become director of special studies
under the NSC. (Document 276)

At an inconclusive NSC meeting on May 20,
NSC 10—the designation for the
Director of Special Studies proposal—was deferred for action at the next
meeting. (Document 277) Kennan prodded Lovett again. He apparently had been in
touch with Dulles and knew he
would be in Washington in late May. He had also been in touch with
Forrestal or his staff and
said that Forrestal was prepared
to come to Lovett's office to
discuss NSC 10. Kennan's tone in his memorandum to
Lovett was pessimistic: “If
the Executive Branch does not act soon to firm up its ideas as to what
should be done along these lines,” Kennan wrote, “the possibility of getting secret funds
out of Congress for covert operations will be lost. If this is not done
now, it will mean that this Government has given up hope of conducting
effective political warfare activities for the duration of this
administration.” (Document 279) Kennan also told the Under Secretary
that if NSC 10 were not adopted, he
would have to recommend abrogation of NSC 4-A, “which is not working out well.”

Forrestal, Lovett, and Dulles met late in May (Document
280) and agreed on a proposal with the following elements:

1) CIA was the proper place for secret operations as well as secret
intelligence.

2) Both subjects should be handled by a new “Special Services Unit”
within CIA.

3) The unit would have a “considerable measure of autonomy within CIA”
and its director could appeal to the NSC
in case of differences with the Director of Central Intelligence.

4) The director of the special services unit would be recruited from
outside CIA and approved by the NSC.

5) The director of the special services unit would have access to and
receive policy guidance from the Departments of State and Defense.

6) The system described above would be a “provisional arrangement subject
to review at a later date.”

The proposal was circulated to NSC
members and debated at length at the Council's meeting on June 3, 1948.
The discussion was not conclusive but the participants strongly
emphasized the importance of political guidance for covert operations.
There was also fairly widespread (although mildly expressed) criticism
of CIA, with some participants also raising doubts about whether CIA had
legal authority to conduct covert operations. After discussing a
proposal for an advisory panel on covert operations, the Council again
remanded the issue to the staff for a new draft proposal. (Document 283)

By this point, both the Department of State and the Central Intelligence
Agency were becoming exasperated by the failure to reach an agreement.
When Souers and the NSC staff proposed
(apparently on the basis of a suggestion by Hillenkoetter) an
arrangement under which the DCI would be
responsible for ensuring that covert activities were consistent with
U.S. foreign policy, and in which there would be an advisory panel of
one State and one Defense member to provide “authoritative policy
guidance” and assist the DCI in the
preparation of all plans, Kennan
wrote to Lovett “that the
arrangements which it envisages might easily operate to cause
embarrassment to this government.” He continued:

“It is our view that these things, if they are to be done at all, must be
done under the intimate direction and control of this Department. If
this cannot be arranged (and I understand the difficulties which stand
in the way), I think it would be better to withdraw this paper entirely
and to give up at this time the idea of attempting to conduct political
warfare.” (Document 286)

This proposal was modified a few days later by another draft, which has
not been found, but, from references to it in other documents,
apparently emphasized the autonomy of the Director of Special Studies
within CIA. Reacting to it, Hillenkoetter wrote to the Assistant
Executive Secretary of the NSC:

“I should like to suggest that, since State evidently will not go along
with CIA operating this political warfare thing in any sane or sound
manner, we go back to the original concept that State proposed. Let
State run it and let it have no connection at all with us. It seems to
me that this is the only thing that will satisfy State in any way and
rather than try to keep a makeshift in running order, subject to
countless restrictions which can only lead to continued bickering and
argument, I think maybe the best idea is to go back and make the OSP
work for State alone.” (Document 287)

By mid-June, when the draft had become NSC 10/1 (apparently close to what Hillenkoetter had
complained about in the preceding letter), Kennan was recommending to Lovett and Marshall that despite its serious defects
they approve the draft, which was “probably the best arrangement we can
get at this time.” (Document 289)

Finally, on June 17, 1948, the NSC
approved NSC 10/2, which:

1) established an Office of Special Projects in CIA to conduct covert
operations;

2) specified that it should be headed by “A highly qualified person”
nominated by the Secretary of State and acceptable to the Director of
Central Intelligence;

3) provided that the head of the Office of Special Projects should report
directly to the Director of Central Intelligence, but “To the maximum
degree consistent with efficiency” the office would operate
independently of other components of the Agency;

4) made the DCI responsible for ensuring,
through designated representatives of the Secretaries of State and
Defense, that covert operations were consistent with U.S. foreign and
military policies; and

5) mandated that disagreements be referred to the NSC. (Document 292)

Despite the approval of NSC 10/2, the
controversy about covert operations continued. The separation of CIA's
secret intelligence and secret operations functions was again brought
forward as an issue by the Dulles
Report. Although a head of covert operations was proposed by the
Department of State and accepted by the DCI, and although the arrangements functioned for a time as
originally designed, the system established under NSC 10/2 was distasteful to the Central
Intelligence Agency. Eventually, the concept of a head of secret
operations who had a special relationship with the NSC, special responsibilities and ties to
the Departments of State and Defense, and a quasi-autonomous status
within CIA was discarded, and the secret operations and secret
intelligence functions were merged under a single head. These
developments, however, occurred after 1950.

241. Memorandum From the General Counsel of the Central Intelligence Agency (Houston) to Director of Central Intelligence Hillenkoetter241. Memorandum From the General Counsel of the Central Intelligence
Agency (Houston) to
Director of Central Intelligence HillenkoetterSource

Washington, September 25,
1947.

SUBJECT

CIA Authority to Perform Propaganda and Commando Type
Functions

1. A review of the National Security Act reveals two provisions which
might be construed as authority for CIA to engage in black propaganda or
the type of activity known during the war as S.O., which included ranger
and commando raids, behind-the-lines sabotage, and support of guerrilla
warfare. Section 102 (d) (4) provides that it shall be the duty of the
Agency to perform for the benefit of existing intelligence agencies such
additional services of common concern as the National Security Council
determines can be more efficiently accomplished centrally. Section 102
(d) (5) provides that the Agency shall perform such other functions and
duties related to intelligence affecting the national security as the
NSC may direct. Taken out of context
and without knowledge of its history, these Sections could bear almost
unlimited interpretation, provided the service performed could be shown
to be of benefit to an intelligence agency or related to national
intelligence.

2. Thus, black propaganda, primarily designed for subversion, confusion,
and political effect, can be shown incidentally to benefit positive
intelligence as a means of checking reliability of informants,
effectiveness of penetration, and so forth. Even certain forms of S.O.
work could be held to benefit intelligence by establishment of W/T teams
in accessible areas and by opening penetration points in confusion
following sabotage or riot. In our opinion, however, either activity
would be an unwarranted extension of the functions authorized in
Sections 102 (d) (4) and (5). This is based on our understanding of the
intent of Congress at the time these provisions were enacted.

3. A review of debates indicates that Congress was primarily interested
in an agency for coordinating intelligence and originally did not
propose any overseas collection activities for CIA. The strong move to
provide specifically for such collection overseas was defeated, and, as
a compromise, Sections 102 (d) (4) and (5) were enacted, which permitted
the National Security Council to determine the extent of the collection
work to be performed by CIA. We do not believe that there was any thought in the minds of
Congress that the Central Intelligence Agency under this authority would
take positive action for subversion and sabotage. A bitter debate at
about the same time on the State Department's Foreign Broadcast Service
tends to confirm our opinion. Further confirmation is found in the brief
and off-the-record hearings on appropriations for CIA.

4. Aside from the discussions of normal departmental expenses for CIA as
a whole, approval was given to the unvouchered funds requested by the
Director of Central Intelligence mainly for the specific purposes of
conducting clandestine intelligence operations outside the United
States. We believe that there was no intent to use either the vouchered
or unvouchered funds for M.O. or S.O. work. Either of these activities
would require establishment of a new branch of office, employment of
considerable personnel, the procurement of huge quantities of all types
of goods and materials, and large sums for expenses of administrative
support and incidentals. We believe this would be an authorized use of
the funds made available to CIA. It is our conclusion, therefore, that
neither M.O. nor S.O. should be undertaken by CIA without previously
informing Congress and obtaining its approval of the functions and the
expenditure of funds for those purposes.

5. There is, however, one function now being properly performed by CIA
which is so closely related to the matters discussed above as to be
mentioned in connection therewith. An important by-product of the
clandestine intelligence function is the acquisition of extensive
information on plans in Western Europe for establishment of resistance
movements in the event of further extension of Communist control. These
plans include training of agents and W/T's, organizing groups, providing
outside contacts, and every other form of resistance. It is on such
groups that M.O. and, particularly, S.O. would depend for most efficient
function.

6. It is felt that this body of information might be the basis for
consideration by the National Security Council, or a sub-committee
thereof, in order to form a basic policy of cooperation with planned or
actual resistance movements and to assign the implementation of such
policy to the proper agency or body. If such implementation were then
assigned to CIA, it would, we feel, still be necessary to go to Congress
for authority and funds.

Lawrence R. Houston1

* Source: Central Intelligence Agency
Historical Files, HS/HC-805, Item 12. Secret. Attached to a brief
transmittal note from Houston
to Hillenkoetter summarizing the contents. See the
Supplement.

1 Printed from a copy that bears this
typed signature.

242. Memorandum From the Secretary of the State-Army-Navy-Air Force Coordinating Committee (Moseley) to the Under Secretary of State (Lovett)242. Memorandum From the Secretary of the State-Army-Navy-Air Force
Coordinating Committee (Moseley) to the Under Secretary of State (Lovett)Source

Washington, October 15,
1947.

SUBJECT

Proposal for a National Psychological Warfare Organization

In accordance with procedure whereby the more important papers under
consideration by the State-Army-Navy-Air Force Coordinating Committee
(SANACC)1 are
brought to your and the Secretary's attention, it is believed that you
will be interested in SWNCC 304/62 which proposes the establishment in time of war
or threat of war of a National Psychological Warfare Organization. This
paper is a report of the SANACC
Subcommittee on Special Studies and Evaluations which consists of full
time representatives of State, CIG and
the Armed Services, who have been directed to study and propose plans
for the conduct of psychological warfare in time of war or threat of
war. (Mr. Ralph Block, OIE, is Chairman
of this Subcommittee.)

This paper proposes for approval (Tab A)3 the plans
for a Psychological Warfare Organization which in time of war or threat
of war would be either under the National Security Council or the
reconstituted State-Army-Navy-Air Force Coordinating Committee. This
organization would be empowered to provide unified direction and
authoritative coordination of the national psychological warfare effort
and activities, and operations related thereto. It would be headed by a
director, appointed by the President; the director also to be chairman
of a policy planning board which would include representation from the
JCS, CIG and the Armed Services. The paper further recommends
that the Organization should be provided with the necessary allocations
of manpower, funds, facilities, etc.

The paper concludes (Tab B) that a psychological warfare specialist
category should be established and training instituted now in the Army,
Navy and Air Force and that rosters of available people for this type of
work should also be made up by the State Department, CIG and the Armed
Services.

The paper also brings out the facts that:

a. The SANACC Subcommittee is the only
peacetime organization of the Government charged with the preparation of
policies, plans and studies for employment of psychological warfare in
time of war.

b. The Department of State and the Military Establishment have no funds
appropriated for psychological warfare purposes.

c. No psychological warfare specialist reserves exist within the Military
Establishment or the Department of State.

d. Adequate training of personnel for psychological warfare would require
a training school, recruitment policies and measures, and an extensive
training period.

It should be pointed out that the terms of reference of the SANACC Subcommittee authorize it to
prepare policies and plans for employment only in time of war or threat
of war, and that it is not authorized to conduct psychological warfare
in peacetime. Thus, the plans proposed in the paper relate only to a
wartime agency except for the proposals that there be created now a
psychological warfare category by the Armed Services and that rosters of
available personnel be prepared.

* Source: National Archives and Records
Administration, RG 353, Records of Interdepartmental and
Intradepartmental Committees—State Department, Records of the
State-War-Navy Coordinating Committee, Box 55, File 304, 381,
Psychological Warfare Pt. 1. Secret.

1 Earlier known as the State-War-Navy Coordinating
Committee (SWNCC).

2 Dated
September 30. (National Archives and Records Administration, RG 353,
Records of Interdepartmental and Intradepartmental Committees—State
Department, Records of the State-War-Navy Coordinating Committee,
File 304, 381, Psychological Warfare Pt. 1) See the
Supplement.

3 Although the source text identifies two enclosures, SENC 304/1 and
SWNCC 304/6, it does not
specify which is at which Tab A. SWNCC 304/1, which was forwarded to the National
Intelligence Authority for concurrence on December 12, 1946, has not
been found. (Memorandum by Earman; Central Intelligence Agency Historical
Files, HS/HC-243, Job 84-00473R, Box 3, Folder 1)

243. Memorandum by the Army Member of the State-Army-Navy-Air Force Coordinating Committee (Pixtou)243. Memorandum by the Army Member of the State-Army-Navy-Air Force
Coordinating Committee (Pixtou)Source

Washington, undated.

SANACC 304/8

PSYCHOLOGICAL WARFARE

1. With the question of the functioning of the National Security Council
still undetermined and with the SANACC now being reconstituted, I consider it premature and
unnecessary at this time to determine the agency to whom the proposed
psychological warfare agency shall be accountable. I recommend,
therefore, that this remain a problem for future determination in the light of subsequent
developments in the organization and operation of the National Security
Council and the SANACC. Subject to
this reservation I approve SANACC
304/6.1

2. I note that the terms of reference of the Subcommittee limit its
considerations to those within the time frame of war or threat of war as
determined by the President. I am of the opinion that the changing tenor
of events of the past few months has raised for serious consideration
the problem of determining the desirability or necessity of engaging in
deliberate coordinated psychological effort on a national scale at the
present time. I recommend, therefore, that the Subcommittee be directed
to consider and make recommendations as a matter of urgency, on the
problem “Should the U.S. at the present time utilize coordinated
psychological measures in furtherance of the attainment of its national
objectives? If so, what organization is required and what should be its
terms of reference?”

* Source:
National Archives and Records Administration, RG 353, Records of
Interdepartmental and Intradepartmental Committees—State Department,
Records of the State-War-Navy Coordinating Committee, Box 55, File
304, 381, Psychological Warfare Pt. 1. Secret. Transmitted under an
October 20 transmittal note from the committee secretariat.

1 See footnote 2, Document 242.

244. Memorandum From Director of Central Intelligence Hillenkoetter to the State-Army-Navy-Air Force Coordinating Committee244. Memorandum From Director of Central Intelligence Hillenkoetter to the
State-Army-Navy-Air Force Coordinating
CommitteeSource

Washington, October 22,
1947.

SUBJECT

Psychological Warfare

REFERENCE

SWNCC 304/6 dated 30 September 19471

The Central Intelligence Agency approves SWNCC 304/6 dated 30 September 1947 subject to the
following provisions:

1. In view of the fact that the functioning of the National Security
Council is still undetermined, and the fact that SWNCC is now being reconstituted, I
recommend that the decision of determining the agency to whom the
Psychological Warfare Agency shall be accountable be deferred at this
time. When the question does arise, however, I recommend that study and
thought be given to assigning accountability of the Psychological
Warfare Agency to the Joint Chiefs of Staff.

2. The paper envisages guidance for a Psychological Warfare Agency which
will be established in time of war or threat of war as determined by the
President. I am of the opinion that conditions now indicate that
psychological warfare measures be instituted now as a matter of urgency.
I, therefore, recommend that the Ad Hoc Subcommittee undertake a study
and submit recommendations on the program “Should the U.S. at the
present utilize psychological warfare measures in furtherance of the
attainment of its National objectives.”

RH Hillenkoetter
Rear Admiral, USN

* Source: National Archives and Records
Administration, RG 353, Records of Interdepartmental and
Intradepartmental Committees—State Department, Records of the
State-War-Navy Coordinating Committee, Box 55, File 304, 381,
Psychological Warfare Pt. 1. Secret.

1 See footnote 2, Document
242.

245. Memorandum From the Executive Secretary of the National Security Council (Souers) to Secretary of Defense Forrestal245. Memorandum From the Executive Secretary of the National Security
Council (Souers)
to Secretary of Defense ForrestalSource

Washington, October 24,
1947.

The attached memorandum1
from Secretary Harriman is a very
persuasive and accurate appraisal of the need for psychological warfare
operations to counter Soviet-inspired Communist propaganda, particularly
in France and Italy.

Secretary Harriman, however,
leaves the question of appropriate organization somewhat indefinite. It
seems to me that this problem could be solved fairly simply along the
following lines:

(a) Continue and support the strengthening of the overt activities of the
Information Division of the Department of State.

(b) Assign the conduct of covert activities to the Central Intelligence
Agency, since it already has contacts and communications with
appropriate organizations and agents in foreign countries.

(c) Establish policies for both of the above activities and coordinate
their operations by means of a full-time interdepartmental board under
the chairmanship and supervision of the Department of State, with
representatives from the National Military Establishment and CIA.

It is my understanding that sufficient unvouchered funds to initiate
these activities might be obtained from CIA or the Military
Establishment. Also, I understand the Department of State already has a
qualified psychological warfare expert serving as chairman of a
subcommittee of SANACC which deals
with this subject.

SANACC, incidentally, has formed a
special group to prepare a recommendation for the President that the
United States initiate this type of operation, which I understand will
be transmitted through the National Security Council.

Sidney W. Souers2

* Source: National Archives and Records
Administration, RG 353, Records of Interdepartmental and
Intradepartmental Committees—State Department, Records of the
State-War-Navy Coordinating Committee, Box 55, File 304, 381,
Psychological Warfare Pt. 1. Secret.

1 Not found.

2 Printed from a
copy that indicates Souers signed the original.

246. Memorandum From the Assistant Executive Secretary (Lay) to the Executive Secretary of the National Security Council (Souers)246. Memorandum From the Assistant Executive Secretary (Lay) to the Executive
Secretary of the National Security Council (Souers)Source

Washington, November 3,
1947.

SUBJECT

Psychological Warfare

REFERENCE

SANACC 304/101

The organization proposed in SANACC
304/10 does not appear to offer a practical solution for the following
reasons:

a. It is proposed to establish it under either the National Security
Council or the Committee of Two. The Council appears inappropriate since
it is only advisory to the President and was not legally designed to
supervise interdepartmental activities, with the sole statutory
exception of CIA. The Committee of Two2 is an
informal body like its predecessor, the Committee of Three,3 which never
to my knowledge undertook to supervise interdepartmental organizations.
SANACC, on the other hand,
already supervises two interdepartmental organizations (Military
Information Control and the Security Advisory Board) which are similar
in character to that required for the coordination of foreign
information and psychological warfare activities.

b. SANACC 304/10 proposes a full-time
working group headed by a specially appointed director, with separate
funds and personnel. This would only create another governmental agency.
Its director would be usurping the functions of the head of the State
Department's Information Service. Finally, a request for separate funds
for the proposed organization would jeopardize the security of
psychological warfare operations.

A much less complicated and more effective organization could easily be
built along the following lines: Establish, under SANACC, a board whose functions would be
to formulate coordinated policies and plans for the conduct of foreign
information and psychological warfare activities and, upon their
approval by SANACC, to coordinate the
implementation of such policies and plans. This board would be composed
of officials in the various departments and agencies who are responsible
for the conduct of foreign information and psychological warfare
activities. The Assistant Secretary of State for Public Affairs should
be chairman. The other members should consist of the official in CIA
charged with covert activities, and any officials in other Government
departments who are responsible for similar activities. The members of
the board should jointly furnish the funds and the personnel required to
form a full time staff for the board.

The above plan would have the following benefits and advantages:

a. An established interdepartmental coordinating body, SANACC, would furnish policy direction
which incorporated the views of the State Department and the Departments
of the National Military Establishment.

b. A separate agency, with a new director, separate budget, and
additional personnel, would not be required.

c. The formulation of policies and plans and the coordination of their
implementation would be in the hands of the officials responsible for
the actual conduct of foreign information and psychological warfare
activities.

James S. Lay, Jr.4

* Source: National Archives and Records
Administration, RG 273, Records of the National Security Council,
NSC 10/2. Top Secret.

1 Dated November 3. (Ibid., RG 353, Records of
Interdepartmental and Intradepartmental Committees—State
Department, Records of the State-War-Navy Coordinating
Committee, Box 55, File 304, 381, Psychological Warfare Pt. 1)
See the Supplement.

2 The
Secretary of State and the Secretary of Defense.

3 The Secretaries of State, War, and Navy, who met
informally under this rubric from 1944 to 1947.

4 Printed from a copy that bears this typed
signature.

247. Memorandum From the Deputy Director (Wright) to Director of Central Intelligence Hillenkoetter247. Memorandum From the Deputy Director (Wright) to Director of Central
Intelligence HillenkoetterSource

Washington, November 4,
1947.

SUBJECT

Psychological Warfare

1. You are aware that I have been keeping in close touch with the subject
of Psychological Warfare and the various studies being conducted in
connection therewith. It now appears that the latest SANACC conclusions will be aired today
in a full committee meeting. You (or your Deputy) have been invited to
attend and I urgently recommend that you (or your Deputy) be fully
briefed as to the desires of the NSC
prior to this meeting.

2. The subject of Psychological Warfare has been an active issue with
SWNCC since 6 June 1946 (see
SWNCC 304) and has been under
urgent consideration since the formation of SANACC. While techniques and organization of a
Psychological Warfare Agency have been argued pro and con, all parties
are agreed on the following:

a. The present world situation requires the U.S. immediately to develop
and utilize strong and concerted measures designed to produce
psychological situations and effects favorable to the attainment of U.S.
national objectives.

b. The organization to carry out the proposed project should be operated
within the framework of the National Security Council.

3. At one period of the SWNCC (later
SANACC) studies there was
proposed an organization which, with minor changes, could efficiently
carry out the national program envisaged. (See paragraph 31 of SSE 1, 1
August 1947—SWNC Subcommittee Special Studies and Evaluations.) After
further studies were conducted, however, it has become apparent to me
that thought is being focused on another inter-departmental coordinating
committee completely unable to do an efficient job in this important
field. The SANACC ad hoc Committee on
Psychological Warfare has stated their latest proposal under date of 3
November in SANACC 304/10.1
This proposal would only provide, in my estimation, the following:

a. An inter-departmental committee to sit over another inter-departmental
committee with a “Director” in between.

b. The nucleus of another national intelligence organization.

4. As you know, I have recently discussed these matters with General
Donovan and other individuals with wartime experience in Psychological
Warfare organization and technique. I urgently recommend that, if you
and the NSC concur, we present to SANACC our views on this matter as
follows:

a. The immediate development of an organization, within the framework of
the NSC, to implement both white and
black psychological warfare designed to the attainment of U.S. national
objectives.

b. The proposed organization to be under the control and direction of a
“Director” appointed by the President from military or civil life. (See
Annex I, herewith.)

c. “The Director” to be the chairman of a Planning and Policy board
composed of representatives of the Departments of State, Army, Navy,
Air, the Central Intelligence Agency, and such other government agencies
whose participation may be necessary or desirable.

d. The Organization be so established as to be easily merged into the
Military Establishment in the event of war or threat of war.

e. The necessary authority, guidance, information, and resources of
manpower, funds, facilities, and materials be provided to enable the
organization its efficient functioning in the achievement of national
aims.

f. The Organization to be authorized to merge into a national effort all
activities and operations related to psychological warfare using
established agencies where practicable.

g. The Organization to be fully responsible for the planning,
development, and coordination of all phases of the national program of
radio, press, publications, and
related propaganda activities involving the dissemination of information
in the national interests.

E. K. Wright2

Brigadier General, USA

Annex I

SUBJECT

Psychological Warfare

Reference is made to paragraph 4. b., of basic Memorandum, herewith.

1. You will remember that General Donovan in my recent discussion with him, was positive
in his opinion that all Psychological Warfare be conducted by the
Central Intelligence Agency. He agreed that it would be desirable if it
could be done under proper cover. His recommendation in this regard was
as follows:

a. The “Director” mentioned in my basic memorandum should actually be
appointed by the President as a Special Assistant to the Secretary of
Defense—with the specific understanding that he was actually under the
operational control of the Director of Central Intelligence.

b. That the knowledge of this operational control be known only to the
fewest possible individuals.

2. General Donovan of course is a
firm believer, as are most of those people having operational experience
in this field, in the principle that the greatest propaganda success
will be found in the field of Black operations. He, therefore, feels the
organization must be so operated as to foster the use of Black methods.
Since such methods are solely within the jurisdiction of CIA, General
Donovan feels the Director of
Central Intelligence should be firmly in control of the entire
operation, both White and Black.

3. I submit this separate paper for your consideration since I know you
are fully cognizant of the magnitude of the whole project. Personally I
would like to see the proposed “Director” appointed as the Special
Assistant to the Secretary of Defense with the Director of Central
Intelligence and an Assistant
Secretary of State designated as Advisory Consultants.

E. K. Wright3
Brigadier General, USA

* Source: Central Intelligence Agency
Historical Files, HS/HC-807, Item 4. Secret.

1 See Document 246.

2 Printed from a copy that bears this typed
signature.

3 Printed from a copy that bears this
typed signature.

248. Memorandum From the Deputy Director (Wright) to Director of Central Intelligence Hillenkoetter248. Memorandum From the Deputy Director (Wright) to Director of Central
Intelligence HillenkoetterSource

Washington, November 4,
1947.

The results of the War Council1 Meeting held
this date generally took the following line in connection with an
organization to carry out psychological warfare measures. The position
of the Security Council was that any propaganda measures in time of
peace were a primary function of the State Department and that in any
case should not be handled by the Security Council as such since it is
in effect an advisory group to the President.

It was decided that the project for carrying out psychological warfare
will be restricted solely to the foreign field and would be under the
direct supervision of an Assistant Secretary of State. The Assistant
Secretary of State to carry out these functions to be appointed from
among individuals to be recommended in the next two or three days by the
members of the War Council.

It was decided that insofar as public knowledge was concerned that this
new organizational set up would deal only in what is known as White
propaganda. However, it was agreed that the fullest advantage of any
propaganda measures would have to be obtained in the field of Black
propaganda. That, therefore, the Assistant Secretary of State to handle
this project would have as Advisory Consultants, the Director of Central Intelligence and a
military representative to be selected by the War Council.

The Security Council is cognizant of the fact that they will have to
issue a directive to the Director of Central Intelligence to provide him
the legal status for assisting the State Department in carrying out our
phase of operations in this field.

New subject:

At the SANACC conference this
afternoon the Committee was confused by a statement made by Mr.
Whitney, Assistant Secretary
of Air, that the War Council intended to appoint a Director to carry out
these operations under the Assistant Secretary of State mentioned above.
This was not the intent nor the expression of the War Council. Their
discussions with regard to the appointment of an individual to carry out
the project had to do with the appointment of a new Assistant Secretary
of State.

I have already submitted to Admiral Souers the name of David K.E. Bruce,
currently an Assistant Secretary of Commerce, and have indicated that
tomorrow I will furnish him additional names for consideration.

E. K. Wright2
Brigadier General, USA

* Source: Central Intelligence Agency
Historical Files, HS/HC-807, Item 4. Secret.

1 A group
consisting of the Secretary of Defense, the three service
secretaries, and the three service chiefs, established by the
National Security Act of 1947 to advise the Secretary of Defense on
“broad policy pertaining to the armed forces.”

2 Printed from a copy that bears this
typed signature.

249. Report by an Ad Hoc Subcommittee of the State-Army-Navy-Air Force Coordinating Committee249. Report by an Ad Hoc Subcommittee of the State-Army-Navy-Air Force
Coordinating CommitteeSource

Washington, November 7,
1947.

SANACC 304/11

PSYCHOLOGICAL WARFARE

The Problem

1. To determine whether at the present time the U.S. should utilize
coordinated psychological measures in furtherance of the attainment of
its national objectives; if so, what organization is required and what
should be its terms of reference.

Facts Bearing on the Problem and Discussion

2. a. The USSR is conducting an intensive propaganda campaign directed
primarily against the U.S. and is employing coordinated psychological,
political and economic measures designed to undermine all non-Communist
elements in foreign countries which are capable of opposing Soviet
aspirations.

b. The ultimate objective of this campaign is not merely to undermine the
prestige of the U.S. and the effectiveness of its national policy but to
weaken and divide foreign opinion to a point where effective opposition
to Soviet aspirations is no longer attainable by political, economic or
military means.

c. In conducting this campaign, the USSR is utilizing all such meas-ures
available to it through satellite regimes, Communist parties, and
organizations susceptible to Communist influence.

d. The U.S. is not now employing coordinated psychological meas-ures to
counter this propaganda campaign or to further the attainment of its
national objectives.

e. The extension of economic aid to certain foreign countries,
particularly in Europe, is one of the principal means by which the U.S.
has undertaken to defend its
vital interests. The extent of this aid and other U.S. contributions to
world peace is unknown to large segments of the world's population.
Inadequate employment of psychological measures is impairing the
effectiveness of these undertakings.

f. None of the existing departments or agencies of the U.S. Government is
now charged with responsibility for utilizing coordinated psychological
measures in furtherance of the attainment of U.S. national
objectives.

g. Taking into account the foregoing considerations the ad hoc Committee
has reached the following Conclusions:

Conclusions

3. The present world situation requires the U.S. immediately to develop
and utilize coordinated measures designed to influence attitudes in
foreign countries in a direction favorable to the attainment of U.S.
objectives and to counteract effects of anti-American propaganda.

4. It is considered that the initial steps to implement paragraph 3 above
should be designed to provide closer coordination of policies, more
effective integration of existing facilities, and intensification of
psychological measures.

5. a. The Secretary of State should be charged with responsibility for
the general direction and coordination of psychological measures
designed to influence attitudes in foreign countries in a direction
favorable to the attainment of U.S. objectives and to counteract effects
of anti-American propaganda. It is assumed that this responsibility will
be delegated to the Assistant Secretary of State for Public Affairs,
hereinafter referred to as the Assistant Secretary. The Assistant
Secretary should be assisted by an informal group composed initially of
representatives of the Army, Navy and Air Force Departments, and the
Central Intelligence Agency, and subsequently of other departments or
agencies at his discretion.

b. All participating departments and agencies should be directed to
insure the most effective utilization of all their appropriate
facilities, and to perform such additional functions as may be
necessary, for the execution of approved policy decisions.

c. The Assistant Secretary should be furnished with qualified full-time
personnel from each participating department or agency, headed by a
director appointed by the Secretary of State. The major responsibilities
of the Director should be to implement the policies and plans
established by the Secretary of State by:

(1) Obtaining the most effective utilization and coordination of all
informational facilities and of related psychological activities within
the participating departments and agencies;

(2) Providing effective liaison with other departments and agencies whose
related activities can be profitably employed;

(3) Initiating and developing for the approval of the Assistant Secretary
specific plans and programs designed to influence foreign opinion in a
direction favorable to U.S. interests and to counteract effects of
anti-American propaganda.

6. As a matter of priority, the Assistant Secretary should take steps to
determine the need for such funds as may be necessary to insure
performance of the responsibilities assigned in paragraph 5 above.

7. The Assistant Secretary and Director should be furnished by the
Central Intelligence Agency with appropriate foreign intelligence.

8. The Assistant Secretary should be furnished with classified
information necessary for the fulfillment of his responsibilities by the
participating departments.

9. In carrying out the responsibilities assigned in paragraph 5 above,
the Assistant Secretary and the Director should maintain the closest
possible liaison with the SANACC
Subcommittee on Special Studies and Evaluations, in order that the
latter may adequately fulfill its responsibilities.

10. The utmost secrecy should be observed with regard to the contents of
this report.

Recommendations

11. It is recommended that:

a. SANACC approve the above
Conclusions.

b. After approval by SANACC, the
Conclusions of this paper be forwarded to the National Security Council
for appropriate action.

* Source: National
Archives and Records Administration, RG 353, Records of the
Interdepartmental and Intradepartmental Committees—State Department,
Records of the State-War-Navy Coordinating Committee, Box 55, File
304, 381, Psychological Warfare Pt. 2. Top Secret. Although dated
November 7, SANACC amended and
approved the report on November 13, and the last 2 pages of the
source text bear the typed notation “Revised 13 November 1947.” The
source text is an enclosure to two memoranda, neither printed.
(Ibid.) The first is a November 13 covering note from the SANACC secretaries explaining the
changes. The latter is another note by the SANACC secretaries, dated November
7, which indicates that the text amended and approved by SANACC was a revised version of the
report originally submitted by the ad hoc committee on November 3
and designated as SANACC 304/10.
(Ibid.) See the Supplement for SANACC 304/10.

250. Memorandum of Discussion at the 2d Meeting of the National Security Council250. Memorandum of Discussion at the 2d Meeting of the National
Security CouncilSource

Washington, November 14,
1947.

[Here follows discussion of agenda items 1-4, control of exports to the
USSR and Eastern Europe, U.S. Maritime Commission, U.S. position with
respect to Italy, and base rights in Greenland, Iceland, and the
Azores.]

5. Psychological Warfare (SANACC 304/11)1

Secretary Marshall requested that the title of this paper be changed to
eliminate the word “warfare.”2

[1 paragraph (2-1/2 lines of source text) not
declassified]

Mr. Lovett and Admiral
Hillenkoetter explained that the intent was only to ensure that all
psychological activities were coordinated with our foreign policy and
our information program. The Secretary of State was therefore given the
responsibility for general coordination of all such activities.

Secretary Royall, speaking also
for Secretary Forrestal and
Secretary Symington, stated that
the Military Establishment did not believe that it should have a part in
those activities. He therefore suggested deletion of the provisions for
an advisory group and a director.

The National Security Council:

Referred SANACC 304/11 to the National
Security Council Staff for revision in the light of the comments at the
meeting.

[Here follows discussion of agenda item 6, review of the world situation
as it relates to the security of the United States.]

* Source: Truman Library,
Papers of Harry S. Truman,
President's Secretary's Files, Subject File. Top Secret.

1 Document 249.

2  Hillenkoetter
told his staff meeting on November 18 “Mr. Marshall does not like
term ‘PW’ and does not seem to favor the idea of psychological
warfare at this time.” (Minutes of Staff Meeting, November 18;
Records of the Central Intelligence Agency, Job 80-01731R, Box 31,
Folder 3)

251. Memorandum From the Deputy Director of Central Intelligence (Wright) to the Chief of the Interagency Coordinating and Planning Staff, Central Intelligence Agency (Childs)251. Memorandum From the Deputy Director of Central Intelligence
(Wright) to
the Chief of the Interagency Coordinating and Planning Staff, Central
Intelligence Agency (Childs)Source

Washington, December 2,
1947.

SUBJECT

NSC Notes on Psychological
Operations

Reference is made to your attached notes on Psychological
Operations.1 That paragraph relating to the placing of a special
panel of Army, Navy, and Air
Force planners within CIA (or elsewhere), to give special attention to
psychological operations to insure very close cooperation abroad—is very
alarming.

All concerned must appreciate that this Agency is and must be the sole
agency to conduct organized foreign clandestine operations. To sabotage
this principle can only lead to chaos in this type of operation.

Whatever Agency is chosen to indicate the type of Black operations to be
conducted, or the material and/or propaganda to be disseminated—the
Central Intelligence Agency must alone be the Agency to determine how
the material is disseminated. The pattern of our foreign operations will
not permit supervision of these activities by other agencies if it is to
be maintained as an efficient and secure operation and the conduct of
Black psychological operations must fit into the over-all operational
pattern.

It is possible that the actual situation is not known or appreciated by
all members of the NSC staff. If you
feel this is so I would be very happy to discuss it with them.

EKW
Brigadier General, USA

* Source: Central
Intelligence Agency Historical Files, HS/HS-74, Item 1. Top
Secret.

1 Not found. The memorandum
appears to refer to discussions at the NSC staff level about the prospective NSC directive on psychological
warfare.

252. Memorandum From the Executive Secretary (Souers) to the Members of the National Security Council252. Memorandum From the Executive Secretary (Souers) to the Members of the National Security CouncilSource

Washington, December 9,
1947.

NSC 4

COORDINATION OF FOREIGN INFORMATION MEASURES

REFERENCES

a. SANACC 304/11

b. NSC Action No. 111

At its second meeting the National Security Council referred SANACC 304/11 to the National Security
Council Staff for revision in the light of the comments at the meeting.
The enclosed report has been prepared pursuant to that directive, after
consultation with representatives of the Departments of State, the Army,
the Navy and the Air Force, and of the Central Intelligence Agency.

It is recommended that the National Security Council approve the enclosed
report and authorize its submission to the President, with the
recommendation that he approve the “Conclusions” contained therein and
direct that they be implemented by all appropriate executive departments
and agencies of the U.S. Government under the coordination of the
Secretary of State.

Sidney W. Souers2

Enclosure3

National Security Council Memorandum

NSC 4

Washington, December 17, 1947.

REPORT BY THE NATIONAL SECURITY COUNCIL ON COORDINATION OF FOREIGN
INFORMATION MEASURES

The Problem

1. To determine what steps are required to strengthen and coordinate all
foreign information measures of the U.S. Government in furtherance of
the attainment of US national objectives.

Analysis

2. The USSR is conducting an intensive propaganda campaign directed
primarily against the US and is employing coordinated psychological,
political and economic measures designed to undermine non-Communist elements in all countries. The
ultimate objective of this campaign is not merely to undermine the
prestige of the US and the effectiveness of its national policy but to
weaken and divide world opinion to a point where effective opposition to
Soviet designs is no longer attainable by political, economic or
military means. In conducting this campaign, the USSR is utilizing all
measures available to it through satellite regimes, Communist parties,
and organizations susceptible to Communist influence.

3. The US is not now employing strong, coordinated information measures
to counter this propaganda campaign or to further the attainment of its
national objectives. The extension of economic aid to certain foreign
countries, particularly in Europe, is one of the principal means by
which the US has undertaken to defend its vital interests. The nature
and intent of this aid and other US contributions to world peace is
unknown to or misunderstood by large segments of the world's population.
Inadequate employment of information measures is impairing the
effectiveness of these undertakings.

4. None of the existing departments or agencies of the US Government is
now charged with responsibility for coordinating foreign information
measures in furtherance of the attainment of US national objectives.
Upon the Department of State devolves the principal responsibility,
under the President, for the formulation and execution of American
foreign policy and the conduct of American foreign relations.

5. Facilities now existing in the Departments of State, the Army, the
Navy and the Air Force in the field of foreign information or which can
be utilized in this field are listed in the Appendix4
hereto.

Conclusions

6. The present world situation requires the immediate strengthening and
coordination of all foreign information measures of the US Government
designed to influence attitudes in foreign countries in a direction
favorable to the attainment of its objectives and to counteract effects
of anti-US propaganda.

7. It is considered that the initial steps to implement paragraph 6 above
should be designed to provide closer coordination of policies, more
effective integration of existing facilities, and intensification of
foreign information measures.

8. a. The Secretary of State should be charged with formulating policies
for and coordinating the implementation of all information meas-ures
designed to influence attitudes in foreign countries in a direction
favorable to the attainment of US objectives and to counteract effects
of anti-US propaganda. It is
assumed that these functions will be exercised by the Assistant
Secretary of State for Public Affairs, hereinafter referred to as the
Assistant Secretary. The Assistant Secretary should consult with an
informal group composed of representatives of other appropriate
departments and agencies.

b. Appropriate departments and agencies should be directed to insure the
most effective coordination and utilization of their appropriate
facilities for the implementation of approved foreign information
policies.

c. The Assistant Secretary should be assisted by a staff including
qualified full-time personnel detailed from each appropriate department
or agency. This staff should assist the Assistant Secretary in
implementing the policies and plans established by the Secretary of
State by:

(1) Obtaining the most effective utilization and coordination of all
federal foreign information facilities;

(2) Initiating and developing for the approval of the Assistant Secretary
specific plans and programs designed to influence foreign opinion in a
direction favorable to US interests and to counteract effects of anti-US
propaganda.

9. As a matter of priority, the Assistant Secretary should coordinate the
determination of the requirement for funds necessary to insure
performance of the functions assigned in paragraph 8 above.

10. The Assistant Secretary should be furnished by the Central
Intelligence Agency with appropriate coordinated foreign
intelligence.

11. The Assistant Secretary should be furnished by the appropriate
departments with classified information necessary for the fulfillment of
his responsibilities.

12. In carrying out the functions assigned in paragraph 8 above, the
Assistant Secretary should maintain the closest possible liaison with
the State-Army-Navy-Air Force Coordinating Committee.

* Source: National Archives and Records
Administration, RG 273, Records of the National Security Council,
NSC Minutes, 4th Meeting.
Confidential. Copies sent to the President, the Secretaries of
State, Defense, the Army, the Navy, and the Air Force, and the
Chairman of the National Security Resources Board. For an early
version of this document, see the memorandum from “REN” to Souers,
November 25, and the two undated attachments (ibid.) in the
Supplement.

1 NSC Action No. 11, taken at the
NSC meeting on November 14,
referred SANACC 304/11 to the
NSC Staff for revision based
on the comments at the meeting. (National Archives and Records
Administration, RG 273, Records of the National Security
Council, Record of Actions, Box 55)

2 Printed from a copy that
bears this typed signature.

3 Confidential. The word “Draft” at
the top of the first page has been crossed through. The typewritten
date December 9 was changed by hand to December 17.

4 The appendix, not found, lists agencies and offices
of the Departments of State, the Army, the Navy, and the Air Force
involved in the dissemination of information overseas.

253. Memorandum From the Executive Secretary (Souers) to the Members of the National Security Council253. Memorandum From the Executive Secretary (Souers) to the Members of the National Security CouncilSource

Washington, December 9,
1947.

NSC 4-A

PSYCHOLOGICAL OPERATIONS

REFERENCE

SANACC 304/111

1. The National Security Council at its second meeting referred SANACC 304/11 to the NSC Staff for revision in the light of the
comments at the meeting.

2. SANACC 304/11 appears to be
designed to accomplish the following two related but separate
purposes:

a. To initiate steps looking toward the conduct of covert psychological
operations designed to counteract Soviet and Soviet-inspired
activities.

b. To ensure that all overt foreign information activities are
effectively coordinated.

3. Therefore, in the interest of security and clarity, the Staff of the
National Security Council has prepared separate reports to the National
Security Council designed to achieve each of the above purposes. This
report deals with the purpose described in 1-a, while NSC 42 deals with the
purpose stated in 1-b.

4. The enclosed draft directive to the Director of Central Intelligence
is believed to be an appropriate and adequate action by the Council with
reference to covert psychological operations abroad. This directive
contains the following desirable provisions:

a. It specifies the reason and the authority for the Council's
action;

b. It grants sufficient authority to the Central Intelligence Agency;
while

c. At the same time it ensures that Central Intelligence Agency will
conduct such operations in a manner consistent with U.S. foreign policy,
overt foreign information activities, and diplomatic and military
operations and intentions abroad.

5. The names of appropriate departments and agencies to be represented on
the panel referred to in subparagraph 3-a, will be recommended by the
NSC Staff in a separate
memorandum.3

6. It is therefore recommended that the National Security Council approve
and issue the enclosed directive to the Director of Central
Intelligence.

Sidney W. Souers4

Enclosure5

Draft Directive to Director of Central Intelligence Hillenkoetter

Washington, undated.

1. The National Security Council, taking cognizance of the vicious
psychological efforts of the USSR, its satellite countries and Communist
groups to discredit and defeat the aims and activities of the United
States and other western powers, has determined that, in the interests
of world peace and U.S. national security, the foreign information
activities of the U.S. Government must be supplemented by covert
psychological operations.

2. The similarity of operational methods involved in covert psychological
and intelligence activities and the need to ensure their secrecy and
obviate costly duplication renders the Central Intelligence Agency the
logical agency to conduct such operations. Hence, under authority of
Section 102 (d) (5) of the National Security Act of 1947, the National
Security Council directs the Director of Central Intelligence to
initiate and conduct, within the limit of available funds, covert
psychological operations designed to counteract Soviet and
Soviet-inspired activities which constitute a threat to world peace and
security or are designed to discredit and defeat the United States in
its endeavors to promote world peace and security.

3. In order to insure that such psychological operations are in a manner
consistent with U.S. foreign policy, overt foreign information
activities, and diplomatic and military operations and intentions
abroad, the Director of Central Intelligence is charged with:

a. Obtaining approval of all policy directives and major plans for such
operations by a panel to be designated by the National Security
Council.

b. Coordination of operations with the senior U.S. diplomatic and
military representatives in each area which will be directly affected by
such operations.

4. Nothing contained herein shall be construed to require the Central
Intelligence Agency to disclose operational details concerning its
secret techniques, sources or contacts.

* Source: National Archives and Records
Administration, RG 273, Records of the National Security Council,
NSC Minutes, 4th Meeting. Top
Secret.

1 Document 249.

2 Document 252.

3 Document 255.

4 Printed from a copy that
bears this typed signature.

5 Top Secret. Paragraph 3 of this
draft was dropped in the final version and replaced by a paragraph
that made the Director of Central Intelligence responsible for
ensuring that psychological warfare operations were consistent with
U.S. foreign policy. See the attachment to Document 257.

254. Memorandum From Director of Central Intelligence Hillenkoetter to the Executive Secretary of the National Security Council (Souers)254. Memorandum From Director of Central Intelligence Hillenkoetter to the
Executive Secretary of the National Security Council (Souers)Source

Washington, December 15,
1947.

1. Reference is made to NSC 4-A (Report
to the National Security Council by The Executive Secretary on
Psychological Operations) as distributed under date of 9 December
1947,1 with particular
reference to the proposed Directive To The Director of Central
Intelligence.

2. In the event the subject project is implemented, it is requested that
consideration be given to rewording paragraph 3.b., of the proposed
Directive to The DCI as follows:

“b. The senior U.S. diplomatic representative in each area, and the
military commander in each occupied area, will be kept informed of
psychological operations being conducted in areas under their
jurisdiction.”

3. We feel the suggested rewording will satisfy the intent of the
original wording and will—

a. Provide greater security to our organized covert operations, and

b. Will follow the existing interdepartmental agreement that the senior
U.S. representative in each foreign area is responsible for the
coordination of all overt intelligence activities.

RH Hillenkoetter
Rear Admiral, USN

* Source: National Archives and Records
Administration, RG 273, Records of the National Security Council,
NSC Minutes, 4th Meeting. Top
Secret.

1 Document 253.

255. Memorandum From the Executive Secretary (Souers) to the National Security Council255. Memorandum From the Executive Secretary (Souers) to the National Security CouncilSource

Washington, December 16,
1947.

SUBJECT

Representation on the panel recommended in NSC 4-A1

It is recommended that the panel referred to in paragraph 3-a of the
draft directive in NSC 4-A consist of
one representative from each of the following Departments:

Department of State
Department of the Army
Department of the
Navy
Department of the Air Force

At the suggestion of General Gruenther, it is also recommended that the
Joint Staff, Joint Chiefs of Staff, be invited to designate a
representative who shall sit with the above panel as an observer.

Sidney W. Souers

* Source: National Archives and Records
Administration, RG 273, Records of the National Security Council,
NSC Minutes, 4th Meeting. Top
Secret.

1 Document 253.

256. Department of State Briefing Memorandum256. Department of State Briefing MemorandumSource

Washington, December 17,
1947.

COORDINATION OF FOREIGN INFORMATION MEASURES (NSC 4) PSYCHOLOGICAL OPERATIONS (NSC 4-A)

I. Discussion

The NSC Staff has revised SANACC 304/11 (the psychological warfare
paper) and prepared two separate reports, one which plans the
coordination of foreign
information measures in overt operations (NSC 4), and the other initiating steps working toward
covert psychological operations (NSC
4-A).

NSC 4 (Tab A),1 which has the
approval of the Department as indicated in Mr. Sargeant's memorandum (Tab B)
proposes:

(a) The Secretary of State should be charged with formulating and
coordinating the implementation of all information measures designed to
influence attitudes in foreign countries in a direction favorable to the
attainment of US objectives and to counteract effects of anti-US
propaganda. It is assumed that these functions will be exercised by the
Assist-ant Secretary of State for Public Affairs, who should consult
with an informal group composed of representatives of other appropriate
departments and agencies.

(b) Appropriate departments and agencies should be instructed to insure
the most effective coordination and utilization of their appropriate
facilities, and

(c) The Assistant Secretary should be assisted by a staff including
qualified full-time personnel detailed from each appropriate agency.

NSC 4-A (Tab C)2 entitled
Psychological Operations provides that covert psychological operations
shall be conducted by the CIA and a draft directive to the Director of
CIA is enclosed with the report. This directive authorizes CIA to
initiate and conduct covert psychological operations designed to
counteract Soviet-inspired activity provided that the approval of all
policy directives and major plans are obtained from a panel to be
designated by the Council. This panel will probably consist of
representatives of State, Army, Navy, Air and perhaps the JCS.

In the memorandum, (Tab D),3
Mr. Kennan indicates that whereas
it is desirable to establish the authority for the proposed operations,
the Council should be frankly informed that before giving our consent to
any such activities we would wish to consider most carefully the need
therefor. Furthermore, we would want to examine the situation in all its
aspects in case of any suggested operation, and to judge each case
strictly on its merits.

II. Recommendations

It is recommended:

(a) That you approve NSC 4 Coordination
of Foreign Information Measures, and

(b) Approve NSC 4-A Psychological
Operations with the understanding that we are only approving the
establishment of the authority for the proposed operations.

(c) That you indicate to the Council our views on such activities as
indicated above.

Tab B4

Memorandum From the Deputy to the Assistant Secretary of State for Public
Affairs (Sargeant) to Acting
Secretary of State Lovett

Washington, December 15, 1947.

SUBJECT

Report to National Security Council on Coordination of Foreign
Information Measures

1. The attached report5 is a
revision of SANACC 304/11 drafted by
the NSC staff in the light of comment at
the second meeting of the National Security Council.

2. It is recommended that the report be approved by the Department.

3. Significant changes in the original SANACC paper have been made as follows:

(a) All reference to “psychological measures” has been eliminated;

(b) Paragraph 6 provides for “the immediate strengthening and
coordination of all foreign information measures of the U.S. Government
… .”

(c) Paragraph 8a assumes that the Assistant Secretary of State for Public
Affairs, acting for the Secretary of State, will “consult with” rather
than “be advised by” an informal group composed of representatives of
other appropriate departments and agencies in formulating information
policies and coordinating the implementation of all information
measures.

(d) “Other appropriate departments and agencies” are not specified in the
report, but it is understood that they shall include, initially, the
Departments of Army, Navy, Air Force, and the Central Intelligence
Agency.

4. The report contains no recommendation regarding implementation of
Paragraph 3b, which provides that “appropriate departments and agencies
should be directed to insure the most effective coordination and
utilization of their facilities … .” Presumably, such a directive would
be issued by the Committee of Two. This point should be clarified,
however, as the Secretary of State would not be in a position to carry
out his responsibilities without a clear directive to the participating
departments and agencies.6

5. I understand Mr. Kennan has
briefed you on another aspect of this problem which will be discussed at
the National Security Council meeting. If possible, I should like to
discuss briefly with you the relationship between these two aspects.

HHS

* Source: National Archives and Records
Administration, RG 59, Records of the Department of State, Records
of the Executive Secretariat, NSC
Files: Lot 63 D 351, NSC 4. Top
Secret. The date is handwritten on the source text. The memorandum
has neither an addressee nor a sender, but presumably it was
intended for Under Secretary Lovett, who was Acting Secretary at the time. The
document is a briefing paper for the NSC meeting held December 17.

1 Document 252.

2 Document 253.

3 Not found.

4 Secret.

5 Not attached.
Reference is to a draft of NSC 4,
possibly Document 252.

6 In the margin next
to this paragraph is the following handwritten note: “Secretary of
State would have authority to issue these directives under
President's approval of the paper. S/S-H.W. Moseley.”

257. Memorandum From the Executive Secretary of the National Security Council (Souers) to Director of Central Intelligence Hillenkoetter257. Memorandum From the Executive Secretary of the National Security
Council (Souers)
to Director of Central Intelligence HillenkoetterSource

Washington, December 17,
1947.

SUBJECT

Psychological Operations

REFERENCE

NSC 4-A

At its fourth meeting the National Security Council amended and approved
the draft directive to the Director of Central Intelligence contained in
NSC 4-A.1

This directive, as approved by the National Security Council, is
transmitted herewith for appropriate action.

Sidney W. Souers2

Attachment3

National Security Council Directive to Director of Central Intelligence
Hillenkoetter

1. The National Security Council, taking cognizance of the vicious
psychological efforts of the USSR, its satellite countries and Communist
groups to discredit and defeat the aims and activities of the United
States and other Western powers, has determined that, in the interests
of world peace and U.S. national security, the foreign information
activities of the U.S. Government must be supplemented by covert
psychological operations.

2. The similarity of operational methods involved in covert psychological
and intelligence activities and the need to ensure their secrecy and
obviate costly duplication renders the Central Intelligence Agency the
logical agency to conduct such operations. Hence, under authority of
Section 102(d)(5) of the National Security Act of 1947, the National
Security Council directs the Director of Central Intelligence to
initiate and conduct, within the limit of available funds, covert
psychological operations designed to counteract Soviet and
Soviet-inspired activities which constitute a threat to world peace and security or are designed to
discredit and defeat the United States in its endeavors to promote world
peace and security.

3. The Director of Central Intelligence is charged with ensuring that
such psychological operations are consistent with U.S. foreign policy
and overt foreign information activities, and that appropriate agencies
of the U.S. Government, both at home and abroad (including diplomatic
and military representatives in each area), are kept informed of such
operations which will directly affect them.

4. Nothing contained herein shall be construed to require the Central
Intelligence Agency to disclose operational details concerning its
secret techniques, sources or contacts.

* Source: National Archives and Records
Administration, RG 273, Records of the National Security Council,
NSC Minutes, 4th Meeting. Top
Secret. Central Intelligence Agency records contain a typescript
copy that apparently was made from a signed copy; it is identical to
the source text. (Central Intelligence Agency Historical Files,
HS/CSG-773, Job 83-00036, Box 5, Folder 8) Also reproduced in CIA Cold War Records: The CIA under Harry Truman, pp.
173-175.

1 The NSC minutes for the Council's
4th meeting on December 17 refer only to NSC 4, noting simply that it was adopted without change
and subsequently submitted to the President for approval. (National
Archives and Records Administration, RG 273, Records of the National
Security Council, NSC Minutes, 4th
Meeting) There is no mention of NSC
4-A in the minutes. The amendment referred to in the undated
directive to Hillenkoetter involved paragraph 3, where the proposal
for an advisory panel was eliminated. See the enclosure to Document 253. Souers submitted NSC 4 to the President for approval
under a memorandum of December 17. Truman approved NSC
4 on December 18. (National Archives and Records Administration, RG
273, Records of the National Security Council, NSC Minutes, 4th Meeting) The file
contains no mention of the President's approval of NSC 4-A.

2 Printed from a copy that
bears this typed signature.

3 Top Secret.

258. Memorandum From Director of Central Intelligence Hillenkoetter to the Assistant Director for Special Operations (Galloway)258. Memorandum From Director of Central Intelligence Hillenkoetter to the
Assistant Director for Special Operations (Galloway)Source

Washington, December 22,
1947.

SUBJECT

Foreign Information Measures

1. This Agency has been directed by the National Security Council to
supplement the foreign information activities of the U.S. Government by
covert psychological operations. Further, we have been charged with
insuring that such operations are consistent with U.S. foreign policy
and overt information activities, and that appropriate agencies of the
U.S. Government, both at home and abroad, are kept informed of such
operations which will directly affect them.

2. It has been determined that the Office of Special Operations will be
the operational unit for the conduct of covert psychological operations
in accordance with the directive of the National Security Council to
this Agency.

3. Attached hereto, for your information and guidance, is Copy No. 18 of
NSC 4.1 This document will be
utilized as the basic policy directive for the operations considered
herewith.

4. It is desired that you take immediate steps to prepare a plan for the
conduct of covert psychological operations, utilizing wherever
practicable existing facilities of your office and the other offices of
this Agency. Your recommendations reference the following specific
matters will be submitted at the earliest practicable date:

a. Proposed Organizational Chart for a Foreign Information Branch, Office
of Special Operations.

b. Proposed Table of Organization, Staff and Field, for the conduct of
covert psychological measures.

c. Proposed plan of liaison with appropriate departments and agencies of
the Government.

d. Estimate of funds required for fiscal years 1948 and 1949.

Rear Admiral, USN

R. H. Hillenkoetter2

* Source: Central Intelligence Agency Historical
Files, HS/CSG-917, Job 83-00036, Box 6, Folder 11. Top
Secret.

1 Document 252.

2 Printed from a copy that bears this
typed signature.

259. Memorandum From the Director of the Policy Planning Staff (Kennan) to the Under Secretary of State (Lovett)259. Memorandum From the Director of the Policy Planning Staff
(Kennan) to the
Under Secretary of State (Lovett)Source

Washington, February 17,
1948.

In connection with the decision of the National Security Council
regarding psychological warfare operation, I believe it would be
advisable if you were to tell Mr. Wisner, in the absence of Mr. Saltzman, that the work of
the SANACC Subcommittee on Special
Studies and Evaluation1 should be promptly brought
to a conclusion and the subcommittee dissolved. Because of security
considerations, Mr. Wisner should
not be informed of the reasons lying behind your instructions, but he
can be told that this is in response to higher level decision.

George F. Kennan

* Source: National
Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Records of the
Department of State, Decimal File 1945-49, 101.6/2-1748. Top
Secret.

1 The designation for
the SANACC subcommittee that
dealt with psychological warfare.

260. Office of Special Operations Directive No. 18/5 (Interim)260. Office of Special Operations Directive No. 18/5 (Interim)Source

Washington, February 24,
1948.

ACTIVATION OF SPECIAL PROCEDURES BRANCH

1. In accordance with instructions of the Director of Central
Intelligence, and pending formal authorization, a Special Procedures
Branch within the Office of Special Operations was activated effective 1
January 1948.

2. The Chief, Special Procedures Branch, will draft an appropriate
amendment to S.O. Directive No. 18, setting forth the functions and
responsibilities of the branch in detail, which, when approved and
published, will supersede and supplant this directive.

3. The Chief, Special Procedures Branch, will be directly responsible to
the Assistant Director for Special Operations.

Alan R. McCracken

* Source: Central Intelligence Agency
Historical Files, HS/CSG-2154, Job 83-00739R, Box 3, Folder 19.
Secret. On February 24 Office of Special Operations Personnel Order
No. 25 announced the designation of Thomas G. Cassady as Chief of
the Special Procedures Branch. (Ibid., HS/CSG-2155, Job 83-00739R,
Box 3, Folder 20) See the Supplement.

261. Memorandum From the Chief of the Special Procedures Group (Cassady) to the Deputy Chief of the Special Procedures Group (Dulin)261. Memorandum From the Chief of the Special Procedures Group
(Cassady) to the
Deputy Chief of the Special Procedures Group (Dulin)Source

Washington, March 11,
1948.

SUBJECT

Conversations with Mr. Charles Davies,1 State
Department

1. On March 1, I visited Mr. Davies to state that we had, after my
discussions pro and con, arrived at the conclusion that the most
effective method of penetrating
the iron curtain would be via clandestine radio situated in an
artificially created sterile area of our occupied zone. Inasmuch as the
execution of this plan would involve considerable expenditure of public
funds, the hiring of personnel, etc., we did not want to undertake such
a commitment without clearing with State, for the reason that State was
soon to take over the administration of the American zone in Germany.
Aside from that fact, I further stated that we desired at all times to
cooperate with State in the prosecution of our new endeavor.

2. Mr. Davies called today to ask me to come over. He apologized for
being ten days in coming back to me and said finally he had been able to
get to Mr. Cannon2 who, as I
understood it, had talked in turn to Mr. Lovett pertaining to this matter. Mr. Davies states that
Mr. Lovett's reaction was that he
wanted to know very little about our project but in principle he had no
objection. Mr. Cannon's attitude was that we have the green light but
State wanted to be apprised of our progress and proposed operations in
order that they would not conflict with State's policies. This I agreed
to do.

* Source: Central Intelligence Agency Historical
Files, HS/CSG-609, Job 83-00036, Box 4, Folder 10. Secret.

1 Reference is probably to John P. Davies.

2 Presumably George Kennan.

262. Memorandum From Secretary of Defense Forrestal to the Executive Secretary of the National Security Council (Souers)262. Memorandum From Secretary of Defense Forrestal to the Executive Secretary of the
National Security Council (Souers)Source

Washington, March 26,
1948.

SUBJECT

NSC 4 Series (Coordination of
Foreign Information Measures)

1. Several months have elapsed since the National Security Council
approved the NSC 4 Series, dealing with
foreign information activities. I believe that both the State Department
and CIA have begun setting up the staff organization to carry out their
respective responsibilities under this program. Since the Council's action the international
situation has become more critical and it is more important than ever
that our foreign information activities be effectively developed and
that they be coordinated with the other phases of our foreign and
military policies.

2. Therefore, I recommend that the National Security Council assure
itself that the NSC 4 Series is being
satisfactorily implemented and that the programs thereunder are being
conceived and carried out in full accord with the intentions of the
National Security Council and in effective coordination with political
and military plans and activities. I request that this question be
placed on the agenda of the next meeting of the National Security
Council and suggest that at that time the Council direct the staff
consultants to look into this problem on its behalf and submit an early
report with my necessary recommendations.

James Forrestal1

* Source: National
Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Records of the
Department of State, Policy Planning Staff Files 1947-53: Lot 64 D
563, Pol amp; Psych Warfare 1948-50, Box 11. Top Secret. On March 30
Souers sent Forrestal's
memorandum to NSC members, noting
that it would be on the agenda of the April 2 meeting. (Ibid.) See
the Supplement.

1 Printed from a copy that indicates
Forrestal signed the
original.

263. Office of Special Operations Directive No. 18/5263. Office of Special Operations Directive No. 18/5Source

Washington, March 29,
1948.

ACTIVATION OF SPECIAL PROCEDURES GROUP

1. Authorization

In accordance with the authorization contained in the memorandum for the
Assistant Director for Special Operations from the Director of Central
Intelligence, dated 22 March 1948, Subject: “Additional Functions of the
Office of Special Operations,”1
the “Special Procedures Group,” as activated 1 January 1948 under the
name “Special Procedures Branch,” is confirmed effective 22 March
1948.

2. Functions

The basic function of Special Procedures Group will be to engage in
covert psychological operations outside the United States and its
possessions, for the purpose of
(1) undermining the strength of foreign instrumentalities, whether
government, organizations, or individuals, which are engaged in
activities inimical to the United States, and (2) to support United
States' foreign policy by influencing public opinion abroad in a
direction favorable to the attainment of United States' objectives.

3. Definition of Covert Psychological Operations

As used herein and as conducted within the Office of Special Operations,
covert psychological operations may include all measures of information
and persuasion short of physical in which the originating role of the
United States Government will always be kept concealed.

4. Chief of Special Procedures Group

In accordance with directives and policies of the Assistant Director for
Special Operations, the Chief of Special Procedures Group shall exercise
direction over all covert psychological operations outside the United
States and its possessions. In carrying out this responsibility, he
will:

a. Act as adviser to the Assistant Director relative to covert
psychological operations and submit to him, for approval, specific
directives on covert psychological operations for field implementation
through the facilities of the Chief of Operations.

b. As directed by the Assistant Director, make recommendations for the
final approval of all proposed covert psychological operations from the
standpoint of their conformity to United States' foreign policy,
suitability of general program content and objectives, and the
commitment of funds.

c. Exercise direct control and supervision over all personnel and
functions of the Washington office of Special Procedures Group.

d. Exercise general program and technical direction over all field
representatives engaged in covert psychological operations, coordinating
closely with the Chief of Operations who will exercise operational field
control over such representatives.

e. Maintain close planning and operational liaison with the Chief of
Operations in connection with plans, directives, and other matters
relating to covert psychological operations which require implementation
through the facilities and resources of the Chief of Operations.

f. Provide for the development of program plans to implement policies and
directives applicable to the activities of Special Procedures Group.

g. Provide for all necessary operational action, including the
preparation of detailed operational directives, required for the
execution of approved program plans and projects developed by or
delegated to Special Procedures Group.

h. Establish a project control over all field operations involving covert
psychological operations.

i. Maintain, as directed by the Assistant Director, such liaison with the
Department of State, or other authority charged with formulation of
foreign policy, as may be necessary to obtain guidance on United States'
foreign policy and objectives, as they affect the operations of Special
Procedures Group.

j. Issue, with the approval of the Assistant Director, directives
defining the editorial and political policies to be followed in
conducting covert psychological operations in the field.

k. Establish, for approval of the Assistant Director and on the basis of
United States' foreign policy and aims, the basic program objectives and
targets for covert psychological operations.

l. In accordance with liaison requirements and procedures of Budget and
Liaison Control, establish and control authorized liaison of Special
Procedures Group with other elements of Office of Special Operations,
Offices of the Central Intelligence Agency, and other United States
Departments and Agencies which provide for direct liaison on secret
operational matters.

m. Develop and maintain, as directed by the Assistant Director, such
liaison with private individuals, organizations, or institutions in the
United States as may be necessary to the effective conduct of covert
psychological operations abroad, keeping Budget and Liaison Control
generally informed of such liaison.

n. Insure that operations of Special Procedures Group do not conflict
with or overlap the open foreign informational activities of the
Department of State and, to that end, effect such liaison and
coordination with the Department of State as may be directed by the
Assistant Director.

o. Coordinate with the Chief of Administrative Services to insure full
support of operations of Special Procedures Group by Office of Special
Operations administrative and supporting services.

p. Insure adequate training for all personnel engaged in covert
psychological operations, using for such purpose the facilities of the
Training Staff of Office of Special Operations and, with practical
limits, making available to the Training Staff, for lecture and other
instruction in covert psychological operations, experienced personnel of
Special Procedures Group.

q. Provide for the conduct of inspections of local activities of his
office and, when directed by the Assistant Director, of overseas
operational activities involving covert psychological operations,
effecting the necessary coordination with the Chief of Operations.

r. For the purpose of insuring proper policy and program coordination in
the field, take appropriate measures in coordination with the Chief of
Operations and through his field facilities, for keeping the chief
diplomatic representative in an area or the Chief United States
Commanding Officer in an occupied zone generally informed of covert
psychological operations.

5. Deputy Chief

a. Acts for the Chief of Special Procedures Group in his absence.

b. Performs such duties as may be assigned by the Chief.

c. Maintains over-all supervision of the activities of Special Procedures
Group to insure the proper execution of directives and policies relating
to Special Procedures operations.

6. Chief of Plans Section

As directed by the Chief of Special Procedures Group, the Chief of the
Plans Section:

a. In General

Shall be responsible for defining the program objectives of covert
psychological operations, developing programs in line with such
objectives and preparing directives defining the editorial and political
policy to be followed in the conduct of field operations.

b. In Particular

(1) Shall, on the basis of United States' foreign policy and foreign
objectives of the Central Intelligence Agency, define and currently
maintain the basic program objectives and targets for covert
psychological operations and prepare, as required, field directives
defining such objectives and targets.

(2) Shall, on the basis of United States' foreign policy and aims,
prepare field directives defining the editorial and political policy,
theme, and general line to be followed in the conduct of covert
psychological operations, insuring that such directives are consistent
with United States' foreign policy as it affects covert psychological
operations.

(3) Shall initiate and develop, as directed by the Chief, Special
Procedures Group, programs, themes, and ideas for covert psychological
operations in the field.

(4) Shall, as a basis for evaluating and countering foreign propaganda or
other psychological activity directed against the United States, conduct
a continuing selective analysis of foreign news and other informational
sources, including pertinent intelligence collected by Central
Intelligence Agency and other informational materials available to
Central Intelligence Agency.

(5) Shall conduct, for the purpose of developing background data and
information for covert psychological operations, research relating to
foreign news and events,
international propaganda and the psychological and political character
of operational targets, including individuals, groups, and
organizations.

(6) Shall initiate or develop, in response to requests from authorized
sources, editorial production, in complete or substantive form, for
transmission to overseas stations for operational use.

(7) Shall analyze and evaluate, to the extent practicable, the results of
covert psychological field operations in terms of their propaganda or
psychological effectiveness.

(8) Shall assist in the training of personnel engaged in covert
psychological operations, insofar as training relates to the functions
of the Plans Section.

7. Chief, Operations Section

As directed by the Chief of Special Procedures Group, the Chief of the
Operations Section:

a. In General

Shall be responsible to the Chief of Special Procedures Group for the
operational aspects of covert psychological operations and assure proper
coordination between Chief of Operations, Office of Special Operations,
and Special Procedures Group in the field implementation of policies and
programs relating to covert psychological operations.

b. In Particular

In carrying out these general responsibilities, the Chief of the
Operations Section:

(1) Shall prepare detailed plans and instructions and take any other
necessary, authorized action to implement basic policies, programs and
directives received from the Chief of Special Procedures Group.

(2) Shall establish a project control over all approved covert
psychological operations to provide for the controlled expenditure and
proper accounting of funds used for covert psychological operation and a
constant review of authorized projects, including assignments, progress,
cost and effectiveness of agents and informers used in covert
psychological operations.

(3) Shall inform the Chief, Administration and Services, Office of
Special Operations, of operational plans and insure adequate joint
planning with interested elements of his offices to support the
implementation of such plans.

(4) Shall assist in the training of personnel engaged in covert
psychological operations insofar as such training relates to the
functions of the Operations Section, Special Procedures Group.

(5) Shall coordinate with the Training Branch and the Personnel Division,
Office of Special Operations, the training of new staff employees, advising both of the
detailed training requirements of Special Procedures Group.

(6) Shall keep Budget and Liaison Control generally informed of liaison
with private individuals, organizations, or institutions in the United
States, as referred to in c.(2)(j) below.

c. Liaison Responsibilities

The Chief, Operations Section, will conduct liaison and coordinate with
the Chief of Operations, Office of Special Operations, on covert
psychological matters requiring field implementation through facilities
and resources of his office for the following purposes:

(1) General

(a) In the field implementation of covert psychological operations, to
make available to the Chief of Operations, Office of Special Operations,
any required information, data, facilities, or other services at the
disposal of Special Procedures Group.

(b) Within limits approved by the Chief of Operations, Office of Special
Operations, to consult with operating elements of his office concerning
operational possibilities for covert psychological operations, and the
acquisition of operational information required by Special Procedures
Group in the planning of such operations.

(c) To insure that proposed plans and projects of Special Procedures
Group are operationally practicable from the standpoint of field
capabilities and conditions.

(2) Particular

Specifically, the purpose of such liaison will be to effect, in
accord-ance with arrangements approved by the Chief of Operations,
coordination with the Deputy Chief of Operations for Counter Espionage,
the Deputy Chief of Operations for Plans and Projects, and appropriate
Foreign Branch Chiefs, on the following matters relating to covert
psychological operations of Special Operations.

(a) Development of agent cover and related possibilities in connection
with planned covert psychological operations.

(b) Objectives, recruiting, engagement, and training of covert personnel
who will engage in covert psychological operations.

(c) Briefing, assignment, and movement of covert psychological
operations. Such personnel will not be reassigned, transferred, or moved
in any manner inconsistent with their current assignments, without prior
approval of the Assistant Director for Special Operations, except where
emergency conditions justify independent action in the field.

(d) Obtaining operational information and data for field directives and
for the development of methods, techniques, and plans for use in
connection with approved or planned covert psychological operations.

(e) Providing guidance and assistance to field representatives engaged in
covert psychological operations, including useful background
information, comments, and criticisms on methods and sources and
technical advice.

(f) Obtaining reports from the field on the progress, results, and status
of covert psychological objectives.

(g) Establishing the program objectives and targets for covert
psychological operations.

(h) Following up action taken by the field on directives pertaining to
covert psychological operations.

(i) Developing long-range plans and projects for covert psychological
operations.

(j) Employment, on a covert basis, of individuals in the United States,
including American citizens and foreign nationals, for information and
other operational services in connection with current or planned covert
psychological operations overseas.

(k) Security investigations of all personnel of Special Procedures Group
other than the staff to be used in the Washington office.

8. S.O. Directive No. 18/5 (Interim), dated 24 February 1948,2 is rescinded and
superseded by this Directive.

Assistant Director Special Operations

Donald H. Galloway

* Source: Central Intelligence Agency Historical
Files, HS/CSG-2154, Job 83-00739R, Box 3, Folder 19. Top
Secret.

1 Not found. A
draft of this memorandum, dated February 26, is in Central
Intelligence Agency Records, Job 83-00036, Box 9, Folder 16.

2 Document 260.

264. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for Public Affairs (Allen) to Acting Secretary of State Lovett264. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for Public
Affairs (Allen) to
Acting Secretary of State LovettSource

Washington, March 31,
1948.

SUBJECT

Coordination of Foreign Information Measures

At the National Security Council meeting on Friday1 you may be pressed to agree to a
proposal by the Armed Services to set up immediately a psychological warfare organization.
The more enthusiastic representatives of the Armed Services would
apparently like to begin actual psychological warfare operations at the
earliest possible moment. I suggest that you go slow on any positive
commitments along this line until we can go into the matter further.

It is important to remember that psychological warfare is in its essence
a political activity and in Russia and Great Britain among other places
is and has been traditionally an instrument of the Foreign Office. Under
a National Security Council Directive of December 9, 1947 (NSC-4), it is clearly recognized that the
State Department has jurisdiction in the matter and this point should be
maintained. Claims which may be advanced by the War Department that the
State Department has been lax in taking any action under NSC-4 are exaggerated to say the least. We
have taken a good deal of action under this directive already as the
attached will indicate.

Following approval of NSC-4 by the
President on December 18th, 1947, letters were sent out on January 2nd,
1948, by Mr. Lovett to the
Secretaries of the Army, the Navy, the Air Force, and the Director of
the Central Intelligence Agency, requesting them to designate
representatives to consult with Mr. Allen, in order to carry out the NSC-4 Directive.

The Central Intelligence Agency named its representative on January 5th,
the Air Force on February 4th, the Army on February 5th, and the Navy
not until March 9th.

On March 10th the first meeting of this informal Inter-departmental
Consultative Group was set for March 15th. Mr. Allen chaired this
meeting, and called upon representatives of the other Departments to
prepare written memoranda on the overseas activities of their
Departments falling within the scope of NSC-4, and to name representatives to the full-time Working
Staff called for by NSC-4, the duties of
which were (1) to coordinate all federal foreign information facilities,
and (2) to initiate and develop for the approval of the Assistant
Secretary specific plans and programs in the foreign information
field.

Further meetings of the Consultative Group were held on March 18th and
March 29th with Mr. Allen in the
Chair each time. At these meetings there was informal discussion of the
functions of the Consultative Group and of the full-time Working Staff,
with a view to carrying out NSC-4 as
early as possible. April 12th was agreed upon as the earliest target
date by which the Working Staff members would be designated by the other
Departments and commence activities. Appropriate office space and
working facilities have been held ready by the Assistant Secretary since
March 15th. A member of Mr. Allen's staff has also been ready since the inception of the
Consultative Group to serve as Executive Secretary of the full-time
Working Staff.

A list of proposed projects on which the Working Staff shall commence its
duties has been prepared; these are to be integrated with the projects
of the OIE, so as to avoid duplication
or overlapping.

* Source: National Archives and Records
Administration, RG 59, Records of the Department of State, Records
of the Executive Secretariat, NSC
Files: Lot 63 D 351, NSC 4, Box
4205. Top Secret.

1 April 2.

265. Memorandum From the Director of the Office of Information and Educational Exchange (Stone) to Acting Secretary of State Lovett265. Memorandum From the Director of the Office of Information and
Educational Exchange (Stone) to Acting
Secretary of State LovettSource

Washington, April 1,
1948.

SUBJECT

Proposed Creation of Psychological Warfare Agency

With reference to the question of foreign information activities which
Mr. Allen mentioned in his
memorandum1 to you yesterday, and
which will come up for discussion in the meeting of the National
Security Council on Friday,2
there is additional information which you should have as background:

I am informed that the Armed Services are again pressing to set up an
independent psychological warfare agency under the National Security
Council at the earliest possible moment. The Joint Chiefs of Staff have
approved a paper recommending such action. The paper which had gone to
Admiral Leahy is in the form
of an amendment to an earlier report of the SANACC Subcommittee which has been studying future plans
for a wartime psychological warfare organization. If Admiral Leahy approves, the paper in
question will come up before the SANACC Committee at a meeting next Wednesday, April 7, at
which time the Department will have an opportunity to state its
position.

I have discussed this matter with George
Allen (who is in New York today) and checked with
operating division who are concerned in the Department. The consensus is
that no new organization should be set up at this time for the following
reasons: 1) Except in time of war, psychological warfare is essentially a political
activity and the responsibility must rest with the Secretary of State.
2) The National Security Council has placed this responsibility with the
Secretary in NSC-4, under which
Assistant Secretary Allen is responsible for coordinating all foreign
information activities . Mr. Allen is now discharging this responsibility, operating
through a consulting group and working staff composed of representatives
of the Army, Navy, Air Forces and CIA. 3) The wartime plans prepared by
SANACC Subcommittee have not been
completed and are not suitable for immediate application.

The above is for your information in the event this matter comes up at
the meeting of the National Security Council tomorrow.

WTS

* Source: National Archives and Records
Administration, RG 59, Records of the Department of State, Records
of the Executive Secretariat, NSC
Files: Lot 63 D 351, NSC 4. Top
Secret. Following his handwritten initials above the subject line
Stone wrote: “(In the absence of George
Allen.)”

1 Document 264.

2 April 2.

266. Memorandum for the President of Discussion at the 9th Meeting of the National Security Council266. Memorandum for the President of Discussion at the 9th Meeting of
the National Security CouncilSource

Washington, April 2,
1948.

[Here follows discussion of agenda items 1 and 2, U.S. policy in Korea
and U.S. position on short-term assistance to China.]

3. Coordination of Foreign Information Measures (Memo for the NSC from
the Executive Secretary, same subject, dated March 30, 1948.)1

Mr. Lovett read a memorandum2 from Assistant
Secretary Allen, stating that the
Department of State believed that no new psychological warfare
authorization should be set up now because in peacetime the State
Department should control this activity, as provided in NSC 4. Mr. Lovett also described the steps that had been taken so
far in implementation of NSC 4.

The National Security Council:3

Directed the NSC Consultants to review
the implementation of certain aspects of NSC 4 series and to submit to the Council an early report
with any necessary recommendations.

[Here follows discussion of agenda item 4, internal security.]

* Source: Truman
Library, Papers of Harry S.
Truman, President's Secretary's Files, Subject File.
Top Secret.

1 See the source note, Document
262.

2 Document 264.

3 The following paragraph constitutes NSC Action No. 42. (National Archives
and Records Administration, RG 273, Records of the National Security
Council, Record of Actions, Box 55)

267. Memorandum From the Executive Secretary (Souers) to the Members of the National Security Council267. Memorandum From the Executive Secretary (Souers) to the Members of the National Security CouncilSource

Washington, April 26,
1948.

SUBJECT

Coordination of Foreign Information Measures

REFERENCES

a. NSC 4 Series

b. NSC Action No. 421

Pursuant to directive by the National Security Council (Reference b), the
NSC Consultants have reviewed the
implementation by the Director of Central Intelligence of certain
aspects of the NSC 4 Series. Mr.
George V. Allen, Assistant
Secretary of State for Public Affairs, participated in this review.

Taking into consideration the fact that only four months have elapsed
since the issuance of the initial directive to the Director of Central
Intelligence, and the difficulties of screening personnel both as to
security and qualifications for such duties the NSC Consultants and Mr. Allen feel that satisfactory progress has been made.
They also believe that existing organizational relationships both at
home and abroad appear to be developing satisfactorily.

At Mr. Allen's suggestion, the
Director of Central Intelligence was advised to concentrate so far as
possible upon the use of anti-Communist democratic forces in foreign
countries, particularly those which are politically left of center. The
Director of Central Intelligence also was requested to project these
operations forward, both as to scope and area coverage, as rapidly as
possible.

The NSC Consultants recommend that the
National Security Council:

a. Approve the above findings.

b. Direct the NSC Consultants to
undertake a similar review and report in approximately two months.

Sidney W. Souers

* Source: National Archives and Records
Administration, RG 59, Records of the Department of State, Records
of the Executive Secretariat, NSC
Files: Lot 63 D 351, NSC 4, Box
4205. Top Secret. In a May 10 note to Lovett, Kennan referred to a report “made after the National
Security Council Consultants had met with the Director of Central
Intelligence to review the implementation of foreign information
measures,” and he recommended that he be authorized informally to
tell Souers that the Department approved the Consultants' two
recommendations. (Ibid., Policy Planning Staff Files, 1947-1953, Box
11A) See the Supplement. This referenced report is probably the
source text.

1 See Document
266.

268. Memorandum by the Chief of the Special Procedures Group, Central Intelligence Agency (Cassady)268. Memorandum by the Chief of the Special Procedures Group, Central
Intelligence Agency (Cassady)Source

Washington, undated.

POLICY LIAISON FOR SPG ACTIVITIES

1. Since black propaganda activities may have a direct relationship to
both the foreign policy of the U.S. and the responsibility of the
Director of CIA for conducting operations consistent with such policy,
it is recognized that close and continuing policy liaison must be
maintained between SPG and the proper
foreign policy authority of the U.S. Government. For its day-to-day
activities, it is recommended that SPG
rely on the Department of State as the primary outside source for policy
direction and guidance. In addition, it is possible that the National
Security Council may, from time to time, request CIA, through SPG, to undertake certain programs and
activities which may not have originated exclusively at the suggestion
of the State Department. However, any such programs or activities would
necessarily have to be consistent with foreign policy of the U.S. as
established by the State Department. Therefore, it would seem that the
primary source and authority for foreign policy and, consequently for
policy direction for SPG activities, is
the Department of State.

2. Regarding the question of how policy direction from the proper level
at the Department of State can be transmitted to SPG, it is believed that this could be effectively achieved
by the following arrangement:

a. Foreign policy of the U.S. Government, as reflected and expressed in
the overseas informational program of the U.S., is already currently
stated in policy directives issued by the CIE (Voice of America) in the
State Department to its foreign informational offices throughout the
world. It is understood that these directives are issued on a weekly,
and sometimes on a daily, basis. They specifically state what the U.S.
Government seeks to achieve through its overseas informational program
in terms of our foreign policy and general objectives. They are,
therefore, both an expression of foreign policy and an indication of how
foreign policy is to be promoted through the overseas informational
media available to the U.S. Government. It is recommended, therefore,
that these informational directives of CIE be likewise made available to
SPG for policy guidance in
connection with its black propaganda activities. In making these
directives available to SPG, the State
Department would be free to
modify the directives, if necessary, so as to adapt them better to the
needs of black propaganda.

3. As a channel for communicating these directives, and any additional
appropriate comment, from the State Department to SPG, it is proposed that SPG appoint a liaison officer for the
purpose of effecting the necessary liaison with the State Department in
this particular field. It is believed that liaison within the Department
of State should be made with a high ranking staff officer attached to
the Office of the Assistant Secretary for Public Affairs. The rank and
position of this State Department officer should be such as to enable
him to obtain prompt and authoritative action on all policy matters
affecting SPG activities. He should
likewise be in a position to assist SPG
in obtaining information, data, material, etc., from OIE and from other branches of the State
Department which might be helpful to SPG. In this connection, the OIE has undoubtedly accumulated much information and data
concerning the overseas informational picture which would be of direct
interest to SPG, and this latter Group
should be in a position to draw freely on this material for its black
propaganda operations.

4. In addition to the current directives issued by the State Department
for the foreign offices of OIE, it is
conceivable that the Department of State, through the Office of the
Assistant Secretary for Public Affairs, will wish to transmit to SPG supplemental propaganda themes and
lines, and possibly even general target objectives. In such cases,
SPG would likewise be guided by such
supplemental directives and, to the extent possible within its
limitations, endeavor to implement such directives operationally.

5. Moreover, general programs and general capabilities of the SPG would, under this liaison arrangement,
be brought by the SPG Liaison Officer to
the attention of his opposite number in the Office of the Assist-ant
Secretary for Public Affairs. The SPG Liaison Officer would also bring
to the attention of the Office of the Assistant Secretary for Public
Affairs, for State Department consideration, any suggested propaganda
themes and general programs which might be originated by SPG and which are not covered by the
directives received from the Department of State. SPG would not, however, reveal to the
Department of State operational methods and techniques, or other
classified operational details, involved in the conduct of black
propaganda activities. There is no objection to revealing to the State
Department the broad, general character of SPG programs and the general capabilities of SPG, but such specific operational details
as to how, by whom and specifically where and through what channels
SPG activities will be conducted
should not be revealed in our liaison arrangement with State, primarily
because (1) of the highly secret nature of such operations and (2)
because the State Department, for its own protection, should remain in
ignorance of such details so as
to be in a position to deny knowledge thereof and thereby avoid possible
diplomatic embarrassment.

6. Summed up, the foregoing liaison arrangement is one which can be
effected quickly and simply. U.S. foreign policy, as reflected in the
informational program of the U.S. Government, is already being currently
established in connection with the activities of OIE. This policy, in the form of OIE directives, is specifically stated on a day-to-day and
week-to-week basis. It would be a simple matter, through proper liaison
with the Office of Assistant Secretary for Public Affairs, to transmit
such directives, with any additional appropriate comment, to SPG for its basic policy direction. SPG would thereby be receiving approved
foreign policy directives of the U.S. Government which have been
authorized and issued at the proper policy making levels of the State
Department. This entire matter of policy liaison and direction for black
propaganda activities of SPG is just that simple in its essence and
solution.

TG Cassady

* Source: Central Intelligence Agency
Historical Files, HS/CSG-909, Job 83-00036, Box 6, Folder 11.
Secret. No addressee is indicated on the source text. A handwritten
note on the source text reads: “Approximate Date—1 May 48.”

269. Policy Planning Staff Memorandum269. Policy Planning Staff MemorandumSource

Washington, May 4,
1948.

The Problem

The inauguration of organized political warfare.

Analysis

1. Political warfare is the logical application of Clausewitz's doctrine
in time of peace. In broadest definition, political warfare is the
employment of all the means at a nation's command, short of war, to
achieve its national objectives. Such operations are both overt and
covert. They range from such overt actions as political alliances,
economic meas-ures (as ERP),
and “white” propaganda to such covert operations as clandestine support
of “friendly” foreign elements, “black” psychological warfare and even
encouragement of underground resistance in hostile states.

2. The creation, success, and survival of the British Empire has been due
in part to the British understanding and application of the principles
of political warfare. Lenin so synthesized the teachings of Marx and
Clausewitz that the Kremlin's conduct of political warfare has become
the most refined and effective of any in history. We have been
handicapped however by a popular attachment to the concept of a basic
difference between peace and war, by a tendency to view war as a sort of
sporting context outside of all political context, by a national
tendency to seek for a political cure-all, and by a reluctance to
recognize the realities of international relations—the perpetual rhythm
of [struggle, in and out of war.]1

3. This Government has, of course, in part consciously and in part
unconsciously, been conducting political warfare. Aggressive Soviet
political warfare has driven us overtly first to the Truman Doctrine,
next to ERP, then to sponsorship of Western Union [1-1/2 lines of source text not declassified]. This was all
political warfare and should be recognized as such.

4. Understanding the concept of political warfare, we should also
recognize that there are two major types of political warfare—one overt
and the other covert. Both, from their basic nature, should be directed
and coordinated by the Department of State. Overt operations are, of
course, the traditional policy activities of any foreign office enjoying
positive leadership, whether or not they are recognized as political
warfare. Covert operations are traditional in many European
chancelleries but are relatively unfamiliar to this Government.

5. Having assumed greater international responsibilities than ever before
in our history and having been engaged by the full might of the
Kremlin's political warfare, we cannot afford to leave unmobilized our
resources for covert political warfare. We cannot afford in the future,
in perhaps more serious political crises, to scramble into impromptu
covert operations [1 line of source text not
declassified].

6. It was with all of the foregoing in mind that the Policy Planning
Staff began some three months ago2 a consideration of specific
projects in the field of covert
operations, where they should be fitted into the structure of this
Government, and how the Department of State should exercise direction
and coordination.

7. There are listed below projects which have been or are now being
suggested by the Staff:

a. Liberation Committees.

Purpose: To encourage the formation of a public American organization
which will sponsor selected political refugee committees so that they
may (a) act as foci of national hope and revive a sense of purpose among
political refugees from the Soviet World; (b) provide an inspiration for
continuing popular resistance within the countries of the Soviet World;
and (c) serve as a potential nucleus for all-out liberation movements in
the event of war.

Description: This is primarily an overt operation which, however, should
receive covert guidance and possibly assistance from the Government. It
is proposed that trusted private American citizens be encouraged to
establish a public committee which would give support and guidance in
U.S. interests to national movements (many of them now in existence)
publicly led by outstanding political refugees from the Soviet World,
such as Mikolajczyk and Nagy. The American Committee should be so
selected and organized as to cooperate closely with this Government. The
functions of the American Committee should be limited to enabling
selected refugee leaders [to keep alive as public figures with access to
printing presses and microphones. It should not engage in underground
activities.]3

What is proposed here is an operation in the traditional American form:
organized public support of resistance to tyranny in foreign countries.
Throughout our history, private American citizens have banded together
to champion the cause of freedom for people suffering under oppression.
(The Communists and Zionists have exploited this tradition to the
extreme, to their own ends and to our national detriment, as witness the
Abraham Lincoln brigade during the Spanish Civil War and the current
illegal Zionist activities.) Our proposal is that this tradition be
revived specifically to further American national interests in the
present crisis.

[1 heading and 2 paragraphs (21-1/2 lines of source
text) not declassified]

c. Support of Indigenous Anti-Communist Elements in Threatened Countries
of the Free World.

Purpose: To strengthen indigenous forces combatting communism in
countries where Soviet political warfare is a threat to our national
security.

Description: This is a covert operation again utilizing private
intermediaries. To insure cover, the private American organizations
conducting the operation should be separate from the organizations
mentioned in previous projects. [3 lines of source
text not declassified] This project is a matter of urgency
because the communists are reported to be planning the disruption of ERP
through labor disturbances in France. [2 lines of
source text not declassified]

d. Preventive Direct Action in Free Countries.

Purpose: Only in cases of critical necessity, to resort to direct action
to prevent vital installations, other material, or personnel from being
(1) sabotaged or liquidated or (2) captured intact by Kremlin agents or
agencies.

Description: This covert operation involves, for example, (1) control
over anti-sabotage activities in the Venezuelan oil fields, (2) American
sabotage of Near Eastern oil installations on the verge of Soviet
capture, and (3) designation of key individuals threatened by the
Kremlin who should be protected or removed elsewhere.

8. It would seem that the time is now fully ripe for the creation of a
covert political warfare operations directorate within the Government.
If we are to engage in such operations, they must be under unified
direction. One man must be boss. And he must, as those responsible for
the overt phases of political warfare, be answerable to the Secretary of
State, who directs the whole in coordination.

9. [6-1/2 lines of source text not
declassified]

10. The National Security Council Secretariat would seem to provide the
best possible cover for such a directorate. Such cover would also permit
a direct chain of command from the Secretary of State and be a natural
meeting ground for close collaboration with the military
establishment.

Recommendations

11. There should promptly be established, under the cover of the National
Security Council Secretariat, a directorate of political warfare
operations to be known as the Consultative (or Evaluation) Board of the
National Security Council.

12. The Director should be designated by the Secretary of State and
should be responsible to him.

13. The Director should have initially a staff of 4 officers designated
by the Department of State and 4 officers designated by the Secretary of
National Defense.

14. The Board should have complete authority over covert political
warfare operations conducted by this Government. It should have the
authority to initiate new operations and to bring under its control or
abolish existing covert political warfare activities.

15. Specifically, (a) the four projects mentioned in paragraph 7 above
should be activated by the Board and (b) covert political warfare now
under CIA and theater commanders abroad should be brought under the
authority of the Board.

16. The coordination of the above covert operations with the overt
conduct of foreign policy should, of course, be accomplished through the
offices of the Secretary and Under Secretary of State.

* Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 273,
Records of the National Security Council, NSC 10/2. Top Secret. No drafting information appears
on the source text. An earlier, similar version, April 30, is ibid.,
RG 59, Records of the Department of State, Policy Planning Staff
Files 1944-47: Lot 64 D 563, Box 11. The Policy Planning Staff
minutes for May 3 state: “There was a discussion of the Planning
Staff Memorandum of April 30, 1948 on the inauguration of organized
political warfare. This paper was generally approved and Mr.
Kennan will present it
tomorrow for discussion at a meeting of NSC consultants.” (Ibid., Box 32)

1 Although
the following page of the source text indicates in an unidentified
hand that 3 lines were missing from the bottom of the previous page,
a comparison with the April 30 version of the memorandum cited in
the source note above identified that only the 6 words in brackets
were missing.

2 Although
the following page of the source text indicates that 3 lines were
missing from the bottom of the previous page, a comparison with the
April 30 version of the memorandum cited in the source note above
finds that no words were missing.

3 The words in brackets were
taken from the April 30 version; see footnote
1 above.

270. Draft Proposed NSC Directive270. Draft Proposed NSC DirectiveSource

Washington, May 5,
1948.

1. There is hereby established under the NSC the position of Director of Special Studies. The
Director shall be nominated by the Secretary of State and appointed by
the NSC.

2. The Director should have initially a full time staff of four
representatives assigned from the Department of State and one
representative each from the Departments of the Army, Navy and Air
Force, and the CIA, and one member to be designated by the Secretary of
National Defense.

3. For the purpose of coordinating covert operations as defined in this
paper, in the interest of national security, it shall be the duty of the
Director, under the direction of the National Security Council:

a. To arrange for the preparation, by his own staff or other agencies as
appropriate, of plans for covert operations.

b. To review all such plans, and if he approves them to arrange for their
execution by appropriate agencies.

c. To review the execution of such operations to insure that they are
being conducted in accordance with approved plans, provided that nothing
contained herein shall require the disclosure of secret intelligence
sources and methods.

d. To arrange for the development of a program for the conduct of covert
operations in time of war or national emergency to include such matters
as organization, training, equipment and logistical support.

4. The Director of Special Studies is charged with ensuring that such
covert activities are consistent with US foreign policies and overt
activities and that appropriate agencies of the US Government both at
home and abroad (including diplomatic and military representatives in
each area) are kept informed of such operations which will directly
affect them.

5. The Director is charged with giving timely notification of intended
plans and operations to directly interested governmental agencies. Any
disagreements arising should be resolved by the staff of the Director in
their respective agencies, and in event of no resolution of important
features of the plans or operations, the matter shall be referred to the
NSC.

6. Covert operations are understood to be all planned measures exclusive
of armed conflict by recognized military forces and overt information
emanating from a legitimate source designed to influence the thought,
morale, and behavior of a people in such a manner as to further the
accomplishment of national aims.

* Source:
National Archives and Records Administration, RG 273, Records of the
National Security Council, NSC 10/2.
Top Secret. No drafting information appears on the source text. For
another version, see the draft NSC
directive, May 4 (ibid.), in the Supplement.

271. Memorandum From Director of Central Intelligence Hillenkoetter to the Executive Secretary of the National Security Council (Souers)271. Memorandum From Director of Central Intelligence Hillenkoetter to the
Executive Secretary of the National Security Council (Souers)Source

Washington, May 5,
1948.

1. Reference is made to the draft of the proposed NSC Directive establishing the functions of a Director of
Special Studies—as distributed this date.1 This Agency desires
to place itself on record as follows:

a. If it appears desirable, in the interest of national security, to
designate an individual responsible for the planning and coordination of
psychological warfare activities, this Agency feels the individual
should be the present chief of current activities in that field.
War-time activities in that field should be a natural growth and
expansion of peace-time activities. The individual responsible for
future planning should be identical with the individual responsible for
current planning and operations.

b. The existing operation and its liaison with the Department of State is
handicapped only by the absence of a State Department officer having
authority to represent the Department in regard to over-all
policies.

c. It is assumed that the word “all”, in the first line of paragraph 3 of
the subject draft paper, is a typographical error in view of the
provisions of NSC 4-A and NSCID 5.

d. If the National Security Council feels, in opposition to subparagraphs
a, b, and c, above, that a necessity still exists for the appointment of
a Director of Special Studies, it is urgently recommended that one of
two actions be taken, as follows:

(1) Paragraphs 2 and 3 of the proposed directive be changed to read
substantially as follows:

“2. The Director should have initially only the necessary clerical staff
to perform his designated functions.

“3. For the purpose of planning covert psychological operations for
implementation by the operating Agency, in the interest of national
security, it shall be the duty of the Director, under the Direction of
the National Security Council:

“a. To develop a program for the conduct of both overt and covert
psychological operations in time of war or national emergency.

“b. To plan for emergency or war-time organization, training, equipment
and logistical support.”

(2) Divorce the existing covert psychological operations from the control
and operation of CIA by the rescission of NSC 4-A and place it under the control and operation of a
new Agency. Security in the conduct of this sensitive operation cannot
be maintained except through control by one Agency.

2. It will be noted that the proposed draft directive provides for the
full control of covert psychological operations without the
responsibility. It is not believed this is the intent of either the
Congress or the National Security Council as indicated in NSC 4-A, NSCID 5, and the National Security Act of 1947.

RH Hillenkoetter
Rear Admiral, USN

* Source: National Archives and Records
Administration, RG 273, Records of the National Security Council,
NSC 10/2. Top Secret.

1 Document 270.

272. Memorandum From Director of Central Intelligence Hillenkoetter to the Executive Secretary of the National Security Council (Souers)272. Memorandum From Director of Central Intelligence Hillenkoetter to the
Executive Secretary of the National Security Council (Souers)Source

Washington, May 6,
1948.

Reference is made to the attached draft copy of a proposed NSC Directive1 to be discussed by your Staff on 7 May 1948. We
have advised our representative to present our views on the subject
paper, as follows:

1. We feel the appointment of a Director of Special Studies for purposes
other than war-time planning is a dangerous duplication of existing
assigned functions.

2. We desire to call attention to the fact that this Agency, acting under
NSC 4-A, has made considerable
strides in the subject field, has obligated itself to a considerable
expenditure of funds for equipment, transportation, and experienced
personnel, and has made firm commitments for clandestine psychological
operations outside the United States for a long period of time.
Interference with this activity infers a disruption of current
activities and the possibility of serious breaks in security.

3. We feel that paragraph 3 of the proposed directive, if issued, should
be changed to read as follows:

“3. For the purpose of planning for war-time or emergency covert
psychological operations, in the interest of national security, it shall
be the duty of the Director, under the direction of the National
Security Council:

“a. To arrange for the preparation, by his own staff or other agencies as
appropriate, of plans for war-time or emergency covert psychological
operations.

“b. To be prepared to recommend area and material priorities in the field
of psychological warfare in the event of emergency or state of war.

“c. To develop a program for the organization, training, equipment, and
logistical support for war-time or emergency covert psychological
operations.”

4. We must call attention to the fact that paragraph 4 of the proposed
directive is an exact duplication of this Agency's directive under
NSC 4-A.

5. We must call attention to the fact that paragraph 5 of the proposed
directive is an exact duplication of our present arrangement under
NSC 4-A.

6. We feel that paragraph 6 of the proposed directive should either be
eliminated as being out-dated by events or that the word “psychological”
be added after the word “covert” in the first line of that paragraph and
the words “and overt information emanating from a legitimate source” be
deleted.

7. We feel that the proposed directive infers the necessity for a
rescission of NSC 4-A and the
reestablishment of covert psychological functions under an Agency other
than CIA. It is a step toward placing secret intelligence and Special
Operations (in the accepted international sense) under separate
agencies. We respectfully invite attention to our own experience and the
experience of other nations in this regard. There is no question but
that war-time operations require a division between combat (or tactical)
psychological warfare and strategic psychological warfare. From the
standpoint of national security, we strongly urge a realistic
understanding of our current needs as balanced against our needs in the
event of war.

8. In view of the above, we again urgently recommend that the present
operations under NSC 4-A be not
jeopardized and that war-time planning be placed in the hands of the
facility conducting current activities in the subject field.

RH Hillenkoetter
Rear Admiral, USN

* Source: National Archives and Records
Administration, RG 273, Records of the National Security Council,
NSC 10/2. Top Secret.

1 Most likely a reference to Document
270.

273. Memorandum From Director of Central Intelligence Hillenkoetter to the Executive Secretary of the National Security Council (Souers)273. Memorandum From Director of Central Intelligence Hillenkoetter to the
Executive Secretary of the National Security Council (Souers)Source

Washington, May 11,
1948.

SUBJECT

Psychological Operations

1. Reference is made to the proposed NSC
Directive, as drafted 7 May 1948,1 pertaining to covert
(psychological) operations. This Agency has several times, during the discussion phases of this
proposed directive, placed itself on record as opposed to the plan on
which the proposed directive is based. The proposed directive, if
enacted, will establish a staff function providing for Authority in a
delicate field of operation—without the Responsibility.

2. This Agency again strongly urges that the provision of NSC 4-A, as written, be continued without
change. If the National Security Council and the Joint Chiefs of Staff
feel the need for emergency and wartime planning in the covert
psychological warfare field, then we again suggest that advance planning
be made the responsibility of the facility currently in operation.

3. However, if the National Security Council approves this proposed draft
of 10 May 1948,2 the Central Intelligence Agency, of course, will
cooperate to the best of its ability in an endeavor to make a going
concern of the proposed Special Studies organization.

R. H. Hillenkoetter3
Rear Admiral, USN

* Source: Central Intelligence Agency Historical
Files, HS/HC-807, Item 22. Top Secret. The source text is a copy
transcribed for the CIA Historian in 1953. Also reproduced in CIA Cold War Records: The CIA under Harry Truman, p.
201.

1 The May 7
draft has not been found.

2 Not printed. (National
Archives and Records Administration, RG 273, Records of the National
Security Council, NSC 10/2) See the
Supplement.

3 Printed from a copy that indicates
Hillenkoetter signed the original.

274. Draft Report by the National Security Council274. Draft Report by the National Security CouncilSource

Washington, May 12,
1948.

NSC 10

DIRECTOR OF SPECIAL STUDIES

The Problem

1. To consider measures for the furtherance of covert operations in the
interest of our national security.

Analysis

2. The means employed by a nation in pursuit of its national objectives
may be both overt and covert. They range in time of peace from such
overt actions as political alliances, economic measures (as ERP), and
“white” informational activities, to such covert operations as
unacknowledged support of “friendly” foreign elements, “black”
propaganda and encouragement of underground resistance in hostile
states.

3. Having assumed greater international responsibilities than ever before
in our history and having been engaged in a “cold war” by the full might
of the Kremlin, the United States cannot afford to leave unmobilized or
unemployed its resources for covert operations. The United States cannot
afford in the future, in perhaps more serious political crises, to reply
upon improvised covert operations as was done at the time of the Italian
elections.

4. In NSC 4-A1 provision was made
for the conduct of certain covert psychological (propaganda) operations.
The State-Army-Navy-Air Force Coordinating Committee has considered such
matters as utilization of refugees from the USSR in the United States
national interest (SANACC 395),2
plans for evacuation of key foreign personnel (SANACC 396), demolition of oil
facilities (SANACC 398), and
psychological warfare (SANACC
304).3 In connection with
psychological warfare, the views of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, concurred
in by the State-Army-Navy-Air Force Coordinating Committee, have been
referred to the National Security Council for consideration. It is the
opinion of the Joint Chiefs of Staff that from the military point of
view “there should be established, as soon as practicable, under the
National Security Council, a Psychological Warfare Organization, but
with its peacetime scope and activities limited to that of a working
nucleus for planning and coordination” (SANACC 304/14).4 The Policy Planning Staff of the Department of
State has also recommended that covert operations be immediately
instituted under unified direction.5

5. In the light of the above considerations, there is a need for an
organization which is designed to strengthen and extend current covert
operations in the interest of our national security and to provide for
plans and preparations for the conduct, in time of war, of covert
operations and of the overt
phases of psychological warfare. The establishment of such an
organization will require the revision of NSC 4-A.

Conclusions

6. The proposed National Security Council Directive in Annex A should be
approved, and if approved, the proposed revision of NSC 4-A in Annex B should be approved

Annex A6

Proposed NSC Directive

1. There is hereby established under the National Security Council the
position of Director of Special Studies. The Director shall be nominated
by the Secretary of State and appointed by the National Security
Council.

2. The Director should have initially a staff of four members assigned
from the Department of State, one service member each from the Army,
Navy, and Air Force, and one member from the Central Intelligence
Agency. The Secretary of Defense may assign a member if he so desires.
The staff members will act both as assistants to the Director, in the
performance of his duties, and as liaison between him and their
respective agencies.

3. It shall be the duty of the Director, under the direction of the
National Security Council:

a. To be responsible for the preparation by his own staff or by other
agencies, as appropriate, of plans for all covert operations. It is
intended that each operating agency will develop the details of that
part of a plan covering its own operations.

b. To review all such plans and, if he approves them, to arrange for
their execution by appropriate agencies.

c. To review the execution of such operations to insure that they are
being conducted in accordance with approved plans, provided that nothing
contained herein shall require the disclosure of secret intelligence
sources and methods.

d. To develop an over-all program for the conduct of covert operations
and overt phases of psychological warfare in time of war or when
directed by the President, to include organization, training, equipment
and logistic support, and to arrange for initiation of such training and
preparations in time of peace as necessary for the prompt initiation of
such a program.

4. The Director is charged with:

a. Giving timely notification of intended plans and operations to each
government agency represented on his staff through the respective staff
members and to other government agencies which may be affected. Problems
arising in connection with the formulation of plans for or the conduct
of operations shall be resolved directly between the Director and the
agency or agencies involved.

b. Insuring that such covert activities are consistent with US foreign
policies and overt activities and that plans for war-time covert
operations and psychological operations are consistent with and
complement Joint Chiefs of Staff approved plans for military
operations.

5. The ends envisaged in this paper will require unvouchered funds other
than those already appropriated.

6. As used in this directive “covert operations” are understood to be all
activities (excluding armed conflict by recognized military forces,
espionage and counter-espionage) which are conducted or sponsored by
this government against hostile foreign states or groups or in support
of friendly foreign states or groups but which are so planned and
executed that any US Government responsibility for them is not evident
to unauthorized persons and if uncovered the US Government can plausibly
disclaim any responsibility for them. Specifically, such operations
shall include any covert activities related to propaganda; preventive
direct action, including sabotage, anti-sabotage, demolition and
evacuation measures; subversion against hostile states, including
assistance to underground resistance movements, guerrillas and refugee
liberation groups; and support of indigenous anti-communist elements in
threatened countries of the free world.

7. “Overt psychological warfare” referred to herein shall be construed to
mean information programs designed to facilitate the development of an
informed and intelligent understanding at home and abroad of the status
and progress of any war effort in which the United States may be engaged
and of the war policies, activities and aims of the Government.

Annex B7

Draft Revision of NSC 4-A

1. The National Security Council, taking cognizance of the vicious
psychological efforts and covert operations of the USSR, its satellite
countries and Communist groups to discredit and defeat the aims and activities of the United States
and other Western powers, has determined that, in the interests of world
peace and US national security, the overt foreign activities of the US
Government must be supplemented by covert operations.

2. The similarity of operational methods involved in covert operations
and covert intelligence activities makes the Central Intelligence Agency
an appropriate agency to conduct such operations. Therefore, under the
authority of Section 102 (d)(5) of the National Security Act of 1947,
the National Security Council:

a. Directs the Director of Central Intelligence to continue, within the
limit of available funds, such covert propaganda operations as may be
arranged with and approved by the Director of Special Studies in
accordance with the latter's directive from the National Security
Council.

b. Authorizes the Director of Central Intelligence to conduct such other
covert operations as may be arranged by the Director of Special Studies
in accordance with the latter's directive from the National Security
Council.

3. The Director of Central Intelligence is charged with ensuring that
appropriate agencies of the US Government, both at home and abroad
(including diplomatic and military representatives in each area), are
kept informed of such operations which will directly affect them.

4. Nothing contained herein shall be construed to require the Central
Intelligence Agency to disclose operational details concerning its
secret intelligence techniques, sources or contacts.

* Source: National Archives and Records
Administration, RG 273, Records of the National Security Council,
NSC 10/2. Top Secret.
Transmitted under a covering note from Souers to the NSC submitting the report for
consideration at an early meeting. For a May 10 draft of this
report, see the Supplement. (National Archives and Records
Administration, RG 273, Records of the National Security Council,
NSC 10/2)

1 Document 257.

2 The SANACC
numbers refer to series rather than to individual papers.

3 See, for example, Document 249.

4 JCS memorandum for SANACC, undated (Central
Intelligence Agency Historical Files, HS/HC-291) and SANACC memorandum for the Executive
Secretary of the National Security Council, April 12. (National
Archives and Records Administration, RG 273, Records of the National
Security Council, NSC 10/2) See the
Supplement for both; the JSC memorandum is filed under date of
January 1948.

5 See Document 269.

6 Top Secret. The proposed directive is
a further revision of Document 270.

7 Top Secret.

275. Memorandum From the Intelligence Survey Group to the Executive Secretary of the National Security Council (Souers)275. Memorandum From the Intelligence Survey
Group to the Executive Secretary of the National Security
Council (Souers)Source

Washington, May 13,
1948.

SUBJECT

Interim Report No. 2: Relations between Secret Operations and
Secret Intelligence

In connection with our study of the intelligence operations of the
Government, particularly those of CIA, we have been informed that a plan for developing certain
other covert operations is being submitted to the NSC. As we understand it, such operations
would be directed particularly towards affording encouragement to the
freedom-loving elements in those countries which have been over-run by
Communism and toward combating by covert means the spread of Communist
influence.

We understand that it is suggested that a Director of Special Studies, to
be nominated by the Secretary of State, and appointed by the NSC, with a staff of nine members assigned
from the Department of State, the armed services and CIA, be given the
responsibility to develop and give general direction to a program of
covert operations as indicated above, including work in the covert
psychological field, which under NSC 4a
has already been initiated in CIA.

The question of policy involved in these measures is not directly within
our terms of reference. However, these projects have an important
bearing on the future of the intelligence operations of CIA, and, for
this reason, we feel justified in commenting on this phase of the
subject.

We suggest, in particular, that further attention should be given to the
means for the carrying out of the special operations contemplated and
the relation between these operations and the proper conduct of secret
intelligence.

A central planning and coordinating staff, as proposed in the new plan,
is essential, but the centralized control of operations is equally
important. In this delicate field, actual control must be exercised by
the Director, who should be in intimate touch not only with plans and
policies but also with the details of the operations. We do not believe
that these types of operation can be “farmed” out to various existing
agencies of the Government without jeopardizing their effectiveness and
involving serious security risks. In particular, it would be dangerous
to have several unrelated and uncorrelated clandestine operations
carried out in such sensitive areas as those behind the Iron Curtain.
There would be duplication of effort, crossing of wires in the use of
clandestine agents, and serious risk for the chains and agents used in
the respective operations. In our opinion, the Director and staff, if
removed from actual operations, as apparently contemplated under the
proposed NSC directive, would not be
able to control this situation.

In carrying out these special operations, the Director and his staff
should have intimate knowledge of what is being done in the field of
secret intelligence and access to all the facilities which may be built
up through a properly constituted secret intelligence network. Secret
operations, particularly through support of resistance groups, provide
one of the most important sources of secret intelligence, and the
information gained from secret intelligence must immediately be put to
use in guiding and directing secret operations. In many cases it is
necessary to determine whether a particular agent or chain should
primarily be used for secret
intelligence or for secret operations, because the attempt to press both
uses may endanger the security of each.

The special operations contemplated will require a staff operating abroad
both under State Department and other cover, as in the case of secret
intelligence. Unless the personnel for both operations is under one
overall control in Washington, even though a measure of insulation is
provided in the field, there is likely to be overlapping of activities
and functions in critical areas which will imperil security.

The Allied experience in the carrying out of secret operations and secret
intelligence during the last war has pointed up the close relationship
of the two activities. The British, for example, who had separate
systems during the war, have now come around to the view that secret
intelligence and secret operations should be carried out under a single
operational head and have reorganized their services accordingly.

We recommend:

1. That a Director, subject to appropriate policy guidance as suggested
in the proposed NSC directive, should be
made responsible for all forms of covert activities, including secret
intelligence, secret operations, clandestine psychological work and such
other covert operations as may be assigned to the Director by the NSC.

2. That each branch of these covert activities should be under a chief
reporting to the Director.

3. That the Director should be immediately responsible to the NSC or to the Director of CIA as the NSC might determine.

The practical effect of the decision reached under point 3 would be to
determine whether CIA should continue to be charged with the collection
of secret intelligence. It would, in any case, continue to be the
recipient of all intelligence collected by the Director of Special
Studies, and even if secret intelligence were removed from its control,
CIA might be used as a “cover” agency for the new operations.

It had been our intention to reserve for our final report our
recommendations as to whether the collection of secret intelligence
should or should not continue to be a function of the CIA, as we had
wished to complete our survey of the entire intelligence set-up before
dealing with this key question.

However, if the NSC should now determine
that a program of secret operations is to be undertaken, and desires any
further views from us as to how this would affect the handling of secret
intelligence, we shall be glad to submit a report on this subject.

* Source: National
Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Records of the
Department of State, Records of the Executive Secretariat, NSC Files: Lot 63 D 351, NSC 4. Top Secret. The NSC appointed the Survey Group in
February 1948 to evaluate the performance of the Central
Intelligence Agency and the intelligence system generally. Its
members were Allen Dulles,
who served as chairman, Mathias F.
Correa, and William H.
Jackson.

276. Memorandum From the Director of the Policy Planning Staff (Kennan) to the Under Secretary of State (Lovett) and Secretary of State Marshall276. Memorandum From the Director of the Policy Planning Staff
(Kennan) to the
Under Secretary of State (Lovett) and Secretary of State MarshallSource

Washington, May 19,
1948.

Attached is an NSC paper, Director of
Special Studies, dated May 10, 1948.1 This is an important
matter—expansion of covert activities and establishment of a central
directorate over all such activities. I would be glad to explain it
personally to you, if you wish.

The underlying paper has been cleared with Bohlen but not with other
offices of the Department because it intimately involves NSC 4-A, a document knowledge of which for
security reasons has been limited to you, Assistant Secretary Allen, and the Policy Planning Staff.
It is, however, based largely on and adheres to the fundamental
principles of one prepared by this Staff, entitled “Political
Warfare”.2 Our paper on
political warfare was made available to Mr. Bohlen, Mr. Allen, and the four geographical
offices. They either gave affirmative approval or indicated no
objection. I therefore feel that the attached NSC paper would be generally acceptable to them.

Outside of this Department, the underlying NSC paper has been cleared by the other consultants to the
NSC and, I understand, it has been
approved in principle by Mr. Forrestal and the JCS.

The recommendation that the Director of Special Studies (covert
operations) be directly under the NSC
does not represent the ideal solution sought in the attached NSC paper. Organizationally, the ideal
solution would be to place the Director of Special Studies, for cover
and intelligence reasons, under the Director of CIA. S/P did not
recommend this solution because, at the present time, the CIA set-up in
respect both to personalities and organization is not favorable to such
a development and it is not likely that there will be any material
change in this situation in the near future. We therefore reluctantly
decided to let the CIA sleeping dog lie and recommend a separate
organization which might at a later date be incorporated in CIA.

Subsequent to approval of the attached paper by the NSC consult-ants, I received a copy of a
memorandum to Admiral Souers from the Survey Group headed by Allen Dulles (Tab A).3 Dulles hits the organizational
problem head on, recommending (a) removing secret intelligence from CIA and placing it, with
covert operations, under a separate director or (b) placing covert
operations under CIA—which we feel should not be done at this time. I
have high regard for Dulles'
experience and knowledge in this field and, therefore, attach great
weight to his recommendations. But the implications of his
recommendations are so far-reaching that I think they should be
discussed by you and Mr. Forrestal rather than in the lower levels of NSC.

Meanwhile, time is running out on us. If we are to engage effectively in
intelligent, organized covert activities, appropriations must be
obtained from the Congress. Congress, however, is soon to adjourn.
Therefore, if we are to get into operation in this field before the end
of summer, Congress must be approached immediately with a request for
the necessary funds.

Recommendations:4

It is recommended that :

1. You approve the principle underlying the attached NSC paper that this Government expand and
bring under unified direction its covert activities;

2. You propose to Mr. Forrestal
that together, in your discretion, you invite Dulles either to (a) replace
Hillenkoetter as Director of CIA, with covert operations under him, or
(b) assume directorship of covert operation and secret intelligence
under Hillenkoetter, or (c) accept the position of Director of Special
Studies as recommended in the attached NSC paper;

3. If Dulles accepts, you ask him
(a) to present for your and Mr. Forrestal's approval his plans for covert operations and
(b) immediately to approach Congress for the funds necessary to conduct
these operations;

4. If Dulles declines, you ask him
to recommend a Director of Special Studies as proposed in the underlying
NSC paper.

George F. Kennan5

* Source: National Archives and Records
Administration, RG 59, Records of the Department of State, Policy
Planning Staff Files 1947-53: Lot 64 D 563. A May 11 version of this
memorandum (ibid.), is in the Supplement.

1 Document 274.

2 Document 269.

3 Document 275.

4 There is no indication on
the source text that Marshall approved or disapproved the
recommendations.

5 Printed from a copy that bears this
typed signature.

277. Memorandum for the President of Discussion at the 11th Meeting of the National Security Council277. Memorandum for the President of Discussion at the 11th Meeting of
the National Security CouncilSource

Washington, May 20,
1948.

[Here follows discussion of agenda item 1, U.S. position on support for
Western Union and other related free countries.]

2. Director of Special Studies (NSC
10)1

Mr. Lovett said that the subject
report is intended to provide for an expansion of our covert activities.
He said that he had not had time to match up the subject report with the
comments of the Dulles survey
group. He would, therefore, like further time to study this matter.

Secretary Royall said that he was
opposed to creating new organizations. He asked why CIA could not direct
these activities instead of setting up a Director of Special
Studies.

Mr. Lovett said that from the
beginning of the National Intelligence Authority it was the general
feeling that CIA should have no police duties for fear that it would
become a Gestapo. He was afraid that if CIA undertook to conduct these
covert operations, the Congress might be afraid that it was becoming a
gestapo.

Secretary Royall felt that setting
up another organization would merely result in duplication of what CIA
is doing.

Secretary Forrestal noted that one
important consideration is that, if intelligence activities are to be
effective, they must be secret.

Mr. Souers noted that comments of the Joint Chiefs of Staff had not yet
been received.

Mr. Lovett said that although the
JCS comments would be interesting,
it must be remembered that we are not talking about wartime activities
but rather about activities to be conducted at the present time. He
noted, however, that the covert operations were of a type which the
State Department could not conduct.

Secretary Forrestal said that
these operations must not be conducted on an ad hoc personal basis as in
the past.

Mr. Lovett said that he had talked
with Senator Bridges2 who had at one time
offered to appropriate $50,000,000 for this type of operation.

Admiral Hillenkoetter noted that the Director of Special Studies could
not properly conduct sabotage and counter-sabotage. He felt that current
operation should be done as at present by CIA but should be taken over
by the Joint Chiefs of Staff in wartime.

Mr. Lay explained the background
of this report. The Joint Chiefs of Staff had proposed the creation of a
nucleus psychological warfare operation immediately. SANACC concurred in this proposal and
submitted it to the NSC for
consideration. The Policy Planning Staff of the Department of State had
proposed an organization to conduct political warfare. The NSC Staff considered both of these
proposals and prepared the subject report which envisaged a Director of
Special Studies under the NSC who would
control, but not conduct, all covert operations. The Dulles survey group on the other hand
proposed that both covert operations and secret intelligence activities
be performed by a single Agency, either under CIA or directly under the
NSC.

The National Security Council:3

Deferred action on this report until the next meeting of the Council.

[Here follows discussion of agenda items 3-8, protection of intelligence
sources and methods from unauthorized disclosures, scheduling of NSC meetings, documents resulting from
conversations with the British regarding the Eastern Mediterranean and
the Middle East, U.S. policy on atomic warfare, review of the world
situation as it relates to the security of the United States, and NSC status of projects.]

* Source: Truman
Library, Papers of Harry S.
Truman, President's Secretary's Files, Subject File.
Top Secret. Prepared on May 21. According to the minutes of the 11th
meeting, the following persons were present: Secretary of State
Marshall; Secretary of Defense Forrestal; Secretary of the Army Royall; Secretary of the Navy
Sullivan; Secretary of
the Air Force Symington;
NSRB Chairman Hill; Under Secretary of State
Lovett; DCI Hillenkoetter; NSC Executive Secretary Souers; and
Assistant Executive Secretary Lay. (Ibid.)

1 For the draft of NSC 10, see Document 274.

2 Senator Styles
Bridges, Republican-New Hampshire.

3 The following paragraph constitutes NSC Action No. 47. (National Archives
and Records Administration, RG 273, Records of the National Security
Council, Record of Actions, Box 55)

278. Memorandum From Director of Central Intelligence Hillenkoetter to the National Security Council278. Memorandum From Director of Central Intelligence Hillenkoetter to the
National Security CouncilSource

Washington, May 24,
1948.

SUBJECT:

Covert (Psychological) Operations

1. With regard to the discussions at the National Security Council
meeting the other afternoon on this subject, I wish to present the
following idea which I think possesses many advantages. I believe a plan
worked out, as suggested below, would overcome almost all of the
objections raised, and I believe it would be in consonance with the
Dulles-Jackson-Correa paper1 and would satisfy the
State Department's demands for a directing hand in what forms of
propaganda are to be used and what underground resistance movements are
to be supported. Furthermore, the suggested plan would be in consonance
with NSC 4-A and would answer the
objections of the Secretary of the Army regarding the establishment of a
new Agency and regarding making the National Security Council an
operating body. Also, I believe this suggested plan would receive the
warm support of the Joint Chiefs of Staff and certainly would be in line
with the intent of Congress as derived from conversations with both
Senators and Representatives.

2. To begin with, in the proposed paper2 on a Director of Special Studies, as presented, it is
necessary to divide “Covert Operations” into two sections: (1) those
operations that will be carried out in peace time and (2) those that
will be carried out only during war time or during a period when the
outbreak of war is imminent. The first group of such operations, those
to be carried out in peace time, will involve black propaganda,
including morale subversion, assistance to underground movements, and
support of resistance movements. The second group, which it is very
obvious that the United States would not perform except in relation to
war or when war was so close that it was felt it could not be avoided,
are the positive operations involving sabotage, anti-sabotage,
demolition, subversion against hostile states, guerrilla support, and
evacuation. The above division appears to be a most logical one inasmuch
as it is very difficult to believe that we would send in parties to
accomplish physical destruction in any phase of a “cold” war.

3. To carry out this concept, it is suggested that a paper be prepared to
set forth the following points:

(a) To provide in the State Department a high-level liaison officer for
covert operations. This officer should be of sufficient stature to have
the authority to pass on the forms of propaganda to be employed and to
tell the Central Intelligence Agency that it is the policy of the United
States to support such-and-such an underground or resistance movement
and to deny such support to another underground or resistance movement.
(It has been the lack of any such liaison with authority that has really
caused the present discussions.)

(b) Covert operations of the first group, involving black propaganda,
assistance to underground movements, and support of resistance
movements, to be carried on in peace time, shall be conducted by the
Central Intelligence Agency in accordance with NSC 4-A and in accordance with the policies derived from
the liaison officer mentioned in (a) above.

(c) Covert operations of the second group, involving sabotage,
anti-sabotage, demolition, etc., which are not to be carried on in peace
time but only in war time or in a state of emergency, to be considered
and planned now by a committee under the Joint Chiefs of Staff, with
members from the Armed Services and the Central Intelligence Agency. It
is to be emphasized that only “planning” is to be done now for this
second group of operations.

(d) Both groups of operations in war time or emergency will naturally
fall under the military commander. Upon the outbreak of war or in a
state of emergency, the organization conducting covert operations in (b)
above should be lifted bodily from the Central Intelligence Agency and
placed under the Joint Chiefs of Staff in relation to the plans for the
covert operations mentioned in (c) above.

(e) The Joint Chiefs of Staff will be kept informed by the Central
Intelligence Agency of the measures undertaken under (b) above, in order
that the transition from a peace time status to a war time status can be
made smoothly and efficiently.

RH Hillenkoetter

* Source: National Archives and Records
Administration, RG 273, Records of the National Security Council,
NSC 10/2. Top Secret. The
memorandum was originally addressed to Souers and was readdressed
for circulation to the members of the Council. The only other
difference between the original and the circulated version was the
addition of footnote 2 below to the latter.

1 Document 275.

2 NSC 10. [Footnote in the source
text.]

279. Memorandum From the Director of the Policy Planning Staff (Kennan) to the Under Secretary of State (Lovett)279. Memorandum From the Director of the Policy Planning Staff
(Kennan) to the
Under Secretary of State (Lovett)Source

Washington, May 25,
1948.

We are concerned here in the Staff about the political warfare question.
If the Executive Branch does not act soon to firm up its ideas as to
what should be done along these lines, the possibility of getting secret
funds out of Congress for covert operations will be lost. If this is not
done now, it will mean that this Government has given up hope of
conducting effective political warfare activities for the duration of
this administration.

If nothing is done along the lines recommended in NSC 10, this Staff will have to recommend that the State
Department press for the abrogation of NSC 4-A, which is not working out well.

If you want further information on the background of this project, I
would suggest that you talk with Davies,1 of my staff, who is thoroughly familiar
with it.

I understand that Allen Dulles is
arriving in Washington on Thursday and will be here through Saturday
morning. He is fully acquainted with the NSC 10 project and it is our hope that he will head the
organization. During his stay here, he will make himself available for
discussion and comment on NSC 10. We are
informed by Mr. Forrestal's
office that Mr. Forrestal is so
strongly in favor of implementation of NSC 10 that he is prepared to come over to the Department
to discuss the problem with you and Mr. Dulles if you wish.2

GFK

* Source: National
Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Records of the
Department of State, Policy Planning Staff Files, 1947-53: Lot 64 D
563, Box 719, Pol & Psych Warfare. Top Secret.

1
John P. Davies, Jr.

2 Next to
this paragraph a handwritten annotation from Lovett reads: “I think we ought to
meet with Forrestal promptly.
L”

280. Memorandum of Meeting280. Memorandum of MeetingSource

Washington, May 28,
1948.

MEMORANDUM ON A MEETING HELD IN MR. FORRESTAL'S OFFICE ON FRIDAY, 28 MAY 1948 TO CONSIDER
NSC-10

“DIRECTOR OF SPECIAL STUDIES”

PRESENT

Messrs. Forrestal, Lovett,
Allen Dulles and Blum; also for the first part of the
meeting, General Gruenther and Admiral Hillenkoetter; for the latter
part of the meeting, Mr. Souers

Admiral Hillenkoetter briefly reviewed the CIA
view regarding NSC-10, pointing out
particularly that a distinction should be made between covert operations
in time of peace, which should be assigned to CIA, and those covert
operations which would only be carried out in time of war, and
responsibility for the planning of which should be assigned to the
JCS.

General Gruenther reviewed the informal view of the JCS as developed at their Wednesday
meeting. He said that the JCS seemed to
favor, in principle, having secret operations as well as secret
intelligence in CIA, but said that they had questions as to CIA's
ability to handle this task. He asked whether Hillenkoetter would be
prepared to accept the idea of an advisory panel (as in NSC-10) if the operations were placed in
CIA. Hillenkoetter replied in the affirmative.

After Admiral Hillenkoetter and General Gruenther had left the meeting,
the discussion continued and the following agreement was reached by Mr.
Forrestal and Mr. Lovett.

(1) The present head of the Office of Special Operations in CIA should be
replaced.

(2) Responsibility for both secret intelligence and secret operations
should be assigned to CIA under the new head appointed under (1).

(3) This new office should have considerable autonomy within CIA, and its
head should be authorized to appeal directly to the National Security
Council in case of differences arising between him and the Director of
Central Intelligence.

(4) Allen Dulles, present at the
meeting, was asked whether he would accept the new post. He replied that
he did not think so, but that he would give his final decision in a few
days.

(5) Names of other persons who might fill the new post were
considered.

* Source:
National Archives and Records Administration, RG 273, Records of the
National Security Council, NSC 10/2.
Top Secret. Drafted on June 1 presumably by Blum. For background information on
this meeting, see Document 279.

281. Memorandum From the Executive Secretary (Souers) to the National Security Council281. Memorandum From the Executive Secretary (Souers) to the National Security CouncilSource

Washington, June 2,
1948.

SUBJECT

Establishment of a Special Services Unit in CIA

REFERENCE

NSC 10

The enclosed proposal on the above subject, which is suggested as a
possible alternative to the Conclusions in NSC 10, represents the results of an informal discussion
between the Secretary of Defense, the Under Secretary of State, and Mr.
Allen W. Dulles.1

At their request the enclosure is submitted herewith for consideration by
the National Security Council in connection with NSC 10, which is scheduled as Item 1 on the Agenda for the
NSC 12th Meeting on Thursday, June
3.2

Sidney W. Souers

Enclosure3

Proposal Submitted to the National Security Council

ESTABLISHMENT OF A SPECIAL SERVICES UNIT IN THECENTRAL INTELLIGENCE
AGENCY

Further consideration of the problem of developing our activities in the
field of covert political warfare leads to the following points which,
it is suggested, should serve
as a basis for the further consideration of this problem by the National
Security Council.

CIA provides the legal structure within which covert political activities
can be conducted and it is already charged under NSC 4-A with the conduct of covert psychological operations
abroad. In addition, CIA is already charged by National Security Council
Directive No. 5 with conducting espionage and counter-espionage
operations abroad, which operations are by their nature very closely
related to covert political activities as contemplated in NSC 10. It, therefore, seems desirable for
legal, as well as operational reasons, not to create a new agency for
covert political activities, but to place the responsibility for this
work within the legal structure of the Central Intelligence Agency and
closely relate it to secret intelligence.

The principal objection to this proposal arises out of doubt as to
whether CIA is presently so constituted that it can effectively handle
this problem which is so different from CIA's primary task of
coordinating intelligence activities and correlating and evaluating
intelligence relating to the national security. There is also fear lest
covert operations develop in a manner inconsistent with our foreign and
military policies.

These considerations lead to the following general conclusions and
recommendations:

(1) Responsibility for both secret intelligence and secret operations,
including covert psychological activities, should be placed in a new
Special Services unit to be created in CIA.

(2) This unit should have a considerable measure of autonomy within CIA
and its directors should be authorized to appeal directly to the
National Security Council in case of differences arising between him and
the Director of Central Intelligence.

(3) A highly qualified person recruited from outside the present ranks of
CIA and approved by the National Security Council should be appointed to
head the new unit in CIA.

(4) Provision should be made so that the chief of the newly created unit
has access to and receives policy guidance from the Department of State
and the Military Establishment.

(5) It is understood that this is a provisional arrangement subject to
review at a later date.

The following actions should be taken if the National Security Council
approves in principle the foregoing points:

(a) The Department of State, the National Military Establishment, and CIA
should jointly request funds for the proposed operation.

(b) The Executive Secretary, National Security Council, should be
directed to prepare a detailed directive covering the above points for
approval by the Council.

* Source: Truman Library, Papers of Harry S. Truman, President's
Secretary's File, Subject File. Top Secret. Attached to another copy
of this document is an earlier draft of the proposal with
handwritten changes. (National Archives and Records Administration,
RG 273, Records of the National Security Council, NSC 10/2)

1 Document 280.

2 See Document
283.

3 Top Secret.

282. Memorandum From George H. Butler of the Policy Planning Staff to the Under Secretary of State (Lovett) and Secretary of State Marshall282. Memorandum From George H.
Butler of the Policy Planning Staff to the Under
Secretary of State (Lovett) and Secretary of State MarshallSource

Washington, June 2,
1948.

The text of the paper regarding the establishment of a Special Serv-ices
unit in CIA, attached to the June 2nd memorandum from the Executive
Secretary of the National Security Council,1 conforms with my
understanding of Mr. Lovett's
views as a result of his conversation with Mr. Forrestal and Mr. Dulles.

The Policy Planning Staff suggests that the detailed directive referred
to in the final paragraph (b) of the paper be drafted in the first
instance by a representative to be designated by the Secretary and one
to be designated by Mr. Forrestal. Mr. Davies of the Policy Planning Staff has been
following this subject for the Department. He is temporarily abroad on
an official mission. Mr. Butler
of the Planning Staff is handling this part of Mr. Davies' work.

George H. Butler2

* Source: National Archives and Records
Administration, RG 59, Records of the Department of State, Policy
Planning Staff Files 1947-53: Lot 64 D 563. Top Secret.

1 Document 281.

2 Printed from a copy that bears this
typed signature.

283. Memorandum for the President of Discussion at the 12th Meeting of the National Security Council283. Memorandum for the President of Discussion at the 12th Meeting of
the National Security CouncilSource

Washington, June 3,
1948.

The following notes contain a brief summary of the discussion at the 12th
meeting of the National Security Council on June 3, 1948.

1. Director of Special Studies (NSC 10)

Mr. Lovett explained the proposal
which resulted from discussion between Messrs. Forrestal, Lovett and Dulles, at which General Gruenther and Admiral Hillenkoetter were also
heard.1 Mr. Lovett said that this proposal was a possible method of
meeting the problem to enable the Council to move rapidly in getting the
necessary funds.

Admiral Hillenkoetter noted the statement that the principal objection
was whether CIA could handle this job. He said that no protest or doubts
had been expressed up to the present. The Office of Special Operations
in CIA is practically autonomous now. However, Admiral Hillenkoetter
thought that the proposed right of appeal to the Council by the Director
of that office was totally wrong. Admiral Hillenkoetter stated that CIA
now has qualified people. The man heading this work is a Mr. Cassidy who
worked with General Donovan in
France. Admiral Hillenkoetter, therefore, did not see the need to put in
another man who could get necessary policy guidance. Admiral
Hillenkoetter wondered why he himself could not be given such
guidance.

Mr. Lovett said that the Dulles recommendations revolved around
having secret intelligence, covert operations and psychological warfare
all under one man who in turn would be under Admiral Hillenkoetter. Mr.
Lovett drew a distinction
between the overall function of CIA and these covert operations which
were a specialized extra curricular activity.

Secretary Forrestal said that the
proposals also took account of the criticisms that CIA should not be an
operating organization. These would be answered in part by making a
separate unit for covert operations from the parts of CIA which
discharged its coordinating and evaluating functions. Secretary
Forrestal said that the real
thing to face is the feeling that a military organization cannot deal
with the political subtleties in this activity. He felt that we must
have a very able man with a civilian type of mind.

Mr. Lovett pointed out that CIA is
intended to be a civilian agency.

Secretary Forrestal said that it
comes down to getting a man who will be acceptable to Admiral
Hillenkoetter, the type such as Mr. Dulles.

Admiral Hillenkoetter said that he had started carrying out NSC 4-A by getting Mr. Cassidy who was
recommended by General Donovan
and by David Bruce. Mr. Cassidy is a broker and banker from Chicago.

Mr. Lovett said that another point
about the right of appeal arose in part from the feeling that it might
be necessary, because of the multiplicity of military interests, for the
NSC to compose any differences that
arise.

Mr. Souers pointed out that NSC 4-A
originally proposed an advisory panel which was stricken out. The result
has been that there has been no
authoritative guidance. If no official tie-in is established, there is
the danger that this activity will be celled off.

Admiral Hillenkoetter said that the organization chart provided a tie-in
with State, but it was not official enough.

Secretary Royall said that he agreed with Admiral
Hillenkoetter's comments. Secretary Royall had no faith in the proposed right of appeal. He
felt that if you gave a man responsibility, you should give him the full
authority to run it.

Mr. Hill agreed with Secretary
Royall.

Secretary Forrestal said that he
was confident Mr. Cassidy could do the job. Admiral Hillenkoetter agreed
and said that Mr. Cassidy came with the best recommendation.

Mr. Lovett said that he certainly
could not ask for more than CIA had done [less than 1
line of source text not declassified].

Mr. Whitney said that there were
many papers on this subject. He pointed out that there is a JCS paper2 along the lines of Admiral Hillenkoetter's view which
had been monitored by General Vandenberg who feels quite strongly on
this subject.

Mr. Lovett said that the wording
of the second principle in the Forrestal-Lovett
proposals did not adequately convey their thought. They had understood
that the Director of the special unit would only be authorized to report
to the NSC on matters which affected the
interests of other agencies in this activity.

Admiral Hillenkoetter felt that this still has the same objectionable
features.

Mr. Souers pointed out that part of this activity is extra curricular to
CIA. Secret intelligence is all right, but the other activities
envisaged are not normal CIA functions.

Admiral Hillenkoetter felt that the other activities should be either in
CIA or set up entirely separate.

Secretary Forrestal said that
their proposals were an effort to preclude setting up a separate agency
but still to recognize the complexities in this field. He said that they
were trying to deal with the realities arising out of the criticisms in
Congress and elsewhere on this subject. He agreed that Admiral
Hillenkoetter must be allowed to keep his finger on this activity, but
felt there should still be a channel to the NSC.

Secretary Royall said that this
activity carried a lot of responsibility since it is felt to be
questionable morally in some quarters. He didn't see how the NSC could give responsibility without
authority.

Secretary Forrestal said that
giving it completely to CIA would not meet the criticisms regarding
military influence.

Secretary Royall felt that if CIA
was not civilian in nature, it was the fault of the NSC because CIA is supposed to be above the
military. If it is not, he felt that the NSC should correct the situation. His first choice is to
give it to CIA. The second choice would be to create a separate
organization. His third and last choice would be to retain the right of
appeal.

Mr. Lovett noted that the
Dulles recommendations were
that this activity be placed either under the NSC or under CIA as the NSC
desires. He understood that the Dulles point would be met by a tightly knit unit under
CIA, but he was concerned because this goes beyond CIA legislative
authority. There is no legal authority for this activity except that
residing in the NSC. He, therefore, felt
it was necessary to have an umbilical cord to the NSC.

Mr. Souers noted that Mr. Kennan
had made the point that State wants to work with partisan groups in this
country. He was afraid that this activity would be destroyed if they had
to work with an intelligence agency. Mr. Souers pointed out that in
peacetime State has the biggest stake. [1 line of
source text not declassified] When this is not done the
operations are likely to go astray. There must, therefore, be a direct
channel to State for policy guidance.

Admiral Hillenkoetter pointed out that CIA has a channel to State and
that CIA can operate properly if State will indicate what it wants.

Mr. Lovett said that the proposed
activity goes beyond the type of work done [less than
1 line of source text not declassified]. He felt there must be
some way, if funds are to be obtained, to show that NSC authority flows directly into this
unit.

Mr. Souers said this means that there must be an advisory group which can
come up to the NSC when it is not
satisfied.

Secretary Royall said that he
doesn't want any Army representative to have anything to do with this
activity. He felt it was no concern of the military in peacetime.

Secretary Forrestal pointed out
that the military were in the middle of the activities [less than 1 line of source text not
declassified].

Secretary Royall felt that they
shouldn't have been unless they were called in. In wartime the military
should run it. He felt that the military should stay out of the
political field, which includes this activity.

Mr. Lovett noted that the Army is
already in political activities regarding bases and other questions.

Secretary Royall said that the
military only presented their views to State on this subject. He thought
the military should give advice only.

Mr. Lovett said that no
Department, and certainly not State, should have any part in the conduct
of the covert operations. State, however, must be consulted and he thought that there would
probably also be some military aspects.

Secretary Forrestal said that
there were two practical aspects regarding obtaining necessary funds.
First, it is not clearly legal for CIA to conduct these activities.
Secondly, they must be tied into the State Department.

Mr. Lovett said that, if funds are
to be obtained, the NSC must move
quickly. He suggested that the proposal should be altered to delete the
right of appeal. Instead, all authority would be vested in the head of
CIA who would have an advisory panel which could report directly to the
NSC if they disagreed with Admiral
Hillenkoetter.

Admiral Hillenkoetter suggested, and Mr. Lovett agreed, that this panel might be modeled on the
Intelligence Advisory Committee. Admiral Hillenkoetter noted, however,
that the relations of this new panel with IAC would have to be carefully defined.

Mr. Lovett said that it was hard
for the NSC to define the specific
organization. He suggested, therefore, that the Council refer NSC 10 back to the Staff to prepare a new
paper, reflecting the approach discussed in the meeting. He felt this
paper should bring in the views of Secretary Royall and Admiral Hillenkoetter.

The National Security Council:3

Referred NSC 10 back to the NSC Staff for the preparation of a
substitute report reflecting the discussion at the meeting.

[Here follows discussion of agenda items 2-8, preparations for demolition
of oil facilities in the Middle East, handling of SANACC papers submitted for
consideration by the NSC, U.S. position
regarding the use of military power in Greece, NSC status of projects, U.S. position with respect to
Soviet-directed world communism, policy on atomic warfare, and trade
with Eastern Europe.]

* Source: Truman
Library, Papers of Harry S.
Truman, President's Secretary's Files, Subject File.
Top Secret. Prepared on June 4.

1 See Document
280.

2 Not
found.

3 The paragraph that follows constitutes
NSC Action No. 56. (National
Archives and Records Administration, RG 273, Records of the National
Security Council, Record of Actions, Box 55)

284. National Security Council Memorandum284. National Security Council MemorandumSource

Washington, June 4,
1948.

PRINCIPLES TENTATIVELY APPROVED BY THE NATIONAL SECURITY COUNCIL

1. Responsibility for both secret intelligence and secret operations,
including covert psychological activities, should be placed in a new
special services unit to be created in CIA.

2. This unit should have a considerable measure of autonomy within
CIA.

3. A highly qualified person recruited from inside or outside the present
ranks of CIA and approved by the National Security Council should be
appointed to head the new unit in CIA.

4. Provision should be made so that the chief of the newly created unit
has access to and receives policy guidance from the Department of State
and from the Office of the Secretary of Defense to the extent that
military questions are involved.

5. It is understood that this is a provisional arrangement subject to
review at a later date.

* Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 273,
Records of the National Security Council, NSC 10/2. Top Secret. No drafting information appears
on the source text but it was probably prepared by the NSC staff on the basis of the
discussion at the preceding day's meeting of the Council.

285. Memorandum From the Assistant Executive Secretary of the National Security Council (Lay) to Director of Central Intelligence Hillenkoetter285. Memorandum From the Assistant Executive Secretary of the National
Security Council (Lay) to Director of Central Intelligence HillenkoetterSource

Washington, June 7,
1948.

Attached is the proposed NSC Directive
which is based upon your paper of June 4, 1948 on the establishment of
an Office of Special Services.1

As indicated in our phone conversation this morning, the attached will be
discussed at an NSC Staff meeting at
10:00 a.m. tomorrow in Room 224, Old State Building.

James S. Lay, Jr.2

Attachment3

PROPOSED NSC DIRECTIVE

1. The National Security Council, taking cognizance of the vicious
psychological efforts and covert operations of the USSR, its satellite
countries and Communist groups to discredit and defeat the aims and
activities of the United States and other Western powers, has determined
that, in the interests of world peace and US national security, the
overt foreign activities of the US Government must be supplemented by
covert operations.

2. The Central Intelligence Agency provides the legal structure within
which all covert activities can be conducted and it is already charged
under NSC 4-A with the conduct of covert
psychological operations abroad. In addition, the Central Intelligence
Agency is already charged by the National Security Council with
conducting espionage and counter-espionage operations abroad. These
latter operations are by their very nature closely related to covert
operations. It therefore seems desirable, for legal as well as
operational reasons, not to create a new agency for covert operations,
but to place the responsibility for this mission within the legal
structure of the Central Intelligency Agency and closely relate it to
espionage and counter-espionage operations under the overall control of
the Director of Central Intelligence.

3. Therefore, under the authority of Section 102(d)(5) of the National
Security Act of 1947, the National Security Council hereby directs
that:

a. Responsibility for the conduct of covert operations, including covert
psychological operations conducted pursuant to NSC 4-A, in peacetime and for planning for such operations in time of war or
national emergency, shall be placed in a new Office of Special Services
to be created within the Central Intelligence Agency.

b. The Office of Special Services shall have, for security reasons, a
considerable measure of autonomy within the Central Intelligence
Agency.

c. A highly qualified person recruited from either inside or outside the
Central Intelligence Agency, nominated by the Director of Central
Intelligence and approved by the National Security Council, shall be
appointed to head the Office of Special Services.

d. The Director of Central Intelligence shall be responsible for ensuring
that:

(1) Covert operations are consistent with US foreign and military
policies and with overt activities, and that plans for wartime covert
operations are consistent with and complement Joint Chiefs of Staff
approved plans for military operations.

(2) Appropriate agencies of the US Government, both at home and abroad
(including diplomatic and military representatives in each area), are
kept informed of such operations which will directly affect them.

e. To assist the Director of Central Intelligence in discharging the
responsibilities in d above, there shall be established an Operations
Advisory Committee composed of one representative of the Secretary of
State and one representative of the Secretary of Defense. These
representatives may have such assistants and staffs as are required by
them. The functions of this Committee shall be:

(1) To furnish authoritative policy guidance on covert operations to the
Director of Central Intelligence.

(2) To assist the Director of Central Intelligence in the preparation of
all plans for such operations. Where disagreement arises between the
Director of Central Intelligence and one or more members of the
Operations Advisory Committee over such plans, the matter shall be
forwarded to the National Security Council for decision.

f. Supplemental funds for the conduct of the proposed operations for
fiscal year 1949 shall be immediately requested. Thereafter operational
funds for these purposes will be included in normal Central Intelligence
Agency Budget requests.

4. As used in this directive, “covert operations” are understood to be
all activities (excluding armed conflict by recognized military forces,
espionage and counter-espionage) which are conducted or sponsored by
this Government against hostile foreign states or groups or in support
of friendly foreign states or groups but which are so planned and
executed that any US Government responsibility for them is not evident
to unauthorized persons and if uncovered the US Government can plausibly
disclaim any responsibility for them. Specifically, such operations
shall include any covert
activities related to propaganda; preventive direct action, including
sabotage, anti-sabotage, demolition and evacuation measures; subversion
against hostile states, including assistance to underground resistance
movements, guerrillas and refugee liberation groups; and support of
indigenous anti-communist elements in threatened countries of the free
world.

5. This Directive supersedes the directive contained in NSC 4-A, which is hereby cancelled.

* Source: National Archives and Records
Administration, RG 273, Records of the National Security Council,
NSC 10/2. Top Secret.

1 Not printed.
(Ibid.) See the Supplement.

2 Printed from a copy that bears this typed
signature.

3 Although there were editorial changes and
some rearrangement of paragraphs, this draft closely follows the
text of the CIA draft mentioned in the covering memorandum and
footnote 1 above. The major difference between the two versions is
that the NSC reworking broadens the
authority of the Operations Advisory Committee and gives its members
a right of appeal to the NSC in
disputes with the Director of Central Intelligence.

286. Memorandum From the Director of the Policy Planning Staff (Kennan) to the Under Secretary of State (Lovett)286. Memorandum From the Director of the Policy Planning Staff
(Kennan) to the
Under Secretary of State (Lovett)Source

Washington, June 8,
1948.

The Staff of the National Security Council has under discussion the
attached paper1 relating to secret operations.
It is our understanding that the paper represents the results of
discussions which took place at a full Council meeting on June 3.

This is a project which I believe emanates largely from the initiative of
the Policy Planning Staff, which has been trying for several months to
help devise some means by which this Government could conduct political
warfare as an integral part of its foreign policy.

The proposal embodied in the attached paper does not appear to us to meet
this need, and we feel that the arrangements which it envisages might
easily operate to cause embarrassment to this Government.

It is our view that these things, if they are to be done at all, must be
done under the intimate direction and control of this Department. If
this cannot be arranged (and I understand the difficulties which stand
in the way), I think it would be better to withdraw this paper entirely
and to give up at this time the idea of attempting to conduct political
warfare.

This is a heavy decision to take, because our policy in Europe, in
particular, will remain severely hampered in application unless it is
supplemented in this way. But
two of the most important elements of our European policy: namely, the
administration of the ERP, and the control of policy with respect to
Germany, have already passed largely out of the hands of this
Department; and rather than have a third major factor of European policy
handled elsewhere in the Government, I think it would be better not to
have it handled at all.

I therefore ask permission to inform Mr. Souers that the State Department
wishes to withdraw this paper.2

I further recommend that this Department request the cancellation of
NSC 4, which is not operating
satisfactorily.

Should you not wish the enclosed paper to be withdrawn from the agenda of
the NSC, I would appreciate it if you would let me know whether there
are any modifications of it you would wish to have made before it comes
before the Council for final approval.

George F. Kennan

* Source: National
Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Records of the
Department of State, Policy Planning Staff Files 1947-53: Lot 64 D
563, Box 719, Pol & Psych Warfare. Top Secret. The source text
contains the handwritten annotation, “Contents presented orally
6/8/48.”

1 This memorandum has two
attachments, Documents 284 and 285.

2 There is no
indication in the source text whether the recommendations were
approved or disapproved.

287. Letter From Director of Central Intelligence Hillenkoetter to the Assistant Executive Secretary of the National Security Council (Lay)287. Letter From Director of Central Intelligence Hillenkoetter to the
Assistant Executive Secretary of the National Security Council
(Lay)Source

Washington, June 9,
1948.

Dear Jimmy: The attached represents our general thinking about the new
draft.1 I should like to suggest that,
since State evidently will not go along with CIA operating this
political warfare thing in any sane or sound manner, we go back to the
original concept that State proposed. Let State run it and let it have
no connection at all with us. It seems to me that this is the only thing that will satisfy State in
any way and rather than try to keep a makeshift in running order,
subject to countless restrictions which can only lead to continued
bickering and argument, I think maybe the best idea is to go back and
make the OSP work for State alone.

I am sending this letter for your own information and, of course, for
Admiral Souers and have made it separate in order that it need not be
forwarded with our comments on the last draft.

Sincerely,

R. H. Hillenkoetter2

Rear Admiral, USN

Attachment3

Memorandum From Director of Central Intelligence Hillenkoetter to the
Assistant Executive Secretary of the National Security Council
(Lay)

Washington, June 9, 1948.

SUBJECT

Proposed NSC Directive

1. The draft directive of 8 June 1948 is considered much weaker and less
satisfactory than that of last Friday, 4 June.4
Further, the latest draft is much more inconsistent and much less
organizationally sound than the 4 June paper.

2. For example, in para. 2 of the draft of 8 June, reasons are stated why
the new office should be placed under the Central Intelligence
Agency—then along in para. 3c are stated a number of restrictions on
what can and cannot be done, all of such restrictions leading to
confusion and chaos. Suppose the Director of Central Intelligence is out
of town, then does the work of the Special Projects stop, does it “free
wheel”, or does it work with the Acting Director of Central
Intelligence? All of this remains in doubt by the statement “the head of the Office of Special
Projects shall report directly to the Director of Central Intelligence.”
In the present set-up of the Central Intelligence Agency, the head of
any branch can see the Director of Central Intelligence any time
desired—the door is always open. It would seem that a new branch should
come in, in a similar manner. The need for special measures, security or
otherwise, exists as much for our present Office of Special Operations
as it would for the new Office of Special Projects, and the present
set-up does not seem to hamper the Office of Special Operations, nor can
I see why a similar set-up should hamper the Office of Special
Projects.

3. Also, what is meant by “to the maximum degree consistent with
efficiency, the Office of Special Projects shall operate independently
of other components of Central Intelligence Agency”? Does this mean that
the Office of Special Projects will have its own administrative staff,
its own budget staff, its own communications net, its own services, etc.
and etc? And, who is to decide what is the “maximum degree consistent
with efficiency”—the Director of Central Intelligence, the Chief of
Office of Special Projects, the National Security Council, or who? This
paragraph cannot be accepted as is. I should much prefer the working of
the corresponding paragraph (3b) in the draft of 4 June.

4. It would seem that either the National Security Council has confidence
in the operation of the Office of Special Projects by the Central
Intelligence Agency or it has not. If such confidence exists, then the
Central Intelligence Agency should be directed to operate the new office
subject to a general declaration of policy by the National Security
Council. If such confidence does not exist, then the Central
Intelligence Agency should not be expected or directed to operate the
Office of Special Operations in any manner.

R. H. Hillenkoetter5
Rear Admiral, USN

* Source: Central Intelligence Agency Historical
Files, HS/HC-807, Item 25. Top Secret. The source text is a copy
transcribed for the CIA Historian on March 26, 1953. Also reproduced
in CIA Cold War Records: The CIA under Harry Truman, pp.
203-205.

1 Reference is to a draft NSC directive of June 8 not found but
referred to in the enclosure.

2 Printed from a copy that indicates
Hillenkoetter signed the original.

3 Top Secret. The source text is a
copy transcribed for the CIA Historian on March 26, 1953.

4 See Document 285.

5 Printed from a copy that indicates
Hillenkoetter signed the original.

288. Note by the Executive Secretary (Souers) to the National Security Council288. Note by the Executive Secretary (Souers) to the National Security CouncilSource

Washington, June 15,
1948.

NSC 10/1

OFFICE OF SPECIAL PROJECTS

Reference: NSC 10

At its 12th meeting the National Security Council referred NSC 10 back to the NSC Staff for the preparation of a substitute report
reflecting the discussion at that meeting.1

Pursuant to the above action, the enclosed draft National Security
Council Directive, prepared by the NSC
Staff as a substitute for NSC 10, is
submitted for consideration by the National Security Council at its 13th
meeting to be held on Thursday, June 17, 1948.

Sidney W. Souers2

Enclosure3

PROPOSED NATIONAL SECURITY COUNCIL DIRECTIVE

1. The National Security Council, taking cognizance of the vicious covert
activities of the USSR, its satellite countries and Communist groups to
discredit and defeat the aims and activities of the United States and
other Western powers, has determined that, in the interests of world
peace and US national security, the overt foreign activities of the US
Government must be supplemented by covert operations.

2. The Central Intelligence Agency is charged by the National Security
Council with conducting espionage and counter-espionage operations abroad. It therefore seems
desirable, for operational reasons, not to create a new agency for
covert operations, but in time of peace to place the responsibility for
them within the structure of the Central Intelligence Agency and
correlate them with espionage and counter-espionage operations under the
overall control of the Director of Central Intelligence.

3. Therefore, under the authority of Section 102(d)(5) of the National
Security Act of 1947, the National Security Council hereby directs that
in time of peace:

a. A new Office of Special Projects shall be created within the Central
Intelligence Agency, and under the policy guidance of an Operations
Advisory Committee to be established shall plan and conduct covert
operations; and in coordination with the Joint Chiefs of Staff shall
plan and prepare for the conduct of such operations in wartime.

b. A highly qualified person, nominated by the Secretary of State,
acceptable to the Director of Central Intelligence and approved by the
National Security Council, shall be appointed as Chief of the Office of
Special Projects.

c. The Chief of the Office of Special Projects shall report directly to
the Director of Central Intelligence. For purposes of security and of
flexibility of operations, and to the maximum degree consistent with
efficiency, the Office of Special Projects shall operate independently
of other components of Central Intelligence Agency.

d. There shall be established an Operations Advisory Committee composed
of one representative of the Secretary of State and one representative
of the Secretary of Defense. These representatives shall be provided
assistants and staffs as necessary by their respective Secretaries. The
functions of this Committee shall be:

(1) To furnish authoritative policy guidance on covert operations to the
Director of Central Intelligence.

(2) To assist in the preparation of all plans for such operations. In
disagreements arising between the Director of Central Intelligence and a
member of the Operations Advisory Committee over such plans, the matter
shall be referred to the National Security Council for decision.

e. The Director of Central Intelligence shall be responsible for:

(1) Ensuring through the Operations Advisory Committee that covert
operations are planned and conducted in a manner consistent with US
foreign and military policies and with overt activities, and that plans
for wartime covert operations are also drawn up with the assistance of a
representative of the Joint Chiefs of Staff and are accepted by the
latter as being consistent with and complementary to approved plans for
wartime military operations.

(2) Informing, through appropriate channels, agencies of the US
Government, both at home and abroad (including diplomatic and military
representatives in each area), of such operations as will affect
them.

f. Covert operations pertaining to economic warfare will be conducted by
the Office of Special Projects under the guidance of the departments and
agencies responsible for the planning of economic warfare.

g. Supplemental funds for the conduct of the proposed operations for
fiscal year 1949 shall be immediately requested. Thereafter operational
funds for these purposes shall be included in normal Central
Intelligence Agency Budget requests.

4. Covert operations, in time of war or emergency when the President
directs, shall be conducted under appropriate arrangements to be
recommended by the Office of Special Projects in collaboration with the
Joint Chiefs of Staff and approved by the National Security Council.

5. As used in this directive, “covert operations” are understood to be
all activities (except as noted herein) which are conducted or sponsored
by this Government against hostile foreign states or groups or in
support of friendly foreign states or groups but which are so planned
and executed that any US Government responsibility for them is not
evident to unauthorized persons and that if uncovered the US Government
can plausibly disclaim any responsibility for them. Specifically, such
operations shall include any covert activities related to: propaganda;
economic warfare; preventive direct action, including sabotage,
anti-sabotage, demolition and evacuation measures; subversion against
hostile states, including assistance to underground resistance
movements, guerrillas and refugee liberations groups, and support of
indigenous anti-communist elements in threatened countries of the free
world. Such operations shall not include armed conflict by recognized
military forces, espionage, counter-espionage, and cover and deception
for military operations.

6. This Directive supersedes the directive contained in NSC 4-A, which is hereby cancelled.

* Source: National Archives and Records
Administration, RG 273, Records of the National Security Council
NSC 10/2. Top Secret. Addressed
to the Secretaries of State, Defense, Army, Navy, and Air Force and
the Chairman of the National Security Resources Board. The typed
date on the cover sheet of June 18 has been changed by hand to June
15.

1 See Document 283.

2 Printed from a copy that
bears this typed signature.

3 Top Secret. The draft directive
closely resembles an earlier version, dated June 10, which was sent
to the NSC Consultants for comment
in a June 11 memorandum from James S.
Lay, Jr., the Assistant Executive Secretary.
(National Archives and Records Administration, RG 273, Records of
the National Security Council, NSC
10/2) See the Supplement.

289. Memorandum From the Director of the Policy Planning Staff (Kennan) to the Under Secretary of State (Lovett) and Secretary of State Marshall289. Memorandum From the Director of the Policy Planning Staff
(Kennan) to the
Under Secretary of State (Lovett) and Secretary of State MarshallSource

Washington, June 16,
1948.

Attached is the draft of NSC 10/11 on the subject of covert activities.
It has been drawn up to meet the requirements contained in the 4-point
statement approved by the NSC on June 4,
1948.2

Since this paper was prepared on the basis of a top-level NSC decision, it has not been circulated in
the Department for clearance.

I do not think that this arrangement will meet the more important needs
of this Government for the conduct of political warfare, as urged by
John Foster Dulles, Anne O'Hare McCormick and many other people. It
draws too sharp a distinction between operations and planning. It is too
remote from the conduct of foreign policy. And we will not be likely to
find a suitable person to head it.

Nevertheless, I think we had better accept the paper. My reasons are
these:

(a) It is probably the best arrangement we can get at this time.

(b) It is important that some funds be obtained from Congress this year
for minor activities of this nature.

(c) We will at least know where we stand in these matters.

You will note that as the paper is now drafted, it would be up to the
Secretary of State to nominate the person to be appointed Chief of the
Office of Special Projects under the Director of Central
Intelligence.

George F. Kennan3

* Source: National Archives and Records
Administration, RG 59, Records of the Department of State, Policy
Planning Staff Files 1947-53: Lot 64 D 563, Box 719, Pol & Psych
Warfare. Top Secret.

1 See the enclosure to Document 288.

2 Document 284.

3 Printed from a copy that bears this
typed signature.

290. Memorandum From the Director of the Policy Planning Staff (Kennan) to the Under Secretary of State (Lovett) and Secretary of State Marshall290. Memorandum From the Director of the Policy Planning Staff
(Kennan) to the
Under Secretary of State (Lovett) and Secretary of State MarshallSource

Washington, June 17,
1948.

With further reference to the draft of NSC 10/11 which is on the
agenda of today's meeting of the National Security Council, the Joint
Chiefs of Staff have now examined this paper and have asked that
paragraph 4 be re-drafted as follows:

“4. In time of war or national emergency or when the President directs,
all plans for covert operations shall be coordinated with the Joint
Chiefs of Staff and the execution of covert operations in military
theaters shall be under the control of the Joint Chiefs of Staff.”

I find this wording reasonable and appropriate, from the standpoint of
this Department.

George F. Kennan2

* Source: National Archives and Records
Administration, RG 59, Records of the Department of State, Policy
Planning Staff Files 1947-53: Lot 64 D 563, Box 719, Pol & Psych
Warfare. Top Secret.

1 See the enclosure to
Document 288.

2 Printed from a copy that bears this
typed signature.

291. Memorandum for the President of Discussion at the 13th Meeting of the National Security Council291. Memorandum for the President of Discussion at the 13th Meeting of
the National Security CouncilSource

Washington, June 17,
1948.

[Here follows discussion of agenda item 1, trade relations with Eastern
Europe.]

2. Office of Special Projects (NSC 10/1)1

Mr. Souers read the comments of the Joint Chiefs of Staff,2 which proposed a change in
paragraph 4 of NSC 10/1.

Secretary Royall said he had the
same doubt as at the last meeting concerning paragraph 3d. He said that
he still hates to see any part of the National Military Establishment
given the responsibility for policy guidance on such activities during
peacetime.

Mr. Lovett recalled that at the
last meeting the Council had discussed the choice between the Secretary
of Defense or the Joint Chiefs of Staff to represent the military point
of view. He thought the Council had agreed upon representation by the
Secretary of Defense.

Mr. Souers stressed his belief that the State Department must dominate
these activities in peacetime.

Mr. Lovett agreed, but also felt
that, as long as we have military and naval attaches, the Agency
conducting these activities must have military advice on long-range
plans.

Secretary Forrestal recalled that
the current proposal was based upon the advice of the Joint Chiefs of
Staff.

Secretary Royall said that he
would prefer that military representatives merely be kept advised of
these activities but not given responsibility for them as the subject
paper appears to do.

Mr. Lovett felt that we would only
be kidding ourselves if we think that either the political or military
agencies can be relieved of the responsibility.

Secretary Symington thought that
there was a great deal in what Secretary Royall said. Secretary Symington felt that the wording concerning policy
guidance was very broad and tended to give the military broad
responsibility in the field in peacetime. He thought that the National
Security Council was the place where the State Department tells the
military what our foreign policies are.

Mr. Lovett did not agree with this
view. He felt that the NSC was a work
room to reconcile advice to the President from both political and
military points of view.

Secretary Royall thought that the
reference to an Operations Advisory Committee should be stricken from
the paper and a general paragraph substituted therefor.

Mr. Lovett expressed the firm
belief that the National Security Council would be held responsible for
these activities regardless of the language in this directive.

Secretary Royall thought that CIA
should ask for advice when it needed it and that the military should
give this advice only when military questions were involved.

Secretary Forrestal said that this
activity must represent a composite of both political and military
interests.

Secretary Royall said that in
peacetime this is not a proper field for military operation.

Mr. Lovett believed that the
military does have responsibility and must, therefore, be tied in.

Secretary Royall felt that to make
the military responsible for covert operations gets into a dangerous
field.

Secretary Symington agreed with
Secretary Royall. Secretary
Symington expressed the fear
that these activities would be made public and there would be a tendency
to discredit the military agencies more than the civilian.

Mr. Lovett pointed out that the
military agencies are now involved in the NSC in the relation of four to one. He believed that the
military should be represented on a staff planning level even if they
were not in the line of authority. Mr. Lovett pointed out that, if any future Pearl Harbor
occurs, it cannot be said that State did not tell the military what was
going on. There is now complete interchange of advice through the
National Security Council and all members thereof will be held
responsible if any future Pearl Harbor occurs.

Mr. Lay suggested, and the
Council approved, the deletion of paragraph 3d and amendments in
paragraphs 3a and e.

The National Security Council:3

Approved the directive in NSC 10/1,
subject to deletion of paragraph 3d and amendments to paragraphs 3a and
e and 4.

Note: Amended directive subsequently issued as NSC 10/2.4

[Here follows discussion of agenda items 3-6, Turkish arsenal aid, U.N.
temporary commission in Korea, review of the world situation as it
relates to the security of the United States, and NSC status of projects.]

* Source: Truman
Library, Papers of Harry S.
Truman, President's Secretary's Files, Subject File.
Top Secret. Prepared on June 18. According to the minutes of the
13th meeting, the following persons were present: Forrestal, Lovett, Royall, Sullivan, Symington, Hill, Hillenkoetter, Souers, and Lay. (Ibid.)

1 See
the enclosure to Document 288.

2 Not found.

3 The following paragraph and note constitute
NSC Action No. 65. (National
Archives and Records Administration, RG 273, Records of the National
Security Council, Record of Actions, Box 55)

4 Document 292.

292. National Security Council Directive on Office of Special Projects292. National Security Council Directive on Office of Special
ProjectsSource

Washington, June 18,
1948.

NSC 10/2

1. The National Security Council, taking cognizance of the vicious covert
activities of the USSR, its satellite countries and Communist groups to
discredit and defeat the aims and activities of the United States and
other Western powers, has determined that, in the interests of world
peace and US national security, the overt foreign activities of the US
Government must be supplemented by covert operations.

2. The Central Intelligence Agency is charged by the National Security
Council with conducting espionage and counter-espionage operations
abroad. It therefore seems desirable, for operational reasons, not to
create a new agency for covert operations, but in time of peace to place
the responsibility for them within the structure of the Central
Intelligence Agency and correlate them with espionage and
counter-espionage operations under the over-all control of the Director
of Central Intelligence.

3. Therefore, under the authority of Section 102(d)(5) of the National
Security Act of 1947, the National Security Council hereby directs that
in time of peace:

a. A new Office of Special Projects shall be created within the Central
Intelligence Agency to plan and conduct covert operations; and in
coordination with the Joint Chiefs of Staff to plan and prepare for the
conduct of such operations in wartime.

b. A highly qualified person, nominated by the Secretary of State,
acceptable to the Director of Central Intelligence and approved by the
National Security Council, shall be appointed as Chief of the Office of
Special Projects.

c. The Chief of the Office of Special Projects shall report directly to
the Director of Central Intelligence. For purposes of security and of
flexibility of operations, and to the maximum degree consistent with
efficiency, the Office of Special Projects shall operate independently
of other components of Central Intelligence Agency.

d. The Director of Central Intelligence shall be responsible for:

(1) Ensuring, through designated representatives of the Secretary of
State1 and of the Secretary of Defense, that covert
operations are planned and conducted in a manner consistent with US
foreign and military policies and with overt activities. In
disagreements arising between the Director of Central Intelligence and
the representative of the Secretary of State or the Secretary of Defense
over such plans, the matter shall be referred to the National Security
Council for decision.

(2) Ensuring that plans for wartime covert operations are also drawn up
with the assistance of a representative of the Joint Chiefs of Staff and
are accepted by the latter as being consistent with and complementary to
approved plans for wartime military operations.

(3) Informing, through appropriate channels, agencies of the US
Government, both at home and abroad (including diplomatic and military
representatives in each area), of such operations as will affect
them.

e. Covert operations pertaining to economic warfare will be conducted by
the Office of Special Projects under the guidance of the departments and
agencies responsible for the planning of economic warfare.

f. Supplemental funds for the conduct of the proposed operations for
fiscal year 1949 shall be immediately requested. Thereafter operational
funds for these purposes shall be included in normal Central
Intelligence Agency Budget requests.

4. In time of war, or when the President directs, all plans for covert
operations shall be coordinated with the Joint Chiefs of Staff. In
active theaters of war where American forces are engaged, covert
operations will be conducted under the direct command of the American
Theater Commander and orders therefor will be transmitted through the
Joint Chiefs of Staff unless otherwise directed by the President.

5. As used in this directive, “covert operations” are understood to be
all activities (except as noted herein) which are conducted or sponsored
by this Government against hostile foreign states or groups or in
support of friendly foreign states or groups but which are so planned
and executed that any US Government responsibility for them is not
evident to unauthorized persons and that if uncovered the US Government
can plausibly disclaim any responsibility for them. Specifically, such
operations shall include any covert activities related to: propaganda,
economic warfare; preventive direct action, including sabotage,
anti-sabotage, demolition and evacuation measures; subversion against
hostile states, including assistance to underground resistance
movements, guerrillas and refugee liberation groups, and support of
indigenous anti-communist elements in threatened countries of the free
world. Such operations shall not include armed conflict by recognized
military forces, espionage,
counter-espionage, and cover and deception for military operations.

6. This Directive supersedes the directive contained in NSC 4-A, which is hereby cancelled.

* Source: National Archives and
Records Administration, RG 273, Records of the National Security
Council, NSC 10/2. Top Secret.
Although undated, this directive was approved by the National
Security Council at its June 17 meeting and the final text,
incorporating changes made at the meeting, was circulated to members
by the Executive Secretary under a June 18 note. (Ibid.) See the
Supplement. NSC 10/2 and the June 18
note are also reproduced in CIA Cold War Records:
The CIA under Harry
Truman, pp. 213-216.

1 According to an August 13
memorandum from Davies to Kennan, Kennan was subsequently appointed as the
representative of the Secretary of State. (National Archives and
Records Administration, RG 59, Records of the Department of State,
Policy Planning Staff Files 1947-53: Lot 64 D 563) See the
Supplement.

293. Memorandum From Director of Central Intelligence Hillenkoetter to the Chief of Naval Operations (Denfeld)293. Memorandum From Director of Central Intelligence Hillenkoetter to the
Chief of Naval Operations (Denfeld)Source

Washington, June 18,
1948.

SUBJECT

Project for high level balloon research and development

1. The Central Intelligence Agency has developed an effective method of
penetrating the Iron Curtain with the use of high level balloons.

2. Naval officers with special technical training and essential
background of upper air conditions are required to effectively carry out
this project. It is requested that the Chief of Naval Operations issue
the necessary directive to implement this project as discussed and
approved verbally between representative of this office and Admiral
Denfeld, Vice Admiral Price1 and Rear Admirals Cassady2 and Inglis. Liaison officers are prepared
to furnish detailed information for use in preparation of necessary
details.

3. U.S. Air Force participation will be required and approval for such
participation has been given by the Chief of Staff, U.S. Air Force. This
will include full cooperation with the Navy in implementing the project
upon receipt of an official request from the Chief of Naval
Operations.

4. You will appreciate the fact that because of the nature of this
project this letter should be shown only to those officers who “need to
know.”

* Source: Central
Intelligence Agency Historical Files, HS/CSG-605, Job 83-0036, Box
4, Folder 10. Top Secret. The source text is a transcript made for
the CIA Historian in December 1952.

1 Probably Vice
Admiral J. D. Price, the Deputy Chief of Naval Operations
(Air).

2 Probably Rear Admiral John H. Cassady, the
Assistant Chief of Naval Operations for Air.

294. Memorandum From the Director of the Policy Planning Staff (Kennan) to the Under Secretary of State (Lovett)294. Memorandum From the Director of the Policy Planning Staff
(Kennan) to the
Under Secretary of State (Lovett)Source

Washington, June 30,
1948.

The following are my suggestions, in the order named, for persons whom
the Secretary could nominate as Chief of the Office of Special Projects
under the Central Intelligence Agency:

Frank Wisner

Mathias F. Correa

Irving Brown (representative of A.F. of L. in Paris and a very able and
active citizen)

Norris Chipman (Foreign Service Officer in Paris)

Francis Stevens (now Chief of the Russian Division)

John Davies (member of my Staff)

I am told there is little likelihood of getting Correa. I have no
information as to Brown's availability and feel that this would have to
be considered a political appointment to be discussed first with William
Green.

I have placed Wisner at the head
of the list on the recommendations of people who know him. I personally
have no knowledge of his ability, but his qualifications seem reasonably
good, and I should think that it would be relatively easy to spare him
for this purpose.

George F. Kennan

* Source: National
Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Records of the
Department of State, Policy Planning Staff Files 1947-53: Lot 64 D
563, Box 11A. Top Secret.

295. Memorandum From the Chief of the Special Procedures Group (Cassady) to Director of Central Intelligence Hillenkoetter295. Memorandum From the Chief of the Special Procedures Group
(Cassady) to
Director of Central Intelligence HillenkoetterSource

Washington, June 30,
1948.

SUBJECT

Covert Propaganda to Exploit Tito-Cominform Dispute

1. The Cominform denunciation of Marshal Tito, and his firmly defiant
stand, constitutes the first major open break in the satellite front
which the Soviet Union has established in Central Europe.

2. The situation arising therefrom tends to arouse dissension and
confusion in the world structure of Communism and invites exploitation
by prompt, effective propaganda measures through every available medium,
with the idea of achieving:

a. A lessening of Moscow control over satellite governments.

b. An increase of friction between leading Communist groups and
individuals, with consequent decline in the effectiveness of world
Communism as an agency of Soviet expansion.

c. Conditions more favorable to the overthrow of Communist governments in
satellite nations and to the strengthening of non-Communist
governments.

3. The propaganda opportunities of the Cominform-Tito dispute were
recognized in the counter-statement issued by the Yugoslav Central
Committee.

4. The situation finds the United States and the Marshall Plan nations
unable to take full advantage of the propaganda openings which are
presented. [4 lines of source text not
declassified]

[14 paragraphs of source text (37-1/2 lines of source
text) not declassified]

* Source: Central Intelligence Agency
Historical Files, HS/CSG-615, Job 83-00036, Box 4, Folder 10.
Secret. Sent to Colonel Donald H.
Galloway, the Assistant Director for Special
Operations, for Hillenkoetter. The source text is a transcript made
for the CIA Historian in December 1952.

296. Memorandum From Commander Robert Jay Williams to the Chief of the Special Procedures Group (Cassady)296. Memorandum From Commander Robert Jay
Williams to the Chief of the Special Procedures Group
(Cassady)Source

Washington, July 23,
1948.

SUBJECT

Project Ultimate, Critical Delay in

1. In the original plan for Project Ultimate as submitted to this agency
by Captain Orville, it was indicated that it would be desirable to
initiate operations in the European theatre as soon as possible. For
this reason every effort was made to complete technical development by 1
July and to be prepared for operations not later than 1 August.

2. Continuing delay in implementation of this project is jeopardizing
whatever success it might have. A study of weather conditions in the
proposed operating area has revealed that many factors will work against
the project after 1 November. These factors include increased risk in
launching due to unfavorable ground conditions; less favorable wind
conditions which may result in depositing the load over neutral
territory, and considerably less effect in the target areas due to
difficulty of finding the leaflets on snow-covered ground.

3. When all of these factors are considered together, it may be concluded
that the value of this project after 1 November may be so little as to
argue against its inception during the winter months. It is, therefore,
requested that every effort be made to obtain permission to start the
project immediately in order that satisfactory weather conditions
anticipated in September and October may be taken advantage of to insure
an effective operation.

* Source: Central Intelligence Agency Historical
Files, HS/CSG-606, Job 83-00036, Box 4, Folder 10. Secret. The
source text is a transcript made for the CIA Historian in December
1952. Williams was the chief of “Project Ultimate,” which appears to
be the same as the plan discussed in Document
293.

297. Memorandum for the Record by the Chief of the Special Procedures Group (Cassady)297. Memorandum for the Record by the Chief of the Special Procedures
Group (Cassady)

Washington, August 6,
1948.

[Source: Central Intelligence Agency Historical Files, HS/CSG-607, Job
83-00036, Box 4, Folder 10. Secret. 1 page of source text not
declassified.]

298. Memorandum of Conversation and Understanding298. Memorandum of Conversation and UnderstandingSource

Washington, August 6,
1948.

SUBJECT

Implementation of NSC 10/21

The following is a memorandum of conversation had and understanding
arrived at at a conference in Mr. Souers' office on the morning of
Friday, August 6, 1948. Present at the meeting were Messrs. Souers,
Kennan, Blum, Wisner, Admiral Hillenkoetter, and Colonel Yeaton.

1. Mr. Kennan opened the meeting
with a statement that the conference had been requested in order to
clarify certain points and to make certain that there was general
understanding and agreement concerning the manner in which the
contemplated implementation of NSC 10/2
would be carried out. He stressed the fact that political warfare is
essentially an instrument of foreign policy and accordingly that the
activity which serves this aim must function to the fullest extent
possible as a direct instrumentality of the Departments of State and of
the National Military Establishment. It is recognized that because of
certain of its attributes this activity should be placed within the
framework of CIA and must therefore be conducted with due deference to
the organizational requirements of that body. It must nevertheless be
recognized that it must take
its policy direction and guidance from the Departments of State and the
National Military Establishment and for this purpose the operating chief
of the new Office of Special Projects must have the fullest and freest
access to representatives of these two Departments who have been
designated by them as their respective points of contact. Mr. Kennan further stated that it must be
considered that the activity is a major political operation and that it
must have special recognition as such, as well as the greatest
flexibility and freedom from the regulations and administrative
standards governing ordinary operations. Finally, Mr. Kennan made the point that as the State
Department's designated representative he would want to have specific
knowledge of the objectives of every operation and also of the
procedures and methods employed in all cases where those procedures and
methods involve political decisions.

2. Mr. Souers indicated his agreement with Mr. Kennan's thesis and stated specifically
that it has been the intention of the National Security Council in
preparing the document2 that it should
reflect the recognition of the principle that the Departments of State
and National Military Establishment are responsible for the conduct of
the activities of the Office of Special Projects. (The Department of
State taking pre-eminence in time of peace and the National Military
Establishment succeeding to the pre-eminent position in war time.) Mr.
Souers expressed the view that this principle is manifest in the
document.

3. Admiral Hillenkoetter expressed the opinion that the new activity
would be given sufficient scope and flexibility to accomplish its
objectives by the contemplated setup within the organization of CIA. He
pointed to the fact that the present Office of Special Operations also
enjoys a large measure of freedom and autonomy within CIA, and that it
has many special privileges. Admiral Hillenkoetter agreed with Mr.
Kennan's statement that the
political warfare activity should be conducted as an instrument of U.S.
foreign policy and subject in peacetime to direct guidance by the State
Department. He insisted that it was essential for the State Department
to accept the political responsibility, giving decisions in regard to
individual projects, and he was critical of the fact that at times in
the past the handling of individual cases had been turned over to him by
the State Department without any political guidance. (Mr. Kennan agreed that it was necessary
that the State Department assume responsibility for stating whether or
not individual projects are politically desirable and stated that as the
State Department's designated representative he would be accountable for
providing such decisions.)

4. Admiral Hillenkoetter pointed out that the organization being set up
is to some extent parallel to the British arrangement, except that the British Chiefs of Staff
have made military units available to their special operations people.
There was some discussion as to who would be responsible for organizing
and training units for special military operations, and Colonel Yeaton
said that a JCS paper on this subject is
in proc-ess of completion. It was agreed that the Office of Special
Projects should propose and take a continuing interest in the necessary
preparation and training of military units.

5. Mr. Wisner said that it would
be necessary that the head of the new Office of Special Projects have
continuing and direct access to the State Department and the various
elements of the military establishment without having to proceed through
the CIA administrative hierarchy in each case. Admiral Hillenkoetter
agreed to this point, but said that it would be necessary that he be
kept informed in regard to all important projects and decisions. Mr.
Wisner concurred. It was
agreed that the designated representatives of the State Department and
the National Military Establishment would be kept informed of all
problems and that they would attempt to reconcile any differences
between their respective Departments concerning political and military
guidance and advice given to the Office of Special Projects. In the
event that the two representatives are unable to resolve their
differences, the matter would be referred to the Secretaries of State
and of the National Military Establishment.

6. Mr. Blum raised the question as
to what would happen to Mr. Raymond Murphy under the new arrangement.
Mr. Kennan said that he thought
Mr. Murphy should come under the Chief of the new office. Admiral
Hillenkoetter doubted whether this was desirable, but said that he would
be willing to leave that up to the Chief of the new office.

7. The question was raised as to possible difficulties in dealing with
foreign nationality groups in the United States for the purpose of
developing operations abroad. Mr. Blum said that he had the impression that CIA was
experiencing difficulties in its dealings with foreign nationality
groups because of the restrictions imposed by the FBI. Admiral Hillenkoetter replied that
although it was necessary to secure FBI
approval for all contacts, this had not been too difficult a problem for
CIA.

8. Mr. Kennan said that it might
be desirable for the new operation to be able to work through some kind
of public “American freedom committee” in dealing with foreign
nationality groups in the United States. It was pointed out that there
had been a number of suggestions for setting up some kind of committee
of this nature.

9. Mr. Wisner said that the head
of the new office would require broad latitude in selecting his methods
of operations, for example, as to whether he would use large numbers of
Americans working abroad or whether he would work primarily through
foreign groups. He did not think the new chief should be committed to
any existing methods of operations. Admiral Hillenkoetter agreed to this statement. Mr.
Wisner also pointed out that
the new position would also require considerable assistance from other
Government Departments and agencies, including State and the National
Military Establishment, and he raised the question whether the necessary
help would be available. Admiral Hillenkoetter said that he felt there
was a general spirit of cooperation in all the departments. It was
agreed that Mr. Kennan and
Colonel Yeaton would be responsible for soliciting the help of the State
Department and the National Military Establishment respectively and that
if any major troubles arose in obtaining cooperation from other
departments, the problem could be referred to the National Security
Council.

10. Mr. Wisner stated to Admiral
Hillenkoetter that there were a number of internal organizational
matters concerning which he felt there should be some discussion and
clarification, but that these might be more appropriately discussed in a
separate meeting between himself and Admiral Hillenkoetter. Admiral
Hillenkoetter agreed that this was important and suggested an early
meeting for this purpose.

11. It was agreed that a memorandum of the conference should be prepared
and circulated to all who attended for their concurrence. Mr. Wisner undertook to prepare this
memorandum in consultation with Mr. Blum and Colonel Yeaton, who had likewise taken notes on
the discussion.

Frank G. Wisner3

August 12, 1948.

The individuals whose names appear below and opposite the spaces provided
for their respective initials, being all of the participants in the
conversation hereinabove referred to, acknowledge that this memorandum
comprises an accurate record of the conversation and further that the
views therein set out correspond to their conception of the manner in
which the activity shall operate.4

Rear Adm. R.H. Hillenkoetter

Colonel Ivan D. Yeaton

Mr. Robert Blum

Mr. George Kennan

Mr. Sidney W. Souers

Mr. Frank G. Wisner

* Source: Central Intelligence Agency Historical
Files, HS/CSG-771, Job 83-00036, Box 5, Folder 8. Top Secret. The
source text is a transcript prepared for the CIA Historian on March
27, 1953.

1 Document 292.

2 Reference is to
NSC 10/2.

3 Printed from a copy that bears this typed
signature.

4 None of
the names has been initialed on the source text.

299. Memorandum for the President of Discussion at the 18th Meeting of the National Security Council299. Memorandum for the President of Discussion at the 18th Meeting of
the National Security CouncilSource

Washington, August 19,
1948.

[Here follows discussion of agenda items 1-3 regarding Berlin, U.S.
internal security and SANACC.]

4. Office of Special Projects (NSC 10/2)1

Mr. Souers reported on the action taken in implementation of NSC 10/2. He stated that the Department of
State, with the concurrence of the Director of Central Intelligence, had
nominated Mr. Frank G. Wisner for
the position of Director of the Office of Special Projects. He also
reported that, as provided in NSC 10/2,
the Secretary of State had designated Mr. George F. Kennan as his representative for NSC 10/2 affairs and the Secretary of
Defense had designated Colonel Ivan D. Yeaton both as his and the Joint
Chiefs of Staff's representative. Mr. Souers reported further that a
method of operation has been agreed upon by the representatives of the
Secretary of State, the Joint Chiefs of Staff and the Director of
Central Intelligence with respect to the initial procedures of the
Office of Special Projects.

The National Security Council:2

a. Approved the nomination by the Department of State, with the
concurrence of the Director of Central Intelligence, of Mr. Frank G. Wisner as Director of the
Office of Special Projects.

b. Noted the designation of representatives of the Secretary of State,
the Secretary of Defense, and the Joint Chiefs of Staff as provided in
NSC 10/2.

c. Noted that a method of operation has been agreed on by the
representatives of the Secretary of State, the Secretary of Defense, the
Joint Chiefs of Staff, and the Director of Central Intelligence.

[Here follows discussion of agenda item 5 regarding Palestine.]

* Source: Truman
Library, Papers of Harry S.
Truman, President's Secretary's Files, Subject File.
Top Secret. Prepared on August 20.

1 Document 292.

2 Paragraphs a-c constitute NSC Action No. 95. (National Archives
and Records Administration, RG 273, Records of the National Security
Council, Record of Actions, Box 55)

300. Central Intelligence Agency General Order No. 10300. Central Intelligence Agency General Order No. 10Source

Washington, August 27,
1948.

SUBJECT

Organization

1. The activation of the Office of Policy Coordination, effective 1
September 1948, is hereby announced.

2. Mr. Frank G. Wisner is
announced as Assistant Director for Policy Coordination.

3. Detailed directives reference the functions of the Office of Policy
Coordination will be the subject of separate orders.

For the Director of Central Intelligence:

E. K. Wright
Brigadier General, USA
Deputy Director

* Source: Central Intelligence Agency Historical
Files, HS/CSG-2155, Job 83-00739R, Box 3, Folder 20. Secret.

301. Letter From Acting Secretary of State Lovett to Secretary of Defense Forrestal301. Letter From Acting Secretary of State Lovett to Secretary of Defense ForrestalSource

Washington, October 1,
1948.

My Dear Mr. SECRETARY: As you know, the Office of Policy Coordination of
the Central Intelligence Agency, established under NSC 10, is preparing to discharge its
mandate to conduct political warfare. This political warfare program in
Europe will be effective only if it receives the whole-hearted
cooperation of the United States military authorities in Germany. Among other things, it may
be necessary for the Director of the Office of Policy Coordination to
make certain requests of these authorities concerning (a) political
activity among refugees from the Soviet world and (b) handling of bona
fide political refugees and deserters from the Soviet Zone. There may be
other requests of this nature which will have to be made.

The Department of State considers that political warfare will be an
important factor in the implementation of United States policies in the
coming period. If effectively conducted, it may affect materially the
possibilities for the achievement of United States objectives by means
short of war.

For this reason, considerations of foreign policy require, in the view of
this department, that every effort be made to assist the Director of the
Office of Policy Coordination in the implementation of his programs. In
particular, it hopes that he will have the full cooperation of the
United States military establishment in Germany which is a key territory
from the standpoint of political warfare.

It will be appreciated if you will instruct the American Military
Governor in Germany, General Clay, in the sense of the foregoing.

Sincerely yours,

Robert A. Lovett1

* Source: National Archives and Records
Administration, RG 59, Records of the Department of State, Decimal
File 1945-49, 101.61/10-148. Top Secret. Drafted by Kennan on September 30. Sent to
Lovett for signature
under cover of a September 30 note from Kennan that reads: “Mr. Wisner is going to encounter, as one of his first
major obstacles, the problem of cooperation with the Army in
Germany. He has asked us to give him a boost in this respect. Here
it is.” (Ibid.)

1 Printed from a copy that indicates
Lovett signed the
original.

302. Memorandum From Acting Director of Central Intelligence Wright to the Executive Secretary of the National Security Council (Souers)302. Memorandum From Acting Director of Central Intelligence Wright to the Executive
Secretary of the National Security Council (Souers)Source

Washington, October 8,
1948.

Reference is made to your Memorandum1 of 8 October 1948, addressed to the Director of
Central Intelligence and pertaining to the action of the National Security Council in amending our
directive in connection with NSC
29.2

It would be appreciated if this Agency could be informed of the
considerations which prompted the decision of the Security Council to
amend their original directive. The implementation of our functions in
connection with NSC 29 can best be
accomplished if we have full knowledge of any new considerations brought
to the attention of the Council.

It is strongly recommended that Central Intelligence be represented at
Security Council meetings when matters pertaining to CIA operations are
discussed.

E. K. Wright3
Brigadier General, USA

* Source: National Archives and Records
Administration, RG 273, Records of the National Security Council,
OCB 10/2-10/5. Top Secret.

1 Not
found.

2 Not printed. NSC 29, a paper entitled “Security of Strategically
Important Industrial Operations in Foreign Countries,” was approved
by the NSC at its 19th meeting on
September 2. At that meeting the Council expressed concern over the
vulnerability of Venezuelan petroleum installations to hostile
action and instructed the Director of Central Intelligence to refer
to the Office of Special Projects the preparation of a plan for the
security of the facilities. (Memorandum of discussion at the 19th
meeting of the NSC, September 3;
Truman Library, Papers of Harry S.
Truman, President's Secretary's Files, Subject File)
At its 23d meeting on October 7, the NSC amended this decision to provide that it should be
carried out by the CIA but not by the Office of Special Projects.
(Memorandum of Discussion at the 23d meeting of the NSC, October 8; ibid.)

3 Printed from a copy that bears this
typed signature.

303. Memorandum From the Executive Secretary of the National Security Council (Souers) to Acting Director of Central Intelligence Wright303. Memorandum From the Executive Secretary of the National Security
Council (Souers)
to Acting Director of Central Intelligence WrightSource

Washington, October 11,
1948.

SUBJECT

Amendment of Directive to the Director of Central Intelligence re
NSC 29

REFERENCE

Memo for Executive Secretary, NSC,
from Acting Director of Central Intelligence, same subject, dated
October 8, 1948 (CIA 22896-a)1

In response to the reference memorandum, the main consideration mentioned
in the NSC meeting which prompted the
amendment of the original
directive on this subject, was the fact that this directive placed an
excessive burden on the recently organized Office of Special Projects
which was not commensurate with the other more urgent and important
projects for which this Office was created. The point was also made that
the NSC 29 project was not necessarily
an appropriate function of the Office of Special Projects, since many of
the activities required by this project might be overt in nature.

The propriety of having the Council tell the Director of Central
Intelligence which part of his organization he should use for a given
project was discussed. In this connection it was pointed out that,
whereas the intelligence organization of CIA was created by statute
under the control of the Director of Central Intelligence, the Office of
Special Projects, which is not truly an intelligence operation, was
created by the NSC itself to operate
independently of other components of CIA to the maximum degree
consistent with efficiency. Incidentally, this independence of operation
of the Office of Special Projects is also recognized more specifically
in a “Memorandum of Conversation and Understanding” which the Director
of Central Intelligence has initialled.2

The principle that CIA should be represented at NSC meetings when matters pertaining to CIA operations are
discussed is recognized by the Council, as indicated by the attendance
of the Director of Central Intelligence at all Council meetings when he
is in Washington. No provision was made for such representation at the
last meeting, since it was not anticipated that CIA operations would be
on the agenda for that meeting.

Sidney W. Souers3

* Source: National Archives and Records
Administration, RG 273, Records of the National Security Council,
OCB 10/2-10/5. Top Secret.

1 Document 302.

2 Document 298.

3 Printed from a
copy that bears this typed signature.

304. Letter From Secretary of Defense Forrestal to Acting Secretary of State Lovett304. Letter From Secretary of Defense Forrestal to Acting Secretary of State
LovettSource

Washington, October 13,
1948.

My Dear Mr. SECRETARY: I have received your letter of 1 October
1948,1 which brings to my
attention the need for obtaining the cooperation of the United States
military authorities in Germany in order that the Office of Policy
Coordination of the Central Intelligence Agency may effectively
discharge its mandate to conduct political warfare.

I wish to assure you of my wholehearted agreement with you in regard to
the importance of political warfare and the desirability of obtaining
the full cooperation of the United States military authorities in
Germany with respect to those measures, mentioned in your letter, which
will support the political warfare program.

With my approval, Mr. Wisner,
Director of the Office of Policy Coordination, has discussed this
problem with the appropriate authorities in the Department of the Army.
They have expressed complete agreement with the proposals in your letter
and are transmitting their views to General Clay. Mr. Wisner will be informed of General
Clay's comments and of further developments in this matter.

Sincerely yours,

Forrestal

* Source: National Archives and Records
Administration, RG 59, Records of the Department of State, Decimal
File 1945-49, 101.61/10-1348. Top Secret.

1 Document 301.

305. Memorandum From the Director of the Policy Planning Staff (Kennan) to the Under Secretary of State (Lovett)305. Memorandum From the Director of the Policy Planning Staff
(Kennan) to the
Under Secretary of State (Lovett)Source

Washington, October 29,
1948.

A cardinal consideration in the establishment of Wisner's office under NSC 10/2 was that, while this Department
should take no responsibility for his operations, we should nevertheless maintain a firm guiding
hand.

If we are to do this, a small body of personnel—perhaps no more than five
men—who have Foreign Service and Departmental experience must be
designated to guide Wisner's
operation, both from within this Department and within Wisner's own office.

I realize the necessity of this and Wisner is genuinely anxious to have this type of help.
But we have both met with stubborn resistance from our own personnel
people.

This resistance is caused in part by the fact that our personnel,
necessarily uninformed of NSC 10/2, do
not understand the overriding importance of the assignments which we
request. Consequently, with no sense of proportion they resist the
release of officers who are assigned to functions of relatively minor
importance and their appointment to the job which Wisner and I wish them to take.

Because of the high security classification of NSC 10/2, it is impossible for me to reason with our
personnel people on this score. I am therefore reluctantly persuaded
that the only way to cut the gordian knot is to ask Peurifoy to instruct the personnel
division chiefs along the lines of the attached memorandum1 prepared for your signature.

George F. Kennan

* Source: National
Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Records of the
Department of State, Policy Planning Staff Files 1947-53: Lot 64 D
563, Pol & Psych Warfare. Top Secret.

1 Reference is to an October 29 memorandum from
Lovett to Peurifoy, not printed. See the
Supplement.

306. Memorandum From the Assistant Director for Policy Coordination (Wisner) to Director of Central Intelligence Hillenkoetter306. Memorandum From the Assistant Director for Policy Coordination
(Wisner) to
Director of Central Intelligence HillenkoetterSource

Washington, October 29,
1948.

SUBJECT

OPC Projects

REFERENCES

(a) National Security Directive 10/2

(b) Memorandum of 28 October 1948 from the Director to ADPC re: Fiscal Year 1949 Budget1

1. During your absence, OPC has been
holding a series of meetings of an Advisory Council which consists of
high-level, security-cleared representatives of Army, Navy, Air Force,
JCS and State. These representatives
were nominated by the respective Secretaries to assist in formulating
and coordinating policies for OPC in
accordance with the charter outlined in reference (a). Although this
preliminary planning has not yet been completed, the overall program is
beginning to take shape along the following general lines of clandestine
activity:

Functional Group I—Psychological Warfare

Program A—Press (periodical and non-periodical)

Program B—Radio

Program C—Miscellaneous (direct mail, poison pen, rumors, etc.)

Functional Group II—Political Warfare

Program A—Support of Resistance (Underground)

Program B—Support of DP's and Refugees

Program C—Support of anti-Communists in Free Countries

Program D—Encouragement of Defection

Functional Group III—Economic Warfare

Program A—Commodity operations (clandestine preclusive buying, market
manipulation and black market operation)

Program B—Fiscal operations (currency speculation, counterfeiting,
etc.)

Functional Group IV—Preventive Direct Action

Program A—Support of Guerrillas

Program B—Sabotage, Countersabotage and Demolition

Program C—Evacuation

Program D—Stay-behind

Functional Group V—Miscellaneous

Program A—Front Organization

Program B—War Plans

Program C—Administration

Program D—Miscellaneous

2. Until the overall plans and policies were formulated, it was obviously
impossible to present an accurate or realistic outline for budgetary
allocations as set forth in reference (b). However, the senior staff
officers of OPC are currently working on
such specific plans which I shall be in a position to review with you in
the very near future.

3. In the meantime, we have had no alternative but to accept certain
sub-projects which have been literally thrust upon us, such as the old
Umpire Project2 which was inherited from SPG, and Dr. Hilger, Czech Refugee Group. You may be sure
that we have done everything possible to hold such emergency assignments
to a minimum. In those instances where we had no alternative, we have
limited our commitments and have set up ear-marked funds to control
expenditures.

Frank G. Wisner3

* Source: Central Intelligence Agency
Historical Files, HS/CSG-2155, Job 83-00739R, Box 3, Folder 20.
Secret. Also reproduced in CIA Cold War Records:
The CIA under Harry
Truman, pp. 241-242.

1 Not found.

2 A plan for broadcasting to
the Soviet Union and Eastern Europe from the U.S. Zone of
Germany.

3 Printed from a copy that bears this
typed signature.

307. Memorandum for the File307. Memorandum for the FileSource

Washington, November 16,
1948.

SUBJECT

Relationship and proposed course of dealing as between OPC and ECA; memorandum of conversation between H1, H2 and
FGW1

1. On the afternoon of November 16, I had a very extensive conversation
with H1 and H2 at their office and the following are some of the most
important features of this conversation.

2. I explained generally our significance and I mentioned a few of the
thoughts which we have had in connection with our possible usefulness to
the mission of ECA in Europe. H2 wanted
to know whether we would be handling the ECA counterpart fund arrangement in Italy and I told him
that we would take this over as soon as we were in a position to do so.
He then spoke of France, saying that the situation there was most
critical and that he believed that everything should be done by way of
giving support to the anti-communist elements of French labor. [28 lines of source text not declassified] H1
having reentered the room the conversation broadened out to a detailed
discussion of the situation in general within France. H1 and H2 are both
of the opinion that the Marshall Plan is less successful, less
understood and less appreciated in France than in any other Western
European nation. They are very concerned about this and they proposed
that a fully coordinated all out effort should be made to regain control
of the situation which has slipped so badly. They requested me to take
the lead in working out an overall plan for [1 line of
source text not declassified] building up the Marshall Plan in
France and combating the communist efforts to wreck it. H2 is very keen
about this and wants to follow up early next week. I suggested that as
the first step he and I should meet with George Kennan to discuss this problem and to block out
the work. I further stated that by the time this meeting occurs, I would
endeavor to have ready in rough form a memorandum raising the various
possibilities which had occurred to me. [2 lines of
source text not declassified] They both stressed that time is
of the essence and that matters have taken such a serious turn in France
that no effort should be spared. H1 said that he had been devoting some
thought to various types of overt publicity and H2 said that his people in Paris had also
been thinking about this but with the general conclusion so far that
obviously self-serving and American financed publicity might do more
harm than good. He was not satisfied with this conclusion and agreed
with H1 that it was a matter of method and presentation. H1 then
suggested that it might be possible to use ECA counterpart funds for the publication of a “report” on
the Marshall Plan aid, mentioning quantities and the uses to which the
aid had been put. [3 lines of source text not
declassified] H2 undertook to cable Al Friendly2 to get his reaction. H2
then stated that he believed the military should be interested in this
overall program since the situation in France is crucial to their plans
for Western European defense. If France falls out of line, the whole
military defense program (Western Union Military Alliance) will crumble.
H1 then stated that moving picture might be employed. He thought that
what the French need most is a rejuvenation of spirit and he believed
that an extensive showing of the recently released “Joan of Arc” might
have an electrifying effect upon French psychology. He asked me to send
a qualified person to see this movie and to give him a report on its
possible effect upon the French people.

3. The conversation having turned toward the subject of French morale and
its effect upon the political situation, I then asked H2 for his view
about the prospects of deGaulle's accession to power. He replied at
length stating that although this appears to be an odds-on bet, he felt
that it would be very bad and that it might well result in an
impossibility of dealing constructively with the French on either
military or economic matters. [3 lines of source text
not declassified] I mentioned that certain very competent
observers of the French political situation had become convinced that
deGaulle's accession to power was inevitable and had suggested that we
should start laying our plans with a view to establishing a basis of
dealing with deGaulle. I wondered what H2 thought of this. He first
replied that it would be “playing with fire”. Later on, however, he
seemed to modify his position by stating that we should certainly
establish better contacts with deGaulle and his people than we now have.
Moreover, toward the close of the conversation and in commenting upon
the overall program, H2 was at pains to make it clear that this should
be done on a completely “non-partisan” basis. H1 agreed with H2 that the
whole emphasis should be laid upon French economic recovery and the
successful working of the Marshall Plan. I was left in some doubt as to
the strength of H2's conviction in regard to the deGaulle business.

[2 paragraphs (14 lines of source text) not
declassified]

F.G.W.3

* Source:
Central Intelligence Agency Historical Files, HS/CSG-453, Job
83-00036, Box 3, Folder 4. Secret.

1 The identities of H1 and H2 are
conjectural, although they are obviously senior officials of the
Economic Cooperation Administration and/or the ECA representation in Europe. Among
possible identifications are Paul G. Hoffman, the ECA Administrator; W. Averell Harriman, the U.S.
Special Representative in Europe; and David K.E. Bruce, the head
of the ECA mission in
Paris.

2 Chief of Information in the office of the U.S.
Special Representative in Europe.

3 Printed from a copy that
bears these typed initials.

308. Memorandum From the Director of the Policy Planning Staff, Department of State (Kennan) to the Assistant Director for Policy Coordination, Central Intelligence Agency (Wisner)308. Memorandum From the Director of the Policy Planning Staff,
Department of State (Kennan) to the Assistant Director for Policy
Coordination, Central Intelligence Agency (Wisner)Source

Washington, January 6,
1949.

Mr. Wisner:

I have examined carefully the volume entitled “OPC Projects Fiscal 19-9-1950”.1

In my opinion, this presentation contains the minimum of what is required
from the foreign policy standpoint in the way of covert operations
during the coming year. There may be one or two instances in which we
will have to ask you to add to the list of functions set forth in this
representation.

As the international situation develops, every day makes more evident the
importance of the role which will have to be played by covert operations
if our national interests are to be adequately protected.

George F. Kennan

* Source:
Central Intelligence Agency Historical Files, HS/CSG-759, Job
83-00036, Box 5, Folder 8, Top Secret.

1 Not found.

309. Memorandum From the Assistant Director for Policy Coordination, Central Intelligence Agency (Wisner) to the Chief of the Economic Cooperation Administration Mission in France (Bruce)309. Memorandum From the Assistant Director for Policy Coordination,
Central Intelligence Agency (Wisner) to the Chief of the Economic Cooperation
Administration Mission in France (Bruce)Source

Washington, April 26,
1949.

[6 paragraphs (19 lines of source text) not
declassified]

The Department of State has instructed Mr. Caffery to take up with the
French Prime Minister the question of removing the ration on newsprint
in France and making it
freely available so that at least part of the pre-war large Paris
information press could get going again. Mr. Caffery has not yet
reported the results of his démarche, if any, to the French Prime
Minister, but a telegram has gone forward to him in the last few days
requesting him to please press the matter. If this is not successfully
completed by the time you get back to Paris, I should be grateful if you
would do what you can to press it.

F. G. Wisner1

* Source: Central
Intelligence Agency Historical Files, HS/CSG-2065, Job 83-00739R,
Box 2, Folder 12. No classification marking. The source text is
annotated with somewhat confusing marginalia, which suggest that
another version of this document may exist.

1 Printed from a copy that bears this
typed signature.

310. Memorandum From the Assistant Director for Policy Coordination, Central Intelligence Agency (Wisner) to Members of His Staff310. Memorandum From the Assistant Director for Policy Coordination,
Central Intelligence Agency (Wisner) to Members of His StaffSource

Washington, June 1,
1949.

SUBJECT

Conversation with Mr. John
McCloy

1. Last night I talked for about forty-five minutes with Mr. McCloy pursuant to the suggestion
which had been made to Mr. McCloy on my behalf by Mr. Robert Murphy. I explained to
Mr. McCloy the general
significance and origin of OPC and then
I took up with him certain aspects of our present and prospective
operations in Germany. In the latter regard I mentioned in particular
the conversations and exchange of communications which I had had with
General Clay in regard to the radio broadcasting activity from Germany.
In this connection I filled him in on the background and significance of
the developments regarding the formation of the various refugee national
committees and the New York Committee, pointing out that General Clay
had said that he saw no problem in allowing duly authorized representatives of “really responsible and
broadly representative” national committees of refugees to enter Germany
and there to arrange for broadcasts. I also told him of our current
rather modest activities in Germany today, emphasizing the point that up
until the present time our people have had no authorization from us to
engage in any activities aimed at targets within the U.S., British or
French zones. In this connection I said that the British were a bit
ahead of us and that we were considering bringing ourselves abreast of
their activities, at least to the extent of authorizing our people to
undertake on a selective basis—fully approved from here in
advance—campaigns calculated to discredit the communist activities and
leadership within our zone.

2. Mr. McCloy stated that he
thought he understood the nature of our program and he seemed to be
impressed by my statement that the original architects of the whole deal
included Messrs. Lovett, Harriman, Forrestal,
Kennan, Marshall, et al. He
wanted to know whether and to what extent he would be kept informed of
our activities in Germany and what precautions would be taken to make
certain that our activities there would not interfere re conflict with
his responsibilities for policy and administration. I told him that we
would be prepared to keep him as fully advised as he might deem
desirable—but that we felt he would probably arrive at the conclusion
that he would not want to know the minutiae of our business. He replied
that he wanted to be kept generally informed but he wanted to make
certain of this. I said that we were looking forward to getting to
Germany soon a top level representative who would be of such stature and
caliber as to be able to represent our activities to him.

* Source: Central Intelligence Agency Historical
Files, HS/CSG-342, Job 83-00036, Box 2, Folder 11. Secret. Addressed
to “Messrs. Offie, Frank [and] Lindsay.” There is no typed or
written signature on the memorandum but the level of the
conversation and the context of the file in which the source text
was found point to Wisner as
the drafter.

311. Memorandum From Robert P. Joyce of the Policy Planning Staff to the Counselor of the Department of State (Kennan)311. Memorandum From Robert P.
Joyce of the Policy Planning Staff to the Counselor of
the Department of State (Kennan)Source

Washington, September 7,
1949.

* [Source: Central
Intelligence Agency Historical Files, HS/CSG-761, Job 83-00036, Box
5, Folder 8. Top Secret. 2 pages of source text not
declassified.]

312. Memorandum From Secretary of Defense Johnson to Director of Central Intelligence Hillenkoetter312. Memorandum From Secretary of Defense Johnson to Director of Central Intelligence
HillenkoetterSource

Washington, October 6,
1949.

SUBJECT

Support of Covert Operations of CIA

With reference to your memorandum request for supply bases, dated 11 May
1949,1 I have received
the views of the Joint Chiefs of Staff and give you herewith the
position of the Department of Defense with respect to the principles on
which we will support covert operations of CIA. These principles of
operation will generally apply regardless of the particular form of the
organization to conduct various covert operations and are given without
reference to present or future organizational structure.

As Secretary of Defense I recognize the importance of covert foreign
operations under present world conditions, and I intend to take measures
to support such operations. I have great concern, however, regarding the
proper location of administrative responsibility for these operations
and, pending further study, I reserve my position with respect to
whether this responsibility should reside in your Agency. Since these
operations effectively conducted constitute one of the best ways of
supporting our national defense in time of peace and contribute
importantly to success in war, I am proceeding to state herein the
reasonable conditions on which the Defense Department will cooperate in
the planning and conduct of such operations.

There are two very important factors which I believe must be emphasized
as this organization for covert operations develops. First, the
organization must assume autonomous responsibility and be so effectively
obscured as to assure that neither the President nor the Secretaries of
State or Defense will be placed in a position of having to answer
publicly for its activities.

The second factor, and this derives partially from the first, concerns
financial support of these operations. As indicated in NSC 10/2, operational funds are hereafter
to be provided out of the CIA budget. As we reduce expenditures and
personnel within the Department of Defense, you and your Assistant
Directors must understand that there may be less money and manpower
available to contribute to these and other functions of your Agency unless such
contributions are of substantial value to U.S. national security.

With the foregoing in mind the following principles will constitute the
basis for Department of Defense support of covert operations.

We recognize that the equipment which will be required to carry out
covert operations, either in peace or in war, should be available in the
areas in which required. There are, however, certain differences between
the peacetime scope and the wartime scope of Department of Defense
participation in and support for such operations of the Office of Policy
Coordination, Central Intelligence Agency. NSC 10/2 directs the Office of Policy Coordination in time
of peace “to plan and conduct covert operations” and “in coordination
with the Joint Chiefs of Staff to plan and prepare for the conduct of
such operations in wartime.” In addition, NSC 10/2 states that “in time of war or national emergency,
or when the President directs, all plans for covert operations shall be
coordinated with the Joint Chiefs of Staff, and execution of covert
operations in military theaters shall be under the control of the Joint
Chiefs of Staff.”

Peacetime and wartime differences are not involved in the currently
prescribed method of financing covert operations. NSC 10/2 states that after fiscal year 1949
“operational funds for these purposes shall be included in normal
Central Intelligence Agency budget requests.” It is, therefore, expected
that the Department of Defense will be reimbursed by transfer of funds
from the Central Intelligence Agency for most of the material and
services furnished.

As a general rule, covert operations planned and conducted by the CIA in
time of peace should not be inconsistent with the Joint Chiefs of Staff
and United States military policies, and should not be undertaken if
specifically disapproved by the Department of Defense. The participation
of the Department of Defense therein will be subject to the following
general conditions:

a. Captured enemy equipment at the disposal of the Department of Defense
and equipment which has been or may be declared surplus will be made
available upon request by CIA without reimbursement, except for expenses
incident to rehabilitation, packing, crating, transportation and any
storage costs incurred through utilization of other than military
facilities;

b. Subject to consideration of other requirements, military equipment and
supplies in stock in the several Departments will be made available on a
reimbursable basis upon request of the CIA. In this connection, military
equipment and supplies with distinctive markings which would indicate
the Department of Defense as their source will not be transferred unless
such markings can be altered or obliterated to prevent such
identification;

c. Military type supplies not available under a. and b. will, upon
request by the CIA be procured by the Department of Defense on a
reimbursable basis;

d. Personnel, supplies, and equipment will be transported to overseas
storage points under military control and supplies and equipment will be
stored and protected at such points without reimbursement where
additional, extraordinary expenses to the Department of Defense are not
involved. Details regarding the designation of storage points and the
storage, protection, readying for use, and release of supplies and
equipment must be arranged locally with the United States military
commander of the area (including unified commands) who must first
receive appropriate military instructions from the appropriate Executive
Agent of the Joint Chiefs of Staff. Where the Service incurs additional,
extraordinary expenses in providing transportation or establishing and
maintaining at overseas points dumps for covert operations, the CIA must
make reimbursement therefor. However, military commanders may provide,
to the extent that they are able to do so without adversely affecting
normal military operations, necessary military personnel at overseas
storage points without reimbursement for services, such personnel to be
available for normal military duty only; and

e. Peacetime movement of supplies and equipment from military overseas
storage points to areas in which or from which covert operations are to
be launched will be the responsibility of the CIA. The Department of
Defense would expect further that very special and effective precautions
would be taken by the CIA to insure that such operations cannot be
attributed to the Department of Defense.

Where the Department of Defense requests or embraces particular
operations in covert support of specific military missions (e.g., the
establishment of escape and evasion organizations), special arrangements
for support and reimbursement will be made in each instance.

With respect to plans and preparations for covert operations to be
conducted in military theaters in time of war, the Joint Chiefs of Staff
are of the opinion, with which I concur, that, consistently with NSC 10/2, the following conditions and
limitations must apply:

a. The operations for which military equipment and supplies are to be
stocked must first be integrated in the war plans of the Joint Chiefs of
Staff and any actual preparations must be specifically approved by
them;

b. Military supplies and equipment for wartime covert operations will be
made available from stock or procured on a reimbursable basis subject to
consideration of other requirements. Special arrangements may be
necessary in the procurement of highly specialized supplies for such
operations; and

c. All details regarding the integration of military personnel for
technical, security, and other purposes, in connection with covert
operations, and all details
regarding dumps of operational supplies, aircraft and aircraft equipment
(including location of these supplies and equipment), must, after
integration in each instance with war plans indicated in a. above, and
with Joint Chiefs of Staff policy guidance, be locally coordinated with
and agreed to by the representatives of the CIA and of the Executive
Agent of the Joint Chiefs of Staff of the theater concerned.

It should be pointed out that the foregoing views do not cover the actual
conduct of covert operations in military theaters under JCS control in time of war since this is
more properly an integral part of war plans.

The Joint Chiefs of Staff believe that detailed arrangements for the
matter discussed herein can be made through designated representatives
of the Department of Defense until such time as a military organization
to work with the CIA on covert operations is established.

If the above arrangements are satisfactory to you, I will issue the
necessary directives to the Services to execute them. Please let me have
your views at early convenience.

Louis Johnson2

* Source: Central Intelligence Agency
Historical Files, HS/CSG-2051, Job 83-00739R, Box 2, Folder 12. Top
Secret.

1 Not found.

2 Printed from a copy that indicates
Johnson signed the
original.

313. Letter From Secretary of Defense Johnson to Secretary of State Acheson313. Letter From Secretary of Defense Johnson to Secretary of State AchesonSource

Washington, October 7,
1949.

My Dear Mr. SECRETARY: At our luncheon on September 23, 1949, we
discussed the location and various aspects of certain special activities
of the Central Intelligence Agency. I expressed to you my very great
concern at the present situation, and we both agreed that on an interim
basis we should make special and direct arrangements to provide policy
guidance for these activities.

I am familiar with your arrangements in the State Department whereby Mr.
Kennan serves as your adviser
on these activities, and in accordance with our understanding I am
designating Brigadier General John
Magruder, U.S. Army (Retired), as my special adviser on
these activities. He will be particularly concerned with the subject
contained in NSC 10/2, but in addition,
and for the purpose of providing the necessary integration of other
interrelated matters, he will concern himself on my behalf with NSC 4 and NSC 43 series. Your Department and mine under this
arrangement can then proceed to guide these activities in a direction
that we deem mutually desirable, and likewise to seek agreement
respecting an appropriate organizational setting for the activities
comprised in NSC 10/2.

The designation of General Magruder as my policy representative does not
alter the previous arrangements for the Joint Chiefs of Staff
representation in NSC 10/2 and NSC 43 matters.

I am also informing the three Secretaries of the military departments,
the Joint Chiefs of Staff and the Executive Secretary, National Security
Council, of my action.

Sincerely yours,

Louis Johnson1

* Source: National Archives and Records
Administration, RG 273, Records of the National Security Council,
NSC 10/2. Top Secret. Copies
were sent to the Secretaries of the Army, Navy, and Air Force, the
Joint Chiefs of Staff, the Executive Secretary of the NSC, and the Director of Central
Intelligence.

1 Printed from a copy that indicates
Johnson signed the
original.

314. Memorandum From the Assistant Director for Policy Coordination, Central Intelligence Agency (Wisner) to Joseph A. Frank of the Office of Policy Coordination314. Memorandum From the Assistant Director for Policy Coordination,
Central Intelligence Agency (Wisner) to Joseph A.
Frank of the Office of Policy CoordinationSource

Washington, October 13,
1949.

SUBJECT

Recommended Lines of Thought for Operational Planning

1. At the weekly meeting in Mr. Webb's office Tuesday afternoon1 I covered practically all of the
subject matter upon which I had been briefed by yourself and the others who attended the
morning briefing session, and a considerable amount of interest was
shown on the part of Mr. Webb and
General Magruder, in particular. Toward the conclusion of the session,
Mr. Webb began to spark off a
number of ideas and as he warmed to his subject, he began to produce
some very useful thoughts. All of the others present at the meeting were
much impressed about his grasp of the significance and operational
possibilities of the OPC activity, and
General Magruder was especially enthusiastic in his comment upon Mr.
Webb's suggestions.

2. In view of the fact that Mr. Webb has taken this degree of personal interest and has
gotten to the point of generating some lines of policy guidance to us, I
believe that we would be well advised to do what we can to develop some
refinements, and ultimately to produce some plans and projects along the
lines of Mr. Webb's
recommendations. We will surely be asked from time to time in the future
what we are doing about his proposals, and in addition there is no doubt
that he has got hold of some useful thoughts.

3. The first line of thought developed by Mr. Webb originated with a discussion of the situation in
Yugoslavia, and the fact that Tito's performance and the Tito heresy are
causing the Cominform more disturbance and woe than any single thing
which has occurred since the war. [20 lines of source
text not declassified]

4. Mr. Webb went on from this to
propose that we should put considerable effort into spreading the story
of the Tito heresy, and moreover that we should endeavor to induce
similar developments in other Communist areas and within the Communist
Parties of free areas. [9 lines of source text not
declassified]

[1 paragraph (6-1/2 lines of source text) not
declassified]

6. Mr. Webb made reference to the
article on Tito by Hamilton Fish Armstrong in the current issue of the
Atlantic Monthly magazine, and whereas he
agreed that it could not be effectively used in its present form because
of its American origin and authorship—he said that we should draw
material from it which should be caused to appear in disguised
forms.

[1 paragraph (39 lines of source text) not
declassified]

FGW

ADDENDUM

You will recall that in the talk which Mr. Kennan gave in Q Bldg. this morning, he listed as the
first and perhaps the most serious weakness in the international
position of the U.S. the inadequate and unsatisfactory character of the
situation as regards Germany and Japan. In this connection he stated specifically that for the
improvement of the German situation, it is absolutely essential that the
German people be able to see the prospect of a position for themselves
as full-fledged members of the Western European community, and that this
will require the development of a better understanding between the
German people and the peoples of the Western European countries. (These
may not be his exact words but it is the sense of what he said.) I
believe that this serves to reinforce Mr. Webb's suggestion as outlined in paragraph 7 of the
foregoing memorandum and that we may therefore with confidence proceed
to work up the outlines of one or more projects calculated to accomplish
the desired result.

I believe that it would be useful for you to make this memorandum
available to your senior staff officers.

* Source: Central Intelligence Agency Historical
Files, HS/CSG-2301, Job 83-00764R, Box 1, Folder 9. Top
Secret.

1 October 11.

315. Memorandum From Director of Central Intelligence Hillenkoetter to Secretary of Defense Johnson315. Memorandum From Director of Central Intelligence Hillenkoetter to
Secretary of Defense JohnsonSource

Washington, October 18,
1949.

SUBJECT

Support of Covert Operations of CIA

REFERENCE

Memorandum from the Secretary of Defense, above subject, 6 October
19491

1. The reference memorandum reduces to four basic principles the supply
support of CIA covert operations by the Department of Defense:

a. The Department will expect reimbursement from CIA for the costs of
supplies and their storage and transportation when additional or
extraordinary costs to the Department are involved, unless such expenses
are unmistakably associated with particular operations requested or
embraced by the Department of Defense in covert support of specific
military missions.

b. Operations should be consistent with U.S. military policies and
approved by the Department of Defense prior to implementation in time of
peace, support details to be arranged with the local U.S. military
commander concerned.

c. Precautions should be taken to insure against identification of the
Department of Defense with operations in process.

d. Operations, planned to be conducted in military theaters in time of
war, should be in accordance with plans integrated in the war plans of
the Joint Chiefs of Staff and should have local coordination and
agreement in the theater concerned.

2. These principles are generally agreeable to this Agency and are
accepted subject to:

a. Any deviations which may be directed by the President or the National
Security Council.

b. Any modifications agreed to in specific instances between the
Department and CIA. (For example, at this time, the presence of
additional conventional American equipment in China and on the Greek
frontier would create no security risk.)

3. It would appear that the best hope for the smooth, prompt, and, where
necessary, flexible implementation of the arrangements you detail lies
in the creation of the “military organization to work with the CIA on
covert operations,” to which you refer in the next to the last paragraph
on page 4 of the reference memorandum. I, therefore, urge that this
organization be brought into being as soon as possible and recommend
that it be vested with such discretionary power as will contribute to
smooth relations between CIA and the Department of Defense.

R.H. Hillenkoetter2
Rear Admiral, USN

* Source: National Archives and Records
Administration, RG 273, Records of the National Security Council,
NSC 10/2. Top Secret. The source
text indicates that a copy was sent to the Executive Secretary of
the NSC.

1 Document 312.

2 Printed from a
copy that indicates Hillenkoetter signed the original.

316. Memorandum From the Assistant Director for Policy Coordination, Central Intelligence Agency (Wisner) to Mr. Miller of His Staff316. Memorandum From the Assistant Director for Policy Coordination,
Central Intelligence Agency (Wisner) to Mr. Miller of
His StaffSource

Washington, June 21,
1950.

SUBJECT

Conversation with Mr. Averell
Harriman

1. In my conversation of recent date with Mr. Harriman (which took place immediately following your
talk with him) he made a number of points which I considered to be worth
recording, and I believe that the appropriate members of your staff
should know about it.

[2 paragraphs (19-1/2 lines of source text) not
declassified]

4. Mr. Harriman expressed concern
about the American position at the moment in the cold war and strongly
emphasized the fact that it is essential for this Government to
recapture the peace mantle from the Russians. The emphasis in official
statements of all kinds as well as our unofficial activities should be
concentrated on the theme “Peace-Peace-Peace” even though we get tired
of hearing ourselves say it. He does not feel that the situation in
France at the moment is quite as serious as reported by Mr. Bruce,
although he does acknowledge that unless we can change our apparent
position, it may become so. He considers that it would be difficult to
overcome the pacifism and neutrality of the editors of Le Monde by any
ordinary efforts. He stated that Messrs. Bruce and Bohlen have been
working on certain of these people, but without noticeable success. [2-1/2 lines of source text not declassified]

F.G.W.1

* Source: Central Intelligence
Agency Historical Files, HS/CSG-2066, Job 83-00739R, Box 2, Folder
12. Secret.

1 Printed from a copy that
bears these typed initials.

Hillenkoetter's Tenure as Director of Central IntelligenceHillenkoetter's Tenure as Director of Central Intelligence: Document List

Introduction

Document 317: Central Intelligence Group Paper No. 24/1

Washington, undated.

Source: Central Intelligence Agency Historical Files, HS/HC-276. Confidential. Attached to a May 13 memorandum from Earman to the members of the Intelligence Advisory Board, which noted that it was circulated at the request of the Director of Central Intelligence as an alternative to CIG 24 (Document 189).

Document 318: Minutes of the 13th Meeting of the Intelligence Advisory Board

Washington, May 15, 1947, 2:30 p.m.

Source: Central Intelligence Agency Historical Files, HS/HC-281. Secret. The meeting was held in the North Interior Building. The text printed reflects changes in a correction sheet issued on May 26, which was attached to the minutes. See the Supplement.

Document 319: Minutes of the 10th Meeting of the National Intelligence Authority

Washington, June 26, 1947, 10:30 a.m.

Source: Central Intelligence Agency Historical Files, HS/HC-245, Job 84-00473R, Box 3. Top Secret. The meeting was held at the State Department.

Document 320: Minutes of the 14th Meeting of the Intelligence Advisory Board

Washington, July 17, 1947, 2:30 p.m.

Source: Central Intelligence Agency Historical Files, HS/HC-281. Secret. The meeting was held in the North Interior Building.

Document 321: Memorandum From the General Counsel of the Central Intelligence Group (Houston) to the Director of Central Intelligence (Hillenkoetter)

Washington, July 29, 1947.

Source: Central Intelligence Agency Historical Files, HS/HC-806, Item 2. Secret. Sent to the Director of Central Intelligence through ICAPS. The source text is a transcript made for the CIA Historian on October 15, 1952.

Document 322: National Intelligence Authority Directive No. 10

Washington, July 30, 1947.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 218, Records of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, Leahy Files, No. 132. Secret.

Document 323: Minutes of the 15th Meeting of the Intelligence Advisory Board

Washington, July 31, 1947, 2 p.m.

Source: Central Intelligence Agency Historical Files, HS/HC-281. Secret. The meeting was at the North Interior Building.

Document 324: Minutes of the 16th Meeting of the Intelligence Advisory Board

Washington, September 11, 1947, 2 p.m.

Source: Central Intelligence Agency Historical Files, HS/HC-281. Secret. The meeting was held at the North Interior Building.

Document 325: National Intelligence Authority Directive No. 11

Washington, September 16, 1947.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 218, Records of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, Leahy Papers, No. 132. Confidential.

Document 326: Memorandum From the Secretary of State's Acting Special Assistant for Research and Intelligence (Armstrong) to Acting Secretary of State Lovett

Washington, October 28, 1947.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Records of the Department of State, Records of the Bureau of Intelligence and Research: Lot 58 D 776, JIS, JIC, JCS. Restricted.

Document 327: Letter From the Secretary of State's Acting Special Assistant for Research and Intelligence (Armstrong) to Director of Central Intelligence Hillenkoetter

Washington, October 29, 1947.

Source: Central Intelligence Agency Historical Files, HS/HC-806, Item 9. Secret.

Document 328: Letter From the Acting Secretary of State's Special Assistant for Research and Intelligence (Armstrong) to the Executive Secretary of the National Security Council (Souers)

Washington, November 5, 1947.

Source: Truman Library, Papers of Harry S. Truman, Records of the National Security Council. Confidential.

Document 329: Memorandum From the Chief of the Global Survey Group, Central Intelligence Agency (Montague) to the Assistant Director for Reports and Estimates (Babbit)

Washington, November 12, 1947.

Source: Central Intelligence Agency Historical Files, HS/HC-450, Item 24. Confidential.

Document 330: Memorandum From the Director of the Policy Planning Staff (Kennan) to the Under Secretary of State (Lovett)

Washington, November 18, 1947.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Records of the Department of State, Policy Planning Staff Files, 1947-53: Lot 64 D 563, Box 10, Intelligence. No classification marking. The Policy Planning Staff minutes for November 18 indicate that Kennan would recommend to Lovett that the Policy Planning Staff go over the draft NIA directives sent to the Department for comment. (Ibid., Box 32)

Document 331: Memorandum From the Secretary of State's Special Assistant for Research and Intelligence (Armstrong) to Acting Secretary of State Lovett

Washington, November 20, 1947.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Records of the Department of State, Records of the Bureau of Intelligence and Research: Lot 58 D 776, Drafts of NSC Directives to Replace NIA Directives. Top Secret.

Document 332: Minutes of a Meeting of the Intelligence Advisory Board

Washington, November 20, 1947, 2 p.m.

Source: Central Intelligence Agency Historical Files, HS/HC-657. Secret. The meeting was held in the North Interior Building. The minutes themselves do not identify this as an IAB meeting and there was some debate on the subject at the table (see especially Hillenkoetter's exchange with Admiral Inglis and General Chamberlin at the end of the meeting). Darling describes this as an IAB meeting, pointing out that the IAB did not go out of existence when the National Security Act came into force because the NSC extended the validity of National Intelligence Authority Directives for 60 days. (Darling, The Central Intelligence Agency, pp. 211-212)

Document 333: Memorandum From the Chairman of the Research and Development Board (Bush) to Secretary of Defense Forrestal

Washington, December 5, 1947.

Source: Central Intelligence Agency Historical Files, HS/HC-806, Item 10. Secret. The source text is a copy transcribed for the CIA Historian on July 3, 1953.

Document 334: Memorandum From the Executive Secretary (Souers) to the National Security Council

Washington, December 10, 1947.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Records of the Department of State, Records of the Policy Planning Staff, NSC Files: Lot 62 D 1, NSC Intelligence Directives. Top Secret.

Document 335: Minutes of the 3d Meeting of the National Security Council

Washington, December 12, 1947.

Source: Truman Library, Papers of Harry S. Truman, President's Secretary's Files. Top Secret. The meeting was held in the office of the Secretary of Defense.

Document 336: National Security Council Resolution

Washington, January 13, 1948.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Records of the Department of State, Records of the Executive Secretariat, NSC Files: Lot 66 D 148, Box 1555. Top Secret. The source text is Annex 1 to the Intelligence Survey Group Report to the NSC, January 1, 1949. The full text is in the Supplement. The resolution was approved by the NSC at its 5th meeting January 13. A brief entry in the minutes records that Souers presented the resolution and the NSC approved it and forwarded the names of Allen Dulles, Mathias Correa, and William H. Jackson for the President's consideration as members of the survey group. (National Archives and Records Administration, RG 273, Records of the National Security Council, Minutes, Fifth Meeting) The resolution was approved as NSC Action No. 25. (Ibid., Record of Actions, Box 55)

Document 337: Memorandum From Director of Central Intelligence Hillenkoetter to the Intelligence Advisory Committee

Washington, January 27, 1948.

Source: Central Intelligence Agency Historical Files, HS/HC-54. Confidential. Sent to the Special Assistant to the Secretary of State for Research and Intelligence; the Director of Intelligence, Army General Staff; the Chief of Naval Intelligence; the Director of Air Force Intelligence; and for information to the Director of Security and Intelligence, Atomic Energy Commission, and the Deputy Director, Joint Intelligence Group, Joint Staff.

Document 338: Letter From the Secretary of Defense's Special Assistant (McNeil) to Mathias F. Correa

Washington, February 2, 1948.

Source: Central Intelligence Agency Records, Job 86-B00269R, Box 5. Personal and Secret.

Document 339: Letter From Sherman Kent to Director of Central Intelligence Hillenkoetter

Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut, February 9, 1948.

Source: Central Intelligence Agency Historical Files, HS/HC-808, Item 4. Secret. The source text is a copy transcribed for the CIA Historian on March 9, 1953. Kent had been invited by Hillenkoetter in December 1947 to survey the Office of Reports and Estimates. (Darling, The Central Intelligence Agency, pp. 301-302)

Document 340: Memorandum From the Executive Secretary of the National Security Council (Souers) to Allen W. Dulles, Mathias F. Correa, and William H. Jackson

Washington, February 13, 1948.

Source: Central Intelligence Agency Records, Job 80-M01009A, Box 1, Folder 12. Restricted. The source text indicates that a copy was sent to the Director of Central Intelligence.

Document 341: Memorandum From the Executive Secretary of the National Security Council (Souers) to Secretary of State Marshall

Washington, March 8, 1948.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Records of the Department of State, Decimal File 1945-49, 101.61/3-848. Restricted.

Document 342: Memorandum From Secretary of State Marshall to the Executive Secretary of the National Security Council (Souers)

Washington, March 12, 1948.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Records of the Department of State, Decimal File 1945-49, 101.61/3-848. Restricted. Drafted by W. Park Armstrong.

Document 343: Memorandum From the Executive Secretary of the National Security Council (Souers) to Allen W. Dulles, Mathias F. Correa, and William H. Jackson

Washington, March 17, 1948.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Records of the Department of State, Records of the Executive Secretariat, NSC Files: Lot 66 D 148. The source text is Annex 2 of the Survey Group Terms of Reference II report to the National Security Council entitled “The Central Intelligence Agency and National Organization for Intelligence,” January 1, 1949.

Document 344: Memorandum From the Executive Secretary of the Intelligence Survey Group (Blum) to Allen W. Dulles, Mathias F. Correa, and William H. Jackson

Washington, April 12, 1948.

Source: Central Intelligence Agency Records, Job 86-B00269R, Box 5. Secret.

Document 345: Minutes of the 10th Meeting of the National Security Council

Washington, April 22, 1948.

Source: Truman Library, Papers of Harry S. Truman, President's Secretary's Files, Subject File. Top Secret. The meeting was held in the Conference Room at the White House. Although the series of Presidential memoranda on the NSC meetings begins with the 9th meeting, no such memorandum was found for the 10th session.

Document 346: Memorandum From the Executive Secretary of the Intelligence Survey Group (Blum) to Allen W. Dulles, Mathias F. Correa, and William H. Jackson

Washington, June 4, 1948.

Source: Central Intelligence Agency Records, Job 80-M01009A, Box 1, Folder 12. Secret.

Document 347: Memorandum From the Executive Secretary of the Intelligence Survey Group (Blum) to the Intelligence Advisory Committee

Washington, June 10, 1948.

Source: Central Intelligence Agency Records, Job 86-B00269R, Box 5. Secret. Although the memorandum has no addressee it presumably was prepared as a background or information paper for the Intelligence Advisory Committee.

Document 348: Verbatim Minutes of Meeting of the Intelligence Advisory Committee

Washington, June 16, 1948, 2 p.m.

Source: Central Intelligence Agency Historical Files, HS/HC-657. Secret. The meeting was held in the Federal Works Building. A note on pages 10 and 11 of the source text indicates that they were corrected copies.

Document 349: Memorandum for the President of the Discussion at the 14th Meeting of the National Security Council

Washington, July 1, 1948.

Source: Truman Library, Papers of Harry S. Truman, President's Secretary's Files, Subject File. Top Secret. Drafted on July 2.

Document 350: Memorandum From Robert G. Barnes to William J. McWilliams of the Executive Secretariat

Washington, August 25, 1948.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Records of the Department of State, Decimal File 1945-49, 101.5/8-2548. Top Secret; For State Department Officers Only. The date is from the Executive Secretariat receipt stamp on the source text.

Document 351: Statement by Director of Central Intelligence Hillenkoetter

Washington, undated.

Source: Central Intelligence Agency Records, Job 86-B00269R, Box 2, Folder 3. Secret. The remarks were prepared for presentation before the Committee on National Security Organization (informally known as the Eberstadt Committee) of the Commission on Organization of the Executive Branch of the Government (Hoover Commission). The date on which the statement was delivered has not been found, since this presentation was not recorded in the summary of testimony prepared by the committee staff, but it appears to have been in September 1948. (Truman Library, McCloy Manuscript, Box 17, Folder 119) See the Supplement under date of September 7.

Document 352: Memorandum From the Assistant Director for Policy Coordination (Wisner) to Director of Central Intelligence Hillenkoetter

Washington, September 13, 1948.

Source: Central Intelligence Agency Records, Job 86-B00269R, Box 2, Folder 3. Top Secret.

Document 353: Letter From Director of Central Intelligence Hillenkoetter to Allen W. Dulles

Washington, November 17, 1948.

Source: Central Intelligence Agency Records, Job 86-B00269R, Box 5. Confidential.

Document 354: Memorandum From the Secretary of State's Special Assistant for Research and Intelligence (Armstrong) to the Intelligence Survey Group

Washington, November 22, 1948.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Records of the Department of State, Records of the Bureau of Intelligence and Research: Lot 62 D 42, Box 7385, Dulles, Correa, Jackson Report and NSC 50. Secret. According to a covering note, “The final hearing for the Department to give its views was held on Monday, November 22, at which time the attached memorandum was submitted.” (Memorandum from Armstrong to Daniels et al., November 22; ibid.) See the Supplement.

Document 355: Verbatim Minutes of a Meeting of the Intelligence Advisory Committee

Washington, December 3, 1948, 2:30 p.m.

Source: Central Intelligence Agency Historical Files, HS/HC-657. Secret. The meeting was held in the Federal Works Building.

Document 356: Verbatim Minutes of Meeting of the Intelligence Advisory Committee

Washington, December 17, 1948, 2:30 p.m.

Source: Central Intelligence Agency Historical Files, HS/HC-657. Secret. The meeting was held in the Federal Works Building.

Document 357: Letter From the Executive Secretary of the Intelligence Survey Group (Blum) to Mathias F. Correa

Washington, December 18, 1948.

Source: Central Intelligence Agency Records, Job 86-B00269R, Box 5. No classification marking. The source text is dated December 18, 1949, but from the context this is clearly a typographical error.

Document 358: Report From the Intelligence Survey Group to the National Security Council

Washington, January 1, 1949.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Records of the Department of State, Records of the Executive Secretariat, NSC Files: Lot 66 D 148, Box 1555. Top Secret. The report includes a January 15 letter transmittal to the Executive Secretary of the NSC from the members of the Survey Group, Allen W. Dulles, Mathias F. Correa, and William H. Jackson; see the Supplement for the full text of the report.

Document 359: Letter From Robert Blum of the Office of the Secretary of Defense to Allen W. Dulles

Washington, January 19, 1949.

Source: Central Intelligence Agency Records, Job 80-M01009A, Box 1, Folder 12. No classification marking.

Document 360: Memorandum From Allen W. Dulles to Mathias F. Correa and William H. Jackson

New York, January 21, 1949.

Source: Central Intelligence Agency Records, Job 80-M01009A, Box 1, Folder 12. No classification marking.

Document 361: Letter From Robert Blum of the Office of the Secretary of Defense to Allen W. Dulles

Washington, February 7, 1949.

Source: Central Intelligence Agency Records, Job 80-M01009A, Box 1, Folder 12. No classification marking. Copies were sent to Jackson and Correa.

Document 362: Letter From Allen W. Dulles to Robert Blum of the Office of the Secretary of Defense

New York, February 8, 1949.

Source: Central Intelligence Agency Records, Job 80-M01009A, Box 1, Folder 12. No classification marking.

Document 363: Memorandum From the Chief of the Intelligence Coordinating and Planning Staff (Childs) to Director of Central Intelligence Hillenkoetter

Washington, February 8, 1949.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Records of the Department of State, Records of the Bureau of Intelligence and Research: Lot 62 D 42, Box 7385, Dulles, Correa, Jackson Report and NSC 50. Confidential. The words “but Eyes Only!” have been added by hand after the classification.

Document 364: Memorandum From the Chief of the Intelligence Coordinating and Planning Staff (Childs) to Director of Central Intelligence Hillenkoetter

Washington, February 9, 1949.

Source: Central Intelligence Agency Records, Job 86-B00269R, Box 5. Top Secret.

Document 365: Letter From Robert Blum of the Office of the Secretary of Defense to Allen W. Dulles

Washington, February 11, 1949.

Source: Central Intelligence Agency Records, Job 80-M01009A, Box 1, Folder 12. Confidential. Copies were sent to Jackson and Correa.

Document 366: Memorandum by the Office of Reports and Estimates, Central Intelligence Agency

Washington, February 14, 1949.

Source: Central Intelligence Agency Records, Job 86-B00269R, Box 15. Top Secret. Transmitted to the Director of Central Intelligence by the Assistant Director for Reports and Estimates, Theodore Babbitt, under a memorandum of February 14. The February 14 memorandum and the full text of the comments are in the Supplement. (Central Intelligence Agency Records, Job 86-B00269R, Box 5)

Document 367: Memorandum From the Assistant Director for Policy Coordination (Wisner) to Director of Central Intelligence Hillenkoetter

Washington, February 14, 1949.

Source: Central Intelligence Agency Records, Job 86-B00269R, Box 5. Top Secret. Another copy bearing a typed signature is reproduced in CIA Cold War Records: The CIA under Harry Truman, pp. 247-250.

Document 368: Memorandum From Daniel DeBardeleben to the Acting Deputy Assistant Director for Special Operations, Central Intelligence Agency

Washington, February 17, 1949.

Source: Central Intelligence Agency Records, Job 86-B00269R, Box 5. Top Secret. The addressee has not been further identified.

Document 369: Memorandum From the Assistant Director for Reports and Estimates (Babbitt) to Director of Central Intelligence Hillenkoetter

Washington, February 17, 1949.

Source: Central Intelligence Agency Historical Files, HS/HC-100, Item 17. Confidential. The source text is a transcript made for the CIA Historian on October 1, 1953. This memorandum draws heavily on a February 16 memorandum from Ludwell L. Montague to Babbitt. (Ibid., HS/HC-450, Item 30) See the Supplement.

Document 370: Memorandum From the Chief of the Intelligence Coordinating and Planning Staff (Childs) to Director of Central Intelligence Hillenkoetter

Washington, February 21, 1949.

Source: Central Intelligence Agency Records, Job 86-B00269R, Box 5. No classification marking. The source text indicates it was prepared for discussion with Mr. Souers.

Document 371: Central Intelligence Agency Memorandum of Comments on the Dulles Report

Washington, February 28, 1949.

Source: Central Intelligence Agency Records, Job 86-B00269R, Box 5. Secret. The full text, including the tables not printed here, is in the Supplement. Sent to the Executive Secretary of the National Security Council who transmitted copies to the members of the NSC. (Memorandum from Souers to the NSC, March 2; Central Intelligence Agency Records, Job 86-B00269R, Box 5) See the Supplement.

Document 372: Memorandum From the Secretary of State's Special Assistant for Research and Intelligence (Armstrong) to Secretary of State Acheson

Washington, March 3, 1949.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Records of the Department of State, Records of the Executive Secretariat, NSC Files: Lot 63 D 351, NSC 50, Box 4207. Top Secret. Drafted by Armstrong. Cleared in C, A, S/P, EUR, NEA, ARA, and FE.

Document 373: Memorandum From the Director of the Executive Secretariat (Humelsine) to the Under Secretary of State (Webb)

Washington, March 8, 1949.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Records of the Department of State, Records of the Executive Secretariat, NSC Files: Lot 66 D 148, Box 1555. No classification marking.

Document 374: Memorandum From the Acting Director of the Policy Planning Staff (Butler) to the Secretary of State's Special Assistant for Research and Intelligence (Armstrong)

Washington, March 17, 1949.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Records of the Department of State, Records of the Policy Planning Staff, NSC Files: Lot 62 D 1, NSC Intelligence Directives, Box 2517. Secret.

Document 375: Memorandum From the Assistant Director for Policy Coordination, Central Intelligence Agency (Wisner) to the Under Secretary of State (Webb)

Washington, March 18, 1949.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Records of the Department of State, Records of the Executive Secretariat, NSC Files: Lot 63 D 351, NSC 50, Box 4207. Top Secret.

Document 376: Memorandum for the President of Discussion at the 36th Meeting of the National Security Council

Washington, March 22, 1949.

Source: Truman Library, Papers of Harry S. Truman, President's Secretary's Files, Subject File. Top Secret. Prepared on March 23.

Document 377: Memorandum From the Secretary of State's Special Assistant for Research and Intelligence (Armstrong) to the Assistant Secretary of State for Occupied Areas (Saltzman)

Washington, March 24, 1949.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Records of the Department of State, Records of the Bureau of Intelligence and Research: Lot 58 D 776. Restricted.

Document 378: Memorandum From the Under Secretary of State (Webb) to the Executive Secretary of the National Security Council (Souers)

Washington, April 4, 1949.

Source: Truman Library, Papers of Harry S. Truman, President's Secretary's Files. Top Secret. Souers circulated Webb's memorandum to Council members on the same day. (Ibid.) See the Supplement.

Document 379: Memorandum From the Chief of the Intelligence Coordinating and Planning Staff (Childs) to Director of Central Intelligence Hillenkoetter

Washington, April 6, 1949.

Source: Central Intelligence Agency Records, Job 86-B00269R, Box 5. No classification marking.

Document 380: Memorandum for the President of Discussion at the 37th Meeting of the National Security Council

Washington, April 7, 1949.

Source: Truman Library, Papers of Harry S. Truman, President's Secretary's Files, Subject File. Top Secret. Prepared on April 8.

Document 381: Memorandum From the Assistant Director for Policy Coordination, Central Intelligence Agency (Wisner) to the Counselor of the Department of State (Bohlen)

Washington, April 15, 1949.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Records of the Department of State, Records of the Executive Secretariat, NSC Files: Lot 63 D 351, NSC 50, Box 4207. Secret; Eyes Only.

Document 382: Memorandum for the President of Discussion at the 38th Meeting of the National Security Council

Washington, April 20, 1949.

Source: Harry S. Truman Library, Papers of Harry S. Truman, President's Secretary's Files, Subject File. Top Secret. Prepared on April 21.

Document 383: Memorandum From Secretary of Defense Johnson to the Secretaries of the Army (Royall), the Navy (Sullivan) and the Air Force (Symington)

Washington, April 27, 1949.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Records of the Department of State, Decimal File 1945-49, 101.61/4-2749. Top Secret. The source text is the copy sent to the Secretary of State. It was covered by a brief note from the Assistant Director of the Executive Secretariat, forwarding it to the Counselor and asking him to read and transmit it to the Special Assistant for Research and Intelligence.

Document 384: Report by Secretary of State Acheson and Secretary of Defense Johnson to the National Security Council

Washington, July 1, 1949.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Records of the Department of State, Records of the Executive Secretariat, NSC Files: Lot 63 D 351, NSC 50. Top Secret. When the Dulles Report and agency comments thereon were submitted to the NSC, the Council decided at its 37th meeting (see footnote 4, Document 380) that the Secretaries of State and Defense should recommend specific actions. To prepare these recommendations, Johnson designated General Joseph T. McNarney and Acheson appointed Carlisle H. Humelsine. According to Darling, the report is largely McNarney's work, which explains why NSC 50 was commonly referred to as the McNarney Report. (The Central Intelligence Agency, p. 347) Filed with the source text was a July 1 covering note from Souers to the members of the Council briefly summarizing the background of the report and indicating it would be considered at the next NSC meeting. See the Supplement. A cover sheet attached to the source text indicates it was approved on July 7 by the President. See the Supplement. The report, the covering note and the title page, without a notation of Truman's approval, are reproduced in CIA Cold War Records: The CIA under Harry Truman, pp. 295-313.

Document 385: Memorandum for the President of Discussion at the 43d Meeting of the National Security Council

Washington, July 7, 1949.

Source: Truman Library, Papers of Harry S. Truman, President's Secretary's Files, Subject Files. Top Secret. Prepared on July 8. According to the minutes of the meeting, the following members were present: Acheson; Edward H. Foley, Jr., Under Secretary of the Treasury; Stephen Early, Under Secretary of Defense; Gordon Gray, Secretary of the Army; Francis P. Matthews, Secretary of the Navy; W. Stuart Symington, Secretary of the Air Force; and John R. Steelman, Acting Chairman of the National Security Resources Board. Also present were Hillenkoetter, Carlisle Humelsine of the Department of State, and General Joseph T. McNarney and John H. Ohly, both of the Office of the Secretary of Defense. Three members of the NSC Secretariat attended: Souers, Lay, and Hugh D. Farley. (National Archives and Records Administration, RG 273, Records of the National Security Council, NSC Minutes, 43rd Meeting)

Document 386: Memorandum From the Executive Secretary of the National Security Council (Souers) to President Truman

Washington, July 7, 1949.

Source: Truman Library, Papers of Harry S. Truman, President's Secretary's Files. Top Secret.

Document 387: Letter From the Executive Secretary of the National Security Council (Souers) to Attorney General Clark

Washington, July 7, 1949.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 273, Records of the National Security Council, NSC Minutes, 43rd Meeting. Secret. Copies were sent to Hillenkoetter and Hoover.

Document 388: Letter From Attorney General Clark to the Executive Secretary of the National Security Council (Souers)

Washington, July 15, 1949.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 273, Records of the National Security Council, NSC Minutes, 43rd Meeting.

Document 389: Memorandum From General Joseph T. McNarney to the Executive Secretary of the National Security Council (Souers)

Washington, July 22, 1949.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 273, Records of the National Security Council, NSC 50. Top Secret.

Document 390: Memorandum From the Executive Secretary (Souers) to the National Security Council

Washington, July 25, 1949.

Source: Department of State, S/P-NSC Files: Lot 62 D 1, NSC Intelligence Directives. Top Secret.

Document 391: Letter From the Secretary of State's Special Assistant for Research and Intelligence (Armstrong) to Director of Central Intelligence Hillenkoetter

Washington, July 29, 1949.

Source: Central Intelligence Agency Records, Job 80-01731R, Box 43, Folder 7. Top Secret. A further exchange of letters and memoranda is ibid.

Document 392: Letter From Secretary of State Acheson to Director of Central Intelligence Hillenkoetter

Washington, August 1, 1949.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Records of the Department of State, Decimal File 1945-49, 101.61/8-149. Secret. Drafted by F.C. Oechsner and W.T. Stone. An attached note indicates that a similar letter was being sent to the Secretary of Defense but no copy has been found. See the draft memorandum from Stone to Acheson, July 22, in the Supplement attached to an August 11 letter from Acheson to Hillenkoetter. (National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Records of the Department of State, Decimal File 1945-49, 101.61/8-149)

Document 393: Letter From the Secretary of State's Special Assistant for Research and Intelligence (Armstrong) to Director of Central Intelligence Hillenkoetter

Washington, August 2, 1949.

Source: Central Intelligence Agency Records, Job 86-B00269R, Box 5. Secret. The enclosures were often referred to as the “Four Papers” or the “Four Problems.” On August 5 Hillenkoetter sent them to the members of the IAC with a covering memorandum that noted that Armstrong had decided to drop a fifth problem designated as “Guidance to CIA.” (Memorandum from Hillenkoetter August 5; ibid.) See the Supplement.

Document 394: Letter From Director of Central Intelligence Hillenkoetter to Secretary of State Acheson

Washington, August 19, 1949.

Source: Central Intelligence Agency Records, Job 86-B00269R, Box 5. Top Secret.

Document 395: Memorandum From Shane MacCarthy to the Chief of the Intelligence Coordinating and Planning Staff, Central Intelligence Agency (Childs)

Washington, August 24, 1949.

Source: Central Intelligence Agency Records, Job 86-B00269R, Box 5. Secret.

Document 396: Memorandum From the Chief of the Intelligence Coordinating and Planning Staff, Central Intelligence Agency (Childs) to the Members of the IAC Standing Committee

Washington, August 25, 1949.

Source: Central Intelligence Agency Records, Job 86-B00269R, Box 5. Secret.

Document 397: Memorandum From the Assistant Director for Special Operations (Schow) to the Chief of the Intelligence Coordinating and Planning Staff, Central Intelligence Agency (Childs)

Washington, August 26, 1949.

Source: Central Intelligence Agency Records, Job 86-B00269R, Box 5. Top Secret.

Document 398: Memorandum From the Deputy Special Assistant (Howe) to the Secretary of State's Special Assistant for Research and Intelligence (Armstrong)

Washington, September 8, 1949.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Records of the Department of State, Records of the Bureau of Intelligence and Research: Lot 58 D 776, Office of Policy Coordination. Confidential.

Document 399: Memorandum From the Assistant Director for Scientific Intelligence (Machle) to Director of Central Intelligence Hillenkoetter

Washington, September 29, 1949.

Source: Central Intelligence Agency Records, Job 84-T00286R, Box 5, Folder 1. Top Secret.

Document 400: Memorandum From Director of Central Intelligence Hillenkoetter to the Executive Secretary of the National Security Council (Souers)

Washington, October 7, 1949.

Source: Truman Library, Papers of Harry S. Truman, President's Secretary's Files. Top Secret. Transmitted to the NSC under an October 10 memorandum from Souers. See the Supplement.

Document 401: Letter From Secretary of Defense Johnson to Secretary of State Acheson

Washington, October 7, 1949.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Department of State, Decimal File 1945-49, 101.61/10-749. Top Secret. A handwritten notation on the source text reads: “Reply drafted S: W.J. Sheppard 10/18/49.” No copy of a reply has been found.

Document 402: Memorandum From the Deputy to the Secretary of State's Special Assistant for Research and Intelligence (Howe) to the Special Assistant to the Secretary (Sheppard)

Washington, October 17, 1949.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Records of the Department of State, Records of the Bureau of Intelligence and Research: Lot 58 D 776, Office of Policy Coordination. Top Secret.

Document 403: Memorandum From Director of Central Intelligence Hillenkoetter to the Intelligence Advisory Committee

Washington, November 1, 1949.

Source: Central Intelligence Agency Records, Job 86-B00269R, Box 5. No classification marking. Addressed to the Special Assistant for Research and Intelligence, Department of State; the Director of Intelligence, Army General Staff; the Director of Naval Intelligence; the Director of Air Force Intelligence; the Director of Intelligence, Atomic Energy Commission; the Deputy Director, Joint Intelligence Group, Joint Staff; and the Director, Federal Bureau of Investigation.

Document 404: Memorandum From the Acting Executive Secretary (Lay) to the National Security Council

Washington, December 14, 1949.

Source: Truman Library, Papers of Harry S. Truman, President's Secretary's Files. Top Secret. A copy was sent to Hillenkoetter.

Document 405: Central Intelligence Agency Memorandum

Washington, December 21, 1949.

Source: Central Intelligence Agency Historical Files, HS/HC-80. Secret.

Document 406: Draft Memorandum From the Secretary of State's Special Assistant for Research and Intelligence (Armstrong) to the Under Secretary of State (Webb)

Washington, December 23, 1949.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Records of the Department of State, Records of the Bureau of Intelligence and Research: Lot 58 D 776, National Intelligence Staff Study. Secret.

Document 407: Memorandum From Director of Central Intelligence Hillenkoetter to the Executive Secretary of the National Security Council (Souers)

Washington, December 27, 1949.

Source: Department of State, S/S-NSC Files: Lot 63 D 351, NSC 50. Top Secret. Souers transmitted Hillenkoetter's report to the members of the NSC under cover of a December 28 memorandum. (Ibid.) See the Supplement.

Document 408: Memorandum From Brigadier General John Magruder to Secretary of Defense Johnson

Washington, December 22, 1949.

Source: Central Intelligence Agency Historical Files, HS/CSG-2434, Job 83-00764R, Box 3, Folder 8. Top Secret. Magruder was a consultant on intelligence to the Secretary of Defense.

Document 409: Memorandum From the Deputy Special Assistant (Howe) to the Secretary of State's Special Assistant for Research and Intelligence (Armstrong)

Washington, January 5, 1950.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Records of the Department of State, Records of the Bureau of Intelligence and Research: Lot 58 D 776, State-CIA Relationship 1949-1956. Secret.

Document 410: Memorandum From the Secretary of State's Deputy Special Assistant for Research and Intelligence (Howe) to the Special Assistant to the Secretary (Sheppard)

Washington, January 9, 1950.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Records of the Department of State, Records of the Bureau of Intelligence and Research: Lot 58 D 776, National Intelligence Staff Study. Top Secret.

Document 411: Memorandum for the Record

Washington, January 19, 1950.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Records of the Department of State, Records of the Bureau of Intelligence and Research: Lot 58 D 776, State-CIA Relationship 1949-1956. Confidential. Drafted by Howe. Appended to the source text is a handwritten “Note for file” by Sheppard dated January 27 which reads as follows: “In conversation with Howe and Barnes it was decided: (1) State now has sufficient control over the content of the daily summary. (2) In view of the CIA situation & the President's interest, (3) We should now do nothing to rock the boat. W.S.S.”

Document 412: Memorandum for the Record

Washington, January 31, 1950.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Records of the Department of State, Records of the Bureau of Intelligence and Research: Lot 58 D 776, State-CIA Relationship 1949-1956. Top Secret. Drafted by Howe. The source text indicates that a copy was sent to William J. Sheppard, one of the special assistants to the Secretary.

Document 413: Memorandum From the Acting Chairman of the National Security Resources Board (Steelman) to the Executive Secretary of the National Security Council (Souers)

Washington, February 2, 1950.

Source: Truman Library, Papers of Harry S. Truman, President's Secretary's Files. Confidential.

Document 414: Memorandum From Director of Central Intelligence Hillenkoetter to the Director of Intelligence of the Army General Staff (Irwin)

Washington, February 15, 1950.

Source: Central Intelligence Agency Historical Files, HS/HC-208, Item 24. Top Secret. Copies were sent to all IAC members.

Document 415: Memorandum From the Secretary of State's Special Assistant for Research and Intelligence (Armstrong) to the Under Secretary of State (Webb)

Washington, February 16, 1950.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Records of the Department of State, Records of the Bureau of Intelligence and Research: Lot 58 D 776, State-CIA Relationship 1949-1956. Top Secret. Drafted by Howe. The date is handwritten on the source text.

Document 416: Letter From Director of Central Intelligence Hillenkoetter to Secretary of Defense Johnson

Washington, February 17, 1950.

Source: Central Intelligence Agency Historical Files, HS/HC-208, Item 23. Secret. Copies were sent to the members of the Intelligence Advisory Committee.

Document 417: Memorandum for the Executive Secretary of the National Security Council (Lay)

Washington, February 23, 1950.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Records of the Department of State, Records of the Bureau of Intelligence and Research: Lot 58 D 776, State-CIA Relationship 1949-1956. Top Secret. The date is the drafting date of a brief covering note from Armstrong to Deputy Under Secretary Rusk. This note, which also bears the handwritten date of February 24, reads: “General Burns approved this paper for the Department of Defense, provided you ok'd it. For your information, Mr. Webb has already seen and approved these comments in draft.” The covering note also indicates that the memorandum was being cleared with Joyce and Humelsine. It is not clear whether this memorandum was actually sent to Lay.

Document 418: Letter From Director of Central Intelligence Hillenkoetter to the Director of Air Force Intelligence (Cabell)

Washington, March 6, 1950.

Source: Central Intelligence Agency Historical Files, HS/HC-208, Item 14. Secret. Sent to all members of the Intelligence Advisory Committee.

Document 419: Memorandum From the Secretary of State's Special Assistant for Research and Intelligence (Armstrong) to the Under Secretary of State (Webb)

Washington, March 6, 1950.

Source: Department of State, A/MS Files: Lot 54 D 291. Top Secret. Drafted by Fisher Howe. The date has been inserted by hand. The subsequent history of this proposal is uncertain and it is not clear that the proposed directive was in fact submitted to the National Security Council.

Document 420: Memorandum From the Secretary of State's Special Assistant for Research and Intelligence (Armstrong) to the Under Secretary of State (Webb)

Washington, May 2, 1950.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Records of the Department of State, Records of the Bureau of Intelligence and Research: Lot 58 D 776, National Intelligence Problem. Secret. Drafted by W.C. Trueheart.

Document 421: Memorandum From Director of Central Intelligence Hillenkoetter to the Assistant Chief of Staff for Military Intelligence, War Department General Staff (Bissell)

Washington, May 8, 1950.

Source: Central Intelligence Agency Historical Files, HS/HC-210, Item 16. Confidential. Also sent to the Director of Naval Intelligence and the Director of Intelligence, U.S. Air Force. A copy was sent to the Special Assistant for Research and Intelligence, Department of State.

IntroductionIntroduction

Rear Admiral Roscoe H. Hillenkoetter became Director of Central
Intelligence on May 1, 1947. His appointment had been decided upon by
the National Intelligence Authority the preceding February. The Central
Intelligence Agency's first Historian, Arthur Darling (who had access to
“oral tradition” as well as documents) believed that it was the
Department of State's “turn” to nominate a candidate for the job, but
that the military services were unwilling to entrust the post to a
civilian at a time when the pending national security legislation
indicated that the post would become more important than before.
Accordingly, Admiral Leahy's
influence prevailed and a naval officer was appointed. (Darling, The
Central Intelligence Agency, pages 194-195)

According to an account recorded many years later by Ludwell L. Montague (then a State
Department officer detailed to CIG,
later a senior CIA official, and still later a historian of the period),
he was told of Hillenkoetter's appointment when he went to the White
House on February 26, 1947, to consult with the President's Naval Aide,
Admiral Foskett, on another matter:

“Foskett asked me what I would think of Admiral Hillenkoetter as DCI in succession to General Vandenberg. I
had never heard of Admiral Hillenkoetter. Foskett explained who he was.
From Foskett's conversation it was evident that the only question had
been what admiral should succeed Vandenberg. Souers had been an admiral;
Vandenberg was an Army general (albeit an Army Air Force one); an
Army-Navy alternation as DCI was just
assumed to be the order of nature. I took a dim view of that. Foskett
made it clear that Hillenkoetter had already been selected.” (Memorandum
for the record by L.M. Montague, April 7, 1970; Central Intelligence
Agency Historical Files, HS/HC-400, Item 8, Job 84T00286R, Box 2, Folder
12) See also Document 188.

In any case, Hillenkoetter came to office with certain advantages. He was
in many respects more qualified than his predecessors in terms of
intelligence experience. Both Souers and Vandenberg had served tours in
intelligence before becoming Director of Central Intelligence, but
Hillenkoetter had had considerably more intelligence experience than
either, albeit at less senior levels. He had served three tours of duty
as assistant naval attaché or naval attaché at Paris and one tour with
the U.S. Embassy at Vichy in 1940-19 41, where Leahy came to have a high regard
for his abilities as an intelligence officer. During World War II,
Hillenkoetter had served as intelligence chief on the staff of the
Commander in Chief, Pacific Ocean Area, Admiral Nimitz.

Hillenkoetter also came to
office with the advantage of becoming the first Director of Central
Intelligence to serve as a statutory official; unlike his predecessors,
he would head an agency established by law and enjoying regular
appropriations.

At the same time, Hillenkoetter inherited most of the controversies that
General Vandenberg had begun. These might well have arisen in one form
or another in any case. But Vandenberg had been so energetic and
aggressive and had served so briefly that most of the uproar he provoked
was at full strength when Hillenkoetter took over; for example, his
designation as “executive agent” of the NIA, his substantial expansion of the CIG's analytical and research work, and his
efforts to define strategic and national policy intelligence in ways
that would enhance the authority of the Director of Central
Intelligence.

Because such issues involved the basic definitions and ground rules of
the national intelligence structure, they often tended to obscure some
of the less spectacular progress that was taking place. During
Hillenkoetter's directorship, for example, there were continued (and
sometimes painful) efforts to develop a scientific intelligence
capability, the Atomic Energy Commission became a member of the IAB, the program of basic intelligence
known as the National Intelligence Survey came into being, the working
level continued to struggle with the problem of intelligence estimates
and managed to produce a number of them, and in general the daily work
of correlating and analyzing information went forward.

At the senior levels, however, the main intelligence issue continued to
be the line of demarcation between the Central Intelligence
Group/Central Intelligence Agency and the departmental intelligence
organizations. At the time Hillenkoetter took office, there were two
items on the agenda of the Intelligence Advisory Board related to this
fundamental question. One was a draft national intelligence directive on
the coordination of intelligence production (in effect a companion piece
to the earlier directive on coordination of intelligence collection)
which proposed to allocate by agency the responsibility for production
of finished intelligence. The other was a proposal to define and spell
out the Intelligence Advisory Board's procedures and prerogatives.

Before either of these issues had come to a head, Hillenkoetter, at his
first formal meeting with the National Intelligence Authority on June
26, 1947 (Document 319), asked the NIA to withdraw the delegation of power
given to his predecessor at the Authority's last meeting in February,
under which the Director of Central Intelligence functioned as the
“agent” of the Secretaries of State, War, and Navy on matters within his
jurisdiction. (Document 185) This was a
conciliatory gesture, intended to improve relationships with the
departmental (especially armed serv-ices) intelligence chiefs and to
ease some of the other controversies with and within the Intelligence
Advisory Board.

The nub of the argument over Intelligence Advisory Board procedures was
the enduring debate over whether the IAB
was a “board of directors” with independent authority of its own or
whether it was created primarily as a sounding board for the Director of
Central Intelligence, who could accept or disregard its advice as he
chose. At the 14th meeting of the IAB on
July 17, 1947, representatives from the Central Intelligence Group,
Department of State, and Naval Intelligence frankly exchanged quite
different views on the subject. (Document
320)

Eventually, an agreement was reached and on September 16, the NIA, in one of its last official acts
before going out of existence, approved National Intelligence Authority
Directive No. 11, which provided that recommendations to the Authority
by the Director of Central Intelligence would be submitted first to the
IAB and that any statements of
non-concurrence would accompany the recommendation onward to the NSC. The directive also provided: “Any
recommendation two or more IAB members
believe should be submitted to the NIA
(NSC) will be submitted by the
Director of Central Intelligence in such form as to set forth his
recommendation and the comments of the IAB members.” (Document 325)

With the coming into effect of the National Security Act of 1947, the
Intelligence Advisory Board ceased to exist, or so it would appear,
since the legislation made no mention of such a body. The issue revived,
however, in the context of Hillenkoetter's proposals for changes in the
intelligence structure to reflect the new statutory authority. As we
have seen (the section on the National Security Act), in a memorandum of
September 11, 1947, to the National Intelligence Authority (Document 220), Hillenkoetter recommended that
the existing NIA directives be continued
in force for 60 days while new versions were prepared; that the National
Security Council establish a subcommittee consisting of the Secretaries
of State and Defense “to furnish the active direction of the Central
Intelligence Agency”; and “while I believe it presumptuous and awkward
on my part to suggest,” that he attend all meetings of the National
Security Council. He also notified the Council (and the Departmental
intelligence chiefs) that he proposed to establish an Intelligence
Advisory Committee “which will to all intents and purposes continue in
existence the Intelligence Advisory Board established under the National
Intelligence Authority.” (Document 222) He
accompanied his recommendation with a proposed charter for the committee
which included the provisions of NIA
Directive No. 11 concerning the committee's right to submit differing
views to the National Security Council.

The National Security Council at its first meeting approved
Hillenkoetter's recommendations concerning the continuance in force of
NIA Intelligence Directives for 60
days and agreed to his attendance at meetings of the Council. The
Council took no action on his proposal for a supervising subcommittee of the NSC to oversee the CIA, but soon approved Souers' amended
version, which deleted the part of his recommendation that would have
carried over the provisions of NIA
Directive No. 11. (Document 325)

The disputes between the Director of Central Intelligence and the
departmental intelligence heads resumed in earnest in November, when
Hillenkoetter put before them the proposed revisions of the National
Intelligence Authority directives (henceforth to be known as National
Security Council Intelligence Directives or NSCIDs). The NSCIDs, like
their predecessors, would be, under the legislation, the basic charters
for the national intelligence system, and as such they offered
considerable possibility for controversy. The State Department's
intelligence chief, W. Park
Armstrong, for instance, thought Hillenkoetter's drafts
went “beyond the intent of Congress,” which “was not…to establish a
single head for all Federal intelligence agencies.” (Document 331)

At a meeting between departmental representatives and Hillenkoetter on
November 20, 1947, the discussion of the proposed directives was
contentious. (Document 332) An ad hoc working
group established at the meeting prepared a revised set of directives
which were unacceptable to Hillenkoetter. By December 8, however, the
air had cleared sufficiently so that at a follow-on meeting,
Hillenkoetter and the departmental intelligence heads reached agreement
on the first batch of directives. What happened in the meantime to bring
about this change is not documented, but according to Darling (The
Central Intelligence Agency, page 215) the precipitating event was
Secretary of the Army Royall's
letter of November 26, 1947, to Souers (Document
230) concerning Souers' amended version of Hillenkoetter's
recommendation for an Intelligence Advisory Committee. Royall objected that the new
arrangement failed to follow the old in not requiring the Director of
Central Intelligence to submit all proposed recommendations to the
NSC through the IAC in order to obtain the latter's
views.

According to Darling's account, this finally led Hillenkoetter to seek a
meeting with Forrestal, who in
turn summoned the Army and Navy Secretaries and intelligence chiefs to
his office. At that session, Hillenkoetter presented his view of how the
intelligence system should function under the National Security Act, and
Forrestal then simply
instructed the intelligence chiefs that they were not to interfere.
(Darling, The Central Intelligence Agency, pages 215-216)

There appears to be no way of knowing whether or not this is a complete
and accurate account. In any case, at the National Security Council
meeting on December 12, 1947, the issue also arose in the context of an
oral report that Hillenkoetter gave on “organization, activities and
plans” of the Central Intelligence Agency. (Document
335) According to the spare account in the minutes, “Secretary
Forrestal said, and the other
members agreed, that there
was no question as to the coordinating authority of the Director of
Central Intelligence. Secretary Forrestal said that Admiral Hillenkoetter tells the
Departments what he needs for collation and evaluation and the
Departments are required to provide it.” (Ibid.)

Although a truce of sorts appeared to have been declared, Hillenkoetter's
problems were just beginning. A month after the NSC had seemed to give him a vote of confidence, it decided
that “two or three specially qualified individuals not in the Government
service should make a comprehensive, impartial, and objective survey of
the organization, activities, and personnel of the Central Intelligence
Agency.” (Document 336) Within another month,
the Intelligence Survey Group, or Dulles committee, had come into being, consisting of
Allen Dulles as chairman,
Mathias F. Correa, and
William H. Jackson.

There is some uncertainty about the origins of the Dulles Survey, although the common
denominator in all accounts is Secretary of Defense Forrestal. Souers, writing some years
later, placed the origin in discussions he had with Forrestal (presumably around the time
the National Security Act came into effect) on how the NSC would discharge its responsibilities
for supervising the Central Intelligence Agency. Forrestal proposed that Souers exercise
oversight on behalf of the Council. When Souers demurred, the two agreed
“to appoint a committee to make a survey so that the N.S.C. members
would be able to carry out their responsibilities by obtaining the
independent judgment of a committee whose members were reasonably
qualified to advise the Council.” (Souers to Montague, October 30, 1969; Central Intelligence Agency
Historical Files No. 206106, Job 84T00286R, Box 2, Folder 12; see also
Souers to Montague, August 13,
1970; CIA Historical Files No. 206102)

Montague thinks that the real
impetus came from Robert Blum of
Forrestal's staff, who had a
watching brief over intelligence and was strongly influenced by
published criticism of the intelligence machinery. (Montague, General Walter Bedell Smith as Director of
Central Intelligence, pages 39-41) Darling believes that Blum and a colleague on Forrestal's staff, John Ohly, were the
architects of the investigation but also notes that Hillenkoetter
himself had proposed to Forrestal
in the fall of 1947 that at the start of the new system under the
National Security Act of 1947, it was a good time to take stock in the
intelligence field. (Darling, The Central Intelligence Agency, pages
298-301) Others may have shared Hillenkoetter's idea.

Whatever the source of Dulles'
inquiry (and all of the above accounts may be correct), there seems to
have been an uneasiness about the intelligence system. The controversies
that had engrossed the intelligence agencies were not purely
bureaucratic struggles. They represented strongly held differences of
view in which there was often merit on more than one side of the case. Some of the
criticism also seems to have come from within CIA, reflecting internal
differences about how the agency should function. Perhaps more than
anything else, whether justified or not, there was impatience and
concern over a perceived lack of “intelligence success,” a sense that
the U.S. intelligence system was inadequate and its accomplishments
limited at best, and a feeling that the resources invested had not
produced commensurate results.

In April 1948, the survey group's executive secretary expressed some of
this thinking when he complained that the “CIA has not performed well or
not performed at all its two functions of coordinating government
intelligence activities and of correlating the evaluation of
intelligence. CIA's mission and actual operations within both these
fields are uncertain, undefined and subject to much controversy and
bitterness,” and he agreed with other government agencies' “criticisms
that CIA is organized as a top heavy bureaucracy and is hampered by a
predominance of military personnel in key positions.” (Document 344)

The Dulles survey group seems to
have taken a fairly activist approach from the beginning. As noted
earlier, Kennan consulted
Dulles about the
psychological warfare problem in April 1948, and in the following month,
under the stimulus of NSC debate on
covert operations, the survey group produced an “interim report” on the
relationship between secret intelligence and secret operations. Later in
May, Forrestal and Lovett invited Dulles to meet with them to discuss the
subject and in the course of the conversation offered him the job of
heading up covert operations under the emerging “autonomous”
arrangements. Dulles declined.
(See the section on Psychological and Political Warfare)

In another memorandum of June 4, 1948, the Dulles inquiry's executive secretary argued that the
group must decide on the type of report it wished to submit to the
National Security Council, and continued:

“In deciding this we must know more clearly the premises that underlie
our work. For example, it now appears that even though it is generally
recognized that Admiral Hillenkoetter is not entirely satisfactory as
Director of Central Intelligence there is no readiness to replace him at
present. On the other hand, there is a willingness approaching
enthusiasm to dispense with the services of Wright (and presumably
certain others with him) and Galloway. If this is the case, then we may
want to work directly with Hillenkoetter in bringing about necessary
reforms within CIA and in the relations between CIA and other agencies.”
(Document 346)

There was also a separate inquiry into intelligence in 1948 by the Hoover
Commission's Committee on National Security Organization (also known as
the Eberstadt committee).
Moreover, in the aftermath of the Bogota riots of April 1948, which
broke out during the Inter-American Foreign Ministers Conference, a
Congressional investigation into the handling of intelligence on the
disturbances led to recriminations between the Department of State and CIA and to
widespread press allegations of an “intelligence failure.”

Although the Intelligence Advisory Committee was fairly quiescent during
1948, this seems to have been mainly because it met so few times during
the year. This may have reflected in part a sense that the Dulles inquiry presaged major changes,
but it is also possible that Hillenkoetter was simply trying to reduce
frictions by convening the committee as little as possible. A number of
unsettling questions persisted, however. One of the most serious was the
vexing issue of “strategic and national policy intelligence.” The
Department of State in its presentation to the Dulles survey group strongly criticized
CIA for duplicating departmental intelligence analysis rather than
exercising its coordinating function by using the departmental agencies
as part of the national intelligence process. (Document 354) This issue was to break out again next year
with renewed vigor after presentation of the Dulles report.

Although a considerable amount of source material is available on the
1947-1948 period, the same tendency toward formal bureaucratic
documentation noted earlier is even more evident. At a good many key
junctures, there is no written record that takes the reader behind the
scenes into the policy process. Compared to 1946 and 1947, when the
IAB met fairly often, the absence of
IAC minutes from the fall of 1947
through the end of 1948 eliminates one of the major sources for
intelligence history during this period. Some of the material connected
with the Dulles inquiry gives a
sense of what lies behind the more formal documentation, but in general
much reading between the lines is required.

From the beginning of 1949 to the outbreak of the Korean war in June
1950, the national intelligence system was preoccupied with the
Dulles Report and its
aftermath, the effort to put into effect the survey group's
recommendations on the organization and management of the national
intelligence effort. Although the intelligence structure continued to
develop and take shape at the working level, there is an inescapable
sense that at the policymaking levels this was a period of drift and
uncertainty, in which there was a marked inability to resolve conflicts
or to solve problems.

The Dulles Report was a long and
complicated document covering a wide span of activities by the Central
Intelligence Agency and the departmental intelligence elements. Overall,
the Dulles survey group
criticized the Central Intelligence Agency for failure to perform its
coordinating functions adequately, for failing to fulfill its assigned
responsibilities to produce national intelligence, and for poor
management of both itself and its interdepartmental responsibilities.
The report made no recommendations for changes in existing legislation
and agreed that the National Security Council was the proper supervising
body for the Central Intelligence Agency. But it urged much closer
liaison between the Agency and
the Secretaries of State and Defense. (An extract from the report is
printed as Document 358; the entire report is
in the Supplement.)

The Dulles Report was particularly
critical of the Central Intelligence Agency's management of the
intelligence process. On the “most vital problem of coordination of
intelligence activities,” for example, it “emphasized that coordination
can most effectively be achieved by mutual agreement among the various
agencies. With the right measure of leadership on the part of the
Central Intelligence Agency, a major degree of coordination can be
accomplished in that manner.” (Document 358)
On national intelligence (intelligence estimates), the Dulles committee was similarly blunt:
“With one or two significant exceptions, whose occurrence was largely
fortuitous, the Central Intelligence Agency has not as yet effectively
carried out this most important function.” (Ibid.)

The report went on to recommend that the Central Intelligence Agency
should draw the departmental agencies more deeply into the estimative
process and replace its Office of Reports and Estimates (whose
performance the survey group criticized) with a small estimates division
which would synthesize the estimative contributions of the other
agencies. Finally, the Dulles
Report proposed that the Intelligence Advisory Committee be revitalized
so as to consider and pass upon all estimates and to become collectively
responsible for them.

In the chapter on “The Direction of the Central Intelligence Agency,” the
report was harsh in its criticisms. While acknowledging the difficulties
of the CIA's work, the strong pressures to show results, and the short
period of time which the Agency had to “demonstrate substantial
accomplishments,” the survey group nonetheless complained that the
“directing staff of the Central Intelligence Agency has not demonstrated
an adequate understanding of the mandate of the organization or the
ability to discharge that mandate effectively,” and it proceeded to
detail the CIA's unsatisfactory working relations with other
departments. Finally, on the question of whether the Director of Central
Intelligence should be a military officer or a civilian, the report
declared “that the Director should be civilian because we are convinced
that continuity of tenure is essential and complete independence of
Service ties desirable for carrying out the duties of the Director. The
post cannot properly be filled as a mere tour of duty between military
assignments. Unless there is such continuity of service and complete
independence of action, the Director will not be able to build up the
esprit de corps, the technical efficiency, the loyalty of home staff and
field workers, which are essential to the success of the enterprise.”
(See the Supplement)

Given the nature of the Dulles
report, and in particular its strong criticism of the management and
direction of the Central Intelligence Agency, Hillenkoetter's position
as Director of Central Intelligence had obviously become a difficult one. He was certainly
aware that senior officials at the Department of State and elsewhere
believed that he should be replaced. The adoption of NSC 10/2 by the NSC 6 months earlier had been, in a sense, a limited vote
of no-confidence in Hillenkoetter. The Dulles Report signified more explicit vote of
disapproval. Nonetheless, Hillenkoetter remained as Director of Central
Intelligence for another 22 months after its submission. During this
period his effectiveness in the position was reduced, and there was an
impasse over the reform of the intelligence system. But, for whatever
reason, Hillenkoetter remained in office.

The Central Intelligence Agency comments on the Dulles Report were submitted to the
Executive Secretary of the National Security Council on February 28,
1949. (Extracts are printed as Document 371;
the full text is in the Supplement) The tone was set in the first
paragraph, which stated: “The observations of the Committee are, in
general, accurate, and its objectives are sound; its conclusions,
however, are, in many respects, faulty, and the recommendations for
their attainment are, in many cases, impracticable.” (Document 371) In general, the CIA's memorandum
of comments, which rejected most of the Dulles Report's basic findings, was as sharp in the tone
of its defense as the Dulles
Report had been in its criticisms. The report's criticism of the
Agency's performance in the field of national intelligence estimates
drew a particularly strong rejoinder, perhaps because the report had
been highly specific in its proposals for remedies, most of which were
unacceptable to the Agency.

The CIA also rejected the Dulles
Report's proposal that the Intelligence Advisory Committee assume
collective responsibility for national intelligence estimates. It
claimed instead that “the Central Intelligence Agency has sole
responsibility for its estimates…and does not share this responsibility
collectively with the members of the Intelligence Advisory Committee.”
(Ibid.) The comments further charged that the “Report does not reflect a
clear understanding of this vital aspect of the coordination theory. To
the Committee, ‘national' intelligence is merely ‘coordinated'
intelligence, and coordinated intelligence is joint intelligence, at the
mercy of departmental bias.” (Ibid.)

At only one point in the CIA memorandum is there a glimpse of the
personal feelings that must have been engendered by the situation.
Concurring with the Dulles
committee's statement that continuity of service was required for the
Director of Central Intelligence, the CIA memorandum elaborated on the
deleterious effects on employee morale and productivity resulting from
changes of directors and organization. This harm, it added with scarcely
veiled sarcasm, “was particularly noticeable last Fall just before
election when literally dozens of rumors were extant in Washington that
one of the Committee members was to become Director of Central
Intelligence as soon as the election was over.” (Ibid.)

The Navy and the Department of State also reacted to the Dulles Report. Admiral Inglis, Director
of Naval Intelligence, reasserted in a memorandum of March 4, 1949, his
long-held position that the Intelligence Advisory Committee should be
explicitly reconstituted as a board of directors superior to the
Director of Central Intelligence. (See the Supplement)

The Department of State recommendations emphasized other changes that
reflected the Department's major concerns and objectives in the
intelligence field at the time: active IAC participation with the Director of Central Intelligence
“in the continuing coordination of intelligence activities and in the
production of finished estimates;” CIA utilization of “the facilities of
the IAC members who should assume
collective responsibility for them;” integration of secret operations
and secret intelligence “in a single self-administered office within
CIA;” and appointment of a civilian “of considerable stature and
prominence, possessing the requisite qualifications of experience and
willingness to serve,” as Director of Central Intelligence. (Document 378)

When the National Security Council met to consider the Dulles findings on April 7, 1949, it
was confronted not only with a bulky report consisting of lengthy
analyses and many complex recommendations, but also with a number of
papers from the intelligence agencies offering comments, observations,
or dissents. It was manifestly impossible for the NSC itself to sort out such a large volume
of proposals and recommendations and it was decided that the Secretaries
of State and Defense, as the two members of the Council most directly
affected, should arrange for the preparation of a more concise document
for further Council consideration. (Document
380) The two Secretaries designated General Joseph T. McNarney
(an adviser to the Secretary of Defense) and Carlisle H. Humelsine (Executive Secretary of the
Department of State) for this purpose.

The resulting document, formally designated as NSC 50 and more familiarly known as the McNarney Report,
was submitted to the NSC on July 1,
1949. (Document 384) In effect, it reduced the
Dulles Report to its
recommendations (omitting most of the analysis and commentary) and
commented on them, endorsing some, disagreeing in whole or in part with
others, and proposing alternative or modified courses of action. For
example, the McNarney Report agreed that the IAC should be more active in intelligence coordination and
proposed that the Director of Central Intelligence should be formally
designated the chairman of the IAC. It
also endorsed the criticism of deficiencies in national intelligence,
but rejected the proposal for the collective responsibility of the
DCI and the IAC in the estimative process (apparently equating this
with requiring unanimous agreement). Instead, the McNarney Report
recommended a procedure under which all intelligence estimates would
either be concurred in by the
IAC or, in those cases where
agreement could not be reached, there would be concurrent submissions of
dissenting views with the estimate.

NSC 50 further proposed that CIA “should
interpret and follow the NSC
Intelligence Directives so as to refrain as far as possible from
competitive intelligence activities in the production of research
intelligence estimates,” and it concurred only in part in the Dulles committee's criticism about
military officers in key CIA positions, recommending instead that the
matter be worked out by the DCI in
collaboration with the Secretaries of State and Defense. On the question
of the directorship, McNarney agreed on the importance of continuity,
suggesting that the director should be a civilian or, if a military or
foreign service officer, either retired or serving a final tour of duty.
Finally, the McNarney Report gave a limited endorsement to the Dulles Report's overall strictures on
CIA's leadership, while softening the criticism and labeling it “too
sweeping.”

The aftermath of the Dulles and
McNarney Reports extended over the following year and beyond. In a
series of documents known as the “Four Problems,” the Department of
State proposed an enhancement of the IAC
through the strengthening of its Standing Committee and its secretariat;
agreed ground rules governing the production of national (estimative)
intelligence; and a general curtailment of research and analytical
activity by CIA in favor of the Departments. In general, the thrust of
the paper was to structure the estimative process along lines that would
increase the participation of the Departmental intelligence components
in the process and carefully define CIA's coordinating and synthesizing
role. (Document 393)

CIA rejected most of the Department of State proposals as well as the
Dulles Report's
recommendations concerning the mechanism for producing estimates. In May
1950, a joint State-Defense proposal (the Webb Report or Webb-Magruder Report) on the organization of work on
national estimates was presented, again proposing detailed rules
governing the estimative process and defining a more limited central
role for the CIA in the production of estimates. It was not forwarded to
Hillenkoetter until July, however. By then the Korean war had broken
out, which distracted attention from these proposals, and by October,
Hillenkoetter had returned to the Navy and General Walter Bedell Smith had become Director
of Central Intelligence. Most of the intelligence problems with which
the government had been grappling in the period since the Dulles Report was submitted were still
unresolved. But the war and the marked differences in style (and
situation) between Hillenkoetter and Smith would create a new
environment for dealing with them.

317. Central Intelligence Group Paper No. 24/1317. Central Intelligence Group Paper No. 24/1Source

Washington, undated.

INTELLIGENCE ADVISORY BOARD PROCEDURES

The Problem

To establish procedure for the Intelligence Advisory Board.

Facts

Although certain basic policies are established by the President's letter
of 22 January 1946 and by subsequent N.I.A. Directives, no procedure has
been formally agreed upon for the accomplishment of the mission of the
I.A.B.

Discussion

In accordance with N.I.A. Directive No. 1,1 paragraph 3, all
recommendations to the N.I.A., initiated by the Director of Central
Intelligence and related to the coordination of such of the activities
of the intelligence agencies of the departments as related to the
national security, are referred to the I.A.B. for concurrence or comment
before submission to the N.I.A.

At its 9th meeting, the N.I.A. established the procedure it desired for
the implementation of N.I.A. Directive No. 5, paragraph 3.2

The I.A.B. has itself agreed upon an acceptable procedure for
implementation of N.I.A. Directive No. 1, paragraph 6, which relates to
intelligence reports prepared by the Central Intelligence Group.

Recommendations requested of the Director of Central Intelligence by the
N.I.A. are not considered as falling into the pattern provided in N.I.A.
Directive No. 1, paragraph 3. Nor is it considered that it was the
intent of the President or of the N.I.A. that all reports, papers, and
statements prepared by the
Director of Central Intelligence for presentation to the N.I.A. be first
submitted to the I.A.B. for advisory opinion. The Director of Central
Intelligence as a member of the N.I.A. can not correctly make the
I.A.B., which was created solely for the purpose of advising him, privy
to all matters before the N.I.A. Similarly as the agent of the N.I.A. he
can not make the I.A.B. privy to all of his relations with the
N.I.A.

Since it is not the current practice of the N.I.A. to formalize agenda in
advance of its meetings, it is impossible for the Secretary, N.I.A., to
undertake to supply N.I.A. agenda to the I.A.B. At such time as the
N.I.A. may formalize such agenda, distribution thereof will necessarily
be determined by the N.I.A. and not by the Director of Central
Intelligence or the I.A.B.

After careful consideration, it is believed that no procedure should be
established which requires the I.A.B.-D.C.I.-N.I.A. channel for the
presentation of opinions by an Intelligence Chief to his respective
departmental head. No such procedure appears contemplated by the
President's letter nor subsequent N.I.A. Directives. This opinion is
further borne out by the absence of any provision requiring the
submission to the N.I.A. by the Director of Central Intelligence of any
recommendation, paper, etc. originated elsewhere than with him. Thus it
would appear that any recommendation originated by a member of the
I.A.B., even though it may receive concurrence of all other I.A.B.
members, can not properly be submitted to the N.I.A. by the Director of
Central Intelligence unless it is accepted by him as a recommendation
from him. Any such recommendation would apparently have to be submitted
individually by each I.A.B. member to his respective N.I.A. member.

Conclusion

It is concluded that a formalization of I.A.B. procedures is
appropriate.

Recommendation

It is recommended that the Intelligence Advisory Board adopt the
following procedures for its consideration of recommendations properly
coming before it for advisory opinion:

1. All recommendations envisaged by paragraph 3b of the President's
letter of 22 January 1946 will be submitted by the Director of Central
Intelligence to the I.A.B. in writing, accompanied by copies of such
papers or statement with which the Director of Central Intelligence may
contemplate accompanying the recommendations upon presentation to the
N.I.A. These recommendations will have attached a voting slip providing
opportunity for (a) concurrence; (b) comment; (c) request for an I.A.B.
meeting to express oral advisory opinion. Voting slips will be returned to the Secretary,
N.I.A., within one calendar week after receipt. If any I.A.B. member so
requests, an I.A.B. meeting shall be promptly called by the Director of
Central Intelligence. The Director of Central Intelligence shall be the
sole judge of the advisability of referring any proposed recommendation
to a special study group or for otherwise delaying the submission of the
recommendation to the N.I.A. If he considers such reference or other
delay inadvisable, he shall give I.A.B. members one calendar week for
the submission of any desired statement of non-concurrence, the basis of
which will accompany the recommendation to the N.I.A.

2. All implementations envisaged by N.I.A. Directive No. 5, paragraph 3,
will be submitted by the Director of Central Intelligence to the I.A.B.
in writing, accompanied by a voting slip providing opportunity for (a)
comment, and (b) calling of a meeting. Written comment by any I.A.B.
member, after consideration by the Director of Central Intelligence,
will be filed by the Secretary, N.I.A., with the file copy of the
related implementation. Oral comment will be fully spread on the minutes
of the I.A.B. meeting, if held. Any implementation modified by the
Director of Central Intelligence as the result of I.A.B. advisory
opinions will be distributed by the Secretary, N.I.A., to the I.A.B. The
decision to hold subsequent I.A.B. meetings or otherwise to delay the
issuance of any proposed implementation rests with the Director of
Central Intelligence.

3. The Secretary, N.I.A. shall circulate to I.A.B. members all proper
recommendations, proposed directives, papers, etc., which any I.A.B.
member may originate for consideration by the Director of Central
Intelligence and the I.A.B. Each shall be accompanied by a voting slip
providing opportunity for (a) concurrence; (b) comment; (c) request for
meeting.

4. Unless otherwise directed by the N.I.A., the Secretary, N.I.A., shall
circulate to the I.A.B. copies of all minutes, decisions, and directives
approved by or issued by or in the name of the N.I.A.

* Source: Central Intelligence Agency Historical
Files, HS/HC-276. Confidential. Attached to a May 13 memorandum from
Earman to the members of
the Intelligence Advisory Board, which noted that it was circulated
at the request of the Director of Central Intelligence as an
alternative to CIG 24 (Document 189).

1 Document 141.

2 Document 160. Paragraph 3 reads “the
Director of Central Intelligence is hereby authorized and directed
to act for this Authority in coordinating all Federal foreign
intelligence activities related to the national security to ensure
that the over-all policies and objectives established by this
Authority are properly implemented and executed.” The reference to
the procedure established at the NIA's 9th meeting is to the NIA's approval of Vandenberg's recommendation that the
Director of Central Intelligence should “operate within his
jurisdiction as an agent of the Secretaries of State, War and the
Navy.”

318. Minutes of the 13th Meeting of the Intelligence Advisory Board318. Minutes of the 13th Meeting of the Intelligence Advisory
BoardSource

Washington, May
15, 1947, 2:30 p.m.

PARTICIPANTS

Rear Admiral R. H.
Hillenkoetter, Director of Central Intelligence, in
the Chair

Members Present

Mr. William A. Eddy,
Special Assistant to the Secretary of State for Research and
Intelligence

Maj. General George C.
McDonald, Assistant Chief of Air Staff-2

Brig. General Walter E. Todd, Deputy Director of Intelligence,
W.D.G.S.

Capt. Abel C. Sabalot, Acting Chief of Intelligence, O.N.I.

Also Present

Mr. Donald Edgar, Central
Intelligence Group

Mr. Park Armstrong,
Department of State

Colonel Riley F. Ennis, U.S.A.

Capt. R. K. Davis, U.S.N.

Colonel E. J. Treacy, U.S.A.

Lieut. Colonel Frank B. Chappell, U.S.A.

Major W. C. Baird, U.S.A.

Secretariat

Mr. J.S. Earman, Secretary, N.I.A.

1. Letter of Appreciation to Lieut. General
Hoyt S. Vandenberg

The Director of Central Intelligence brought to the attention of the
Board a proposed letter of IAB
appreciation to General Vandenberg submitted by the Chief of Naval
Intelligence. The letter was signed by Mr. Eddy and General McDonald and given to Captain Davis to secure the
signature of Admiral Inglis. The
letter will then be returned to the Secretary, N.I.A., who will secure
the signature of General Chamberlin upon his return to Washington, after which it
will be forwarded to General Vandenberg.

2. Coordination of Intelligence Production
(I.A.B. #1)1

The Director stated if there were no comments on paragraphs 2 a (1) and
(2) of the proposed N.I.A. Directive on the “Coordination of
Intelligence Production,” he wished to recommend that paragraph 2 a (3)
be amended to read as follows: “When completed as provided for above,
this outline and initial allocations of production and maintainence
responsibilities shall be issued in the name of the N.I.A. by the
Director of Central
Intelligence as an implementation of this Directive. It is expected …”
(The remainder of the paragraph to read as presently written.)

Colonel Ennis noted that General Chamberlin was extremely concerned about the exact
wording of this paragraph since he felt that its contents were the
backbone of the allocation of personnel, the organization of various
agencies for production, and, therefore, that the outline of basic
intelligence and initial allocations of production and maintenance
responsibilities should be approved on the highest level and that he,
General Chamberlin, was
particularly anxious to have the phraseology “submitted for N.I.A.
approval” included in the paragraph.

After considerable discussion where it was noted by Captain Sabalot that
the outline of all basic intelligence and tentative allocations of
production and maintenance responsibilities should be submitted for
N.I.A. approval rather than issued in the name of the N.I.A. by the
Director of Central Intelligence,

The Intelligence Advisory Board:

Agreed to amend paragraph 2 a (3) to read as follows: “When completed
this outline and tentative allocations of production and maintenance
responsibilities shall be submitted for N.I.A. approval and issued as an
implementation of this Directive. It is expected …” (The remainder of
the paragraph to read as presently written.)

The Director stated he wished to recommend that the last sentence of
paragraph 2 a (4) be amended to read as follows: “The National
Intelligence Surveys will be distributed in such form as shall be
determined by the Director of Central Intelligence and the agencies
concerned.”

After some discussion, where it was noted by Major Baird that a proposed
outline of National Intelligence Surveys2 was now being circulated to the agencies for
approval,

The Intelligence Advisory Board:

Agreed to amend the last sentence of paragraph 2 a (4) as recommended by
the Director, with the exception that the word “distributed” be changed
to “disseminated.”

The Director then recommended the word “sometimes” be placed between the
words “them” and “without” in paragraph 2 b (1). After some
discussion,

The Intelligence Advisory Board:

Agreed to insert the word “usually” between the words “them” and
“without” in paragraph 2 b (1).

The Director stated he wished to recommend that paragraph 2 b (3) be
amended to read as follows: “Interagency dissemination of current
intelligence shall be subject to the overall planning and coordination
of the Director of Central Intelligence and shall be based on stated
requirements of the agencies and upon their known missions and dominant
interest.” After discussion where Mr. Eddy stated that the Department of State preferred that
this paragraph be left unchanged, and Captain Davis stated that ONI has always held the view that
dissemination of current intelligence had been going satisfactorily so
far, and further, to centralize dissemination in this case when there
are so few agencies involved was needless,

The Intelligence Advisory Board:

Agreed that paragraph 2 b (3) should stand as written.

The Director stated that the words “production capabilities” had
unwittingly crept into the wording of paragraph 2 c (2). He recommended
that these words be omitted and the word “or” be added after the word
“responsibility.”

The Intelligence Advisory Board:

Approved the deletion of the words “production capabilities” and the
addition of the word “or” between the words “responsibility” and
“recognition.”

The Director recommended that the word “intelligence” be added between
the words “Any” and “agency” in paragraph 2 c (3).

The Intelligence Advisory Board:

Approved this recommendation without discussion.

The Director then stated A-2 had recommended that paragraph 2 c (4) be
amended to read as follows: “For the purposes of paragraph (3) above,
the following division of interests, subject to refinement through a
continuous program of coordination by the Director of Central
Intelligence, shall serve as a general delineation of dominant
interests.

Political, Cultural, Sociological Intelligence—State Department

Military Intelligence—War Department

Naval Intelligence—Navy Department

Air Intelligence—Army Air Forces

Economic and Scientific Intelligence—Each agency in accordance with its
respective needs”

After some discussion, where it was pointed out by Captain Davis that
ONI was willing to agree to the
amendment of this paragraph as proposed by A-2, with the suggestion that consideration be given
to placing this paragraph as a new general paragraph 4, and rewording of
the first line to read as follows: “For the purposes of intelligence
production the following division …”

The Intelligence Advisory Board:

Approved the changes as recommended by A-2, together with the additional
change suggested by Captain Davis in paragraph 2 c 4.

General Todd then stated that paragraph 2 d (2) had previously read, when
discussed by the Ad Hoc Committee: “The Director of Central Intelligence
shall produce and disseminate national intelligence.” After some
discussion

The Intelligence Advisory Board:

Agreed to amend paragraph 2 d (2) to read as indicated by General
Todd.

The Director stated he wished to recommend that one of the following
revisions of paragraph 2 d (3) be approved by the Intelligence Advisory
Board:

a. “The Director of Central Intelligence shall with the advice of the
IAB agencies plan and develop the
production of national intelligence with due regard to the production
capabilities and dominant interests of the Intelligence Advisory Board
and other departmental intelligence agencies concerned.”

b. “The Director of Central Intelligence shall plan and develop the
production of national intelligence in coordination with the IAB agencies in order that he may obtain
from them, within the limits of their capabilities, the departmental
intelligence which will assist him in the production of national
intelligence.”

After some discussion, the Intelligence Advisory
Board:

Agreed to adopt the revision of paragraph 2 d (3) as indicated in b
above.

The Director stated he also wished to recommend that paragraph 2 d (4) be
amended to read as follows: “The Director of Central Intelligence shall
by agreement with the pertinent agency or agencies request and receive
such special estimates, reports and periodic briefs or summaries to be
prepared by the individual departments or agencies in their fields of
dominant interest or in accordance with their production capabilities as
may be necessary in the production of intelligence reports or estimates
undertaken mutually or by the direction of the President or the National
Intelligence Authority.” After
considerable discussion, where it was brought out that estimates,
reports, and periodic briefs or summaries prepared by the individual
departments or agencies in their fields of dominant interest or in
accordance with their production capabilities were considered to be
those prepared in the past, present and future,

The Intelligence Advisory Board:

Agreed to amend paragraph 2 d (4) to read as follows: “The Director of
Central Intelligence shall by agreement with the pertinent agency or
agencies request and receive such special estimates, reports, and
periodic briefs or summaries prepared by the individual departments or
agencies in their fields of dominant interest or in accordance with
their production capabilities as may be necessary in the production of
intelligence reports or estimates undertaken mutually.”

The Director suggested and

The Intelligence Advisory Board:

Agreed that the word “sufficient” in the second and fifth lines of
general paragraph 3 be changed to “adequate.”

Captain Davis stated that ONI felt that
before this Directive is issued by the National Intelligence Authority,
it should go to the Joint Chiefs of Staff with a request that they
consent to merge the JANIS program
with NIS, and further that the Director
of Central Intelligence request the Director of Intelligence, W.D.G.S.,
to consent to merge SID with NIS.

The Director stated it was his understanding that the Joint Chiefs of
Staff were preparing a paper recommending that JANIS be merged with NIS.
However, in the event such a paper did not materialize, it was his
desire that the proposed N.I.A. Directive on the “Coordination of
Intelligence Production,” as amended at this meeting, be forwarded to
the National Intelligence Authority recommending that the N.I.A. refer
the proposed Directive to the Joint Chiefs of Staff for comment with
reference to the merger of JANIS and
NIS, and further that a letter would
be prepared to the Director of Intelligence, W.D.G.S., recommending that
SID also be merged with NIS.

The Director stated he did not agree altogether with paragraph 6 d of the
report of the Ad Hoc Committee, particularly that part which stated
“with the aid of as many sub-committees as necessary.” He went on to say
that if G-2 and JIC transferred to the
Central Intelligence Group the SID and
JANIS programs, he believed that
the present IAB Ad Hoc Committee, as an
interagency planning board, plus working committees similar to that now
operating on the defense project under ORE guidance, would be capable of efficient handling.

Captain Davis stated only one Ad Hoc Committee had been recommended,
unless it was necessary to get down to the JISPB, the people who were
familiar with the JANIS program. He
further stated that no definite
number of sub-committees were recommended except as might be necessary
to initiate the production of NIS.

Colonel Ennis stated that he was in agreement with the Director and that
the permanent IAB Committee, if
appointed, could invite representatives from the agencies indicated in
paragraph 6 d of the report of the Ad Hoc Committee.

After further discussion, the Intelligence
Advisory Board:

Agreed that the presently established IAB
Ad Hoc Committee would in fact be the committee recommended in paragraph
6 d of the above-mentioned Ad Hoc Committee report and further that
representatives of the other agencies would be invited to sit as members
as they were needed.

3. Action by the Intelligence Advisory Board on
Matters Submitted to the National Intelligence Authority

(C.I.G. 24 and C.I.G. 24/1)3

After some discussion The Intelligence Advisory
Board:

Agreed to hold this paper over until the next meeting in order to give
the members of the Board an opportunity to study the alternative
proposal contained in C.I.G. 24/1.

4. Amendment of the Definition of Strategic and
National Policy Intelligence (I.A.B. #2)4

The Director stated that he did not feel it was within his province to
recommend to the National Intelligence Authority that that Authority
amend the definition of strategic and national policy intelligence after
such definition had in fact been approved by the N.I.A.

The Director noted that any member of the Intelligence Advisory Board had
a perfect right to appeal direct to his N.I.A. member.

After considerable discussion, where it was noted by Captain Davis that
ONI wished to gain the views of the
other IAB members on the present
definition of strategic and national policy intelligence,

The Intelligence Advisory Board:

Agreed, in the absence of Admiral Inglis, to postpone further discussion on this
paper.

5. Exploitation of Enemy Document Repositories (C.I.G. 21 and C.I.G.
21/1)5

The Director stated that in view of the fact that the cost ($82,950) of
carrying out the recommendations contained in the report of the Ad Hoc
Committee appointed to explore the document situation was not included
in the CIG budget, and further that the
budget had not been approved, he wished to recommend that action be
deferred on this paper pending approval of the CIG budget.

After some discussion, The Intelligence Advisory Board:

Agreed to defer action on C.I.G. 21/1 as recommended by the Director.

6. Report by Mr. Eddy

Mr. Eddy informed the IAB in detail of an agreement reached
between him and the Director with reference to certain proposed action
to be taken as a result of the House Appropriations Committee's
recommended cut in the State Department's budget.6

* Source: Central Intelligence
Agency Historical Files, HS/HC-281. Secret. The meeting was held in
the North Interior Building. The text printed reflects changes in a
correction sheet issued on May 26, which was attached to the
minutes. See the Supplement.

1 Document 195.

2 Reference is to a program of basic (“static”) intelligence
studies.

3 Documents 189 and 317.

4 Dated May 9. (Central Intelligence Agency Historical Files,
HS/HC-280) See the Supplement.

5 Dated November 21, 1946 and April
10, 1947. (Both in Central Intelligence Agency Historical Files,
HS/HC-276) See the Supplement.

6 Possibly a reference to the transfer from the
Department of State to CIG of the
Division of Map Intelligence and Cartography and the Joint
Intelligence Studies Publishing Board. (Memorandum from Eddy to Peurifoy, June 23; National Archives and Records
Administration, RG 59, Records of the Department of State, Records
of the Office of the Assistant Secretary for Administration—Subject
Files, 1944-1947: Lot 53 D 28) See the Supplement.

319. Minutes of the 10th Meeting of the National Intelligence Authority319. Minutes of the 10th Meeting of the National Intelligence
AuthoritySource

Washington, June
26, 1947, 10:30 a.m.

PARTICIPANTS

Members Present

Secretary of State George C.
Marshall, in the Chair

Secretary of War Robert P.
Patterson

Secretary of the Navy James
Forrestal

Fleet Admiral William D.
Leahy, Personal Representative of the
President

Rear Admiral R. H.
Hillenkoetter, Director of Central
Intelligence

Also Present

Assistant Secretary of War Howard C.
Petersen

Under Secretary of the Navy John L.
Sullivan

Mr. William A. Eddy,
Department of State

Major General S. J.
Chamberlin USA

Rear Admiral Thomas B.
Inglis USN

Rear Admiral E. T. Wooldridge USN

Mr. Donald Edgar, Central
Intelligence Group

Secretariat

Mr. J. S. Earman,
Secretary

Discussion of the Authority Granted the Director of
Central Intelligence by the National Intelligence Authority at its
9th Meeting To Issue Orders and Directives

Secretary Marshall requested Admiral Hillenkoetter to explain the subject
authority approved by the National Intelligence Authority at its last
meeting.1

Admiral Hillenkoetter, after a brief explanation, stated that at the
present time the Director of Central Intelligence did not need this
authority and he felt that its rescission would create a better feeling
with the member Intelligence Advisory Board agencies. However, he would
be the first to request its reinstatement if ever needed.

Secretary Patterson stated he had
no objection to the withdrawal of the authority provided it was no
longer needed.

Admiral Leahy noted if the
authority had not been used to date he did not see the necessity of its
withdrawal.

Under Secretary of the Navy Sullivan asked Admiral Hillenkoetter if he thought the
withdrawal of the authority in question would result in better
cooperation between the member IAB
agencies.

Admiral Hillenkoetter replied that in his opinion this was correct.

Secretary Forrestal stated the
authority granted the Director of Central Intelligence to operate within
his jurisdiction as the agent for the Secretaries of State, War and Navy
and to issue directives in their names made the CIG appear as a Gestapo and caused unnecessary
friction.

General Chamberlin, upon being
questioned by Secretary Patterson, stated he felt Admiral Hillenkoetter was correct
in requesting the rescission of the authority.

Secretary Marshall asked whether the withdrawal of this authority would
adversely affect the status of CIG and
its relationship with the agencies.

Admiral Hillenkoetter replied that on the contrary he expected it would
improve the relationship.

After further discussion,

The National Intelligence Authority:

Agreed to withdraw the following authority delegated to the Director of
Central Intelligence: “The Director of Central Intelligence shall
operate within his jurisdiction as an agent of the Secretaries of State,
War and the Navy, and the necessary authority is hereby delegated by the
Secretaries of State, War and the Navy to the Director of Central
Intelligence so that his decisions, orders and directives shall be
considered as emanating from them and shall have full force and effect
as such, provided any aggrieved agency may have access to that agency's
Secretary and through him to the N.I.A.”

Discussion of Unfavorable Publicity Directed at
the Central Intelligence Group

Admiral Hillenkoetter stated he had prepared a letter to the House
Committee on Expenditures in the Executive Departments for the signature
of the members of the NIA with reference
to the recent numerous newspaper articles which stated that the Central
Intelligence Group had usurped various departmental functions and forced
established operating organizations out of the field.2

Secretary Patterson stated that
the presidential letter establishing the NIA and the CIG was silent
as to the operations of CIG and left
this responsibility to the NIA.

Admiral Leahy stated the
President had no thoughts on the details of CIG operations, but at the time of the issuance of the
letter of 22 January 1946 the President felt he was not receiving
properly coordinated intelligence reports.

Secretary Patterson stated he had
received several inquiries with reference to the recent unfavorable
publicity of CIG clandestine activities.
He said that while he had no reason to believe that CIG was not ably performing this activity,
there might be some basis for these accusations and, therefore, he would
like to hear any comment the other members of the NIA might have relative to replying to such
inquiries.

Admiral Leahy stated it was
his opinion that clandestine operations were far less effective when
operated by more than one agency. He further stated that such operations
could not be any worse now than they were during the time he was in
France prior to the late war.

Secretary Patterson noted that
NIA had the authority to delegate
conduct of clandestine operations within their respective agencies as
they saw fit.

Secretary Forrestal asked Admiral
Hillenkoetter if Mr. Hoover was in sympathy with the present clandestine
operations of CIG.

Admiral Hillenkoetter replied that he was.

Secretary Forrestal stated that
the NIA had to rely on the soundness of
the organization to which the operation of clandestine activities was
delegated and further he did not see how answers could be given to
unfavorable publicity in this regard due to security reasons.

Secretary Marshall stated that it was his opinion if the operation of
clandestine activities were, for example, centered in the War
Department, the Navy Department would not agree, and conversely, if
these activities were centered in the Navy Department, the War
Department would not agree. Therefore, they must be in a “neutral”
agency.

Secretary Forrestal suggested that
Admiral Hillenkoetter contact the leading newspaper publishers with
reference to the printing of criticisms of CIG.

Admiral Hillenkoetter replied that this had already been done.

After further discussion,

The National Intelligence Authority:

Signed the letter to the House Committee on Expenditures in the Executive
Departments.3

Report by the Director of Central
Intelligence

Admiral Hillenkoetter gave a brief resume of the following report:

“Atomic Energy Commission

“It will be recalled that at that last meeting you approved the issuance
of NIA Directive No. 9, providing for
the transfer from the Manhattan Engineering District to the CIG of military intelligence personnel and
the centralization in CIG of the
coordinating responsibility for collection, production, and
dissemination of intelligence pertaining to foreign atomic energy
developments. Immediately thereafter informal working agreements were
established, and we have every reason to hope that a formal agreement is
imminent. Admiral Souers is working with the AEC toward this goal.4

“State-War-Navy Coordinating Committee

“Running a close second to the Atomic Energy Commission in importance as
a customer of CIG and, in my opinion,
probably leading it eventually on the basis of volume is the
State-War-Navy Coordinating Committee.

“SWNCC is the interdepartmental or
national policy group; CIG is the
interdepartmental or national intelligence group. National policy should
be built on national intelligence. A most satisfactory formal liaison
has been established by CIG with the
SWNCC secretariat. I plan
personally discussing with Mr. Saltzman, the new Chairman of SWNCC, the manner in which CIG can further assist through the
preparation of those intelligence reports and studies which the SWNCC committees should have,
particularly right now, the Ad Hoc Committee for Economic Aid.

“Joint Research and Development Board

“In implementation of established agreements between the Joint Research
and Development Board and CIG, wherein
CIG acts as the scientific
intelligence facility of the Joint Research and Development Board,
detailed working arrangements have been established, formulation of a
National Scientific Intelligence Program has been initiated, and JRDB has started a flow of requests to
CIG for scientific and technical
intelligence. Consideration has been given by CIG in collaboration with the JRDB and the IAB agencies
to scientific intelligence, and CIG has
made continuing progress in meeting JRDB requirements. One weakness that has been disclosed by
CIG coordination is the almost
complete lack of fully qualified collectors of scientific
intelligence.

“Joint Chiefs of Staff

“It will be recalled that the NIA has in
the past discussed the CIG relationship
to the JCS and the confusion and
duplication which exists due to a lack of demarcation of duties between
CIG and Joint Intelligence Committee
of the JCS. To date almost all CIG planning has had to be adjusted to this
continuing problem. I understand that the JIC is now considering a proposal which may resolve the
matter. I do not know its details. In fact I have no official way of
knowing what takes place in JIC. I can
only hope that at an early date the Director of Central Intelligence
will be placed on the distribution list for JIC papers and will be invited to sit with the JIC, at least as an observer. Without some
such close tie-in, there will continue to be a sad lack of
coordination.

“CIG Intelligence
Program

“In our attempt to meet our responsibilities to the President, to
yourselves as members of the NIA, and to
such special organizations as I have mentioned above, CIG has, as its personnel and facilities
have permitted, gradually developed an intelligence program which when
fully activated will, I believe, accomplish what was intended in the
President's originating letter of 22 January 1946.

“We believe that no military or diplomatic planning can be successfully
done except against a background of incontrovertible facts. These facts we call basic
intelligence. In one degree or another these facts are needed by each of
your departments. We are undertaking to coordinate the compilation of
these facts, this basic intelligence, in handbooks to be called National
Intelligence Surveys and to make them available in multiple copies to
the departments. They will be loose-leaf so that they can be kept
currently correct and so that they can be subdivided and distributed for
specialized use. They will contain data on foreign government
organization, pertinent history, topography, population and manpower,
climate, strategic areas, health, and sanitation, etc. In a form
strictly limited to wartime military use, some basic intelligence was
compiled by the JIC in the Joint
Army-Navy Intelligence Studies. We are trying to obtain agreement that
this JIC undertaking, which continues in
a less active manner, be consolidated with our National Intelligence
Surveys. It is my understanding that the JIC is supporting this proposal before the JCS.

“Situation Reports

“Another form of intelligence reference we call Situation Reports. These
reports are to cover countries or areas, and those special international
subjects not restricted to countries or areas. They are designed to
contain a concise summary of the situation, its implications, and its
possible or probable effect on our own national security. These reports
will also be loose-leaf in form for ready revision. They will give
military, naval, political, economic, and diplomatic coverage, and the
facilities of the several agencies will be used to a maximum in their
preparation.

“From time to time we hope to put out a composite overall analysis of the
world situation, based on these separate Situation Reports.

“Interagency Coordination of Production

“The line of demarcation between national intelligence and agency
intelligence is not always clear. But we try consistently to limit our
production efforts strictly to that national intelligence which is
essential to national policy planners, leaving to the agencies that
agency intelligence required for operational use of departmental
officers.

“Further to avoid duplication, CIG has
prepared and the IAB has unanimously
approved a plan for the interagency coordination of the production of
intelligence. The plan attempts to insure complete coverage and
eliminate unproductive duplication. We are awaiting the comments of the
JCS and the agency planners before
submitting it to the NIA.

“Our big problem in the production field is the NIA requirement that the concurrence or comment of each
IAB agency to each CIG intelligence report must be obtained,
excepting current intelligence reports. I plan to review this situation
personally with the IAB.

“Current Intelligence

“By NIA Directive No. 2, CIG is required to produce current
intelligence for use of the President, the members of this Authority,
and a few others. These are the Daily and Weekly Summaries. Personally,
I feel that these summaries are pretty poor, and we are now endeavoring
to make changes in them to increase their value. Any suggestions or
ideas to make them better would be warmly received.”

Admiral Leahy commented that
the President was pleased with the contents of the daily summaries, and
further he read these summaries every day even going so far as to read
the cables attached to his copy.

Under Secretary of the Navy Sullivan stated he thought the information contained in
the CIG Weekly Summary was excellently
presented.

Secretary Forrestal stated that
the veracity of the contents of the daily and weekly summaries should be
without question. He further stated that he made this point since a
portion of the information contained in a recent daily summary had not
been correct.

Admiral Hillenkoetter reaffirmed his position that there was great room
for improvement.

“Collection Coordination

“Two NIA Directives have been issued
affecting the collection of intelligence. One established a program for
the overall coordination of collection activities.5 Recent field surveys
by CIG officers indicate that in some
posts abroad this directive has had a positive and beneficial effect. In
others the generality of its terms has vitiated its force. A continuing
study is being made by CIG, and
suggestions for improvement will probably be made to the intelligence
sections of your departments. With recent budget cuts, the Government's
limited facilities must be employed to their maximum efficiency to
protect the national security.

“The second Directive announced the current essentials and intelligence
objectives of this Government as regards China.6 The purpose behind this
Directive was to pool all agency requirements and allocate them in
accordance with field representative capabilities, thus using manpower
efficiently and avoiding duplication. Further National Intelligence
Requirements are in preparation.

“CIG
Collection

“In addition to coordinating agency facilities for collection, CIG maintains centrally, for the benefit of
all, four operations.

“There is the Office of Special Operations

(Off the record remarks)7

In the Office of Operations are the

1. Contact Branch

2. Documents Branch

3. Foreign Broadcasts Intelligence Branch

“The Contact Branch has continued to develop the exploitation of American
organizations and individuals having a foreign intelligence potential.
Interagency offices are now operating in New York, Washington, Chicago,
and San Francisco. Intelligence classified by the agencies as important
has been obtained from these contacts. In addition, a contact register
is being developed listing future potential sources.

“The Documents Branch is continuing the work of the old Washington
Document Center in the exploitation of captured documents from the Far
East and is now absorbing the German Military Document Section and the
Special Document Section of the War Department Intelligence Division.
Some of these were joint British-Canadian-American projects. This
presents a difficulty because of the lack of authority of CIG to maintain liaison with foreign
governments, a difficulty which may require NIA resolution. As the backlog of these captured documents
decreases, we hope to transfer the attention of our translators to the
exploitation of current foreign periodicals.

“The CIG, under State Department
auspices, has recently reached reciprocal agreement in principle with
the British Government. This provides for complete interchange of
foreign broadcast monitoring material between the BBC monitoring service
and our Foreign Broadcast Intelligence Branch. This reciprocal agreement
is designed to obtain economical monitoring coverage by a division of
the world into U.S. and U.K. zones of monitoring interest. The new
arrangement provides for a transfer of our monitoring station in Cairo,
an area which is rapidly becoming politically unstable, to the British
Crown colony of Cyprus. The British will assume responsibility for our
transmissions from Cyprus to London. In return for this concession, as
well as for the continuation of the wartime arrangement whereby we
receive the entire British monitoring product of BBC, CIG will transmit to London a selected file
of our Far-Eastern and Latin-American monitoring product.

“Collection and Dissemination Coordination

“In addition to the above active collection efforts and to field
coordination, CIG is devoting much time
to the coordination of the collection efforts of the agencies here in
Washington through clearinghouse arrangements and central reading
panels.

“Other Problems

“The continued absence of legislation continues to hamper the soundest
development of CIG in several
directions, both within and without the Government.

“I believe I should bring to your attention one serious problem. CIG is being called upon by the Atomic
Energy Commission, the Joint Research and Development Board, and others
for scientific intelligence. CIG is
unable fully to meet these requirements because of the general lack of
properly qualified collectors of scientific intelligence. Some quarters
have proposed the designation of scientific attaches to missions abroad.
I have no present solution, but CIG is
working closely with Dr. Vannevar
Bush to obtain, as may be possible, qualified scientific
collectors. Several plans, including one of obtaining scientists and
then giving them a course of intelligence, are under discussion. This is
admittedly a difficult and urgent problem but one on which we are
working and which we hope to solve.”

Secretary Patterson asked Admiral
Hillenkoetter if the “CIG Section” in
the Unification Bill was satisfactory to CIG.

Admiral Hillenkoetter replied that it was.

Secretary Forrestal asked Admiral
Hillenkoetter if General Donovan
was in agreement with the present organization of CIG.

Admiral Hillenkoetter replied that General Donovan, Mr. Cheston, his principal assistant in OSS, and Allen
Dulles were in perfect agreement with the present
organization of CIG, and further that
Mr. Cheston and Mr. Dulles had
agreed to appear before the Committee in CIG's behalf. General Donovan had written a letter to the Committee in CIG's behalf since it was impossible for
him to appear personally due to the fact that he was out of the
country.

Discussion of Relationship Between the JCS, JIC
and the CIG

As a result of that part of Admiral Hillenkoetter's report on the
relationship between the JCS and CIG and the lack of demarcation of duties
by the CIG and JIC, Secretary Patterson stated he thought there had been some previous
discussion relative to the dissolution of JIC.

Admiral Hillenkoetter replied that this was correct and that the
discussion had taken place at the last NIA meeting.

Admiral Leahy stated it was
his opinion that JIC should be
abolished. However, JCS had under
consideration a plan for collaboration between JCS and CIG.

Secretary Patterson asked General
Chamberlin if the JIC at present served any useful
function.

General Chamberlin replied in the
affirmative, and noted if JIC were
abolished and its functions assumed by CIG it would thus make an outside civilian agency a party
to projected war plans.

Admiral Leahy noted that as a
possible solution to this problem intelligence information required by
the JCS could be furnished by CIG to JIC,
who, in turn, could put the information in the form desired by the
JCS.

Transfer of the State Department's MAP
Intelligence Division and State Representatives Serving With JISPB to
CIG

Admiral Hillenkoetter stated at the request of the State Department
member of the Intelligence Advisory Board an investigation of CIG appropriations was made and it appears
that CIG can carry these functions for
the next fiscal year. The work and product of the subject organizations
are of considerable importance to all the member agencies and it had
been agreed by the Director of Central Intelligence and the State
Department member of the IAB, subject to
IAB and NIA approval, that CIG
would take over these activities.

Secretary Marshall stated it would be appreciated if the NIA would approve the transfer of the
above-mentioned activities to CIG. He
noted that there was a total of 106 employees involved.

After some discussion,

The National Intelligence Authority

Agreed to the transfer of the State Department's Map Intelligence
Division and that Department's representatives serving with the JISPB to
the CIG and directed the Director of
Central Intelligence to work out the details with the proper authorities
in the State Department.

Secretary Marshall stated he was still troubled by the debates in
Congress over the allotment of money for intelligence activities, and
further it was his opinion that the allotment of funds for intelligence
activities should be appropriated in a lump sum and controlled by one
person.

Secretary Marshall went on to state that Congressman Taber8 was in
agreement and during recent discussions on the appropriation of funds
for intelligence activities Mr. Taber stated it was necessary for him to
talk to twenty-six different
people. Secretary Marshall said it was his belief that the tenor of the
conversations of NIA members in
appearing before Congressional Committees on the subject of
appropriation of funds for intelligence purposes should be that “in
order to get our money's worth” the amount of such appropriations must
be kept secret and some one person had to be trusted in the disbursement
of these funds.

* Source: Central Intelligence
Agency Historical Files, HS/HC-245, Job 84-00473R, Box 3. Top
Secret. The meeting was held at the State Department.

1 See Document 185.

2 See, for example, “Army World Intelligence Ring
Reported Halted by New Agency,” The New York
Times, May 21, and Troy, Donovan and the
CIA, pp. 387, 392, and 395.

3 Document 135.

4 Souers'
report to the Atomic Energy Commission is in the Supplement.
(National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Records of the
Department of State, Decimal File 1945-49, 101.5/7-347)

5 Document 181.

6 NIA Directive No. 8, “National
Intelligence Requirements—China,” February 12, 1947. (National
Archives and Records Administration, RG 218, Records of the Joint
Chiefs of Staff, Leahy
Papers, No. 132) See the Supplement.

7 Not found.

8 Representative John Taber (Republican-New York),
Chairman of the House Appropriations Committee.

320. Minutes of the 14th Meeting of the Intelligence Advisory Board320. Minutes of the 14th Meeting of the Intelligence Advisory
BoardSource

Washington, July
17, 1947, 2:30 p.m.

PARTICIPANTS

Rear Admiral R. H.
Hillenkoetter, Director of Central Intelligence, in
the Chair

Members Present

Mr. William A. Eddy,
Special Assistant to the Secretary of State for Research and
Intelligence

Maj. General Stephen J.
Chamberlin, Director of Intelligence, WDGS

Rear Admiral Thomas B.
Inglis, Chief of Naval Intelligence

Maj. General George C.
McDonald, Assistant Chief of Air Staff-2

Also Present

Mr. Donald Edgar, Central
Intelligence Group

Mr. Park Armstrong,
Department of State

Colonel Riley F. Ennis, WDGS

Capt. R. K. Davis, USN

Lt. Colonel Edgar J. Treacy, WDGS

Major W. C. Baird, AAF-2

Secretariat

Mr. J. S. Earman,
Secretary, N.I.A.

1. Employment of Reserve Officers as Agents (IAB
31 and IAB 3/12 )

The Director of Central Intelligence opened the meeting with the
statement that he wished to add the following to the last sentence of
paragraph 5 of the
Enclosure to IAB 3/13 “except
those employed by CIG” since CIG was presently employing Army and Naval
Reserve officers as agents in a full time capacity.

General McDonald stated he was
inclined to believe that the provisions of IAB 3 were too restrictive. He said, for example, the Army
Air Forces have contracts with institutions, some of whose employees are
Reserve Officers, and pointed out that recently it was necessary for
such an employee to go to Europe in a civilian and overt capacity
in11:493 performance of duties assigned to him by his civilian employer.
General McDonald further stated
that he believed that instances of this nature were likely to occur many
times.

Admiral Inglis stated that cases
of the nature indicated by General McDonald brought out the fact that the Intelligence
Advisory Board should have a coordinated policy on the employment of
individuals as intelligence agents in an overt capacity since agreement
had already been reached that CIG will
have jurisdiction and cognizance over covert intelligence collection,
and while he was not necessarily championing any particular ground rules
he did think there should be a common understanding as to whether or not
ground rules were necessary. He went on to state that if it were
necessary for such an individual to go overseas as an agent of a
department or an institution other than CIG and was not a part of CIG's organized operations, he felt that such action should
be coordinated or at least information given to CIG as to the identity of the individual.

Admiral Inglis further stated that
this was based on the assumption that such an individual was acting in a
covert capacity. If the work of this individual were in the overt field
and he were a Naval Reserve officer, Navy regulations required that he
notify the Bureau of Personnel, Navy Department, prior to his departure,
and further that he “check in” with the Naval Attach é or Senior Naval
Officer in each country visited. Admiral Inglis noted that CIG's
position in this matter seemed to be quite logical and he accepted it
without reservation.

General McDonald stated he did
not believe that the Army had any like requirements as outlined by
Admiral Inglis, but Army Reserve
officers often volunteered to pick up any information they could in
their travels abroad.

Admiral Inglis noted that some
embarrassment might be caused if a Reserve officer were “caught,” since
he could not divorce his identity with the services unless he had previously resigned his
commission. However, it might conceivably be that the job he was
performing was so important that he would resign his commission in order
to take over a particular task.

General Chamberlin asked if the
problem presented in IAB 3 was purely
from a covert viewpoint.

Admiral Inglis replied that the
problem was centered on the covert. Presumably when a Naval Reserve
officer acted as an overt representative of the State Department, for
example, the Navy was ordinarily kept informed.

General Chamberlin stated that he
doubted the advisability of the conclusions of paragraph 5 a of IAB 34 since
he believed that this paragraph stifled liberty of action. He went on to
say he thought in covert intelligence the Central Intelligence Group
should be able to hire the best man suitable for the job whether he was
military or Naval Reserve, and further that he did not think that the
IAB should place any barriers that
might be restrictive.

Admiral Inglis stated that he did
not think that covert methods should as a general rule be used if the
same objectives could be accomplished by using overt methods. He noted
that targets given covert personnel were those that could not be gained
by overt means, and further that they were not hired because they were
Naval Reserve officers but rather on their ability to do the job.

General Chamberlin stated that in
his opinion there should be very little, if any, restrictions imposed on
operations in the covert field.

Admiral Inglis stated that he was
not quite in agreement that covert operations should have no
restrictions and reiterated that if a Reserve officer of the Army, Navy
or Air Forces were caught it would surely cause unfavorable publicity
and embarrassment to his service.

After further discussion where it was brought out by the Director that
CIG had exclusive organizational
jurisdiction over operations in the clandestine field and that there
could be no objection to the member IAB
agencies employing casual agents,

The Intelligence Advisory Board:

Approved the conclusions in IAB 3 with
the following exceptions:

Paragraph 5 a to be omitted.

Paragraph 5 b to be rewritten as follows:

“Members in the Reserve of one military service shall ordinarily not be
employed as agents by, and then only after informing, the other
service.”

Paragraphs c and d to remain as written.5

2. Action by the Intelligence Advisory Board on
Matters Submitted to the National Intelligence Authority
(CIG 24 and CIG 24/1)6

The Director stated the purpose of CIG 24
and CIG 24/1 was to formalize procedure
on matters submitted to the National Intelligence Authority. He said he
did not believe that the Director of Central Intelligence as a member of
the National Intelligence Authority could correctly make the
Intelligence Advisory Board, which was created solely for the purpose of
advising the Director of Central Intelligence, privy to all matters
presented to the National Intelligence Authority. He noted that in the
last two months he had received calls from Admiral Leahy and Secretary Forrestal on matters that did not
concern the coordination of intelligence. He further stated that up
until the last N.I.A. meeting there had been no agenda published.
However, prior to that meeting Secretary Forrestal requested that an agenda be published. An
agenda was prepared and circulated to the member IAB agencies.

Mr. Eddy stated that the State
Department was wholly in agreement with CIG 24/1 with the exception of two changes, one of which
was substantive and the other one of clarification, the substantive
change being that on matters involving the request for personnel or
facilities by CIG to the member agencies
that such requests should be submitted to the IAB in writing prior to submission to the N.I.A.

In this connection Mr. Eddy noted
that the President's letter of 22 January 1946 stated in part that full
use shall be made by the Director of Central Intelligence of the staff
and facilities of the member IAB
agencies.

The Director read paragraphs 3 a, b and c of the above-mentioned
letter.

Upon being asked by the Director Admiral Inglis replied that he went along with the change
recommended by Mr. Eddy, and
further that he had a number of other exceptions as to the whole
philosophy of CIG's position as set
forth in the discussion of CIG 24/1. He
said he took particular exception to the item in paragraph 1 of the
recommendations in CIG 24/1, which
stated: “The Director of Central Intelligence shall be the sole judge of
the advisability of referring any proposed recommendation to a special
studies group or for otherwise delaying the submission of the
recommendation to the National Intelligence Authority.”

The Director stated that he believed that item was a result of the delays
in receiving recommendations from ad hoc committees appointed by the
Intelligence Advisory Board.

Admiral Inglis stated he also took
exception to that part of CIG 24/1 which
required the IAB to submit any desired
statement of non-concurrence in one week.

The Director stated that he was often limited in time in the preparation
of replies to other agencies and cited for an example the urgent request
of the Atomic Energy Commission for comments of the National
Intelligence Authority on the proposed intelligence organization within
the Atomic Energy Commission.

Admiral Inglis noted that in
reality any paper sent to the Intelligence Advisory Board for
consideration could not be answered by “yes” or “no.”

General McDonald stated it was
his opinion that by allowing a week and in some cases less for
consideration of a paper, the work was being taken out of the hands of
the intelligence staffs and was being performed by the members of the
IAB.

The Director stated he agreed with General McDonald but he still felt there should be some time
limitation set on papers circulated to the IAB for comment.

Admiral Inglis stated that in
cases where urgency was of the essence, if a statement to that effect
were indicated he would do all in his power to return his comments in
the time allotted. Admiral Inglis
went on to state that Secretary Forrestal had told him that he expected the IAB to thresh out and reconcile their
differences on papers before they were submitted to the N.I.A., and
further that Mr. Forrestal did
not like the recent procedure of submitting recommendations to the
N.I.A. without having such recommendations discussed by the intelligence
chiefs of that Authority. Admiral Inglis said, however, he recognized that the Director of
Central Intelligence had encountered from time to time inordinate delays
in IAB handling of papers and he
sympathized with the desire to reduce such delays.

Admiral Inglis also stated that it
was his opinion that paragraph 3 of N.I.A. Directive No. 1 did not
restrict the matters which are referred to the IAB to matters related to coordination. Admiral Inglis said he was also not in
agreement with paragraph 4 of the discussion in CIG 24/1, which read: “Recommendations requested of the
Director of Central Intelligence by the National Intelligence Authority
are not considered as falling into the pattern provided in N.I.A.
Directive No. 1, paragraph 3, nor is it considered that it was the
intent of the President or of the National Intelligence Authority that
all reports, papers, and statements prepared by the Director of Central
Intelligence for presentation to the National Intelligence Authority be
first submitted to the Intelligence Advisory Board for advisory opinion” since a great deal
depended upon the subject matter presented to the N.I.A.

The Director stated that he agreed with Admiral Inglis and suggested that the word
“all” precede the word “recommendations” in the beginning of the
above-quoted paragraph.

Admiral Inglis stated since the
Director of Central Intelligence was a non-voting member of the National
Intelligence Authority, it was his opinion that this fact gave a
different implication to the statement contained in CIG 24/1 that “The Director of Central
Intelligence as a member of the National Intelligence Authority can not
correctly make the Intelligence Advisory Board, which was created solely
for the purpose of advising him, privy to all matters before the
National Intelligence Authority.” He went on to state that he certainly
assumed from the reasoning behind the organization of the Intelligence
Advisory Board that that Board should be privy to practically all
matters going to the National Intelligence Authority.

The Director stated he agreed with the viewpoint of Admiral Inglis that practically all matters
presented to the National Intelligence Authority should have had prior
discussion by the Intelligence Advisory Board. He noted, however, that
it would be difficult to define in advance those matters which should go
to the National Intelligence Authority without previous IAB discussion.

Admiral Inglis stated with
reference to the preparation and circulation of formalized agenda for
NIA meetings that it was Mr.
Forrestal's desire that
agenda should be prepared by the Secretary, N.I.A., and items thereon
discussed by the IAB prior to their
discussion by the N.I.A.

Mr. Eddy noted that even if
formalized agenda for N.I.A. meetings were prepared that the
Intelligence Advisory Board could not expect that the N.I.A. would not
discuss other matters than those appearing on the agenda, if they so
desired.

Admiral Inglis stated that it was
not the intent that the National Intelligence Authority could not
discuss any matter they saw fit. However, he was advocating that the
Intelligence Advisory Board use the same procedure as used by the Joint
Chiefs of Staff, i.e., that all matters be thoroughly discussed and
differences reconciled on the working level prior to submission to a
higher authority.

General Chamberlin stated that he
was in agreement with Admiral Inglis that there should be an agenda prepared for
N.I.A. meetings, and further if the N.I.A. chooses to bring up items
other than those appearing on the agenda that was, of course, their
prerogative.

Admiral Inglis stated that it was
his opinion that the provisions of the last three sentences under the
discussion in CIG 24/1 were unsound, and
further that neither the Director of Central Intelligence nor any other
lone member of the Intelligence Advisory Board could nullify the desires
of all other members in
sending any paper to the National Intelligence Authority. He pointed out
that he did not believe it was practicable to require the head of one of
the intelligence agencies to go through his secretary in order to get a
paper to the National Intelligence Authority, and further that such a
practice was not fair to the members of the N.I.A. not to have the
advice of the Intelligence Advisory Board. He also said it was his
opinion that the logical and practical way to submit papers to the
N.I.A. was through the IAB with the
recommendations, if any, of the members of the IAB appended to such papers in the event agreement could
not be reached. Admiral Inglis
went on to say that this procedure was followed by the Joint Chiefs of
Staff and any other way seemed irregular to him.

Mr. Edgar stated that the N.I.A.
and the IAB were not comparable to the
JCS and JIC. The JCS has a
committee where the N.I.A. has a Director of Central Intelligence who is
an individual responsible for certain activities and the IAB is merely advisory to him.

Admiral Inglis stated that he did
not agree that the IAB was merely
advisory to the Director of Central Intelligence and further it was not
intended in the philosophy that established the IAB.

Mr. Edgar said that the title of
the IAB indicated that it was in fact an
advisory body.

Admiral Inglis stated that he did
not believe this was the concept. He said the IAB, in addition to being an advisory body, is also an
implementing body, and further the IAB
is a liaison channel between the Director of Central Intelligence and
the member agencies. It also permits the heads of the intelligence
services themselves to implement and take special personal interest in
the work of the CIG. He pointed out that
the IAB was intended to make the heads
of intelligence services share the responsibility of the success of
CIG and in sharing this
responsibility the members of the IAB
must have a certain amount of authority.

Mr. Eddy stated it appeared to him
that to send a paper to the N.I.A. without the concurrence of the
Director of Central Intelligence and the majority of the members of the
IAB would be expecting a lot of the
N.I.A.

Admiral Inglis thought that any
member of the IAB who filed a paper
should get the concurrence of not less than one other member. However,
if it was desired to adjust this to a majority, that was a compromise,
and that he did not feel too strongly one way or the other.

General Chamberlin stated that he
thought the IAB might approach the
overall question better if CIG 24 and
CIG 24/1 were withdrawn and a
complete new paper prepared. He went on to state that he objected to
CIG 24/1 somewhat along the lines of
Admiral Inglis. He said he agreed
perfectly with Admiral Inglis
that the IAB was a little more than an
advisory body and further that the idea that the IAB had authority to commit their own departments to action
could be justified. He went on to state that the success of intelligence in the government is
dependent entirely on cooperation. He said that the above was a general
summary of his feeling. However, he had other objections in detail and
believed that time could be saved by appointing an ad hoc committee to
redraft a new paper.

Mr. Eddy stated that he would
agree to the appointment of an ad hoc committee to redraft a new paper.
However, he believed that a close examination of the recommendations
contained in CIG 24/1 left nothing to be
desired, and further that he hoped that the ad hoc committee, if
appointed, could start with these recommendations and see how they could
be amended. He went on to say he did not find much in the
recommendations which would not be acceptable to him.

General McDonald, upon being
asked by the Director, agreed to the appointment of the ad hoc committee
mentioned above.

Admiral Inglis asked Mr. Eddy whether the ad hoc committee in
drawing up a new paper should restrict itself to the recommendations
contained in CIG 24/1.

Mr. Eddy replied that he hoped
that they would consider the recommendations and that in the main these
recommendations could form a basis for the new paper.

After some discussion where it was noted by Admiral Inglis that he felt that the IAB should have a staff as did the JIC,

The Intelligence Advisory Board

Agreed to appoint an ad hoc committee to submit a new paper on the
subject of action by the Intelligence Advisory Board on matters
submitted to the National Intelligence Authority, the committee to
consist of Mr. Edgar, Mr.
Armstrong, Lt. Col. Treacy,
Capt. Davis and Col. Mussett.

3. Amendment of the Definition of Strategic and
National Policy Intelligence (IAB 2)7

The Director stated that the phrase “strategic and national policy
intelligence” had its origin in a memorandum from General Donovan to the President dated 18
November 1944.8 Therein General Donovan distinguished between
intelligence pertaining primarily to departmental action and
intelligence material required by the Executive Branch in planning and
carrying out the national policy and strategy. General Donovan went on to say in this
memorandum that while recognizing that production of the former must
remain decentralized, he contended for centralization with respect to
the latter. He proposed as one of the functions of the Central
Intelligence Agency the “final evaluation, synthesis, and dissemination
within the government of intelligence required to enable the government to determine policies
with respect to national planning and security in peace and war and the
advancement of broad national policy.” The Director went on to say that
in a counter proposal prepared by the JIS the above passage was revised and stated that

“Accomplish the synthesis of departmental intelligence relating to the
national security and the appropriate strategic and national policy
intelligence.”

This counter proposal was in turn carried over into the President's
letter of 22 January 1946 with the substitution of “correlation and
evaluation” for “synthesis” and the deletion of “departmental.” The
Director said that Admiral Souers attributed the first change to the
mere preference of Latin to Greek. The second was intended to
deemphasize the idea of dependence on departmental agencies. A new
sentence was added to require their full (but not exclusive) use. The
Director said the JIS draft, which
served eventually as the basis of the President's letter, was based on
the following concepts:

a. That each department would continue to produce the intelligence
required to meet its own operating needs (i.e. pertaining primarily to
departmental action).

b. That such intelligence was inadequate as a basis for national strategy
and policy (i.e. for decisions transcending the responsibilities of any
particular department).

c. That a central agency free of departmental bias was required to
provide, through evaluation and synthesis, the intelligence required as
a basis for such decisions.

The Director said that from the beginning strategic and national policy
intelligence was conceived to be one thing, not two. Strategic was used
in view of the emphasis upon relation to national security and because
it was anticipated that the central organization would supersede the
JIC in the realm of overall national
strategy. National policy was used to broaden the implications of
strategic to exclude, on the one hand, such matters of operational
strategy as purely military plans for the seizure of Okinawa, and to
include on the other considerations of a policy nature. The phrase, as a
whole, was intended to describe that politico-military area of concern
to the State, War and Navy Departments transcending the exclusive
competence of any of them.

Mr. Eddy stated that he preferred
the original definition as approved by the N.I.A.

General McDonald stated that he
believed that the counter proposal submitted by the Navy on the
definition in question was on the right track and that he had a proposal
to go along with it. General McDonald said he thought the last sentence of the Navy
definition might be modified to read as follows:

“It is political-economic-military in scope including such strategic
data, as is necessary, of common concern at least to one military and
one non-military agency.”

Admiral Inglis stated that he
thought operational intelligence had to be reserved to the military, if
it was military, and if diplomatic to the State Department. Mr. Edgar
stated that he thought the definition of staff intelligence clearly
indicated that anything that would be called operational would come
under staff intelligence rather than under national intelligence.

Captain Davis said he questioned Mr. Edgar's remark. He said it had been mentioned a number
of times in discussions at other IAB
meetings that CIG had no jurisdiction
over operational intelligence. He went on to say that CIG no doubt did some operational
intelligence but it was necessary for the military to keep control over
their own operational intelligence. He said that nowhere did he find in
writing or in the laws drafted in relation to CIG that exception, and it seemed to him that such should
be put in writing.

Admiral Inglis stated if it could
be worked in somewhere “that intelligence which is necessary for their
operations” and if there could be an understanding that strategic and
national policy intelligence “must transcend the exclusive competence of
both War and Navy Departments or any other Department thereafter that
may arise from unification,” then he was agreeable to the definition of
strategic and national policy intelligence as written. Admiral Inglis went on to say that he thought
this matter could be settled by writing into the minutes or having a
memo- randum prepared that the meaning of the definition was justified
by implication since it included the words
“political-economic-military,” and further that it must transcend the
exclusive competence of any one department or of the Army and Navy
Departments together.

Mr. Eddy asked whether the IAB could be sure that the JCS were not going to call on CIG for basic intelligence related to
military and naval problems. He noted that the JIC already goes out of the chain of command for required
intelligence information.

Admiral Inglis replied that it
would be hard to give a “yes” or “no” answer.

Mr. Eddy stated that although the
IAB did not know the final form of
the JIC, he had no objections to the
above proposal of Admiral Inglis.

Mr. Edgar suggested that the IAB accept Admiral Inglis' proposal until such time as the
JIC's future was determined and
then, if necessary, again raise the question of the definition of
strategic and national policy intelligence from the Army and Navy
angle.

After some discussion,

The Intelligence Advisory Board:

Agreed to Mr. Edgar's proposal.

* Source: Central Intelligence
Agency Historical Files, HS/HC-281. Secret. The meeting was held in
the North Interior Building.

1 On June 30 the NIA's secretary, at the request of the Acting Chief of
Naval Intelligence, circulated IAB
3, “Employment of Reserve Officers as Agents,” recommending that
reserve military or naval personnel not be used as agents unless
“the information is most important and can not otherwise be
obtained.” (Ibid., HS/HC-280) See the Supplement.

2 IAB 3/1, July 15, summarizing an
ICAPS study, suggested that
employment of agents, military or civilian, for espionage or
counter-espionage by agencies other than CIG ran counter to the intent of NIA Directive No. 5. Reservists acting
in a civilian capacity as observers and reporters for their parent
agencies did not fall within the definition of espionage or
counter-espionage agents, but their activities should be coordinated
in accordance with NIA Directive No.
7. (Central Intelligence Agency Historical Files, HS/HC-280) See the
Supplement.

3 The sentence reads: “Consequently, this practice
[use of reservists as observers and reporters for parent agencies]
must be considered a purely departmental undertaking unrelated to
the special operations of CIG [,]
but all reserve personnel of the Armed Serv-ices residing abroad in
civilian capacity should be used as observers and reporters of
intelligence only by their respective departments.”

4 Paragraph
5 a of IAB 3 recommended that
reserve officers not normally be used as agents abroad.

5 The
“conclusions” section of IAB 3 as
amended became NIA Directive No. 10,
Document 322.

6 Documents 189 and 317.

7 Dated May 9, 1947.
(Central Intelligence Agency Historical Files, HS/HC-280) See the
Supplement.

8 See Troy, Donovan and the CIA
, pp. 445-447.

321. Memorandum From the General Counsel of the Central Intelligence Group (Houston) to the Director of Central Intelligence (Hillenkoetter)321. Memorandum From the General Counsel of the Central Intelligence
Group (Houston) to the
Director of Central Intelligence (Hillenkoetter)Source

Washington, July 29,
1947.

SUBJECT

Memorandum on IAB Procedures—25
July 1947

1. This office has been requested to give its opinion on the legality of
the provisions of Paragraph 2 and 3 of the subject memorandum.1
Paragraph 2 provides for distribution of recommendations by an IAB member and that a vote be taken
thereon. Paragraph 3 provides that recommendations, originating by any
IAB member in which at least one
other IAB member concurs, will be
forwarded by the Director of Central Intelligence to the National
Intelligence Authority, with his comments and those of other IAB members.

2. On Paragraph 2 alone, there is no question, as the IAB could not perform properly its advisory
functions without the full opportunity to consider recommendations of
its individual members. Paragraph 2 and 3 taken together, if followed
literally, would compel the Director to submit recommendations with
which he might disagree, to the NIA, if
two or more members of the IAB
concurred. Proposal of such compulsion requires a review of the
responsibilities of the Director, and of the functions of the Advisory
Board. At present these are set forth in the Presidential Directive of
January 22, 1946, a document which does not have statutory authority,
but has, upon the Executive Departments, the force and effect of law,
and if therefore, subject to the normal rules of statutory
interpretation. Without going in detail into the legal doctrines of such
interpretation, it may generally be said that a law, or similar
directive, is taken to mean exactly what it says, and only in the case
of complete ambiguity, or of facts on which a distorted construction is
proposed, is there need to go behind the final document in an attempt to
determine whether the intent of the law given was other than appears on
the fact of the document.

3. It appears to us that the language of the present Presidential
Directive is clear and non-controversial, and it is assumed that the
wording was well considered when written. Thus, Paragraph 2 states that
a Central Intelligence Group
shall, under the direction of a Director of Central Intelligence, assist
the NIA, and that the Director shall be
responsible to the NIA. Paragraph 3 [a
and b]2 provides that subject to the direction and control of
NIA, the Director shall accomplish
the correlation and evaluation of intelligence relating to the national
security, shall plan for the coordination of the activities of the
Departments relating to national security and shall recommend to the
National Intelligence Authority the establishment of policies and
objectives to assure the most effective accomplishment of the national
intelligence mission.

4. It seems clear that these paragraphs place in the Director sole
responsibility for correlation of intelligence, coordination of
activities and recommendations to the NIA. It is obvious that departmental members of NIA act in a dual capacity, and in their
capacity of Department Heads, must give heed to the recommendations and
wants of their respective departments. It seems equally obvious,
however, that when they sit as the NIA,
their attention focuses on the Director alone, for his recommendations
on central intelligence matters. Any other concept would appear to be
incompatible with the theory of central intelligence developed in the
last few years, and which Congress has recently approved. The heart of
this theory is placing on one point the responsibility for foreign
intelligence affecting the national security, in such a way that
responsibility could not be shifted from that spot to any other agency
or group. To give a Board authority to compel recommendations over the
Director's objection would provide a basis for shifting responsibility
from the Director to the Board. Since, as General Marshall pointed out
recently, action by a Board is generally the action of compromise, the
responsibility for such action falls nowhere.

5. It appears that this situation was clearly recognized by the President
in establishing and assigning functions to the IAB. Paragraph 7, of the Presidential Directive, provides
for the membership of the Board and states only that the Director shall
be advised by such Board. We find some legal interpretation of the word
“advise.” Black's Law Dictionary, Third Edition 1933, definition of
“advise”, is “To give an opinion or counsel, or recommend a plan or
course of action.” It further cites the following court
interpretations:

“This term is not synonymous with “persuade” [Wilson v. State, 38 Ala.
411] or with “direct” or “instruct.” Where a statute authorizes the
trial court to advise the jury to acquit, the court has no power to
instruct the jury to acquit. The court can only counsel, and the jury
are not bound by the advice. People v. Horn, 70 Cal. 17, 11 P. 470.
“Advise” imports that it is discretionary or optional with the person
addressed whether he will act on such advice or not. State v. Downing,
23 Idaho, 540, 130 P. 461, 462; Brown v. Brown, 180 N.C. 433, 104 S.E.
889, 890.”

It seems clear therefore, that the IAB
was to have no direct relationship, as a body, to the NIA, nor is the Director, in any way bound
by their advice. He will, however, of course give due consideration to
the merit of its content. Our conclusion is that establishment of the
procedures in Paragraphs 2 and 3 of the IAB procedures, dated 25 July 1947, would be an
unauthorized assumption by the IAB of
responsibility vested in the Director by law. Conversely, agreement by
the Director to exercise by the IAB of
his recommending functions would be an unwarranted divesting of assigned
responsibility and, moreover, would not relieve him of accountability
for results. He might, in such case, be the channel for policy
recommendations with which he disagreed, but for which he would be held
responsible.

6. Our opinion is not changed, and on the contrary, is confirmed by
consideration of the Merger Bill, known as the National Security Act, of
1947. The sections pertaining to Central Intelligence provide [Sections
105 (d)] that it shall be the duty of the agency to advise the NSC on intelligence activities of
departments and agencies relative to the national security, to make
recommendations to the President through the N.S.C., for coordination of
intelligence activities relating to the national security and to
correlate, evaluate, and provide dissemination of such intelligence. As
emphasized by underlining, Congress uses a more positive word than
“responsibility” and states it shall be the “duty” of the Agency to
perform the functions outlined. The Head of the Agency is of course
solely responsible for the performance of the Agency's duties. This is
completely in accord with the intent of Congress, expressed so often in
hearings and on the floor, that the Executive Branch, the Legislature,
and through them the country, have one place to go for intelligence
related to the National security, with no chance for evasion or excuse
by the responsible officer.

7. There is no provision for the IAB in
the Act and it is apparent that the protection of departmental
intelligence called for in the proviso of sub-paragraph 105 (d) (3) is
the responsibility of the N.S.C. By Paragraph 105 (f), the NIA and CIG cease to exist, and in effect
the Presidential Directive of January 22, 1946, is superseded and voided
by the expression of the will of Congress. This, too, was repeatedly
affirmed in hearings and debate on the Merger Bill, i.e. that functions
of the Executive Branch should be established by Congress, not by
Executive order. It would appear that presently the IAB has no legal status, and if it is to
continue to function, it should do so only on direction from the N.S.C.
as a result of a request from, and recommendations by, the Director of
Central Intelligence.

Lawrence R. Houston3

* Source: Central Intelligence Agency Historical
Files, HS/HC-806, Item 2. Secret. Sent to the Director of Central
Intelligence through ICAPS. The
source text is a transcript made for the CIA Historian on October
15, 1952.

1 Not found, but probably a draft of, or a
memorandum related to, National Intelligence Authority Directive No.
11, September 16; Document 325.

2 All brackets are in the source
text.

3 Printed from a copy that bears this
typed signature.

322. National Intelligence Authority Directive No. 10322. National Intelligence Authority Directive No. 10Source

Washington, July 30,
1947.

EMPLOYMENT OF RESERVE OFFICERS AS AGENTS

The following overall policies and objectives are established by the
National Intelligence Authority for the employment of reserve officers
of the military services as agents abroad:

a. Members in the reserve of one military service shall ordinarily not be
employed as agents by, and then only after informing, the other
service.

b. When reserve personnel are employed as agents, procedures requiring
them to report to local State, War and Navy representatives shall be
eliminated.

c. When casual agents are employed by one department their activities
shall be coordinated with all other such activities by the Director of
Central Intelligence.

For the National Intelligence Authority:

J. S. Earman
Secretary, N.I.A.

* Source: National Archives and Records
Administration, RG 218, Records of the Joint Chiefs of Staff,
Leahy Files, No. 132.
Secret.

323. Minutes of the 15th Meeting of the Intelligence Advisory Board323. Minutes of the 15th Meeting of the Intelligence Advisory
BoardSource

Washington, July
31, 1947, 2 p.m.

PARTICIPANTS

Rear Admiral R. H.
Hillenkoetter, Director of Central Intelligence, in
the Chair

Members Present

Mr. William A. Eddy,
Special Assistant to the Secretary of State for Research and
Intelligence

Maj. General Stephen J.
Chamberlin, Director of Intelligence, WDGS

Rear Admiral Thomas B.
Inglis, Chief of Naval Intelligence

Maj. General George C.
McDonald, Assistant Chief of Air Staff-2

Also Present

Brig. General Geo. F. Schulgen, AAF-2

Mr. Donald Edgar, Central
Intelligence Group

Mr. Park Armstrong,
Department of State

Capt. R. K. Davis, USN

Lt. Colonel Edgar J. Treacy, WDGS

Major W. C. Baird, AAF-2

Secretariat

Mr. J. S. Earman,
Secretary, N.I.A.

1. National Security Council

The Director of Central Intelligence requested the concurrence of the
Intelligence Advisory Board that a letter be written to the National
Security Council, when formed, recommending that all directives, under
which the IAB and the CIG now function, remain in full force and
effect until such time as that Council may desire to make such changes
as it sees fit in these directives.

After some discussion,

The Intelligence Advisory Board

Concurred in the request of the Director as outlined above.1

2. CIG Representation
On U.S. Government Missions Abroad (IAB 4)2

Upon being asked for comments, Mr. Eddy stated that the State Department did not favorably
consider the recommendations contained in the subject paper. He said that this paper
introduced CIG into the collection of
overt and positive intelligence abroad which had already been divided by
fields of dominant interest within the membership of the IAB.

After some discussion, wherein the Director and the members of the IAB stated they concurred in Mr. Eddy's statement,

The Intelligence Advisory Board

Agreed to withdraw the recommendations contained in IAB 4.

3. Coordination of Intelligence Production
(IAB 1 and IAB 1/1)3

The Director stated that he felt that the IAB would be getting into difficulties if they changed the
definitions of basic, current, and staff intelligence as approved by the
IAB at its 13th meeting since he
felt that the recommendations of the Lexicographer of the Library of
Congress were a play on words.

Mr. Eddy stated that he thought
the changes recommended by the Lexicographer lacked conviction.

Admiral Inglis stated that he
believed that the changes recommended were good and, while it was not a
matter of great moment, it was his belief that they gave a clearer
meaning to the definitions.

General Chamberlin stated that he
felt very strongly that the action of the IAB in regard to this matter should be interpreted by the
spirit of the definitions in question and not by a play on an individual
word. He went on to say that if the changes recommended by the
Lexicographer were accepted, immediately the idea of “time evaluation”
was given up.

Admiral Inglis asked General
Chamberlin if he was
referring to basic intelligence.

General Chamberlin replied that
his remarks referred to both basic and current intelligence. He pointed
out that distinction had been made on time and evaluation in the
definitions of basic and current intelligence, as previously approved by
the IAB.

General Chamberlin went on to say,
however, that he felt that the changes recommended by the Lexicographer
in the definition of staff intelligence made that definition read much
better without changing its original meaning.

Mr. Eddy said he felt that the
recommended changes in basic and current intelligence changed the
meaning of these two definitions. He noted, however, that the change
recommended in the definition of staff intelligence was an
improvement.

General McDonald stated that he
agreed with Mr. Eddy.

The Director stated that he agreed with General Chamberlin that the IAB's action in this matter should be
governed by the interpretation of the spirit of the definitions in
question and not by a play on an individual word.

Admiral Inglis stated that he
thought it quite important that the IAB
have an unmistakable understanding of the meaning of basic, current, and
staff intelligence, and he was not inclined to belittle the importance
of definitions. He went on to say, however, that in this particular case
he did not think the recommended change in the definitions of basic and
current intelligence were of any great substance or consequence and he
was willing to accept these two definitions as previously approved, and
the definition of staff intelligence as rewritten by the Lexicographer.
He noted, however, that he preferred all of the changes recommended by
the Lexicographer in the definitions of basic, current, and staff
intelligence.

After some discussion,

The Intelligence Advisory Board

a. Agreed to leave unchanged the definitions of basic and current
intelligence, as previously approved by the IAB at its 13th meeting.

b. Agreed to change the definition of staff intelligence to read as
follows: “Staff intelligence is that intelligence prepared by any
department or agency through the correlation and interpretation of all
intelligence materials available to it in order to meet its specific
requirements and responsibilities.”

4. Exploitation of Enemy Document Repositories
(CIG 21 and CIG 21/1)4

Admiral Inglis stated he would
like to inquire as to the present status of the subject paper since he
had recently received several requests from the Navy Department as to
what action was to be taken on this matter. He said that the Director of
Central Intelligence, at a previous IAB
meeting, had stated that at that time CIG was unable to consider the recommendations contained in
CIG 21/1 due to budgetary problems.
He went on to say that it was his understanding that since that meeting
CIG's budgetary problems had been
settled.

The Director noted the remarks of Admiral Inglis and stated he desired to make a further check of
the funds available to CIG which might
be allocated to carry out the recommendations contained in CIG 21/1.

* Source: Central Intelligence
Agency Historical Files, HS/HC-281. Secret. The meeting was at the
North Interior Building.

1 The letter was first addressed to the National
Intelligence Authority (Document 220).
Another version was subsequently sent to the NSC upon its establishment (Document 222).

2 Dated July 7. (Central
Intelligence Agency Historical Files, HS/HC-280) See the
Supplement.

3 IAB No. 1 is printed as Document 195; IAB 1/1, July 15, is not printed. (Central Intelligence
Agency Historical Files, HS/HC-280) See the Supplement.

4 Dated November 21,
1946, and April 10, 1947. (Central Intelligence Agency Historical
Files, HS/HC-276) See the Supplement for both.

324. Minutes of the 16th Meeting of the Intelligence Advisory Board324. Minutes of the 16th Meeting of the Intelligence Advisory
BoardSource

Washington, September 11, 1947, 2 p.m.

PARTICIPANTS

Rear Admiral R. H.
Hillenkoetter, Director of Central Intelligence, in
the Chair

Members Present

Mr. William A. Eddy,
Special Assistant to the Secretary of State for Research and
Intelligence

Rear Admiral Thomas B.
Inglis, Chief of Naval Intelligence

Major General George C.
McDonald, Assistant Chief of Air Staff-2

Rear Admiral John E.
Gingrich, Director of Intelligence and Security,
Atomic Energy Commission

Brig. General Walter E. Todd, Deputy Director of Intelligence,
WDGS

Also Present

Mr. Donald Edgar, Central
Intelligence Group

Colonel Merritt B. Booth, Department of State

Captain R. K. Davis, USN

Colonel E. P. Mussett, AAF-2

Colonel G. C. Nye, AAF-2

Lt. Colonel Edgar J. Treacy, WDGS

Capt. Patrick Henry, USN

Secretariat

Mr. J. S. Earman,
Secretary, N.I.A.

1. Action by the Intelligence Advisory Board on
Matters Submitted to the National Intelligence Authority
(CIG 24/2)1

Admiral Hillenkoetter stated that the ad hoc committee appointed to
prepare recommendations on the subject paper to the Intelligence
Advisory Board was in agreement with the recommendations contained in
the enclosure to CIG 24/2, with the
exception that the member from the Intelligence Division, WDGS, and the member from the Office of
the Assistant Chief of Air Staff-2 did not concur in the inclusion of
paragraph 4 in the enclosure to CIG
24/2.

Admiral Inglis stated that he
wished to recommend that the fourth sentence of paragraph 1 be amended
to read as follows:

“If the IAB proposes to refer any such
recommendation to a special study group or otherwise to delay the
presentation of the recommendation to the NIA (NSC), but the Director
of Central Intelligence considers such delay inadvisable, the IAB members shall have seven working days, after receipt of the
views of the Director of Central Intelligence regarding such delay, for
the submission of any desired statement of non-concurrence, the basis of
which will accompany the recommendation to the NIA (NSC).”

Mr. Eddy stated he wished to
recommend the insertion of the following sentence between the second and
third sentences of paragraph 1:

“Substance of the statement of the non-concurrence shall accompany the
statement to the NIA (NSC).”

General McDonald noted that it
seemed advisable to him to delete paragraph 4, since the contents of
that paragraph presented a special problem in itself.

After some discussion the Intelligence Advisory Board approved the
enclosure to CIG 24/2 with the following
exceptions:

a. That paragraph 4 thereof be deleted.2

b. That the changes recommended by Mr. Eddy and Admiral Inglis, as indicated above, be adopted.

2. Coordination of Intelligence Production
(IAB 1, IAB 1/1 and IAB 1/2)3

The Director requested comments on the recommendations contained in
IAB 1/2.

Admiral Inglis stated that the
Chief of Naval Operations felt that in view of the National Security Act
of 1947, which established naval aviation as an integral part of the
Navy, the position of the Navy should be made clear in all papers which
dealt with the jurisdiction, cognizance, or responsibility on the
subject of naval aviation. The Navy had, in cooperation with the
Intelligence Division, Army Air Forces, an agency called the Air
Intelligence Division which has been serving both the Army and Navy and
Army Air Forces under instructions from the Joint Chiefs of Staff. The
Navy wanted nothing to occur which would interfere in any way with the
present effective operation of the Air Intelligence Division, and
further that unless paragraph 4 of the proposed NIA Directive on the coordination of intelligence
production was changed as recommended in IAB 1/2, some day after the present incumbents were gone,
controversy might arise as to the interests of the Navy in air
intelligence and, therefore, a
change in the wording of this paragraph as recommended by the Navy was
not only advisable and desirable, but necessary to recognize the
interest of the Navy in air intelligence. General McDonald stated that on the subject of
the Strategic Vulnerability Branch which is in existence—this Branch was
authorized by the Joint Chiefs of Staff to function within the framework
of A-2. However, the National Security Act of 1947 does define to some
general extent areas of responsibility for the ground, sea and air
forces. He had coordinated with the Air Staff the proposed change
recommended by the Navy on the subject paper, and as a result the Air
Forces recommended that paragraph 4 remain as written.

General Todd stated that General Chamberlin thought that the subject paper was not the
paper in which to try to define fields of dominant interest, since, if
it was attempted to define one field, an attempt should be made to
define, for example, military intelligence. General Chamberlin felt that there should
follow in a subsequent paper, defined in greater detail, fields of
dominant interest. However, he felt that the fields of dominant
interests as outlined in the subject paper were generally satisfactory.
General Chamberlin felt that he
did not believe dominant interest could be shared, since each of the
member IAB agencies certainly had a
great deal of interest in the other fields.

Admiral Inglis stated that he
agreed with General Chamberlin's
thoughts and was willing to make some alteration in the wording of his
recommended change to the proposed directive in question. For example,
the Navy and Army Air Forces to share air intelligence each to their
respective needs.

Colonel Mussett stated that he thought this was taken into account in the
definition of staff intelligence. He said that A-2 recognized that each
Department must produce all intelligence that was necessary to its own
needs.

Admiral Inglis stated that he did
not quite agree with the A-2 viewpoint, since the Navy's need for air
intelligence went beyond the question of staff intelligence. He said
that naval air intelligence goes into the field of impact of foreign
aviation on naval operations, not necessarily air operations, but the
naval surface, submarines, amphibious, transports, logistics, and
supply, and for that reason the Navy felt that it did have an interest
in air intelligence which they believed had to be recognized.

After further discussion, the Intelligence Advisory Board agreed to
forward the proposed directive on the coordination of intelligence
production to the NIA, together with the
non-concurrence of the Navy member and the comments of the Air member.
(Note: The non-concurrence of the Navy member and the comments of the
Air member are to be submitted to the Secretary, NIA, within seven working days after date of this
meeting.)

3. Reorganization of Central Intelligence
Group

The Director of Central Intelligence stated he was withdrawing the
memorandum to the individual members of the Intelligence Advisory Board,
dated 15 August 1947, subject—“Reorganization of the Central
Intelligence Group”,4 and would
submit new recommendations on this subject.

4. Transfer of the Janis Program to CIG

Admiral Inglis asked the status of
the proposed transfer of the Janis program to the Central Intelligence
Group.

The Director replied that CIG had
received a request from the Joint Chiefs of Staff to assume
responsibility for this program and that necessary action was being
taken to effect the transfer of functions and personnel of this activity
to the Central Intelligence Group.

5. Overall Policies and Objectives for the
Coordination of Intelligence Relating to Foreign Industrial
Establishments (CIG 22)5

Admiral Inglis asked the status of
CIG 22.

Mr. Edgar replied that further
consideration of this paper was being held pending approval of the
proposed directive on the coordination of intelligence production.

6. Exploitation of Enemy Document Repositories
(CIG 21 and CIG 21/1)6

Admiral Inglis asked what had been
decided by the Director of Central Intelligence on the recommendations
contained in the enclosure to CIG
21/1.

The Director replied that there was some question as to his authority to
expend the sum of approximately $82,950 to carry out the recommendations
contained in the enclosure to CIG
21/1.

After some discussion, the Director agreed to request formal approval
from the National Intelligence Authority that authority be granted to
the Director of Central Intelligence to expend approximately $82,950 of
funds allotted to CIG to carry out the recommendations contained in
enclosure to CIG 21/1.

* Source: Central Intelligence
Agency Historical Files, HS/HC-281. Secret. The meeting was held at
the North Interior Building.

1 Dated August 12. (Ibid., HS/HC-276) See the
Supplement.

2 Paragraph 4 of CIG 24/2 required
the DCI to notify the IAB in writing of any actions planned
under paragraph 3 of NIA Directive
No. 5 (which authorized the DCI to
coordinate all U.S. foreign intelligence activities) and provided
for IAB members to express
concurrence or non-concurrence in such actions.

3 IAB 1 is Document 195. IAB 1/1 and
IAB 1/2, dated July 15 and
September 5, are not printed. (Central Intelligence Agency
Historical Files, HS/HC-280, and HS/HC-276, respectively) See the
Supplement. IAB 1/2 consisted of a
proposed NIA directive on
coordination of intelligence production and a memorandum from the
Chief of Naval Intelligence asking that the allocation of subjects
by agency according to “dominant interest” be changed to reflect
that the Air Force and the Navy had a shared interest in air
intelligence.

4 Memorandum from
Hillenkoetter to Eddy et al.,
August 15, not printed. (Central Intelligence Agency Historical
Files, HS/HC-208, Item 36) See the Supplement.

5 Not found.

6 See footnote 4, Document 323.

325. National Intelligence Authority Directive No. 11325. National Intelligence Authority Directive No. 11Source

Washington, September 16,
1947.

ACTION BY THE INTELLIGENCE ADVISORY BOARD ON MATTERS SUBMITTED TO THE
NATIONAL INTELLIGENCE AUTHORITY

The following policies and objectives are established by the National
Intelligence Authority governing action by the Intelligence Advisory
Board on matters submitted to that Authority:

1) All recommendations envisaged by paragraph 3 of the President's letter
of 22 January 1946 (Section 102 d of the National Security Act of 1947)
will be submitted by the Director of Central Intelligence to the
Intelligence Advisory Board in writing, accompanied by copies of such
papers or statements as the Director of Central Intelligence may
contemplate accompanying the recommendations upon presentation to the
National Intelligence Authority (NSC).
These recommendations will have attached a voting slip providing
opportunity for:

a. Concurrence or non-concurrence;

b. Comment;

c. Request for an IAB meeting.

Voting slips will be acted upon and returned to the Secretary, NIA, within seven working days after
receipt. Substance of the statement of the non-concurrence shall
accompany the statement to the NIA
(NSC). If any Intelligence Advisory
Board member so requests, an Intelligence Advisory Board meeting shall
be called by the Director of Central Intelligence. If the IAB proposes to refer any such
recommendation to a special study group or otherwise to delay the
presentation of the recommendation to the NIA (NSC), but the Director
of Central Intelligence considers such delay inadvisable, the IAB members shall have seven working days,
after receipt of the views of the Director of Central Intelligence
regarding such delay, for the submission of any desired statement of
non-concurrence, the basis of which will accompany the recommendation to
the NIA (NSC).

2) The Secretary, NIA, shall circulate to
the IAB members any recommendations,
proposed directives, papers, etc., which an IAB member may originate for consideration by the Director
of Central Intelligence and the Intelligence Advisory Board. Each shall
be accompanied by a voting slip providing opportunity for:

a. Concurrence or non-concurrence;

b. Comment;

c. Request for an IAB meeting.

3) Any recommendation two or more IAB
members believe should be submitted to the NIA (NSC) will be submitted
by the Director of Central Intelligence in such form as to set forth his
recommendation and the comments of the IAB members.

4) Unless otherwise directed by the NIA,
the Secretary, NIA, shall circulate to
the IAB copies of all agenda, minutes,
decisions, and directives approved or issued by, or in the name of, the
NIA.

For the National Intelligence Authority:

J. S. Earman
Secretary, N.I.A.

* Source: National Archives and Records
Administration, RG 218, Records of the Joint Chiefs of Staff,
Leahy Papers, No.
132. Confidential.

326. Memorandum From the Secretary of State's Acting Special Assistant for Research and Intelligence (Armstrong) to Acting Secretary of State Lovett326. Memorandum From the Secretary of State's Acting Special Assistant
for Research and Intelligence (Armstrong) to Acting Secretary of State LovettSource

Washington, October 28,
1947.

SUBJECT

Withdrawal of State representation from the Joint Intelligence
Committee (JIC) and the Joint
Intelligence Staff (JIS)

As I indicated orally several weeks ago, the reorganization of the Staff
of the Joint Chiefs was expected to provide for representation on the
JIC of the armed services only. On
October 22, 1947, the Joint Chiefs of Staff approved the organization
and functions which had been proposed by General Gruenther, the Director
(Designate) of the Joint Staff, and which limit the membership of the
JIC as anticipated.

Inasmuch as the National Security Act of 1947 establishes duties and
responsibilities for the Director of Central Intelligence substantially
analogous to those
heretofore performed by State representatives on the JIC and the JIS, it appears appropriate for the Department to look to
the Director of Central Intelligence and the Central Intelligence Agency
(CIA) as the channel for communicating the civilian intelligence
viewpoint to the armed services and, reciprocally, for obtaining from
them the military intelligence viewpoint as required. Accordingly, it is
recommended that the Department now withdraw from the JIC and the JIS. This step has been discussed with Admiral Souers,
Executive Secretary of the National Security Council, and with Admiral
Hillenkoetter, the Director of Central Intelligence, both of whom concur
in the proposed action.

The Department's representatives on the JIC and the JIS will hold
themselves available for informal liaison and coordination with the
JIC and the JIS until such time as channels through the CIA are in full
operation. An announcement of these arrangements will be made to the
interested officers of the Department as soon as the Joint Chiefs of
Staff have had an opportunity to acknowledge the notification of
withdrawal, which is appended for your signature.

W. Park Armstrong, Jr.1

Attachment2

Washington, October 31, 1947.

The Department of State has noted the organization and functions of the
Joint Staff described in the Memorandum of the Director (Designate),
Joint Staff (JCS 1794/4), approved by
the Joint Chiefs of Staff on October 22, 1947 (JCS 1794/6).3 Further, the National Security Act of 1947 established
a Central Intelligence Agency headed by a Director of Central
Intelligence whose duties, under the direction of the National Security
Council as provided for in Section 102(d) of the said Act, are believed,
among other things, to
supersede the duties heretofore delegated to Department of State
representatives on the Joint Intelligence Committee and the Joint
Intelligence Staff of the Joint Chiefs of Staff. The Director of Central
Intelligence took the oath of office on September 26, 1947, and the
Central Intelligence Agency has been activated under the law.

The Department of State, therefore, herewith withdraws its formal
representation from the Joint Intelligence Committee and the Joint
Intelligence Staff. Pending the establishment of other channels, the
Department's representatives will continue to perform such liaison and
coordinating activities as may be desired.

Robert A. Lovett4

* Source: National Archives and Records
Administration, RG 59, Records of the Department of State, Records
of the Bureau of Intelligence and Research: Lot 58 D 776, JIS, JIC, JCS.
Restricted.

1 Printed from a copy that bears this typed
signature.

2 Restricted.Memorandum From Acting
Secretary of State Lovett to the Secretary of the Joint Chiefs of
Staff (McFarland)

3 Neither
found.

4 Printed from a copy that indicates
Lovett signed the original.

327. Letter From the Secretary of State's Acting Special Assistant for Research and Intelligence (Armstrong) to Director of Central Intelligence Hillenkoetter327. Letter From the Secretary of State's Acting Special Assistant for
Research and Intelligence (Armstrong) to Director of Central Intelligence HillenkoetterSource

Washington, October 29,
1947.

Dear Admiral Hillenkoetter: The following suggestions for the revision of
current NIA directives are offered in
response to paragraph 3 of your memorandum of 9 October 1947, subject:
Initial National Security Council Directive to CIA.1

a. Those provisions of NIA Directives
1-11, inclusive, and of IAB 1/2 which
are not specifically included in the National Security Act and which
have not become unnecessary through being overtaken by events, should be
repeated in the new National Security Council directive or
directives.

b. The NSC directives should contain a
definition of intelligence relating to or affecting the national
security, which should conform to the definition of national
intelligence as approved by the NIA.

c. The subject of inspection should be clarified in detail. The
provisions now contained in paragraph 2 of NIA #5 should be eliminated and substitution made as
follows:

The Director of Central Intelligence is authorized and directed, in
connection with his responsibilities for coordination, to survey the
operations of the Federal intelligence agencies in order to ascertain
what necessary intelligence functions relating to the national security
are not being presently performed or are not being adequately performed
or involve wasteful duplication of effort. Such a survey shall include a
determination of the causes of any omissions, inadequacies or
duplications. The conclusions of the survey shall serve as the basis of
recommendations to the National Security Council for corrective
measures. In his coordinating capacity the Director of Central
Intelligence is responsible for insuring that existing facilities are
adequate to meet the fair requirements both of the departments and of
the National Security Council as determined by their several
responsibilities. Normally, therefore, such corrective recommendations
will be designed to strengthen the base of the overall intelligence
structure by recognizing primary departmental needs and supporting the
agencies directly serving them. Centralization of functions will be
recommended only in cases when, by agreement among the departments and
the Central Intelligence Agency, such functions are essential and are
most beneficially and effectively accomplished on a centralized
basis.

d. The provisions of NIA #6 should be
revised to accord with the recommendation of the Interdepartmental
Committee already submitted to NIA, and
those of NIA #8 should not be included
in the new directives.

e. The new National Security Council directives should make provision for
clear recognition of the general principle that departmental
intelligence agencies produce finished intelligence in the fields of
their dominant interests and, as far as possible, CIA bases production
of national intelligence upon utilization of finished departmental
intelligence obtained from the agencies rather than upon CIA processing
of source materials.

f. The new NSC directives should provide
for coordination of maintenance and servicing of intelligence document
collections.

W. Park Armstrong, Jr.2

* Source: Central Intelligence Agency
Historical Files, HS/HC-806, Item 9. Secret.

1 Not found.

2 Printed from a copy that bears this typed
signature.

328. Letter From the Acting Secretary of State's Special Assistant for Research and Intelligence (Armstrong) to the Executive Secretary of the National Security Council (Souers)328. Letter From the Acting Secretary of State's Special Assistant for
Research and Intelligence (Armstrong) to the Executive Secretary of the National
Security Council (Souers)Source

Washington, November 5,
1947.

Dear Admiral Souers: Following the conversation which Colonel Booth and I
had with you on October 24th the Department notified the Joint Chiefs of
Staff of the withdrawal of its representation on the Joint Intelligence
Committee and the Joint Intelligence Staff. I enclose a copy of that
memorandum for your information.1

I am also enclosing a copy of a letter to Admiral Hillenkoetter, asking
him to establish relations with the Joint Intelligence Committee which
will provide for continuing cooperation and joint activity between the
Department and the Joint Chiefs on intelligence matters.

Sincerely yours,

W. Park Armstrong, Jr.

Enclosure

Letter From the Acting Secretary of State's Special
Assistant for Research and Intelligence (Armstrong) to Director of Central
Intelligence Hillenkoetter

Washington, November 5, 1947.

Dear Admiral Hillenkoetter: Under date of October 31, 1947 the Department
of State notified the Joint Chiefs of Staff by memorandum2 of the withdrawal of its representation on the Joint
Intelligence Committee (JIC) and the
Joint Intelligence Staff (JIS), at the
same time offering to maintain such liaison and coordinating activities
as may be necessary until other channels are established (copy of
memorandum enclosed). The
Department indicated to the Joint Chiefs of Staff that it believes the
proper channel for joint action in intelligence matters between itself
and the Joint Chiefs is through the Director of Central Intelligence and
the Central Intelligence Agency (CIA). The Department therefore requests
the Director of Central Intelligence and the CIA to establish liaison
and coordinating relations with the JIC
and JIS as soon as feasible to the end
that no gap shall exist between the Department and the intelligence
organization of the Joint Chiefs.

In considering the character and scope of the liaison and coordinating
activities to be established, the following matters, among others, are
of immediate concern: (a) policy with respect to the distribution of
JIC and JIS papers to the CIA and, in turn, to the Department; (b)
the forwarding of and responding to requests for intelligence
contributions between the JIC and the
JIS on the one hand, and the
Department on the other, and (c) procedures whereby concurrence of the
Department is obtained in respect to estimates or papers based in whole
or in part upon contributions by the Department, or which are recognized
to involve important conclusions in its fields of primary interest and,
reciprocally, that concurrences may be obtained by the Department on
intelligence matters within the cognizance of the Joint Chiefs.

A number of possible methods for handling the liaison and coordinating
activities described above will undoubtedly suggest themselves to you.
The following alternative procedures, however, are proposed for your
consideration:

(1) Joint action on intelligence matters might be accomplished in the
IAC assisted by a sub-staff
appointed by the IAC representatives,
the service members of which correspond to the JIS, as was suggested in the JIC 364 series of papers.

(2) Joint action might be accomplished by enlarging the assignment of the
present departmental representatives to ORE (i.e., Mr. M. B. Booth for the Department of State,
Colonel R. F. Ennis for the Department of the Army, etc.), so that these
officers represent their departments with CIA for the purpose of dealing
with problems requiring joint action and the obtaining of concurrences,
rather than, as at present, being limited to such activities in respect
to ORE papers only.

(3) The proposed “Standing Committee” of the IAC could be designated as the agency to assist the IAC in processing all problems involving
joint action.

Of the above alternatives, it seems to us that the third offers the more
direct and satisfactory solution to the problem, although it might
require redefinition of the functions and responsibilities of the
proposed “Standing Committee.” It is suggested, however, that the
foregoing proposals, together with any others which may seem desirable
to you, be placed before ICAPS in order that an acceptable
solution may be presented to the JIC and
the IAC as soon as possible.

Sincerely yours,

W. Park Armstrong, Jr.3

* Source: Truman
Library, Papers of Harry S.
Truman, Records of the National Security Council.
Confidential.

1 See the
attachment to Document 326.

2 See footnote 1
above.

3 Printed from a copy that bears this typed
signature.

329. Memorandum From the Chief of the Global Survey Group, Central Intelligence Agency (Montague) to the Assistant Director for Reports and Estimates (Babbit)329. Memorandum From the Chief of the Global Survey Group, Central
Intelligence Agency (Montague) to the Assistant Director for Reports and
Estimates (Babbit)Source

Washington, November 12,
1947.

SUBJECT

Production of a “World Situation Estimate”

1. The Global Survey Group is charged with the production of “World
Situation Estimates.” The content and frequency of these Estimates are
not specified. I understand that ORE
undertook to produce them on its own initiative, and suppose the content
and timing are left to the discretion of ORE. Presumably the Estimates would consist of a more
extended exposition of those matters presented in current and summary
form in the CIA Series. It has been anticipated that Estimates would be
produced semi-annually, the first by the end of the current year.

2. A prerequisite to the preparation of a World Situation Estimate, as
herein envisaged, is the existence of a body of staff intelligence
prepared by the several Branches with reference to their particular
concerns but affording coverage of all situations of global
significance. This is not to say that the World Situation Estimate would
be merely a miscellany of Branch estimates collected under one cover. On
the contrary, it must be a coherent analysis of the world situation from
a global point of view. The Branch estimates from which it is derived
will presumably have to be reworked by the Global Survey Group to meet
this requirement. The prerequisite staff intelligence must be provided,
however, before the Global Survey Group can proceed with its task.

3. On my return from leave in early September it was my intention to
initiate a series of projects designed to close the gaps in our staff
intelligence coverage and to permit the completion of the first World
Situation Estimate on about 1 December. During September and early
October, however, the Global Group was preoccupied with meeting the
unanticipated and urgent requirements of the National Security Council
and its Staff Group. Thereafter I was unwell and had to defer specific
planning for the World Situation Estimate until about 1 November.

4. On canvassing the situation I now find that the available staff
intelligence is generally adequate with respect to the Near East, the
Far East, and Latin America, but that it is decidedly inadequate with
respect to the U.S.S.R., the U.K., France, and Germany. Those four
countries, however, constitute the very crux of the world situation as
we have analyzed it in CIA 1. ORE should
have produced a complete and thoroughly analytical coverage of them on
general grounds, apart from the requirements of a World Situation
Estimate. The actual state of ORE coverage with respect to each is as
follows:

a. The U.S.S.R.: ORE has produced no
general analysis of Soviet objectives and strategy since ORE 1 (23 July 1946). That part of ORE 1 relating to the basic policy of the
U.S.S.R. is still generally valid (as it should be). But ORE 1 was produced by one man over the
weekend to meet an unanticipated and urgent requirement. It has always
been subject to improvement with more time for deliberation and, at the
age of sixteen months could also be improved in the light of subsequent
developments. As regards current Soviet strategy for the accomplishment
of basic objectives (see Special Evaluation No. 22), it is of course far
out of date.

b. The U.K.: An analysis of British capabilities and policies
corresponding to ORE 1 has been
projected since July, as ORE 26. At last
report, however, its early completion was not to be expected.

c. France: ORE coverage of France has
been exclusively in the form of current intelligence; no thorough
analysis of the French situation has ever been attempted or projected.
Yet France is the key to the situation in Western Europe. There is
presently in preparation an estimate of the current political situation
in that country, but on form it is more likely to run as current than as
staff intelligence. A thorough analysis of all factors in the French
situation is definitely required.

d. Germany: ORE has produced no staff
intelligence on Germany except ORE 11/1
(8 April 1947). That paper, as its title implies, was a summary review
of the objectives and policies of the occupying powers rather than a
thorough analysis of the German situation. Such an analysis should have
been produced ere now in anticipation of the C.F.M. meeting a fortnight
hence. A report on Germany is in preparation, but its original version
was current rather than staff intelligence and it is still too slight and superficial to
provide the thorough analysis of the German situation that is
required.

5. Personnel of the present Global Survey Group produced both ORE 1 and ORE 11/1, the first singlehanded, the second with some
assistance from the Branch. The Group, however, is not the proper body
to prepare any one of the four estimates specifically required and
certainly cannot produce all of them and a World Situation Estimate
simultaneously.

6. Under the existing organization of ORE
it is an implicit function of the Global Survey Group to propose
projects designed to correct deficiencies in ORE coverage as the Group
perceives them. The procedure for giving effect to such proposals is
unclear, however. The Group itself lacks authority to direct the
Branches to take appropriate action or to see to it that any action
taken actually satisfies the requirement indicated. Moreover, three
requirements indicated herein result from the consistent inability or
disinclination of two Branches to perform the primary function of ORE (thorough intelligence analysis, as
distinguished from current intelligence reporting). This is a matter too
fundamental to be dealt with through the routine functioning of the
Global Survey Group and the Estimates Group. Both in theory and as a
practical matter, it appears that only the Assistant Director himself
has the requisite authority to give the direction and the instruction
needed in these circumstances.

7. Recommendations:

a. That the Eastern European-U.S.S.R. Branch be directed to prepare, as a
matter of priority, an analysis of basic Soviet objectives and of
current Soviet strategy, on the order of ORE 1.

b. That the Western European Branch be directed to prepare, as a matter
of priority, thorough analyses of the situation in France and the
situation in Germany.

c. That the Northern Branch be directed to complete ORE 26 as a matter of priority.

d. That each Branch be instructed that in each case the desideratum is a
thoughtful analysis of the fundamental situation rather than a
superficial account of current events.

e. That the preparation of a World Situation Report be deferred until the
estimates referred to above are available at least in final draft.

Ludwell L. Montague1

* Source: Central Intelligence Agency
Historical Files, HS/HC-450, Item 24. Confidential.

1 Printed from a copy that bears this
typed signature.

330. Memorandum From the Director of the Policy Planning Staff (Kennan) to the Under Secretary of State (Lovett)330. Memorandum From the Director of the Policy Planning Staff
(Kennan) to the
Under Secretary of State (Lovett)Source

Washington, November 18,
1947.

The National Security Council has instructed Hillenkoetter to pre-sent by
November 26 a draft of a permanent directive for the CIA.1

He has prepared such a draft and has sent it for comment to Arm-strong,
who heads up these activities in this Department.

Armstrong has rather important
objections to it. He has brought it to me and inquired whether he could
state these objections in the name of the Department. I told him that I
would wish to have the Staff study the matter carefully and that I would
then submit my recommendations to you as to the position the Department
should take. It is a complicated matter, involving the whole pattern of
relations between the various departments and the CIA in intelligence
matters.

Provided you have no objections, we will make this the subject of a Staff
study.2

George F. Kennan

* Source: National
Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Records of the
Department of State, Policy Planning Staff Files, 1947-53: Lot 64 D
563, Box 10, Intelligence. No classification marking. The Policy
Planning Staff minutes for November 18 indicate that Kennan would recommend to Lovett
that the Policy Planning Staff go over the draft NIA directives sent to the Department
for comment. (Ibid., Box 32)

1 Reference is to NSC
Action No. 3, taken at the Council's first meeting on September 26,
instructing the Director of Central Intelligence to submit within 60
days “proposed authorizations supplanting the former directives of
the National Intelligence Authority and specifying his functions and
those of the Central Intelligence Agency in accordance with the
provisions of the National Security Act of 1947.” (National Security Council, Policies of the Government of the
United States of America Relating to the National Security,
vol. 1, 1947-48, p. 53)

2 In the margin next to this
paragraph there is a handwritten “OK” with Lovett's initial. On November 20
the Policy Planning Staff suspended work on the study until an
interagency working group had revised the draft directives. (Minutes
of the 88th meeting, November 20; National Archives and Records
Administration, RG 59, Records of the Department of State, Policy
Planning Staff Files, 1947-1953: Lot 64 D 563, Box 32) This
presumably was the result of action taken by the IAB at its meeting on November 20; see
Document 332.

331. Memorandum From the Secretary of State's Special Assistant for Research and Intelligence (Armstrong) to Acting Secretary of State Lovett331. Memorandum From the Secretary of State's Special Assistant for
Research and Intelligence (Armstrong) to Acting Secretary of State LovettSource

Washington, November 20,
1947.

The attached memorandum from the Director of Central Intelligence, dated
November 10, 1947, on the subject of new NSC Intelligence Directives, drafts of which were
enclosed,1 has been
given careful study in the light of the changes required by the
enactment of the National Security Act and the passage of time. Our
analysis of the proposed new Directives leads us to the tentative
conclusions that (a) in a number of important respects they fail to
include certain basic principles, embraced in the NIA Directives, which are of continuing
validity, and (b) in other respects they are at variance with certain of
those principles and with the intent of the National Security Act.

Since the establishment of the Central Intelligence Group under authority
contained in the President's letter of January 22, 1946, there has been
continued effort to establish a practical system by which the Director
of Central Intelligence can meet his responsibilities toward over-all
coordination of the intelligence activities of the several intelligence
agencies of the Government, and, at the same time, those agencies can
fulfill their departmental and interdepartmental responsibilities. As a
result of this effort the NIA
Directives, including the proposed Directive advanced in IAB 1/2, were progressively evolved.
Although those Directives are not considered perfect or complete, I
believe that, with certain modifications, they could be used as a
satisfactory basis from which to proceed toward accomplishing the
desired coordination. I further believe that the omissions from the
proposed new NSC Directives, coupled
with the parts at variance with the old Directives, not only nullify
much of the progress already made toward the solution of the problem,
but raise the issue of establishing complete control of all intelligence
activity of the Government in a single authority under the NSC. I believe that it was not the intent
of the Congress, as expressed in the National Security Act, to establish
a single head for all Federal intelligence agencies.

In addition to the proposed new Directives going, in my opinion, beyond
the intent of the Congress, I submit further that to establish a single head for all
Governmental intelligence agencies would not be a desirable method for
coordinating the intelligence activities of the Government, so long as
departmental intelligence activities are to continue, because (a) it
would necessarily impede the direct and immediate response of
departmental intelligence organizations to the operational requirements
of their department heads; (b) it would place the chiefs of departmental
intelligence organizations in the impractical situation of facing two
lines of authority, and (c) it identifies the principle of coordination
with command and control functions rather than with those functions of
initiative, clarification, and cooperative action among equals which
form the true meaning of the term.

I cannot, therefore, concur in the proposed NSC Directives pre-sented with the memorandum from the
Director of Central Intelligence. Specific objections, which call
attention to the omissions and variations between the principles
contained in the NIA Directives
(including the proposed Directive contained in IAB 1/2), and the proposed NSC Directives, are set forth in the attached Tab A.

In lieu of the proposed NSC Directives
forwarded with the memorandum of November 10, 1947, we submit herewith,
as Tab B through H, recommended draft proposals for NSC Directives to establish policies for
the coordination of Governmental intelligence activities and the
production of national intelligence.

W. Park Armstrong, Jr.2

* Source: National Archives and Records
Administration, RG 59, Records of the Department of State, Records
of the Bureau of Intelligence and Research: Lot 58 D 776, Drafts of
NSC Directives to Replace NIA Directives. Top Secret.

1 All attachments are in the
Supplement except the draft directives submitted with
Hillenkoetter's memorandum, which were not found.

2 Printed from a copy that bears this typed
signature.

332. Minutes of a Meeting of the Intelligence Advisory Board332. Minutes of a Meeting of the Intelligence Advisory BoardSource

Washington, November 20, 1947, 2 p.m.

PARTICIPANTS

Rear Admiral R. H.
Hillenkoetter, Director of Central Intelligence, in
the Chair

Present

Mr. W. Park Armstrong,
Jr., Special Assistant to the Secretary of State for Research and
Intelligence

Major General Stephen J.
Chamberlin, Director of Intelligence, GSUSA

Rear Admiral Thomas B.
Inglis, Chief of Naval Intelligence

Major General George C.
McDonald, Director of Intelligence, Hdq., US Air
Force

Rear Admiral John E.
Gingrich, Director of Intelligence and Security,
Atomic Energy Commission

Brig. General Walter E. Todd, Deputy Director, Joint Intelligence
Group, JIS

Mr. Prescott Childs, Central Intelligence Agency

Mr. Lawrence R. Houston,
General Counsel

Colonel Merritt B. Booth, Department of State

Colonel Riley F. Ennis, GSUSA

Captain R. K. Davis, USN

Mr. William C. Trueheart, AEC

Mr. Allan Evans, Department of State

Colonel E. J. Treacy, GSUSA

Colonel E. P. Mussett, Air Force

Captain H. C. Doan, Central Intelligence Agency

Colonel John B. Sherman, Central Intelligence Agency

Colonel William J. Clinch, Central Intelligence Agency

General Cabell, Air
Force

Director: I have a couple of corrections I would like to make before we
start on this. In the last three lines at the bottom of page 2 of the
covering memorandum1
change “paragraph 6 from paragraph 2” to “paragraph 1f.” “Paragraph 7
from paragraph 3” to “paragraph 1g.” And “paragraph 8 is derived from
parts of CIG 18 and the National
Security Act.” At the first meeting of the National Security Council on
September 26, they said we would continue the NIA Directives for 60 days. We will have to submit some new
ones on the 26th of this month. That is the limit. We sent a memorandum to the agencies on
October 92 asking for any
suggestions and to please let us know. We got a little help from the
State Department. They came through with some suggestions. Today I don't
know how long it will take to get an agreement on the four NSC directives. We will try to finish those
at least so we can send those in. Is that all right?

Mr. Armstrong: I would like to
say, Admiral, that the Department of State has not been able in the time
available to arrive at a firm position on these directives. The matter
is before Mr. Lovett at the
present time. Due to the Secretary's departure for London today, he has
not been able to pass on the directives themselves and the proposed
changes that we have felt were essential. So while I am prepared to
discuss the directives today, I can't speak for the Department. It
cannot be committed as yet.

Director: I don't think it should be the Departments, the intelligence
heads are to give their opinions.

Mr. Armstrong: Yes, but if it is
coming before the National Security Council, the heads of each of the
intelligence organizations, I feel, must have the Department's position
firm before we can speak finally.

Director: Let's try and get through these first four if we can. If we
can't, we will have to tell them we can't do it.

Adm. Inglis: I understand, in any
case, these papers, before they are finally approved by the National
Security Council, will have another processing in the respective
departments.

Director: Yes.

Adm. Inglis: I want to make it
quite clear that anything I say is my own opinion—

Director: They will all go back again.

Adm. Inglis: As the Chief of Naval
Intelligence and not as a mouthpiece of the Secretary. I have not gone
to him and I have no intention of doing it—

Director: We will have to do it.

Adm. Inglis: On something in which
I am in doubt. There will be another processing of this.

Director: The National Security Council will send them out again.

Adm. Inglis: I would like to make
this comment. You got a little help from the participating agencies
something over a month ago. I feel a lot of time and controversy and
time—especially time—on the part of the intelligence agencies, who are
quite busy, if matters of this kind could be handled in a committee on
the working level so that these differences, and there are numerous
differences in all of these papers, could be reconciled before they were ever brought up to our
level. I realize the Central Intelligence Agency has gone through a
process of reorganization because of the passage of legislation and the
position of the Intelligence Advisory Board, or Committee, is not yet
quite clear, so I am speaking more for the future than the past. But I
think in the future if they can be coordinated by a working committee
and all of these differences are aired and ironed out, and as possible
reconciled, it will save time and ruffled tempers and will come out with
a better job. Out of the 60 days, 45 days had been used before it came
up to us. Finally, the Central Intelligence Agency, on its own
initiative and own authority, produced these papers with 15 days left to
consider them. I think they should be considered as they are formulated
rather than have a finished product to take it or leave it.

Director: I don't think it is taking it or leaving it, but you did have a
time limit. I agree we ought to try and get it worked out beforehand,
but we had to rewrite the things and clear them all around.

Gen. Chamberlin: I would like to
add to Admiral Inglis' remark
that the system used here is quite difficult for us. I am head of the
intelligence department and I have many administrative responsibilities
and I can't turn it off and on at somebody else's command. I have to
seek my own time for these things because I have other things to do. As
far as I am concerned, I came out unprepared to discuss these papers. My
people have worked on them and they find many things that they want to
challenge. There are important differences of principle involved in
these papers that have never been approached nor are they included in
past directives. I have not been able to take those things up with even
my own military chiefs and I think that the problem has been approached
in a way that is quite disadvantageous to the contributing agencies of
intelligence.

Director: I think there ought to be the least difference of opinion in
the National Security Council directives.

Gen. McDonald: I would like to
make a statement. Analysis of these proposed directives revealed it is
going to be necessary for me to recommend many changes. In view of this,
I consider it would be impossible to cover these directives this
afternoon, and there should be, therefore, no attempt here to go into
either the philosophy or the composition of these directives. I
recommend that an ad hoc committee to be formed immediately to examine
our recommendations and those which any of the other members have for
the purpose of reconciling views. I am afraid, for the short time
available, for our people to study these things and get together. That
right now, on this level, we are doing it. We can't be expected to do
the work of an ad hoc committee. I don't think it is quite right or
productive of a cordial overall workable product.

Director: How long do you think it would take this committee to do
it?

Gen. McDonald: Two or three
days.

Adm. Inglis: I estimate ten days
minimum.

Gen. McDonald: That is working
extra time of course. Non-union hours.

Adm. Gingrich: It seems to me we would make faster progress if it were
handled in that way. As far as I am concerned, all I could do here is
discuss the matter and any product that would be turned up here I would
have to take back and get approval from the Commission. We do have some
rather fundamental exceptions to take to the directives from AEC's point of view.

Director: Let's get a committee appointed and try and get them working
this afternoon. If that is the opinion of everyone.

Mr. Armstrong: I might say,
Admiral, our analysis of the directives led us to the conclusion, in a
number of important respects, they failed to include basic principles
embraced in the NIA directives which
should have a continuing validity, and in certain other respects there
was a variance with certain of those principles and intent of the
National Security Act. We think a very considerable revision of the
directives would be necessary as they now stand and we have ourselves
prepared a series of substitutes and proposals. We would be glad to
present them to you or an ad hoc committee for consideration, along with
the directives drafted here.

Director: Does everybody agree to have this ad hoc committee?

Gen. Chamberlin: I wonder how far
we should go into this subject. I'm confident you are going to find a
great deal of differences of opinion on principle, especially on this
first directive—the one I had a chance to read thoroughly. Is it
necessary that the CIA directives themselves have such a high degree of
precedence here? Wouldn't it be advisable to settle the principles in
which the National Security Council is involved expeditiously by an ad
hoc committee and then give them an additional job when they complete
those to go into the DCI directives.

Director: The first four directives have to be in by the 26th. The others
can wait.

Gen. Chamberlin: I don't know
whether you can meet that date. If you can define the duties of this,
the four principle directives, to the ad hoc committee they will go much
faster than the others—rather than take the whole field for the
moment.

Director: The others can wait, but these first four have to be in.

Gen. McDonald: In the meantime,
how would it be to request an additional time period beyond the 60 days
limitation, which is practically over. And you would get a much better
product.

Mr. Armstrong: I have a number of
reasons why I think there would be no opposition.

Gen. Chamberlin: If we don't get
our own departments lined up before they go to it thoroughly in
agreement, then we are going to run into a time-consuming period that
will be—I won't say disastrous—disadvantageous.

Director: We would like to get them in, it would be much better. Let's
knock off this meeting and appoint members right now.

Gen. McDonald: I have Colonel
Mussett.

Adm. Inglis: Captain Davis.

Mr. Armstrong: Mr. Booth.

Adm. Gingrich: Mr. Truehart.

Gen. Chamberlin: Is there any
objection to having two? Both Colonel Ennis and Colonel Treacy. The
thing caught us so short we had to make two individual studies and
neither one have reached me, so I don't know what they are going to say,
but I can get it within the next day or two.

Director: We can make a limitation of time for this committee here.

Gen. Chamberlin: I should think
they could report their findings and differences rather expeditiously if
they confine themselves to the four directives. However, I noted as I
scanned these that there is material in the DCI directives—

Director: There are no origins for those.

Gen. Chamberlin: Which formerly
appeared in the NIA directives and
incorporated into the DCI directives. My
opinion is so broad and fundamental, but shouldn't it be in the NSC directives. They may have to scan them
to find out what should be picked out and put in the higher order
directive, I might say, but I don't think they would have to go into the
detail of the DCI directives. I may be
wrong because I haven't made any detailed study myself.

Director: That is up to the committee. Let's call off our meeting and let
the committee start.

Adm. Gingrich: One point I might mention, Hilly, there doesn't appear to
be any provision in these first two directives here for an Intelligence
Advisory Committee, or Board, such as is executed under our old setup.
While there is no specific provision in the National Security Act for
such a committee, I think you indicated there would be such a group. And
it would seem to me important that that be provided for in this basic
directive, something that is to operate, etc. Can it be defined?

Director: You have your ad hoc committee. In the law here it has very
definitely said who will appoint committees. The Secretary of Defense,
the Chairman of the Resources Board, and the Director of Central
Intelligence have the authority to appoint such committees, etc. On
that, my legal people say their interpretation is that since the other
people were not mentioned they
are not authorized to appoint committees. I am not a lawyer.

Adm. Gingrich: I wasn't thinking of anyone else, but your committee is
not indicated or laid down here.

Mr. Childs: They are coming out
from the National Security Council as their directives and they cannot
appoint committees.

Mr. Armstrong: They can direct
the Director to appoint one.

Adm. Inglis: There isn't any law
which says the National Security Council cannot appoint one.

Mr. Childs: But none saying they
can.

Adm. Inglis: You know they are
going to appoint committees.

Gen. McDonald: Those men are not
shrinking violets—they have the authority.

Director: They haven't yet.

Adm. Inglis: We have a paper that
is controversial. Again it was sent directly to the departments for a
take it or leave it proposition. It got bogged down because there were
dissents and controversy and people hesitated to act. These things can
be ironed out on the working level and the way greased for much prompter
action and less irritation.

Gen. Chamberlin: I would like to
bring out one feature—to me it is a rather dangerous one. I know I would
seriously object to it myself as a matter of principle. Maybe it should
be considered by this group that we have. Whether it was intended or
not, but when this paper was written, there is, undoubtedly, a strain in
here which is to drive a wedge between the chief of the intelligence
departments and his superior; because they say we can come up here and
if we agree on any paper, the chiefs of the intelligence divisions,
unanimously it becomes effective. If they haven't, then the Central
Intelligence chief has the right of appeal to go over their head to
their own Secretary. I would like to make it most emphatic when I come
up here I speak for the Secretary and if I have doubts in the matter it
is up to me to go to the Secretary to find out whether I am on the track
and I personally object to seeing that wedge driving because it destroys
completely command principles.

Director: There was no intention of that. If it is military it goes to
the Secretary of Defense before it goes to the Council.

Gen. Chamberlin: The Secretary of
Defense is all right, but it says the Secretary of the departments and
that principle, I think, is a very dangerous thing from a military
viewpoint and I would hate to see it included as a principle in the
procedures of which I have anything to do.

Adm. Gingrich: Those things will come out in the ad hoc committee.

Gen. Chamberlin: I wanted to call
it to the attention of the people here.

Gen. McDonald: This kind of
activity recalls to mind some of the nasty features of the old NIA Directive No. 9, which you so kindly
rescinded.

Director: I didn't, the NIA did.

Gen. McDonald: You instigated it.
This is the reviving of it.

Gen. Chamberlin: I would be
inclined to keep quiet at all times because I would be very much afraid
it would be appealed over my head.

Director: Let's get our boys started here. Air Force—Colonel Mussett;
Army—Colonel Ennis and Colonel Treacy; Navy—Captain Davis; State—Colonel
Booth and Mr. Evans; AEC—Mr. Truehart.
Can they start here now? We planned for the afternoon anyway.

Gen. Chamberlin: Are they to
concern themselves only with the first four?

Director: General Todd, do you want to appoint anybody?

Gen. Todd: I'm hardly in a position to designate anyone. If you want
General Gruenther—I think he would be just as happy if he wasn't called
upon to do it.

Mr. Armstrong: I would suggest
that the discussion only be confined to the first four, because our view
is that some of those designated as DCI
directives should be NSC.

Director: The first four have to have a priority because they have to go
in.

Adm. Inglis: As a middle ground
between those two thoughts, let us consider the first four NSC directives with the addition of
anything in the DCI directives which the
committee feels should be transposed to the NSC directives.

Director: No, because the NSC directives
theoretically have to be in next Wednesday. I mean there is no time
limitation to the others. You can have four or fourteen days.

Mr. Armstrong: I didn't mean that
I didn't want the others to be included mechanically.

Adm. Gingrich: The question before this committee—would they discuss No.
2 in connection with these directives?

Director: I think that ought to wait until we see what comes out of this
committee.

Adm. Gingrich: I think it has a bearing on the basic directive—whether
you appoint it, or how.

Director: Let the committee discuss it. That, I think, can wait until
after these others have gone in.

Adm. Inglis: At the moment we are
operating under the blanket authority of the National Security Council
because they approved for 60 days the directives of its predecessor the
National Intelligence Authority and in turn authorized the Intelligence Advisory Board. So we have
that authority to set and appoint our representatives. And I think that
is proper at the moment. Is that right?

Director: I think that is debatable. No, I don't think you can stand up
and say it is right. Among other things the NIA went out of existence.

Adm. Inglis: Didn't the National
Security Council pick up the directives and say they would remain in
effect for 60 days?

Director: I don't remember the exact words. That point has come up here
and I think you can make a good argument either way.

Gen. Chamberlin: The National
Intelligence Authority created an IAB.
So if the National Intelligence Authority directives are in effect for
60 days there is automatically an IAB
until the termination of that period.

Director: But on the other hand Congress cut off all of those in the
Act.

Adm. Inglis: Without an extra
legal man.3

Director: Not extra legal, but one on this one. One thing you are sure of
among other things is that there will be no NIA. The IAB reported to
the NIA. The NIA doesn't exist, who can they report to?

Adm. Inglis: By virtue of the
National Security Council approving the old NIA directives.

Director: It is not clear at all on that. We are losing time, let this
committee get started.

* Source: Central Intelligence Agency
Historical Files, HS/HC-657. Secret. The meeting was held in the
North Interior Building. The minutes themselves do not identify this
as an IAB meeting and there was some
debate on the subject at the table (see especially Hillenkoetter's
exchange with Admiral Inglis
and General Chamberlin at the
end of the meeting). Darling describes this as an IAB meeting, pointing out that the
IAB did not go out of existence
when the National Security Act came into force because the NSC extended the validity of National
Intelligence Authority Directives for 60 days. (Darling, The Central Intelligence Agency, pp.
211-212)

1 Dated November 10.
(Memorandum, Hillenkoetter to Special Assistant for Research and
Intelligence, and others; National Archives and Records
Administration, RG 59, Records of the Department of State, Records
of the Bureau of Intelligence and Research: Lot 58 D 776)

2 Not found.

3 Inglis' statement has been
crossed out in the source text.

333. Memorandum From the Chairman of the Research and Development Board (Bush) to Secretary of Defense Forrestal333. Memorandum From the Chairman of the Research and Development
Board (Bush) to
Secretary of Defense ForrestalSource

Washington, December 5,
1947.

SUBJECT

Central Intelligence Agency

It became evident this morning when you and I were before the Joint
Congressional Committee on Atomic Energy, that that Committee is going to delve into the
intelligence situation vigorously. I indicated, and I judge that you
agreed, that in this connection they should turn to the Central
Intelligence Agency, and I believe they will do so soon.

Now I fear the CIA is not yet in a good position to meet this call. They
have been studying the situation of directives, and particularly their
relationships with the Atomic Energy Commission. In this connection,
they have an Intelligence Advisory Committee which meets next Monday,
but it seems to be quite divided. As to the question of whether CIA
should be a small coordinating body or should be itself operating
widely, I attach two memoranda from my staff which indicate to me that
there is a considerable amount of confusion present as things now stand.

The CIA takes its instructions from the National Security Council. In
view of what occurred this morning and the imminence of vigorous
inquiry, I believe that Mr. Souers probably should be alerted and that
the Security Council ought soon to pass on some of the policy questions
involved. If you agree, then I suggest that it might be well to pass
this memo on to him with your comments. Of course, I shall be glad to
aid in any way that the Research and Development Board may be involved
in this whole matter.

V. Bush1

Enclosure 12

Memorandum From the Director of the Programs Division (Clark) to the Chairman of the Research
and Development Board, Department of Defense (Bush)

Washington, December 3, 1947.

SUBJECT

CIA Situation

1. With further reference to attached memorandum, Mr. Beckler, Dr.
Brode,3 and I had
lunch with Mr. Evans of the State Department to discuss this
subject.

2. Another meeting of the IAC is to be
held on Monday, 8 December, to discuss these directives and indications
are that no agreement will be reached. The difficulty seems to be
fundamental differences in philosophy between the two groups in that the
heads of the intelligence operating agencies feel that CIA should be a
small, high-level, strategic intelligence integrating organization,
evolving what they call “national intelligence” from information
supplied by the operating agencies, while CIA proposes to be a
conglomerate of operating and evaluating functions with considerable
authority over the other operating intelligence agencies.

3. The Intelligence Advisory Committee mentioned in Mr. Beckler's
memorandum is, of course, not provided for by law, but in the original
draft directives prepared by CIA it was proposed to have the Director of
CIA reconstitute it as an advisory committee to the Director of CIA. The
committee proposed by the present IAC
would be established by Executive Order almost in the form of a
governing committee for CIA. An Executive Order would be required as it
is contended that the Security Council has no authority to establish
such boards or committees. The Intelligence Advisory Committee proposed
by the heads of the operating agencies would possess a great deal of
power to influence the actions of the Director of CIA.

4. Someone at the highest level should define the objection of CIA in
relation to the production of strategic intelligence in support of the
activities of the Security Council and delineate relationships between
CIA and the operating agencies in such manner that the work of producing
information, detailed intelligence, and integrated strategic
intelligence can proceed.

5. The situation has Dr. Brode completely stymied. It is blocking his
attempts to recruit and organize his staff, and preventing RDB from obtaining any useful intelligence
from CIA.

Ralph L. Clark4

Enclosure 25

Memorandum From the Chief of the Intelligence Section
(Beckler) to the Director of the Programs Division, Research and
Development Board, Department of Defense (Bush)

Washington, December 2, 1947.

SUBJECT

The Critical Situation with Regard to Atomic Energy
Intelligence

Explanation: The information contained in this memo is based on
conversations with responsible members of the Atomic Energy Commission
Intelligence Division. It points out the present awkward position of
AEC in the field of atomic energy
intelligence, which at present is handled almost exclusively by CIA.

1. The Central Intelligence Agency has been directed by the National
Security Council to prepare suitable NSC
directives to implement the National Security Act of 1947. Four basic
directives and a number of Implementing Supplements thereto have been
prepared by the CIA Planning Staff and were submitted by the Director of
Intelligence to his Intelligence Advisory Committee6
at a meeting held on 30 November 1947.7

2. The proposed basic directives have not been submitted to RDB for comment. However, the tenor of
Implementing Supplement IAC/4 (which was
submitted to the Board) indicates that the directives place considerable
authority and responsibility in the hands of the Director of CIA at the
expense of the Departmental Intelligence Agencies as well as the AEC and RDB. The IAC members strongly
opposed these directives and an ad hoc committee was formed to draft a
new set for IAC consideration.

3. The ad hoc committee, under State Department leadership, prepared a
set of revised directives which placed considerably more authority in
the IAC and less in the Director of CIA
than was proposed in the earlier directives. According to the revised
directives, major recommendations of the Director to the NSC must be accompanied by the concurrence
or dissent of the IAC. Further, under
revised Directive No. 1, CIA would not engage in basic intelligence research in those fields in
which the Departmental Intelligence Agencies are engaged. In short, the
original and revised directives embody totally different philosophies.
Under one, CIA would be almost completely self-sufficient. Under the
other, CIA would be a small coordinating body surrounded by strong
Departmental Intelligence Agencies.

4. Regardless of the merits of one set of directives vs. the other—the
present confusion is causing considerable embarrassment to the newly
created Intelligence Division of the AEC, and greatly impedes its operations. Since the directives
as finally decided upon may affect the nature and scope of AEC intelligence operations, the Army,
Navy, and Air Departments as well as CIA—while agreeing in principle to
cooperation with AEC—are deferring
actual exchange of information until the AEC-CIA relationship is crystallized. Considering the
conflicting directives which have been proposed—this may take
considerable time.

5. Dr. Brode has not been officially advised with respect to these
negotiations and has not been consulted in connection with the problem
of AEC-CIA cooperation.

6. Conclusions:

(a) There is considerable difference of opinion as to the type of CIA
organization that would be best suited to implement the provisions and
spirit of the National Security Act. Until CIA specifically delineates
its objectives and responsibilities and defines its terms and mission,
it is doubtful that the best organizational pattern can be decided
upon.

(b) RDB is greatly concerned with the
present attempts to formulate directives. It is completely dependent
upon CIA for strategic as well as scientific intelligence which are the
sine qua non for carrying out Board responsibilities under the Act. The
extent of CIA's ability to produce such intelligence will largely be
determined by the outcome of the present negotiations.

(c) Atomic Energy Intelligence is in a critical situation.

7. Recommendations:

(a) That RDB determine the nature and
type of intelligence it requires from CIA.

(b) That RDB suggest directives to CIA
that are best calculated to effect (a).

(c) That RDB request CIA to keep the
Board informed as to the status of directives under consideration with
the view of commenting thereon.

* Source: Central Intelligence Agency
Historical Files, HS/HC-806, Item 10. Secret. The source text is a
copy transcribed for the CIA Historian on July 3, 1953.

1 Printed from a copy that bears this
typed signature.

2 Source:
Central Intelligence Agency Historical Files, HS/HC-806, Item 11.
Secret. The source text is a copy transcribed for the CIA Historian
on July 3, 1953.

3 Dr. Wallace R. Brode, Chief of
the Scientific Branch, Central Intelligence Agency.

4 Printed from a copy that
indicates Clark signed the
original.

5 Source:
Central Intelligence Agency Historical Files, HS/HC-806, Item 12.
Secret. The source text is a copy transcribed for the CIA Historian
on July 3, 1953.

6 A footnote in the source text at this point gives
the names of the IAC members.

7 No
record of this meeting has been found. The reference may be to
Hillenkoetter's meeting with the departmental intelligence chiefs on
November 20; see Document 332.

334. Memorandum From the Executive Secretary (Souers) to the National Security Council334. Memorandum From the Executive Secretary (Souers) to the National Security CouncilSource

Washington, December 10,
1947.

SUBJECT

Proposed National Security Council Directives to the Central
Intelligence Agency

REFERENCE

NSC Action No. 3

1. In its first meeting the National Security Council agreed that:

a. All directives of the National Intelligence Authority to the Central
Intelligence Group be continued in full force and effect until
specifically repealed, altered or augmented by the National Security
Council, or changed in accordance with paragraph b below.

b. The Director of Central Intelligence should submit to the Council
within sixty days proposed authorizations supplanting the former
directives of the National Intelligence Authority and specifying his
functions and those of the Central Intelligence Agency in accordance
with the provisions of the National Security Act of 1947.

2. Pursuant to 1-b above, the proposed National Security Council
Intelligence Directives enclosed herewith,1 which have been prepared
by the Director of Central Intelligence and coordinated with the
intelligence chiefs of the participating departments, the Atomic Energy
Commission, and the Joint Staff (Joint Chiefs of Staff), are submitted
herewith for consideration by the Council at its third meeting at 3:00
p.m. on Friday, December 12. The enclosed Directives, which have been
generally agreed to by the above intelligence chiefs, are under final
consideration by them, and any
non-concurrences will be submitted to the Council tomorrow.2

3. One additional NSC Intelligence
Directive will be submitted by the Director of Central Intelligence at a
future date, and this will complete action pursuant to paragraph 1-b
above.

Sidney W. Souers3

* Source: National Archives and Records
Administration, RG 59, Records of the Department of State, Records
of the Policy Planning Staff, NSC
Files: Lot 62 D 1, NSC Intelligence
Directives. Top Secret.

1 Copies of draft NSC Intelligence
Directives Nos. 1-6 were enclosed. For texts as approved by the
NSC, see Documents 422-Documents 426 and
432.

2 The documentation on the preparation of the first
set of National Security Council Intelligence Directives is sketchy
and incomplete. The only account is in Darling, The Central Intelligence Agency, pp. 214-217, who appears
to have had access to some materials that have not been located.
According to Darling's account, the ad hoc committee established at
Hillenkoetter's November 20 meeting with the departmental
intelligence chiefs (Document 332) brought
in a set of draft directives that were unacceptable to
Hillenkoetter, or at least unacceptable in part. At about the same
time, Darling records, Hillenkoetter received a copy of Secretary of
the Army Royall's memorandum of November 26 (Document 230) opposing Hillenkoetter's concept of an
Intelligence Advisory Committee. Hillenkoetter thereupon appealed to
Forrestal, who called a
meeting of the Service Secretaries and Service Intelligence Chiefs
and rebuked General Chamberlin and Admiral Inglis for their opposition to Hillenkoetter's
proposals. Hillenkoetter then had his follow-on meeting with the
departmental intelligence chiefs on December 8, at which there was
general agreement on the directives to be submitted to the NSC. A verbatim record of the December
8 meeting, which apparently was not circulated at the time but was
subsequently located by Darling, is not printed. (Central
Intelligence Agency Historical Files, HS/HC-657)

3 Printed from a
copy that bears this typed signature.

335. Minutes of the 3d Meeting of the National Security Council335. Minutes of the 3d Meeting of the National Security CouncilSource

Washington, December 12,
1947.

PARTICIPANTS

Members Present

James V. Forrestal, Secretary
of Defense, presiding

George F. Kennan,
representing the Secretary of State

Kenneth C. Royall, Secretary
of the Army

John L. Sullivan, Secretary
of the Navy

W. Stuart Symington,
Secretary of the Air Force

Arthur M. Hill, Chairman,
National Security Resources Board

Dr. Vannevar Bush, Chairman,
Research and Development Board (invited but unable to attend)

Others Present

Rear Admiral R. H.
Hillenkoetter, Director of Central
Intelligence

Cornelius V. Whitney,
Assistant Secretary of the Air Force

Vice Admiral Forrest P. Sherman, Department of the Navy

Lieutenant General Lauris Norstad, Department of the Air
Force

Major General Stephen J.
Chamberlin, Department of the Army

Rear Admiral Thomas B.
Inglis, Department of the Navy

John H. Ohly, Special Assistant to the Secretary of Defense

W. Park Armstrong, Acting
Special Assistant to the Secretary of State

Robert Blum, office of the
Secretary of Defense

Secretariat

Sidney W. Souers, Executive Secretary

James S. Lay, Jr., Assistant
Executive Secretary

ACTIONS

1. Organization, Activities and Plans of the Central
Intelligence Agency

Admiral Hillenkoetter gave an oral report on the organization, activities
and plans of the Central Intelligence Agency. All Council members asked
questions and made suggestions on this subject.

Specifically, Admiral Hillenkoetter stated that there was a difference of
opinion as to whether he had coordinating authority over the
departmental intelligence agencies or whether the chiefs of such
departmental agencies constituted a board of management over the
Director of Central Intelligence.

Secretary Forrestal said, and the
other members agreed, that there was no question as to the coordinating
authority of the Director of Central Intelligence. Secretary Forrestal said that Admiral
Hillenkoetter tells the Departments what he needs for collation and
evaluation and the Departments are required to provide it.

Admiral Hillenkoetter answered various criticisms made in an article in
magazine “Armed Forces” by Hanson Baldwin.

Secretary Forrestal said that he
was not so concerned about such criticisms. The real test of the success
of CIA, in his opinion, will be two years hence.

Admiral Hillenkoetter stated that the average annual pay of CIA personnel
in grades equivalent to officer rank is $4000.

Secretary Forrestal expressed the
belief, and other members agreed, that this appeared to be a low
average. He said that he would rather have a few good men in CIA than
many mediocre.

Admiral Hillenkoetter reported that the turnover in CIA as a result of
loyalty screening was one per cent per year, while the turnover
resulting from efficiency screening was eight per cent per year.

The National Security Council:1

Noted and commented upon the oral report on the organization, activities
and plans of the Central Intelligence Agency by the Director of Central
Intelligence.

2. Proposed National Security Council Directives to the Central
Intelligence Agency (Reference: Memo for the NSC from the Executive Secretary, same subject, dated
December 10, 1947)2

The Council amended and approved the National Security Council
Intelligence Directive (NSCID) No.
1.3

Secretary Symington felt that
NSCID Nos. 2 and 3 were designed
to avoid duplication while at the same time meeting the secondary needs
of the various Departments. He said that if the Council would not assign
primary responsibility for air intelligence to the Department of the Air
Force, these papers would mean nothing.

Secretary Sullivan felt that such
an assignment would mean that the Navy would lose all its naval air
attach és and naval air intelligence. He said that the interests of the
Air Force do not include all matters of interest to naval air
intelligence.

Secretary Symington said that this
was not necessarily the case and that the Air Force would use naval air
attaches where they appeared to be appropriate.

Secretary Forrestal asked that
Council action on NSCID Nos. 2 and 3
be deferred so that he might reconcile the diversion of views of the
Navy and the Air Force.

Mr. Kennan urged that the
assignment of responsibilities in NSCID No. 2 really be carried out in overseas missions,
since it would eliminate costly duplication and lack of
coordination.

The Council then amended and approved NSCID Nos. 4 and 5, and approved NSCID No. 6.

The National Security Council:4

a. Approved National Security Intelligence Directive No. 1 (NSCID 1) subject to the following
amendments:

(1) Revised paragraph 2 thereof to read:

“2. To the extent authorized by Section 102(e) of the National Security
Act of 1947, the Director of Central Intelligence, or representatives
designated by him, by arrangement with the head of the department or
agency concerned, shall make such surveys and inspections of the
departmental intelligence material of the various Federal Departments
and Agencies relating to the national security as he may deem necessary
in connection with his duty to advise the NSC and to make recommendations for the coordination of
intelligence activities.”

(2) In paragraph 4, second line, delete the words “and national
policy.”

(3) In paragraph 6, line 2, add the words “Federal Bureau of
Investigation and” between “disseminate to the” and “other
Departments”.

b. Deferred action on the proposed NSCID Nos. 2 and 3, pending reconciliation within the
national military establishment of the divergent views of the
Secretaries of the Navy and of the Air Force.

c. Approved NSCID No. 4, subject to the
addition of the word “Staff” after “NSC”
in the third line of paragraph 2. (The Council also noted the remarks of
the Executive Secretary that, for this purpose, the NSC Staff shall consist of the Executive
Secretary and the departmental representatives designated by Council
members to advise and assist the Executive Secretary, and that any cases
of disagreement within this group will be referred to the National
Security Council for decision.)

d. Approved NSCID No. 5, subject to the
following amendments:

(1) Delete the asterisk in paragraph 1 and the footnote.

(2) Revise paragraph 2 to read:

“2. The Director of Central Intelligence shall conduct all organized
Federal counter-espionage operations outside the United States and its
possessions and in occupied areas, provided that this authority shall
not be construed to preclude the counter-intelligence activities of any
army, navy or air command or installation and certain agreed activities
by Departments and Agencies necessary for the security of such
organizations.

e. Approved NSCID No. 6 without
change.

* Source: Truman Library, Papers of Harry S. Truman, President's
Secretary's Files. Top Secret. The meeting was held in the office of
the Secretary of Defense.

1 The paragraph that follows constitutes NSC Action No. 14. (National Archives
and Records Administration, RG 273, Records of the National Security
Council, Record of Actions, Box 55)

2 Document 334.

3 For text of this and other National
Security Council Intelligence Directives, see Documents 422-435.

4 Paragraphs a-e constitute NSC Action No. 15. (National Archives and Records
Administration, RG 273, Records of the National Security Council,
Record of Actions, Box 55)

336. National Security Council Resolution336. National Security Council ResolutionSource

Washington, January 13,
1948.

The National Security Council has agreed that a group of two or three
specially qualified individuals not in the Government service should
make a comprehensive, impartial, and objective survey of the
organization, activities, and personnel of the Central Intelligence
Agency. As a result of this survey this group should report to the
Council its findings and recommendations on the following matters:

a. The adequacy and effectiveness of the present organizational structure
of CIA.

b. The value and efficiency of existing CIA activities.

c. The relationship of these activities to those of other Departments and
Agencies.

d. The utilization and qualifications of CIA personnel.

The National Security Council also authorized and directed the Director
of Central Intelligence and the Intelligence Chiefs of the Departments
represented on the Council to give the above group access to all
information and facilities required for their survey, except details
concerning intelligence sources and methods.

* Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59,
Records of the Department of State, Records of the Executive
Secretariat, NSC Files: Lot 66 D
148, Box 1555. Top Secret. The source text is Annex 1 to the
Intelligence Survey Group Report to the NSC, January 1, 1949. The full text is in the
Supplement. The resolution was approved by the NSC at its 5th meeting January 13. A
brief entry in the minutes records that Souers presented the
resolution and the NSC approved it
and forwarded the names of Allen
Dulles, Mathias
Correa, and William H.
Jackson for the President's consideration as members
of the survey group. (National Archives and Records Administration,
RG 273, Records of the National Security Council, Minutes, Fifth
Meeting) The resolution was approved as NSC Action No. 25. (Ibid., Record of Actions, Box
55)

337. Memorandum From Director of Central Intelligence Hillenkoetter to the Intelligence Advisory Committee337. Memorandum From Director of Central Intelligence Hillenkoetter to the
Intelligence Advisory CommitteeSource

Washington, January 27,
1948.

SUBJECT

Interdepartmental Intelligence Production Program

1. The program for the production of intelligence contained in National
Security Council Intelligence Directive 3 can be considered as no more
than a statement of overall policies and objectives for the Central
Intelligence Agency and the several intelligence agencies of the
National Security Council departments. It defines the several types of
intelligence and indicates which departments have dominant interest in
certain fields of intelligence. It leaves the highly important
scientific, technological and economic fields of intelligence
unallocated except as to the individual needs of each department. The
paper does not, nor was it intended to, provide a definite intelligence
production schedule. However, such a schedule is highly desirable and
procedures should be perfect now to insure that all fields are properly
and adequately covered and that each department receives the material
outside its field of dominant interest, which it requires for
intelligence purposes.

2. It is the opinion of the Director of Central Intelligence that a
prompt and positive approach must be made to a solution of this problem
and that he must advise and make recommendations in this field to the
National Security Council in fulfillment of his statutory duty as set
forth in Section 102(d) of the National Security Act of 1947.

3. It is proposed that the Central Intelligence Agency prepare an
interagency intelligence production program, that the preparation be
carried out in close cooperation with the intelligence agencies
represented on the National Security Council, that it be submitted to
the Intelligence Advisory Committee for concurrence or comment prior to
issuance for implementation.

4. As a first step in the development of this plan, the Director of
Central Intelligence requests that each department intelligence chief
submit a comprehensive and detailed statement of the intelligence
production program of his department, clearly defining (a) the
intelligence requirements of his department; (b) the internal production
schedule of his agency to meet
these requirements; (c) the existing interagency agreements to augment
(1) the internal production with external material and (2) the external
requirements with internal production; and (d) the requirements not
adequately or satisfactorily met by (b) and (c).

5. The Central Intelligence Agency will attempt to correlate these
departmental programs and prepare an integrated plan, with full regard
to the existing basic intelligence program, for study, comment and
possible revision by the Standing Committee of the Intelligence Advisory
Committee for subsequent presentation to the Intelligence Advisory
Committee.

6. With a view toward eliminating undesirable duplication of effort in
the production of intelligence, particularly in regard to publications,
consideration is being given to the proposal previously made by the
JIC that the Central Intelligence
Agency assume the functions of the Publication Review Subcommittee.

7. It is requested that each recipient of this memorandum inform the
Director of Central Intelligence promptly as to the date by which he
will be able to comply with 4 above.

R. H. Hillenkoetter1
Rear Admiral, USN

* Source: Central Intelligence Agency
Historical Files, HS/HC-54. Confidential. Sent to the Special
Assistant to the Secretary of State for Research and Intelligence;
the Director of Intelligence, Army General Staff; the Chief of Naval
Intelligence; the Director of Air Force Intelligence; and for
information to the Director of Security and Intelligence, Atomic
Energy Commission, and the Deputy Director, Joint Intelligence
Group, Joint Staff.

1 Printed from a copy that indicates
Hillenkoetter signed the original.

338. Letter From the Secretary of Defense's Special Assistant (McNeil) to Mathias F. Correa338. Letter From the Secretary of Defense's Special Assistant
(McNeil) to Mathias F. CorreaSource

Washington, February 2,
1948.

Dear MAT: When you were in Secretary Forrestal's office early last week I mentioned that I
had a paper that I thought might be helpful in your study of the Central
Intelligence Agency.

This paper is unsigned but for your information was written by Stephen
Penrose, who has been with me here for about three months but who is leaving to become
President of Beirut University. Penrose was with OSS during the war—in charge of their Middle East Division
and later came to Washington in one of their divisions. He left C.I.A.
because he felt that there were too many Captains and Colonels placed in
charge of divisions who did not have background for the Intelligence
type of work. Hillenkoetter told me he thought Penrose was an extremely
able person but it had been reported to him that Penrose did not get
along with some of his subordinates. I don't know whether that is true
or not but in the short time he has been here I haven't found that to be
the case.

To my mind there is little question that his statements might be colored
to a degree because of his leaving C.I.A., but I have found him to be a
“solid citizen”—everything he has told me has a basis in fact.

Sincerely,

W. J. McNeil

Enclosure1

Memorandum by Stephen Penrose

Washington, January 2, 1948.

REPORT ON CIA

Special Operations is continuing to lose its experienced officers with
four and five years of wartime experience. It is on the point of losing
its foreign exchange expert, who learned his business with the Navy in
World War I, and who, in the last war provided funds for secret
operations in OSS so successfully that
not a single operation was ever blown through improper use of money. His
record was not duplicated even by the British service. With him goes all
capacity of SO for fiscal counter-intelligence. With him also is lost
the agent cashier most widely trusted by the Treasury.

SO is also probably losing a branch chief
who was closely connected in OSS with
the advance preparations for the Africa landings and acquired there and
later a knowledge of handling undercover work which is not now equalled in the
organization since the previous departure of other similarly experienced
men.

One of the most experienced and effective field mission chiefs in the
organization has just returned to this country and there is strong
likelihood that he will decide to leave the work. This man is the author
of a recent report on the situation in Austria, prepared at the request
of USFA, which has made a very great
impression on the State Department.

None of these losses is necessary, for all three men had considered
intelligence as their profession. They are simply fed up with what they
consider to be the inept and unimaginative policies of SO, and have lost confidence in its
leadership.

Special Operations is headed by an officer known among his Army friends
as “Wrong-Way” Galloway. Their doubtful esteem of him is more than
matched by that of his associates and subordinates within his office and
by that of the heads of other branches within CIA. He is hardly on
speaking terms with General Sibert of OO.
He has permitted the State Department SO
to hamper and control the nature of most SO field operations and has
secured so little support for his major liaison officer that the latter,
another man of considerable experience, is also looking elsewhere for
work. Colonel Galloway has little comprehension of the real nature of
secret operations, and is so irascible and dogmatic that he discourages
any efforts to discuss technical details with him. For his technical and
organizational advice he is accustomed to call upon subordinates like
William Tharp, Chadbourne Gilpatrick, or Harry Rositzke, who although
they have been in the organization for some time, have had practically
no real operational experience. Their freely offered operational
theories appear to be acceptable to Colonel Galloway at the same time
that they are the despair of their more experienced associates.
Gilpatrick has just become the major deputy to the Chief of Operations
Staff, who has been persuaded to assign elsewhere the only technically
experienced assistant he possessed on his immediate staff. As a result
of this development apprehension has increased on the operating levels,
and new withdrawals are being contemplated.

In the face of the losses of experience, Colonel Galloway is bringing
back into his office the Colonel Dabney whose unwise and uninformed
suggestions as regards organizational structure are in part responsible
for the ineffectiveness of operation which has so discouraged the older
men. The policy of bringing in newcomers to occupy key posts without
giving them operational seasoning results in keeping the organization
constantly off balance through the varying and uncertain direction which
it receives. Colonel Galloway's deputy is a Captain McCracken (Navy)
whose interest in the work is not matched by any intelligence
experience, and his complete subordination to Colonel Galloway gives him
little opportunity to serve as anything but a “yes-man”. Captain McCracken replaced Captain
Goggins who was only too happy to return to active Navy duty in Panama
after serving a term as Colonel Galloway's deputy.

In spite of this situation within SO it is
still the one branch of CIA which has the respect of outside agencies.
OIR in State prefers to receive raw
intelligence direct from SO rather than
in processed form from OR&E not only for the sake of speed but
because the type of processing now given by OR&E detracts from
rather than adds to the value of the reports. With rare exceptions the
studies put out by OR&E are such as might be written by any fairly
well-informed person, and they command little respect from the users of
such reports in State, Army or Navy. The Strategic Intelligence Division
of the Army recently pointed out that it had received no useful
additions to its files since the R&A Branch of OSS had been broken
up. It considers its conferences with CIA to be largely a waste of time,
particularly as regards Russian matters. Captain Frankel (Navy) of the
OR&E Russian division seems content to rest upon his short visits to
Russia as sufficient qualification of him as a Russian expert.

A report on an aviation subject was recently prepared for OR&E by the
Library of Congress. The research people of the Library developed a
rather low opinion of the OR&E men with whom they had contact who
seemed to be astonished at the quality of the report, which they felt
was beyond their capacity. On a later report in the same field the
Library furnished to a research man from OR&E a complete
bibliography for his research, covering European materials in the main.
They were told by him to omit anything which was not in English since he
could not handle any foreign language. This eliminated at least 80
percent of the material. Naturally the Aeronautics Division of the
Library was not favorably impressed by the capacity of the research man
or of those who directed him and had presumably planned his work.

An unduly large proportion of the effort of OR&E is devoted to
put-ting out the daily intelligence summary. This publication,
containing chiefly State Department materials, could be put together in
short order by a small unit of editorial analysts instead of requiring
half the day of the majority of branch heads and their staffs, as
appears now often to be the case.

OR&E, which should be the top research and analysis office in the
government, is headed by a former assistant military attach é in Turkey
who was never distinguished either for research or administrative
ability during his pre-war stay on the Yale faculty. His stature is not
such as to attract highly qualified research experts. One of the ablest
men in OR&E, the head of the scientific branch, is there more
because of the influence of Dr. Bush than of anyone in CIA, and he is very critical of
the inflexible and unimaginative organizational and personnel policies
of CIA as interpreted by Col.
Shannon, with whom he has already come into conflict.

Dr. Wallace Brode, the distinguished scientist mentioned, has not been
permitted to organize his own branch according to his own ideas,
although his organizational views were proved by experience at Inyokern
during the war. When his plans were finally forwarded they were
accompanied by a set of contrasting plans drawn by Col. Babbitt and Col. Shannon, in the
drafting of which Dr. Brode was not consulted. Such action was contrary
to the written agreement made between Dr. Bush and General Vandenberg.

Contacts between CIA and outside scientific agencies are channeled, as
are most CIA liaisons with other agencies, through the Office of
Collection and Dissemination or the Office of Operations. The former is
controlled by Col. Sands, a former CIC
head in Germany under Gen. Sibert, who heads OO. Contact with AEC is
supposedly maintained by Col. Seaman of OCD, formerly an officer with Manhattan District but
possessing no scientific stature approaching that of Dr. Brode through
whom AEC would greatly prefer to channel
their relations with CIA. Dr. Brode is a member of the National Research
Council, relations with which are supposed to be carefully channelled
through OCD to some secretary of the
Council. Dr. Brode is thus supposed to handle relations with himself
through the devious intermediation of a chain of uninformed
contacts.

In short, OCD, which should be vitally
concerned with expediting and facilitating contacts with outside
agencies for operational or informational purposes, interposes a
mechanical and inflexible channelling procedure which can and does block
such contacts and bottleneck the interchange of information which should
flow freely through them. Without question a system of approving outside
contacts is essential but it must be administered imaginatively and not
in the mechanical fashion which is apt to be typical of military
procedure.

With regard to the Office of Operations, it has brought CIA into
considerable disrepute among a number of large business concerns and
notably Standard Oil of N.J., because of the ineptitude with which
contacts were established and handled. As a result CIA is effectively
blocked off from such potential sources of valuable intelligence, which
Operations Office was set up to tap.

Partly because of the bad relations existent between the heads of OO and SO and
partly because of the ineffectiveness of the former office practically
no leads have been provided to SO for
long range undercover operations or personnel. OO, because of its expected wide connections with business
firms and educational institutions, was supposed to unearth numerous
opportunities which SO could be counted
on to exploit, or to acquaint
SO with personnel who might be
utilized in SO's operations. Neither
service for SO has developed in
practice.

In the direct line of its own responsibility for briefing and debriefing
competent Americans travelling abroad OO
has shown little alertness to respond to cases brought directly to its
attention. Recently the impending voyage abroad of a well-qualified
observer was brought to OO's notice, but
no contact was made before the man's departure and none has occurred
since his return. Because of the lack of contact it was not possible to
judge OO's competence at briefing and
debriefing, but the indications are that relations with the geographic
experts of OR&E or SO are not
sufficiently close or frequently developed to permit the manning on
short notice of a qualified briefing panel or the preparation of a
professional brief.

The disturbing situation which has been described is the more alarming
because it occurs at a time when, as almost never before, the government
needs an effective, expanding, professional intelligence service. On the
contrary, CIA is losing its professionals, and is not acquiring
competent new personnel who might gain experience in the only rapid way
possible, namely by close association with those professionals. It is
dependent in most working branches for imaginative and energetic
direction upon career military men of a type which is not apt to be
either imaginative or energetic as regards non-military intelligence or
procedures. As a direct result, CIA has failed to win the confidence of
the military services or the State Department and is rapidly losing what
confidence they had had in its predecessor organizations. Yet effective
cooperation with these departments is a sine qua non of CIA success.
Under present conditions such cooperation does not exist to any
practical degree. Other departments feel no assurance that they can rely
upon CIA to perform intelligence functions which they will privately
admit could and probably should be performed centrally. Without that
assurance they will continue, as they are continuing, to operate their
individual intelligence services in a manner which cannot but nullify
the principles of coordination and centralization which were implicit in
the establishment of CIA.

* Source: Central Intelligence Agency
Records, Job 86-B00269R, Box 5. Personal and Secret.

1 Secret.

339. Letter From Sherman Kent to Director of Central Intelligence Hillenkoetter339. Letter From Sherman Kent to
Director of Central Intelligence HillenkoetterSource

Yale University, New
Haven, Connecticut, February 9, 1948.

Dear Admiral Hillenkoetter: Herewith a memo on some of ORE's problems. As I note in the
introductory paragraph, I have confined myself to those few things in
which the shortness of my visit was not too heavy a handicap to my
judgment.

I have hesitated to have this manuscript typed in New Haven. It is
confidential enough in character so that I would not like to see it in
the morning paper. You will thus perhaps pardon my sending it to you in
long hand. (On the chance that Miss Brian will type it, I have noted a
couple of spots where I have asked her to perform minor editorial
services.)

Seeing the ORE organization was a great
pleasure. I am honored to have had the invitation.

Kindest regards, yours sincerely

Sherman Kent1

Enclosure2

Memorandum From Sherman
Kent to Director of Central Intelligence
Hillenkoetter

Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut, February 9, 1948.

Summary

1. A problem of first magnitude is the matter of the mission of CIA and
especially its ORE. At the present
ORE is not a coordinator of
departmental intelligence.
ORE much more resembles a fifth
departmental intelligence organization. As such it faces two grave
disadvantages:

a. It has no direct consumer within its own organization as ID has its
P&O and hence is likely to feel the lack of guidance and
direction.

b. It is excluded from overt collection (abroad).

2. There are three problems of a second magnitude. They deal with ORE and the outside.

a. ORE is not close enough to the
consumers it does serve to know precisely their requirements, nor is it
close enough to carry to the consumers a knowledge of ORE's capabilities.

b. The collection and dissemination function now allocated to OCD should be assigned to ORE.

c. ORE and OO should be brought closer together if ORE is to get the full benefit of OO's outside contacts.

3. There is one problem of a third magnitude. It concerns ORE and its management of its own
substantive program.

I incline to the belief that a higher centralization of substantive
control would improve ORE's performance.
In noting the above I hope it will be appreciated that I do not consider
that my short visit to ORE (three days)
makes me an expert adviser on this point.

Sherman Kent3

INTRODUCTORY

In the following pages I confine myself to a limited number of problems
of CIA and ORE. The problems which I
have singled out are those upon which I feel my comments will be most
valid although based upon no more than three days study and interview. I
recognize three magnitudes of importance in the problems which I have
chosen:

1st magnitude—the mission of CIA and ORE

2nd magnitude—ORE and its outside
activities

3rd magnitude—ORE and its internal
organization.

I. The Mission of CIA and ORE.

The National Security Act defines the mission of CIA as a twofold
mission:

(a) coordinating the intelligence activities of the several government
departments and agencies in the interest of national security … ;
and

(b) performing certain intelligence operations which can be more
advantageously performed centrally; or other operations … .

With respect to (b): No comment.

With respect to (a): In the nature of things, the coordinating function
of CIA will be performed by its ORE plus
perhaps CIA's top level administrative staff. The most important share
(that is, the substantive share) of the work of coordination would
naturally fall to ORE. But ORE will have greatest difficulty—if not
insuperable difficulty—in performing this function. Its difficulties
inhere in both (1) the NSC Intelligence
Directives, especially #1 (which appears to me to afford departmental
intelligence the weapons and strategic position to resist any intrusive
coordinative activities by ORE) and (2)
the fact of ORE's present size,
administrative organization, and personnel. The present ORE could not do the large coordinating job
if by chance it were given clear mandate by new NSC directives.

In my view this leads to the conclusion that the present ORE is the equivalent of a fifth
departmental intelligence arm. As such it is in competition with the
other four and disadvantageously so. Of the many disadvantages it
confronts I cite two:

(1) Since it has no direct policy, planning, or operating consumer to
service within its own organization (as ID services P&O, for
example), it is likely to suffer from a lack of feeling of immediacy,
and more importantly, to suffer from a want of close, confidential, and
friendly guidance. The consumers outside CIA which ORE in fact presently services can never
provide the same sharp and demanding guidance which a departmental
intelligence unit may expect from the department's own policy, planning,
and operating units. As to ORE's present
consumers and the guidance they afford, more in the next section (i.e.
#II.).

(2) Since ORE's formal mission is the
coordination of departmental intelligence, NSC Intelligence Directive #2 allocates to ORE no overt collecting functions. If
ORE were in fact a coordinating
mechanism—pure and simple—this denial of the function would be exactly
right. But inasmuch as ORE performs most
of the duties performed by departmental intelligence, and very few not
cognate with these duties, ORE should
have its continuous flow of foreign publications and reports by overt
U.S. observers. But for these publications and reports it must rely upon
the collecting activities of the four “Security” departments. This
arrangement will, in one sense, merely inconvenience ORE to the extent that all departmental
units are inconvenienced by another's slow service. But in another
sense, and one of utmost importance, it can virtually destroy ORE. For whatever intelligence doctrine may
say to the contrary, the collecting phase of research is not separable
from the other phases: a man who is working on a theory of, say, the
overthrow of France must be able directly or indirectly to procure for
himself data, the need for which he could not foresee when he began his work; he must have
on the Madrid end of the wire, so to speak, a professional friend and
equal who understands his problem from the ground up, and who will
collect or observe what he requires and that immediately.

The intelligence unit which is closely bound to its own high grade
foreign collecting force is likely to be the best; the intelligence unit
which has no collecting force of its own is at a prodigious
disadvantage.

It is not impossible that departmental policy with respect to
intelligence may contrive the virtual destruction of departmental
intelligence. There are already signs of this. Should such occur, and
should CIA (and its ORE) gain what might
be called a monopoly in the field of national intelligence, the
intelligence situation would be grave. In these circumstances CIA could
service its high level consumers with complete adequacy, but I do not
think it could service its lower level departmental consumers. In the
first place the task would be so large that the necessary organization
would be almost impossible to build, if not administer. In the second
place no matter how well built and administered, it would always have
trouble getting appropriate guidance from the departmental consumers. In
the third place the departments themselves, even though reduced in funds
for intelligence, would establish all manner of small black-market
intelligence organizations under cover names. The effect of this would
be to furnish the immediate departmental consumer with a less good
product, but preferred by him because it was his own, and to dissipate
what was left of the department's intelligence resources throughout a
number of small uncoordinated cells.

You will perhaps pardon the above excursion into a remote and uncertain
future. I would not have taken it if I had not heard responsible
government people seriously advocate a central intelligence
monopoly.

II. ORE and its
outside activities.

Under this heading I will discuss three problems:

First is the problem of ORE and its high
level consumers. To the extent possible ORE should be brought into closest and most direct contact
with consumers such as the NSC, SANACC, and JIG. Contact such as having
an ORE officer represent CIA (or
participate in CIA's representation) at NSC staff discussions would have two great benefits: (a) It
would assure ORE of knowing the precise
nature of the consumer's requirements; and (b) it would enable ORE to convey to the consumer the precise
dimensions of its (ORE's) capabilities.
It is to be noted that these two matters interlock: when the consumer
knows ORE's capabilities, he may change
the dimensions of this requirement (add to it, lessen it, or reorient
it), and, when ORE knows the precise
dimensions of the requirement, it may deploy its resources in such a
fashion as to enlarge its capabilities. So long as liaison between
consumer and ORE is maintained by
someone not possessed of the
highest professional competence in matters of substance and firsthand
knowledge of ORE's resources, that
liaison is almost certain to be inadequate for the purposes of both
ORE and the consumer.

Second is the problem of ORE and OCD. It is my understanding that you intend
to merge these offices when occasion presents itself. To do so, in my
view, is a matter of the very highest importance. As an outsider I may
not be considered presumptuous to reinforce your decision with arguments
(which may also be your own) which I consider unanswerable.

A. Re Collection

1. The collecting phase of research is inseparable from the other phases.
It must always be conducted under the guidance and supervision of the
substantive expert who uses the materials; and in some cases it must be
conducted by the professional himself. The greatest disfavor that can be
done a substantive expert is to deny him the right to commune with his
opposite numbers and to forbid him to swap information and documents
with them. To allocate the collecting function to persons of
non-professional stature and give them a monopoly of the function is to
hamstring the expert.

2. Should you see fit to set up a library or central repository of
materials, (which I heartily endorse) this library staff can be useful
in collecting on its own hook and without repeated requests from the
professionals several types of material (eg): State Department cables,
attache reports, studies by other intelligence outfits, etc. But the
library staff must not get the notion that it has exclusive rights to
collection. It must realize that its function is a modest service
function. It must realize that it may collect only where, in so doing,
it lightens the burden of the professionals.

B. Re Dissemination

1. The dissemination function should be attached to the office of the
Director of ORE. He is the man most
concerned to know where his product is going and most concerned about
consumer reaction.

Third is the problem of ORE, OO and the outer world which OO deals with. In my experience an OO can be of highest usefulness to an ORE, but only on the following terms:

A. ORE must cultivate the OO field personnel. It must send its experts
to their field offices. It must see to it that OO personnel are thoroughly briefed on subjects under
ORE scrutiny, on where ORE's knowledge is rich and where poor, on
ORE's general program of research
and its continuing responsibilities.

B. OO must reciprocate. It must send its
field personnel to Washington. They should know the ORE personnel, administrative organization,
substantive problems, etc. They will do their best work when they feel
themselves almost a part of ORE.

If this relationship can be built the OO-ORE team will be a
powerful affair.

A note on the Daily Summary.

The Daily Summary is probably as good a document as can be brought to the
attention of its most important half dozen readers. So long as they have
no complaints, the Daily can be regarded as making contract. Complaints
however may be registered by readers lower on the distribution list
whose positions in the government permit them a high degree of technical
expertise in certain substantive matters. That they should complain of
omissions, overemphasis, superficial comment is to be expected. The
Daily which would best serve their purposes would be a much longer and
far more technical document. ORE could
probably write it, but in so doing, ORE
would almost automatically lose its present most important readers.

Because of the importance of the Daily's top half-dozen readers, its
snob-appeal will be enormous. Many officers of the government will want
to be on the distribution list for the sake of the company they will be
keeping, or out of idle but pardonable curiosity. Those with least
reason to be on the list are likely to be the ones worst served by the
document and most critical of its fancied shortcomings.

III. ORE and its
management of its substantive program.

I incline to the belief that a higher degree of centralization in the
control of ORE's substantive program
would be beneficial. On the basis of my very short visit, it seemed to
me that control of planning and programming the output was dispersed
among three or four small units. If this should be the fact, there are
several possible penalties. Two of these I regard as of high
importance.

A. Loose or dispersed control permits the performance and completion of
work with something less than the totality of the Office's resources
having been brought to bear upon it. (A Western European section can do
a job on the Communist Party in France without being forced to
collaborate with the USSR section, the Economists, etc.)

B. Loose or dispersed control is not able to keep up standards of
research across the board. Tight centralized control which forces the
less good units to collaborate on joint projects with the best units has
an easy and telling device to set uniform and high standards of
performance.

* Source: Central Intelligence Agency
Historical Files, HS/HC-808, Item 4. Secret. The source text is a
copy transcribed for the CIA Historian on March 9, 1953. Kent had been invited by
Hillenkoetter in December 1947 to survey the Office of Reports and
Estimates. (Darling, The Central Intelligence
Agency, pp. 301-302)

1 Printed from a copy that indicates
Kent signed the
original.

2 Confidential. The source text is a copy
transcribed for the CIA Historian on March 9, 1953.

3 Printed from a copy that bears this typed
signature.

340. Memorandum From the Executive Secretary of the National Security Council (Souers) to Allen W. Dulles, Mathias F. Correa, and William H. Jackson340. Memorandum From the Executive Secretary of the National Security
Council (Souers)
to Allen W. Dulles,
Mathias F. Correa,
and William H. JacksonSource

Washington, February 13,
1948.

SUBJECT:

Survey of the Central Intelligence Agency

This is to confirm our understanding that you will serve as the group to
make a survey of the Central Intelligence Agency, in accordance with the
enclosed resolution1 approved by the
National Security Council.

This memorandum is your authorization to proceed with this survey and,
upon presentation by you, will constitute a directive to the Director of
Central Intelligence and the Intelligence Chiefs of the Departments
represented on the Council, to furnish you necessary information and
facilities as indicated in the second paragraph of the enclosed
resolution.

Your willingness to participate in this vitally important survey is
sincerely appreciated by all members of the National Security
Council.

Sidney W. Souers

* Source: Central Intelligence Agency
Records, Job 80-M01009A, Box 1, Folder 12. Restricted. The source
text indicates that a copy was sent to the Director of Central
Intelligence.

1 Document 336.

341. Memorandum From the Executive Secretary of the National Security Council (Souers) to Secretary of State Marshall341. Memorandum From the Executive Secretary of the National Security
Council (Souers)
to Secretary of State MarshallSource

Washington, March 8,
1948.

SUBJECT

Survey of the Central Intelligence Agency

REFERENCE

NSC Action No. 251

Pursuant to the resolution of the National Security Council, arrangements
have been made for a survey of the organization, activities and
personnel of the Central Intelligence Agency and its relationship to
other agencies. This survey is to be conducted by Mr. Allen W. Dulles, Mr. Mathias F. Correa and Mr. William H. Jackson.

These gentlemen feel that the resolution of the National Security Council
authorizing the survey is not broad enough to permit them to present a
comprehensive study of all Federal intelligence activities relating to
the national security.

I explained to them that I did not believe the National Security Council
had the right to authorize an examination of departmental intelligence
agencies beyond that contemplated in the Council resolution. Mr.
Jackson, representing the
group, then discussed the matter with the Secretary of Defense, who
expressed a desire to have the intelligence agencies of the Military
Establishment examined and stated that he would place the matter before
his War Council.2

I am now informed that the Secretary of Defense concurs in the
examination of such intelligence activities within the service
departments as relate to the national security. He has also asked the
service Secretaries, as heads of their respective departments, to
indicate their approval of the attached draft memorandum3 as a means of assuring a coordinated
and comprehensive consideration of the entire intelligence problem
related to the national security.

I would appreciate your advice as to whether the terms of the enclosed
memorandum are acceptable to you, both as a member of the Council and in
your capacity as head of the Department of State.

Sidney W. Souers

* Source: National Archives and Records
Administration, RG 59, Records of the Department of State, Decimal
File 1945-49, 101.61/3-848. Restricted.

1 Document 336.

2 Additional information is
provided in Souers' February 26 memorandum to Forrestal. (Central Intelligence
Agency Records, Job 86-B00269R, Box 5) See the Supplement.

3 The draft, not printed here, is virtually identical
to the final version of the memorandum; see Document 343.

342. Memorandum From Secretary of State Marshall to the Executive Secretary of the National Security Council (Souers)342. Memorandum From Secretary of State Marshall to the Executive Secretary
of the National Security Council (Souers)Source

Washington, March 12,
1948.

SUBJECT

Survey of the Central Intelligence Agency

REFERENCE

Your memorandum, same subject, dated March 8, 1948, enclosing
draft memorandum to Messrs. Dulles-Correa-Jackson1

The terms of the draft memorandum forwarded with your covering memorandum
are acceptable to me. A comprehensive survey of the Central Intelligence
Agency will necessarily include the relations of that agency to the
intelligence organization of the Department as well as an examination of
the intelligence facilities of the Department relating to the national
security.

I shall instruct the appropriate officers of the Department to cooperate
fully with the Dulles-Correa-Jackson Committee and its staff in accomplishing the
purposes of the survey.

G.C. Marshall2

* Source: National Archives and Records
Administration, RG 59, Records of the Department of State, Decimal
File 1945-49, 101.61/3-848. Restricted. Drafted by W. Park Armstrong.

1 Document 341.

2 Printed from a copy
that bears this typed signature.

343. Memorandum From the Executive Secretary of the National Security Council (Souers) to Allen W. Dulles, Mathias F. Correa, and William H. Jackson343. Memorandum From the Executive Secretary of the National Security
Council (Souers)
to Allen W. Dulles,
Mathias F. Correa,
and William H. JacksonSource

Washington, March 17,
1948.

SUBJECT

Survey of the Central Intelligence Agency

1. I have already sent you a memorandum1 with the terms of the
resolution of the National Security Council providing that a survey
should be made of the activities of the Central Intelligence Agency and
its relationship to other Departments and Agencies.

2. As a result of our further discussions on this subject, it may be
helpful if I set forth my understanding regarding the scope of the
survey and the procedures to be followed.

3. The survey will comprise primarily a thorough and comprehensive
examination of the structure, administration, activities and
inter-agency relationships of the Central Intelligence Agency as
outlined in the resolution of the National Security Council. It will
also include an examination of such intelligence activities of other
Government Departments and Agencies as relate to the national security,
in order to make recommendations for their effective operation and
over-all coordination, subject to the understanding that the group will
not engage in an actual physical examination of departmental
intelligence operations (a) outside of Washington or (b) in the
collection of communications intelligence. On behalf of the National
Security Council I will undertake to seek the cooperation in this survey
of those Government Departments and Agencies not represented on the
Council which have an interest in intelligence as relates to national
security.

4. It should be understood that the survey of the Central Intelligence
Agency and its relationship to other Departments and Agencies will be
done for and with the authority of the National Security Council. The
survey of the intelligence activities of the Departments of State, the
Army, the Navy, and the Air Force, however, will be for and with the
authority of the respective heads of those Departments.

5. The survey group will submit from time to time recommendations on
individual problems which need to be brought to the attention of the Council or the heads of the
respective Departments and Agencies concerned. Problems concerning CIA
will be given priority over those involving other Agencies. It is
contemplated that the survey will be completed and final report
submitted on or before January 1, 1949.

6. It is my understanding that at your request Mr. Forrestal has agreed to lend to the
investigating group the services of Mr. Robert Blum to head the staff work. I would appreciate
the group's advice as to additional staff members it may require in
order that I may clear them for this work. The members of the staff,
when cleared by the heads of the Agencies concerned, will be given
access to information and facilities required for the survey in the same
manner as provided for your group in the Council's resolution.

7. Compensation and expenses for the members of the investigating group
and its staff will be paid for out of funds available to the National
Security Council and the Central Intelligence Agency.

8. I will be pleased to render so far as practicable any further
assist-ance which you may require in conducting your survey.

Sidney W. Souers2

* Source: National Archives and Records
Administration, RG 59, Records of the Department of State, Records
of the Executive Secretariat, NSC
Files: Lot 66 D 148. The source text is Annex 2 of the Survey Group
Terms of Reference II report to the National Security Council
entitled “The Central Intelligence Agency and National Organization
for Intelligence,” January 1, 1949.

1 Document 340.

2 Printed from a
copy that bears this typed signature.

344. Memorandum From the Executive Secretary of the Intelligence Survey Group (Blum) to Allen W. Dulles, Mathias F. Correa, and William H. Jackson344. Memorandum From the Executive Secretary of the Intelligence
Survey Group (Blum) to
Allen W. Dulles,
Mathias F. Correa,
and William H. JacksonSource

Washington, April 12,
1948.

This is an attempt to set forth briefly a summary and appraisal of the
present position of the Survey, with recommendations for future
procedure.

In my memorandum of March 12, 1948, which is in your files, I recommended
that the Survey Group attempt, within a relatively short time, to arrive
at a general appraisal of CIA, its position in the national intelligence picture and its overall
management. I urged that this general survey be completed as soon as
possible and before looking into the details of CIA operations or of the
other intelligence agencies. I suggested that this procedure was
desirable because the group might conclude that detailed recommendations
would serve no useful purpose in the absence of changes in major
policies and among principal personnel. I also proposed the allocation
of responsibility to individual members of the Survey Group, for inquiry
into particular parts of CIA and for the contact with the other
departments and agencies so as to ensure a fairly rapid overall coverage
during the first stage.

Although there seemed, at the time, to be general agreement with these
recommendations we have in fact departed from them. I suggest therefore
that we review our present progress and reconsider what should be our
priorities and working program. It is appropriate to do this now for the
further reason that, beginning April 19th we will have at least one and
probably two additional staff members. The most effective way of using
them can be determined only in light of our general plan.

The present picture is approximately the following: We have already
collected a fair amount of documentary material, first-hand impressions
and second-hand reports concerning most of the principal parts of CIA,
some of CIA's major problems and the position of CIA in relation to the
other parts of the Government.

In particular, Mr. Dulles has
begun looking into OSO but, so far, has
not had time to do more than attempt to mediate the controversy between
CIA and the State Department [less than 1 line of
source text not declassified]. He is also proposing to look
particularly into the question of OSO's
role with respect to anti-Soviet subversive activities, resistance
groups, etc., in order to determine whether they are developing the full
scope of their opportunities. He has not yet looked at OO.

Mr. Correa has begun investigating
the present arrangements for atomic energy intelligence with which there
is general dissatisfaction. He has not yet looked at OCD or the CIA administrative setup.

Finally, Mr. Jackson has had
initial conversations regarding ICAPS
and ORE, and has also spoken with
General Sibert, head of OO.

I have followed up on all of these lines of inquiry and in addition have
collected information and impressions on the other problems and parts of
CIA and the intelligence picture in general. This has included contacts
with intelligence personnel in State, Army and Navy.

Thus, the coverage has been uneven and necessarily incomplete and we do
not now seem to be proceeding toward an early, overall appraisal of CIA.
Although we have been and are still actively concerned in part with some
of the fundamental problems concerning CIA, we are also giving priority
to certain specific problems brought urgently to our attention. It seems
to me that there are a number of difficulties in this procedure which does not correspond to
any clear objective or, in my opinion, to the requirements of the
situation. In the first place, the dissatisfaction with CIA is so
widespread throughout the government and some of the internal problems
of CIA seem so acute that I do not think our present procedure will
produce adequate results regarding CIA on a priority basis as provided
for in the Terms of Reference for the survey. It is necessary, I
believe, to proceed on the basis of a simple fairly clear, and flexible,
program, which does not have to be substantially altered in order to
absorb the particular problems and controversies which will be brought
to our attention from time to time. We can expect urgent problems to be
referred to us as we progress and while we must, of course, be ready to
do what we can to help in these matters, we must not be deflected too
widely from our course. For example, [1 line of source
text not declassified] but it does not take us to the heart of
the problem of evaluating OSO's
performance. As another example, the problem of atomic energy
intelligence is obviously of outstanding importance, but I am beginning
to doubt whether we can make any effective contribution there without
placing the problem in its proper setting and examining at the same time
some of the broader questions on which it depends (scientific
intelligence generally and CIA's responsibilities for collection,
evaluation and coordination). If we do not constantly try to relate
specific problems to the general setting of which they are a part, we
may find ourselves tackling symptoms with very little effect upon the
causes.

There are two other things which should also be mentioned in this
connection. The present procedure is, I think, being seized upon by some
of the people who are unfavorable to our efforts as an excuse for saying
that we are not effectively tackling our job. Thus, in advance, an
attempt may be made to discount the results of our work. In addition,
there are within CIA a large number of people who are very friendly to
our efforts and hopeful that we will help correct the deficiencies of
the present setup. The morale of these people is very low and, rightly
or wrongly, they are looking to the Survey to remedy what they think is
a deplorable situation.

Finally, events of the past few months, including the recent trouble in
Bogota—on which subject Representative Clarence Brown of Ohio is asking
Admiral Hillenkoetter for an explanation—together with public criticism
of our intelligence setup, may lead to Congressional demand for an
investigation, which it will be difficult to resist unless the Survey
Group can show substantial progress in a relatively short time.

CIA has three broad functions and, in my opinion, our immediate objective
should be a quick appraisal of the soundness of these functions, the way
in which they are being performed and of the principal personnel
responsible for them. In the first place, there is CIA's responsibility
for coordinating all intelligence activities concerning the national
security. This is an
administrative and planning function which is supposed to be carried on
through the Intelligence Advisory Committee, with ICAPS as the responsible staff within
CIA. In fact, CIA has been very inactive along these lines, the IAC is a field for departmental skirmishes
rather than a forum for coordination, and ICAPS is looked upon with scorn both within CIA and
outside. In the second place, CIA is supposed to correlate and evaluate
intelligence relating to the national security. The purposeless way in
which this task has been attempted by CIA through ORE has caused considerable antagonism
outside CIA as well as dissatisfaction and demoralization within ORE. Finally, CIA is charged with
performing certain common services of an intelligence character. It is
under this mandate that OO and OSO operate, and it is probably fair to say
that although there is a good deal of criticism of the efficiency of
their operations, there is not the antagonism and controversy regarding
them that there is for other parts of CIA, particularly ORE.

In summary, it is my present impression that CIA has not performed well
or not performed at all its two functions of coordinating governmental
intelligence activities and of correlating the evaluation of
intelligence. CIA's mission and actual operations within both these
fields are uncertain, undefined and subject to much controversy and
bitterness. On the other hand, CIA's “common services”, OSO and OO,
seem reasonably well established, and unless we wish to raise the
question whether these collection functions should properly remain
combined with the coordination functions, the investigation of these
common collection services is more a question of testing and promoting
their effectiveness than of beginning afresh to define their position in
the government intelligence setup, which is substantially what has to be
done with the two functions of coordination outlined above.

In addition and as part of this, there is the problem of appraising the
quality of CIA's principal personnel and the effectiveness of its
management and staff procedures. On some of these points there seems to
be unanimity of critical opinion, both within CIA and among the agencies
which deal with CIA. The criticisms that CIA is organized as a top heavy
bureaucracy and is hampered by a predominance of military personnel in
key positions meet one at every turn. I think that very little
investigation is needed to test the validity of these accusations. It
may be that no substantial progress can be made on needed reforms unless
there are changes here.

In light of the above statement, which I could expand and fill in at
great length, I wish to renew my recommendation that we aim at
completing within a reasonably short period (for example May 15th or
June 1st) a preliminary report
on certain key problems on which the success of the entire survey
depends. These would include the following:

General competence of CIA's top staff.

Efficiency of CIA's administrative and staff procedures.

Balance between military and civilian personnel in key positions.

CIA's function to coordinate governmental intelligence activities
relating to national security.

CIA's mission to correlate evaluation of intelligence.

The appropriateness and adequacy of the “common services” performed by
CIA.

In each case we should try to analyze the problem, develop our views and
establish recommendations which will enable us to proceed with a more
detailed investigation with confidence that there is a readiness to
remedy the basic difficulties on which the details depend.

In furtherance of this recommendation, I suggest that we complete, if
only in a provisional manner the two special problems with which Mr.
Dulles and Mr. Correa are concerned. We should then
expand our coverage within CIA, along the lines already agreed upon,
using Sprague and Larocque to
help out in regard to OCD, ORE and OO.
We should also extend our contacts outside CIA so as to get the
departmental views more fully than we now have. My own efforts will be
devoted to coordinating this work, and covering OSO (once full clearance
has been obtained), as well as the CIA managerial setup. After this has
been completed, we will be able with greater assurance to go into more
detailed problems of CIA and begin our inquiry into the departmental
intelligence services.

After the above statement and recommendations have been discussed and
revised by the Survey Group and a program approved for the first stage,
I will prepare a more detailed statement of the problems and a working
plan.

RB

* Source: Central Intelligence Agency
Records, Job 86-B00269R, Box 5. Secret.

345. Minutes of the 10th Meeting of the National Security Council345. Minutes of the 10th Meeting of the National Security CouncilSource

Washington, April 22,
1948.

PARTICIPANTS

Members Present

James V. Forrestal, Secretary
of Defense, Presiding

Robert A. Lovett, Under
Secretary of State

Kenneth C. Royall, Secretary
of the Army

John L. Sullivan, Secretary
of the Navy

W. Stuart Symington,
Secretary of the Air Force

Arthur M. Hill, Chairman,
National Security Resources Board

Others Present

Rear Admiral R. H.
Hillenkoetter, Director of Central
Intelligence

C. V. Whitney, Assistant
Secretary of the Air Force

Secretariat

Sidney W. Souers, Executive Secretary

James S. Lay, Jr., Assistant
Executive Secretary

DECISIONS

[Here follows a decision on the U.S. position with respect to support for
Western Union and other related free countries.]

2. Protection of Intelligence Sources and Methods
From Unauthorized Disclosures1

a. Agreed that a National Security Council Directive should be issued on
this subject.

b. Directed the Executive Secretary to prepare such a Directive and
submit it for approval by the Council.2

[Here follows a decision on review of the world situation as it relates
to the security of the United States.]

* Source: Truman Library, Papers of Harry S. Truman, President's
Secretary's Files, Subject File. Top Secret. The meeting was held in
the Conference Room at the White House. Although the series of
Presidential memoranda on the NSC
meetings begins with the 9th meeting, no such memorandum was found
for the 10th session.

1 Paragraphs a-b
constitute NSC Action No. 45.
(National Archives and Records Administration, RG 273, Records of
the National Security Council, Record of Actions, Box 55)

2 The
directive was not issued until January 1950 when the Council
approved NSCID Nos. 11 and 12
(Documents 430 and 431).

346. Memorandum From the Executive Secretary of the Intelligence Survey Group (Blum) to Allen W. Dulles, Mathias F. Correa, and William H. Jackson346. Memorandum From the Executive Secretary of the Intelligence
Survey Group (Blum) to
Allen W. Dulles,
Mathias F. Correa,
and William H. JacksonSource

Washington, June 4,
1948.

SUBJECT

Survey Group: Progress Report and Recommendations for Future
Activities

1. We are in sight of the end of the first stage of the Survey Group's
work. This stage will be over with the completion of our first overall
report on CIA. Our attention in the second stage will be concentrated on
the other intelligence agencies, although we will certainly continue to
follow CIA until the entire Survey has been completed, when it will
probably be necessary to re-examine CIA and the whole intelligence
picture as a result of all of our findings.

2. We have now about completed fairly detailed examination of the
following parts of CIA: ICAPS,
Executive for Administration and Management, Executive for Inspection
and Security, Legal Counsel, Office of Reports and Estimates, Office of
Collection and Dissemination, Office of Operations. Individual summary
reports on these activities are being prepared. For security reasons
survey of the Office of Special Operations and the Advisory Council has
not been completed. We are also completing those contacts in the other
intelligence services which seem necessary in order to clarify the
relations between those services and CIA. More detailed examination of
this question must await the survey of the other intelligence
services.

3. In my opinion, our objective should now be to assemble and analyze the
information and views we now have so that we can work toward
establishing in the Survey Group a common understanding of the present
organization and activities of CIA, the problems concerning them and the
intelligence standards against which they should be measured. We can
then decide on the type of report we will want to submit to the National
Security Council. In deciding this, we must know more clearly the
premises that underlie our work. For example, it now appears that even
though it is generally recognized that Admiral Hillenkoetter is not
entirely satisfactory as Director of Central Intelligence there is no
readiness to replace him at present. On the other hand, there is a
willingness approaching enthusiasm to dispense with the services of
Wright (and presumably certain others with him) and Galloway. If this is
the case, then we may want to
work directly with Hillenkoetter in bringing about necessary reforms
within CIA and in the relations between CIA and other agencies.

4. Whatever decision we take regarding the type of report we submit to
the National Security Council, the first step, in my opinion, is to
develop a common ground through the preparation of an overall draft
report marking the end of this first phase of our work. This draft could
be completed by about 15 July 1948, that is, after the members of the
Survey Group have had time in Washington to study the material in our
files, develop their contacts and direct the staff to complete further
inquiries.

5. Such a draft report should include the following:

(a) A discussion of the elements of a sound central intelligence
organization, including answers to the following questions: who should
control the central agency; should coordination functions and collection
functions be in the same agency; how should coordinated intelligence
estimates be produced; what should be the relation between secret
intelligence and secret operations; should the set-up be different in
time of war than in time of peace; to what extent and in what manner
should there be centralization of services common to several agencies;
how should intelligence collection policies be coordinated; what
coordinating authority should the central agency have over the
departmental services and how should this authority be exercised?

(b) A descriptive analysis of the present responsibilities, organization
and activities of CIA and the relations between CIA and other
departments and agencies.

(c) An analysis of the opinions generally held regarding CIA, its
personnel and its performance of its task as now conceived.

(d) Our conclusions and appraisal regarding CIA's proper mission and its
present organization and operations.

(e) Recommendations, which should be subject to review in light of our
findings in the departmental intelligence agencies.

R.B.

* Source: Central Intelligence Agency
Records, Job 80-M01009A, Box 1, Folder 12. Secret.

347. Memorandum From the Executive Secretary of the Intelligence Survey Group (Blum) to the Intelligence Advisory Committee347. Memorandum From the Executive Secretary of the Intelligence
Survey Group (Blum) to
the Intelligence Advisory CommitteeSource

Washington, June 10,
1948.

1. The IAC created by NSC Intelligence Directive No. 1 is a
successor to the former Intelligence Advisory Board which existed during
the life of the Central Intelligence Group under the National
Intelligence Authority. Some of the present difficulties concerning the
IAC can best be understood by
reference to its development out of the former IAB.

2. The IAB was created by the
Presidential letter of 22 January 1946 which set up the Central
Intelligence Group. This letter was implemented by NIA Directive No. 1 of 8 February 1946
which provided that CIG “shall be
considered, organized and operated as a cooperative interdepartmental
activity”. The NIA directive also
established the composition of the IAB
and provided that “all recommendations, prior to submission to this
Authority (i.e. NIA) will be referred to
the Board for concurrence or comment”. The general effect of this
situation was to give the IAB a position
coordinate with that of the Director of the CIG, stemming from the same authority that controlled
CIG.

3. The National Security Act which created CIA made no reference to an
Intelligence Advisory Committee, although it included, among its general
provisions, an authorization to the Director of Central Intelligence (as
well as to other officials created by the Act) to appoint such advisory
committees as he deems necessary. When, last fall, discussions began as
to the setting up of an advisory committee to work with the Director of
the Central Intelligence Agency created by the Act, two divergent points
of view were brought out in sharp opposition to each other. On the one
hand, the Director of Central Intelligence held that a new IAC should simply be created by him by
virtue of the general authority granted him under the Act, and that this
Committee would be turned to by him for advice. The departmental
agencies, on the other hand, held that a new IAC should act in a sense
as a board of the directors to the Director of CI. They refused to
accept membership on an advisory committee simply set up by him and
agreed to serve only on a Committee created by the National Security
Council. The Department of the Army was particularly adamant during this
controversy.

4. Finally, after several months of discussion, the present IAC was created by NSC Intelligence Directive No. 1, of 12 December 1947. In
the words of the Directive, in
order “to maintain the relationship essential to coordination between
the CIA and the intelligence organizations, an Intelligence Advisory
Committee … shall be established to advise the Director of Central
Intelligence”. Under the Directive, the Director of Central Intelligence
is required to obtain the views of the IAC before making any recommendations to the National
Security Council pertaining to the intelligence activities of the
various departments and agencies. In the event of non-concurrence by one
of the Members of IAC, the problem is to
be referred to the National Security Council for decision. The Members
of the IAC, sitting under the
Chairmanship of the Director of Central Intelligence, consist of the
respective intelligence Chiefs from the Departments of State, Army, Navy
and Air Force, the Joint Staff, and Atomic Energy Commission.

5. It is not clear, even to the people in CIA, whether the IAC has held one or two meetings since its
creation; in any case, no more. The one meeting which is clearly
established was called on the initiative of the Executive Secretary,
NSC, to discuss a specific question
pursuant to the wishes of the NSC. (This
question was that of how to protect the intelligence agencies from being
required to disclose confidential information to Congressional
Committees.) The IAC has never met to
consider actual foreign intelligence situations and intelligence
estimates, although Admiral Hillenkoetter seems to be somewhat confused
on this point and has made statements to the contrary. However, the
IAC has cleared and submitted to the
NSC eight National Security Council
Directives, which have been approved by the Council.

6. In practice, IAC action has been
carried out through the routing of papers for concurrence and by the
delegation of responsibility for the preparation of intelligence
directives and other interdepartmental intelligence papers to a Standing
Committee comprising representatives of each of the IAC agencies, usually from the planning
staffs. This Standing Committee has just recently considered the
advisability of further delegating its responsibilities to a
subcommittee under it.

7. The fact is that the IAC machinery has
not been effective in promoting interdepartmental coordination, and
there seems now to be a feeling, at least in CIA, that it is preferable
to avoid meetings which usually give rise to formal statements of
position by the various representatives and, instead, to use informal
channels for obtaining approval of necessary papers.

8. One fact contributing to the failure of the IAC has been the co-existence of similar bodies, comprising
somewhat the same membership, with important responsibilities in the
intelligence field. The membership of the U.S. Communications
Intelligence Board is almost the same as that of the IAC, and the four Members of the Joint
Intelligence Committee are, at the same time, four of the seven Members
of the IAC.

9. The basic weakness reaches back to the unwillingness of the IAC Members to give their full cooperation
if they are to be purely advisory and the absence of strong CIA
leadership which would be necessary to overcome this unwillingness and
make IAC effective.

Robert Blum1

* Source: Central Intelligence Agency
Records, Job 86-B00269R, Box 5. Secret. Although the memorandum has
no addressee it presumably was prepared as a background or
information paper for the Intelligence Advisory Committee.

1 Printed from a copy that bears this
typed signature.

348. Verbatim Minutes of Meeting of the Intelligence Advisory Committee348. Verbatim Minutes of Meeting of the Intelligence Advisory
CommitteeSource

Washington, June
16, 1948, 2 p.m.

PARTICIPANTS

Rear Admiral R. H.
Hillenkoetter, Director of Central Intelligence, in
the chair

Members Present

Mr. W. Park Armstrong,
Special Assistant to the Secretary of State for Research and
Intelligence

Major General A. R. Bolling, Acting Director, GSUSA

Rear Admiral Thomas B.
Inglis, Chief of Naval Intelligence

Major General Charles P.
Cabell, Director of Intelligence, Office of Deputy
Chief of Staff, Operations, USAF

Mr. William C. Trueheart, Representing Atomic Energy
Commission

Major General Walter E. Todd, Deputy Director, Joint Intelligence
Group, JCS

Also Present

Mr. Prescott Childs, Central
Intelligence Agency

Colonel Merritt B. Booth, Department of State

Mr. Allan Evans, Department of State

Lt. Col. Edgar J. Treacy, Department of the Army

Colonel Allan D. MacLean, Department of the Army

Captain P. Henry, USN

Captain J. M. Ocker, USN

Lt. Col. C. M. DeHority, USMC

Major W. C. Baird, Department of Air

Captain K. A. Knowles, USN(R), Central Intelligence Agency

Colonel William J. Clinch, Central Intelligence Agency

Mr. Shane MacCarthy, Central Intelligence Agency

Director: The agenda for the
meeting today is the NIS Program; to see
what might be worked out. I think the thing we ought to get in is the
target date and I would like to recommend the date of 1952—that the Ad
Hoc committee drew up. Anyone want to discuss that?

Adm. Inglis: I can't meet that
date with present funds and personnel for 75 NIS's. If that is what you mean.

Director: Yes.

Adm. Inglis: The maximum
production during the pressure of war when we had unlimited funds and
personnel, working seven days a week, was 12 per year. That is the most
they ever turned out and we couldn't hope to exceed that with our
present funds and personnel.

Director: That is for three years—four years—

Adm. Inglis: 12 a year—that would
take six and a half years. We couldn't do more than six in 1948. It
takes time to recruit and train people.

Mr. Armstrong: I wonder how we
can establish the target date until we know whether we can get funds and
personnel. That is the criteria on which the speed of the program
depends.

Director: We would also like to bring up how we are going to ask for
funds. Shall we put it all into one? We would also like to get an
estimate of what funds you need, so we can stick it into the next
budget. Shall it be for all of the Departments? We talked about this
thing this morning. The non-IAC agencies
gave us a terrifically large amount of funds needed.

Mr. Childs: Interior and
Agriculture.

Director: Agriculture wants for the first year $160,000, and subsequent
years $260,000; Interior the first year $188,000, and subsequent years
$562,946; and Commerce says no additional cost. I don't see how they can
judge it. It looks like it is going to run into a very sizable amount of
money. We did get Agriculture to cut it down around 40% on another
estimate. Since it is so much money maybe we should take it up with the
Security Council and have them give us written authority to put it in
our next budget. It is close to two and a half million dollars. That
would give us a tough point with Congress.

Adm. Inglis: And you will
reallocate that?

Director: I think it would be better to do it that way rather than leave
it to each Department. The first would get it, the second would have a
little argument, and the rest wouldn't get anything.

Mr. Armstrong: If the money is
appropriated to the Departments, you let the Budget have a crack at
it.

Director: That is right. We can get the Ad Hoc committee to make up an
estimate.

Adm. Inglis: I have my figures
now.

Mr. Armstrong: So have I.

Adm. Inglis: I would like to make
this reservation that, even though we do get additional funds, there is
grave doubt as to whether we can get the additional personnel to
correspond to the additional funds and train them.

Director: It might be difficult.

Adm. Inglis: To meet a 1952
deadline, we think, even though they are both possible, their trying to
push it that fast would be uneconomical, inefficient, and would result
in probably an inferior product.

Director: There is a lot to do.

Adm. Inglis: 12 per year is a very
large substantial start. That is the maximum they produced under the
pressure of war.

Gen. Cabell: I don't quite see
the necessity of meeting those deadlines in the lower priority groups.
Why not leave off the unimportant ones in order to meet the deadlines on
the important ones.

Adm. Inglis: I had the same
thought. I inquired about that and was told that out of 105 that were
wanted 75 were considered of sufficient urgency to be listed by the
JCS as wanted in a comparatively
short time. I still think, however, a lesser number than 75 would meet
the requirements. I was also told that the JCS had overlooked one of the important areas—Italy was
given as an example—and it is a sensitive spot and should have been
included. I was also told by a person working on the Editing Board,
working on this program, that they will be working along on a certain
area and then a crash and the decision is to drop that and start on
something else. It brings about inefficiency also.

Gen. Todd: That happened recently and if we can interest the planners
more in a continual review of these priorities we might gain some time
and avoid these stoppages.

Adm. Inglis: The important areas
change. We have to bear in mind every time they change them it will slow
it down.

Gen. Todd: It may be a 15 degree turn instead of a 90 degree turn, as in
some cases.

Adm. Inglis: We got the money we
asked for. I assume we will get it—it has passed the House and the
Senate. We haven't got the bodies, but I think we can recruit over the
period of a year. But six is the maximum this year, even if you gave us
ten million dollars. We still couldn't turn out more than six. And if we
get the same funds in our appropriations in ensuing years, and can
estimate a build-up to an annual rate of 12 a year, after the Fiscal
Year 1949, and that would mean we could produce 42 by July 1 1952, or 75
by April 1955. That would be the Navy's target date under current
circumstances. Now if it is insistent that we turn out 75, then there
would be in addition to the funds we now have, and expect to get,
$120,000 a year, starting with the Fiscal Year 1950.

Director: I think that is one
of the things we have to hook into the Security Council.

Adm. Inglis: It wasn't your idea
in presenting your estimates to Congress that you would take over the
entire expense; it is only additional funds.

Director: Additional funds.

Adm. Inglis: Because if it were
the entire expense we could give you that figure.

Director: I think additional funds.

Adm. Inglis: I think it should
apply to all the Departments. If you are going to absorb the whole cost,
it will be more than $120,000 a year.

Director: We could put that either way.

Mr. Armstrong: Ours is capable of
being refigured as well as the Navy's because we are currently at almost
zero on capability of doing the studies. But to meet the program of 74
or 75 studies in four years from the time we got fully recruited, that
would be a four-year period, we figured it would run an annual cost of
$1,150,000, adding approximately 180 people to our organization to
account for the three chapters that are assigned to State, and it
doesn't include the amount that would be required on the farmed-out
sections to Agriculture, Commerce, and so on.

Director: I think we will put those in.

Gen. Cabell: It would be awfully
difficult for us to segregate that part of our shop that would be
working on NIS exclusively, and their
determinate cost. I recommend we only call upon CIA for the additional
cost, rather than for the entire program. Then I have another
reservation. I would like to say that the bottleneck with us is going to
be the weather data and the availability of IBM machines. At the present
moment we need some 30 machines to take care of the weather chapters in
these reports. And we are having difficulty in getting those machines.
We may wish to ask for CIA encouragement in getting those machines. I
don't know what we are going to be able to do, but it seems the IBM
Company, or rather Agencies, would rather get new customers than to
serve the older customers. I don't know whether you have a requirement
in CIA for IBM equipment. If not we could use your prestige as a new
customer to get these machines.

Director: We have some IBM machines. Maybe we can do that.

Adm. Inglis: It is a change in
business policy from that of the corner grocery store—they give the
chops to the old customers.

Gen. Cabell: They don't sell
these, they are all leased material.

Director: Do all the agencies have money to do any work this year? This
Fiscal Year, and the one coming up?

Mr. Armstrong: We do not.

Adm. Inglis: We have money for
that—I am morally certain we have. We estimate we can get the personnel
to turn out six.

Director: That is a good start.

Adm. Inglis: And from then on the
personnel have to be educated. That is the best estimate we can make
now.

Gen. Bolling: We are going to need additional funds for 1950 and
1951.

Director: We will put in for these additional funds. We have a better
chance if just one asks for it. Park, what would you need in extra funds
this year to get started on this?

Mr. Armstrong: To approach the
program on full-scale business, that would be $1,150,000. Obviously if
you are going to swing into it slowly, and we could do a lesser number,
then the full program would call for in one year a lesser amount of
money. I don't have an estimate on a graduated basis.

Director: We have some money for it now. It was originally set up for
printing, binding, and maps. We might spare a little of that for the
agencies not having the money.

Adm. Inglis: Reduce the number you
originally set up, and reduce the amount. That money could be
diverted.

Mr. WeArmstrong: We could certainly, in a short time, arrive at estimates
and cost on the basis of six the first year, and an ascending scale
thereafter to show what you have to ask for the current Fiscal Year.

Director: I think you ought to get that part in anyway. We won't get in
any more this year.

Mr. Armstrong: Unless you are
getting a deficiency appropriation.

Director: No, if a new Congress comes in. And it also depends on who is
elected. It takes a terrible argument to get a deficiency appropriation.
They ask you if you get this money whether or not you are coming back to
ask for a deficiency. “Remember, if you are going to get this, you are
not to ask for a deficiency.”

Adm Inglis: That brings up another
point. I think it would save a little embarrassment all the way around
if we do decide to submit the request for additional funds for CIA that
we make it clear, and give the specific amount of how much each
department is already contributing to this department; make it clear
what you are asking for so we can go up and say $350,000 is for the NIS
program. Then they won't say to us that we have already given that.

Director: We can put in a statement.

Adm. Inglis: A table as to what
each agency needs. That would certainly help me and get me off the
hook.

Director: It seems like a strange question, and I probably know the
answer, is there any way of allocating personnel doing other work? Does
anyone have spare personnel?

Adm. Inglis: Speaking for ONI—it is a hope that we can get the
bodies.

Mr. Armstrong: We haven't any
slack at all, and have at present only a very small percentage of our
personnel applied to similar studies that would be dropped when this
program starts. Like the SID.

Director: It is agreeable then that we put down as one of the conclusions
that you will let us know what extra money will be needed for next year
so we can take that up and get the Security Council's backing on it and
then put it up in the budget as soon as the boys meet again.

Adm. Inglis: Are you convinced
that we must turn out 75 by '52?

Director: If it can't be done, it can't be done.

Adm. Inglis: I won't say it can't
be done. We feel it will be wasteful and will result in not so good a
product if we take it slower.

Director: What are your ideas on the “We”?

Gen Todd: I think that problem should be put up to the users. Recently
the need for the review of priorities came to my attention and
information they wanted concerning countries along the Mediterranean
Coast. And in one breath they say they need it before they can complete
certain studies, and that they don't want to review the priority on the
basic intelligence areas. I think it is strictly a problem on which we
should get recommendations from the users.

Col. MacLean: Speaking of these 75 studies, the Joint Planners have
dipped way down to the bottom of these studies for one and they want it
by the 15th of July.

Gen. Todd: That is the problem.

Adm. Inglis: They make it
impossible to fulfill their demands.

Gen. Todd: And they want to compromise. They say we don't want to disturb
the priorities, but we want some material we can do research work on
ourselves. And I do think if they gave a little more time and a little
more consideration to the importance of cutting down these priorities,
or of the arrangement of them before it is too late, we will save time
and money and get a better product.

Adm. Inglis: I would like to make
a recommendation that we report to the users that the maximum output
under war pressure was 12 per year, and that we feel that is a maximum
which can be demanded. Unless the users have need of something urgent,
which we must accept, it will start wasteful practices and inferior
products. Tell them if they will accept 12 per year we can complete this
program by 1955. If they insist on us meeting that date of 1952, what it
will then cost, whatever the cost, in addition to the current funds, and that we recommend
that 12 per year be accepted.

Gen. Bolling: Of course, we go for a little more speed. Our latest date
is completion by June 1952. We fully realize that we have a start in
this. We are working on it now and are pushing the other outfits. I
think it would be very poor policy to put out an inferior product and
sacrifice efficiency for speed.

Gen. Cabell: About what I said a
while ago—I think that 75 is a little unreal on their part, and we have
to ask them if that is unreal. But I should think, and this is a
generality, that if our speed during the war was 12 per year, with the
approved techniques and method of coordination, we could shoot that up
near 20 a year. It would be a reasonable expectation. I would offer the
figure of 20 per year.

Adm. Inglis: They can't turn out
airplanes now faster than they did during the war.

Gen. Cabell: A little more
slowly.

Gen. Bolling: And better airplanes.

Gen. Todd: And we were not confronted with the problems of money and
personnel.

Adm. Inglis: During the war money
meant nothing. We had all the personnel we needed, and now we can't get
either the money or the personnel; and you worked 6-1/2 and 7 days a
week during the war, now you work five. And I think probably the quality
of the personnel is not as good as it was during the war; which I can't
substantiate before the Law.

Gen. Todd: Would it be possible to farm out any of the tasks to the
agencies that do have the talent—the universities, etc.

Gen. Bolling: That is being done now.

Gen. Todd: Increase the amount that is being farmed out.

Gen. Bolling: That depends entirely on funds.

Adm. Inglis: I would like to ask
my advisor on that—have we looked into that?

Col. DeHority: We investigated that and decided against it.

Adm. Inglis: Because you didn't
think any outside agency was competent to do it?

Col. DeHority: It was a combination of that and that highly classified
material can't be made available to them in adequate amounts.

Director: Park, anything?

Mr. Armstrong: Since we are
starting virtually from zero, the difference between 12 and 20 a year is
a question of the rate of recruiting and the amount of money. We could
approach one probably as rapidly as the other. I haven't any real
preference for one over the other. In either case it would be the
figure, substantially or somewhat less, per annum indicated here.

Director: I think if this is agreeable with everyone, the first thing we
will do is to take Todd's suggestion and see what the planners want and
would like to get. And at the same time we can give them the difference
in costs. Regardless whether or not you can get people—that is probably
unknown—you have to get the money. 12 a year and 20 a year, and the
difference in cost. Let them take a look and see if their need is
overriding the cost, which is harder to get than it was during
wartime.

Mr. Armstrong: Get the data from
each of the participating agencies on those two bases in the terms of
dollars and total them and you have a cost program to present to them as
a very important consideration on which they will have to make a
decision.

Director: They ought to have that information on the cost of the thing.
To sit back and say we don't care how much it costs, we want to get it
done—that is getting away from reality.

Adm. Inglis: We might as well make
it 23 instead of 20 because if six is the maximum we can turn out during
'49, that gives you three years at 23 per year.

Director: Let's make it 12 or 23.

Mr. Armstrong: Six the first
year?

Adm. Inglis: That is all we can do
the first year.

Director: I don't think anybody could get more than six this first
year.

Mr. Armstrong: We can't do six
without additional funds.

Director: You let me know approximately what you need.

Mr. Armstrong: What it would cost
for six the first year, and then alternate 12 and 23 for the years
after.

Adm. Inglis: Do you want two
figures in the terms of what we are already committed to do on the
program, and additional figures on how much more money would be needed
to speed it up. And the second category, that requires appropriations
from you?

Director: Practically all of the cases. Then we can give it to the users
and tell them that money is going to be a question. It is more and more
with Congress that they are getting up there and saying we have to make
more economies.

Gen. Todd: It seems to me the trained personnel will also enter into it
and would be worth while for the agencies that are preparing the
material to look into the practices followed by other agencies to see if
some of them couldn't be adopted—such as farming out the projects, and a
view to getting better material and compiling it at a more uniform rate
of speed by the contributing agencies, and perhaps a little faster.

Director: Again it comes back to money. If you farm it out you have to
have money to pay for it.

Gen. Todd: It was my impression, when I was in the Intelligence Division,
that we could get it done faster and cheaper by farming it out. That was
the impression I got. I don't know.

Col. MacLean: We are getting some chapters on 18 studies this year by
outside contract. When this program was started last fall, we made
arrangements to have that done.

Mr. Armstrong: I am reminded that
one thing about farming this out is the disclosure as to the priority of
this program.

Gen. Todd: There are security considerations. The discussion will be on
the working level, but at a later date we might use some short cuts.

Director: Any other remarks? Well, I think the first thing to be done on
this is to check on this and the additional money, and then the
additional amounts we will need in any case. Anyone else have anything
on this?

There is just one other item. I am sorry we did not get it on the agenda,
but it did not come over from Sidney Souers' office until about 15
minutes ago. It is a proposal from the Chief of Naval Operations to
downgrade paragraphs 3d and 3e of NSCID No. 71 from Secret to
Confidential. I don't see that it would hurt us to do that. NSCID No. 7, “Domestic Exploitation,”
paragraph 1:

“The Central Intelligence Agency shall be responsible for the
exploitation, on a highly selective basis, within the United States of
business concerns, other non-governmental organizations and individuals
as sources of foreign intelligence information.”

Paragraph 3:

“Further to implement this undertaking, the intelligence agencies shall:”
d follows:

“Obtain, to the maximum extent possible, from their departments and
agencies the foreign intelligence information which the departments and
agencies have received as a by-product of the normal relationship with
business concerns and other non-governmental organizations and
individuals in the United States in connection with non-intelligence
activities, and transmit to the maximum extent possible, the information
to the Central Intelligence Agency for editing for source security and
for appropriate dissemination.”

Paragraph 3e:

“Obtain, in so far as is practicable and within existing security
regulations, from their departments and agencies information concerning
business concerns and other non-governmental organizations and
individuals in the United States having foreign intelligence potential,
which the department or agency possesses or subsequently acquires, and
make the information available to the Central Intelligence Agency.”

It is a request from the Chief of Naval Operations for authority to
downgrade paragraphs 3d and 3e of NSCID No. 7 from Secret to Confidential. Do you want to
read this? I frankly don't see why we can't do that, unless they want a
more complete dissemination.

Mr. Trueheart: I heard them say when it came up at another meeting that
they couldn't send it to the people who needed it, and that it wouldn't
be implemented unless they could get it out.

Director: If we can do it we should. As far as I am concerned I am
willing.

Gen. Cabell: I wonder if anybody
here could give us the philosophy for the original classification.

Director: It is an occupational disease. Everything they touch is highly
classified.

Adm. Inglis: I think there is a
pretty good reason for being close-mouthed. It is not so much the
information they get from these commercial firms, but the protection of
the firms as sources. They will feel a lot happier if they know that
whatever they give us is very closely held. And some of it has to do
with competition.

Director: That is what they said when we talked to them. They are willing
to give the Government the information, but they don't want to see it
come back later in the hands of the fellow across the street who is
working against them.

Adm. Inglis: That was probably the
factor in having the high classification.

Mr. Trueheart: It should. The fact that every effort will be made to
protect them as a source—probably it would be a good idea to publish it
so they will know that we are taking every precaution to protect
them.

Mr. Armstrong: I don't see any
objections.

Mr. Booth: I would like to check that.

Director: We will send it around with a voting slip. I brought it up
because we got it just before lunch. At first glance it looks as if it
is all right to do it.

The only other item is just for information. That is, DCI 2/1 is over on Mr. Forrestal's desk and we don't know how
long it will be there.

Adm. Inglis: You had another item
all tied up with that same argument. The preparation of NIS.

Director: The NIS, that is going on now.
There is a joint group doing this work for the NIS program which could continue to do it. And since this
Navy-Air dispute is within the Military Establishment and doesn't
materially affect the NIS program, they
will keep on doing what they are doing.

Adm. Inglis: As far as I am
concerned it is all right with me if the air information is produced by
the AID, which is a joint Navy-Air Force enterprise, and as long as they continue to function
and produce those things for the NIS we
can let this decision about responsibility ride until Mr. Forrestal puts out his clarifying
directive. If that isn't satisfactory we had better go ahead with
this.

Gen. Cabell: I don't see quite
what you mean.

Director: It is going along all right now and I don't think you should
interrupt it.

Adm. Inglis: That is all right
with me, but I thought it was coming up for discussion today. This
volume here is an outline of the NIS,
and on one page it gives the tentative allocation of responsibility for
the preparation of NIS. There are four
items here which I believe the AID is working on. One has to do with
civil air facilities, another has to do with military air business, etc.
It is the type of work that AID is working on now. Now Navy has
dissented from allocating the responsibility of that to the Air Force
without any qualifying phrases. That dissent is still in a state of
inanimate suspension and has not been reconciled because it is tied up
with this business which is on Mr. Forrestal's desk. I don't think you care particularly as
long as the work is continued.

Director: You can't continue very long without this thing being
settled.

Adm. Inglis: Not indefinitely, but
if you are willing to let it rest in that state of inanimate suspension
as to the designation of responsibility, but that AID continue to
produce the work and are going to continue the work, that is acceptable
with us.

Gen. Cabell: We would propose to
continue working on the basis of this allocation under the assumption
that after that inanimate suspension it would be along the same
lines.

Adm. Inglis: That is where I
differ. I can't agree with that assumption. We would agree that the
decision go the other way. That is where the conflict is.

Gen. Cabell: It seems to me, in
any case, it would come to an overlap.

Adm. Inglis: There is no need for
an overlap because it is AID stuff we are talking about.

Gen. Cabell: I don't see any
reason to expect us contemplating the changing of that allocation. That
is the best evidence there is right now.

Adm. Inglis: That allocation has
not been formally agreed to and if the lack of a formal agreement
interferes with the work, then it is serious and should be resolved
right away. But if it is not we can continue.

Gen. Cabell: I don't see how the
lack of an agreement on this point could affect the continuation of the
NIS program.

Director: We would like to have it continue. Have you anything else,
Prescott? Anybody else anything? We will call the meeting over.
(2:45)

* Source: Central Intelligence
Agency Historical Files, HS/HC-657. Secret. The meeting was held in
the Federal Works Building. A note on pages 10 and 11 of the source
text indicates that they were corrected copies.

1 For text, see Document 427.

349. Memorandum for the President of the Discussion at the 14th Meeting of the National Security Council349. Memorandum for the President of the Discussion at the 14th
Meeting of the National Security CouncilSource

Washington, July 1,
1948.

[Here follows discussion of agenda items 1-3, U.S. civil aviation policy
toward the Soviet Union and its satellites, U.S. position with respect
to support for Western Union and other related free countries, and the
U.S. position on providing military assistance to nations of the
non-Soviet world.]

4. Proposed NSC
Intelligence Directive Re “Communications Intelligence” (Memo
for NSC from Executive Secretary, same
subject, dated June 15, 1948.)1

Mr. Souers said that the question of legality which he had raised has now
been corrected in the proposed Directive. He said that the other
question which he had raised involved only a matter of form since no
other board had ever been created under the NSC. He stated, however, that, from his point of view, the
proposal by the Intelligence Advisory Committee was just as agreeable a
solution.

Admiral Hillenkoetter explained the two points of difference. He said
that his proposal was to achieve coordination under the aegis of the
Director of Central Intelligence but with the unanimous concurrence of
the Board. The IAC proposal placed the
Board directly under the NSC but
required unanimous concurrence, including the Director of Central
Intelligence. He said that either solution appeared acceptable. His
feeling, however, was that his wording, which was based upon Mr. Souers'
suggestion, was more consonant with the National Security Act of
1947.

Mr. Souers explained that the IAC feels
that no one person should be in the position of a single advocate before
the Council. He said that the IAC
proposal would place the Board directly under the NSC, would require that it operate only on
unanimous agreement, would enable it to elect its own chairman, but
would require that it come up to the NSC
when disagreements arise.

In answer to Secretary Royall,
Admiral Hillenkoetter stated that this Directive would not affect a
merger of Army and Navy communications intelligence activities.

The National Security Council:2

a. Noted the comments by the Director of Central Intelligence and the
Executive Secretary, NSC, that they saw
no serious objection to the revisions of paragraphs 1 and 7 of the
proposed NSCID recommended by the
Intelligence Advisory Committee.

b. Approved the proposed National Security Council Intelligence
Directive, subject to amendment of paragraphs 1 and 7 thereof as
recommended by the Intelligence Advisory Committee.

Note: The proposed Directive as approved
subsequently issued as NSCID 93 and transmitted to
the appropriate Departments and Agencies for information and action.

[Here follows discussion of agenda items 5-7, handling of SANACC papers, atomic warfare policy,
and NSC status of projects.]

* Source: Truman Library, Papers of Harry
S. Truman, President's Secretary's Files, Subject
File. Top Secret. Drafted on July 2.

1 Not
found.

2 Paragraphs a-b and the Note constitute NSC Action No. 73. (National Archives
and Records Administration, RG 273, Records of the National Security
Council, Record of Actions, Box 55)

3 Document 435.

350. Memorandum From Robert G. Barnes to William J. McWilliams of the Executive Secretariat350. Memorandum From Robert G. Barnes
to William J.
McWilliams of the Executive SecretariatSource

Washington, August 25,
1948.

SUBJECT

State Material for CIA

There is attached a draft memorandum covering the question of the
transmission to the Central Intelligence Agency of State Department
telegrams and the use which CIA makes of these telegrams.

I have discussed this problem at some length with Mr. Armstrong. He agrees that this is a
vital question which urgently needs to be settled, and he shares my view
that we probably cannot reach any agreement on it short of taking the question to the
National Security Council. However, he feels that State should first
raise this question with Admiral Hillenkoetter, in the presence of
representatives of the Jackson-Dulles-Correa
Committee. Should this approach fail to achieve agreement, we would then
be in a better position to refer the matter to the NSC.

I agree entirely with the course of action suggested above. My
recommendation is that, after you have gone over the attached draft and
in the light of these suggestions, you might refer this paper to Mr.
Arm-strong for his specific
comments. Whatever line of action we decide to take, I think it is
important that we have very clearly in mind all aspects of the problem,
the points which are essential to our position, and the counteroffers
which might be proposed by CIA.

Mr. Armstrong is also of the
opinion that we will encounter considerable resistance to any proposed
limitation on the right of CIA to pre-sent State policy questions until
such time as we publish, for dissemination at least to NSC members, a daily review of policy
questions somewhat along the lines of our present top secret Daily Staff
Summary. I have considerable reservations as to whether we can and
should get into such an operation or whether it is not better to allow
CIA to continue to operate to a limited extent in this field with a far
more restricted distribution.

Attachment1

Draft Memorandum

Washington, undated.

Problem: To determine appropriate Departmental policy for the
distribution of policy information to the Central Intelligence Agency
and the use to which the CIA may put this information.

Background: Ever since the establishment of the original Central
Intelligence Group the State Department has been making available to
that agency most of its daily telegrams, which are now supplied to the
CIA through two channels:

1. Routine intelligence reports, press telegrams and the less sensitive
policy matters are automatically distributed to CIA by the Division of
Communications and Records. Exclusive of administrative and personnel
matters, this distribution includes the major portion of our traffic.
These telegrams are made available to all sections and divisions of the
Central Intelligence Agency.

2. High level policy telegrams, top secret material and other sensitive
matters are screened in S/S and, where appropriate, released to CIA. The
majority of the telegrams falling into this category are released to
CIA, though distribution of these within CIA is restricted to the office
of the Director and to the research group.

The Unification Act makes the following provision with respect to the
supplying of information to the Central Intelligence Agency:

“To the extent recommended by the National Security Council and approved
by the President, such intelligence of the departments and agencies of
the Government … relating to the national security shall be open to the
inspection of the Director of Central Intelligence, and such
intelligence as relates to the national security and is possessed by
such departments and other agencies of the Government … shall be made
available to the Director of Central Intelligence for correlation,
evaluation, and dissemination.”

Although this issue has never specifically been raised in the National
Security Council, the Department has always placed a very broad
interpretation on this provision. We now supply CIA with all appropriate
intelligence material and with most policy material, for the background
information and guidance of the research analysts. It is not only
difficult to draw a clear distinction between political and economic
policy and intelligence matters, but the extensive use of cross
references in our telegrams makes it difficult to withhold any
considerable body of material without inviting charges that we are
withholding it. The material actually withheld from CIA at present is
limited to strictly personal matters and certain high policy questions
which have not been fully resolved or are transmitted on an “eyes only”
basis.2

It should be noted that the Departments of the Army and Navy have
consistently placed a different interpretation on their obligations to
CIA. In general they make available only such material as is available
to their own intelligence divisions. This excludes almost all policy or
operational questions and, in the case of the Army, most of the material
handled by the Civil Affairs Division. The position of the Department of
the Air Force, which is just beginning to set up its own cable channels,
is not known.

Discussion: All of the material made available by the State Department to
CIA is used in the preparation of their daily top secret summary, whether it is of a policy or of
an intelligence nature. This leads to several distinct but closely
related problems:

1. CIA frankly publishes their daily summary as an “operational” rather
than as an “intelligence” publication. This means that while over 80
percent of all their material is derived from State Department sources,
the emphasis in their daily summary is also heavy in the direction of
State Department policy decisions and reports. There are some issues in
which practically every item is the report of a State Department policy
position (Tab A).3

2. CIA frequently attaches their own comment to items which appear in the
daily summary. This occasionally tends to discredit the intelligence
reporting of some of our missions and also leads to the situation where
CIA comments (without the full benefit of all the policy considerations)
on a State policy position. If the desired goal is the publication of a
document revealing current State Department policy, it would seem more
appropriate that this be published within State in close coordination
with the policy offices; if the goal is a daily intelligence digest, CIA
should not publish State policy positions.

3. The CIA daily receives too broad a circulation for a document
reporting on top level State policy decisions. The current distribution
list is attached (Tab B). In addition to the points of distribution,
which have been set in consultation with Admiral Souers, CIA has
reserved the right to give each recipient as many copies as he desires.
On this basis the Chief of Naval Intelligence is currently receiving
three copies, the Army Intelligence Division two, and so forth. State
Department policy positions are thus being given a much wider
circulation throughout the Government than was our original intention,
and material which we deliberately do not make available to the various
service intelligence agencies receives in this form a very wide
distribution among them.

4. Furthermore, the CIA summary is receiving very wide distribution in
the office of each recipient. There have been instances recently where
outside agencies have requested that certain telegrams, identified in
terms of items in the daily CIA summary, be made available to them.
There is also some evidence that both the Army and the Air Force
intelligence agencies have made further dissemination of State policy
items available to them only through the CIA summary.

Recommendations: That we refer this whole question to the National
Security Council with a view to:

1. Securing a uniform interpretation of the provision of the Unification
Act relative to supplying material to CIA which would be equally
applicable on all Departments.

2. Securing an NSC ruling on the type of
daily summary to be published by the CIA, which ruling should stipulate
either:

a. an operational summary, as at present, with the distribution limited
to one copy only for each member of the National Security Council;

b. an intelligence summary only, with distribution maintained at the
present level and any changes referred to the NSC.

* Source: National Archives and Records
Administration, RG 59, Records of the Department of State, Decimal
File 1945-49, 101.5/8-2548. Top Secret; For State Department
Officers Only. The date is from the Executive Secretariat receipt
stamp on the source text.

1 Top Secret; For State Department Officers
Only. Drafted by R.G. Barnes.

2 We have consistently taken the
position with CIA that we are supplying them with all State
Department material. In other words, CIA is not allowed to secure
references or other direct evidence that material, other than
personal communications, is ever being withheld from that agency.
This should be clearly kept in mind in any discussions with CIA,
since an admission that we are withholding material would allow them
to shift the attack against us. As the record now stands, the
performance of State is so much better than of Army or Navy that the
best cards are in our hands for any possible negotiations. [Footnote
in the source text.]

3 None of the tabs is
printed.

351. Statement by Director of Central Intelligence Hillenkoetter351. Statement by Director of Central Intelligence HillenkoetterSource

Washington, undated.

SUGGESTED REMARKS REFERENCE CLANDESTINE OPERATIONS TO THE
HOOVER COMMISSION

I know the Commission is concerned with the status of our foreign
information collection activities conducted by clandestine or
semi-clandestine means.

There has been entirely too much publicity in this regard, favorably and
unfavorably. The public has come to regard the collection of all
intelligence information as a sinister and dangerous operation by
strictly illegal methods. Without discounting certain actual dangers
which do exist in the collection of information, particularly by
clandestine means, I would like to stress the point that it is mostly a
“pick and shovel” job supervised by able intelligence operators.

Approximately 75% of all intelligence information is gathered by strictly
open methods, that is—through military, naval, commercial, and other
attaches; through the study of readily available books, magazines,
newspapers, radio broadcasts, photographs, conferences; and through
interrogation of travellers, students, employees of American concerns
active in foreign fields, and selected foreigners. About 10% of all
intelligence information is
collected by clandestine or semi-clandestine means. But, while the
quantity is lower than that collected by overt methods, often the
quality of such information far outweighs the other. About 10% of the
potential collectible information defies all methods of collection and
about 5% exists only in the knowledge of top leaders in the target
country.

Your interest is in whether the job is being well done. Let me remind you
that we are building up a system, under pressure and many years behind,
that the British, for example, have been efficiently operating since the
days of the first Queen Elizabeth. It is not a system which can be
perfected in a short space of time. Our junior mission case officers,
for example, can seldom be put in the field in less than fourteen
months. You may be interested in this timing. Having selected a
candidate who appears to have the proper academic, cultural, moral, and
physical requirements, it takes us approximately four months to
thoroughly check his past life, habits, discretion, loyalty, and other
necessary attributes. Having accepted the candidate he is put through a
training period of from six to ten months. Upon completion of his
training it requires another three to four months to arrange his cover
and to place him in the area concerned. We can expect little from him
until he has firmly established himself and opened up his communications
channels. This may take several months.

You may be interested in the type of individual who best fits our
requirements for assignment as a station chief. Let me assure you he is
not the publicized police or detective type. First he must have an
intense desire to further the interest of his country, by any means if
necessary and directed. His academic training must be unquestioned and
he must be dignified, calm, intelligent—and able to discuss a broad
range of subjects with individuals of any stature. You may be further
interested in knowing the general background of some of our station
chiefs occupying positions in current hot spots:

One is a former professor of history at one of our oldest universities
and an authority on world economics. He has been a successful operator
in the clandestine collection of intelligence for over five years. He is
41 years old.

One is a former consultant to the Massachusetts Institute of Technology
and is internationally famous, under another name, in the field of
electronics. He has been an extremely efficient operator in the
clandestine intelligence field for over six years.

These are the type men we strive to place in foreign fields and as our
branch chiefs here in Washington. We have, we feel, been very successful
in this regard.

As to our success to date. Let me assure you that the nation has just
cause to be proud of the operations of our comparatively young espionage
and counter-espionage system. Unfortunately we cannot tell the world about our successes—we
can only bow to the criticism of our failures.

Espionage is a most delicate as well as a most dangerous operation. It is
competitive in a field in which no holds are barred. The men who control
these operations are naturally secretive and aloof to the casual
approach—for they are dealing in the lives of fellow Americans and
proven agents regardless of nationality.

Success in clandestine operations is not based on the absence of
failures. It is based on the knowledge of “those who need to know” that
the successful operations exceed the failures. There will always be
“flaps” and they will always, unfortunately, be referred to as
“intelligence fiascoes” by the ever present second guesser.

One commentator recently stated:

“The fiascoes—they might be called intelligence ‘catastrophes’—have
occurred in Rumania, Hungary, Finland and elsewhere.”

I am sure that, as time goes on, many other countries will be added to
this list. But if we are going to judge the efficiency and coverage of
our clandestine intelligence system by the fact that we do have
failures—then we should get out of the business!

It is hard to be a hero in one's own home town, particularly in a town
where so many people are expert in so many fields. That certainly
applies to the conduct, by this country, of an espionage system. You
will be interested in proof that our people in this field are competent
and that we are better appreciated away from home than we are here.
Further, there are many individuals here at home who understand our
efforts but who, for security reasons, can say little about it.
Fortunately we do have some records along the lines of commendation and
I have taken the liberty of bringing along a few miscellaneous items. If
you desire, and will permit me to eliminate names and places, I will be
glad to discuss a few of them. For security reasons they cannot be
released but we have no objection to either Mr. Bross or Mr. Sutherland1
screening them.

(Here suggest Bross or Sutherland pick 4 or 5 papers at random and then
paraphrase them.)

It is vital for you to know that our centralized operation of clandestine
intelligence collection is a “service” to all governmental intelligence
activities and is not an operation for the interests of CIA alone.
During the build-up of our clandestine system over the past three years
of CIA operation, we have been guided by the experience, the successes,
and the failures of the clandestine systems of other powers. Many of our
operations follow a pattern which has been international practice for
hundreds of years. Yet we feel
that American ingenuity and efficiency have provided us with new methods
that have placed us very high in the field of clandestine
intelligence.

There have been statements that our operating personnel are inexperienced
in this field. If security would permit, I could prove that our
operating personnel, on any basis desired, are more experienced in the
espionage field than any other group of American nationals.

There have been statements that clandestine intelligence collection
should not be centralized. The voice of experience challenges such
statements from so many angles that I will not take the time to discuss
them unless the Committee particularly desires a discussion along those
lines.

One of our primary tasks in this field is a constant search for new
information relative Communist activity in the foreign areas. Naturally
these matters tie in with over-all Soviet activities in the field.
Because of security restrictions, I cannot show this document (display
ST-22) to the Committee as a whole but I can tell you it is dated as of
1 August 1948 and contains the names, official designations, and certain
cover activities of approximately 15,000 Soviet officials abroad. We
have no objection, if the Committee desires, to permit closer study of
this document by either Mr. Bross or Mr. Sutherland.

It is obvious, of course, that we cannot completely divorce our foreign
activities with regard to world communism from our own domestic worries
along the same lines. They must be tied together with close
collaboration with the Federal Bureau of Investigation—and I can assure
you that cooperation in this regard is of the highest. Further, we have
our own experts in domestic communism, each highly qualified and
experienced. In the event you desire to pursue this problem further I
have asked two of our experts, both former members of the FBI, to be with us here to answer any
questions which can be answered within security restrictions.

To sum up. We feel the nation has due cause to be proud of its young but
increasingly successful clandestine intelligence system. The continued
growth and ability of the system depends upon a full realization of the
sensitive nature of such activities and the need for ever-improving
security. The system needs time for full fruition and it needs the
maximum of freedom from publicity and inquiry. The personnel involved
are, we believe, selected and screened as no other governmental group
has been selected and screened. There will always be failures in the
field—but I ask you again to realize that such failures are the hazards
of a very dangerous game. Our successes must remain comparatively
unknown.

This is but a very general review of our clandestine intelligence
activities. There are no doubt many questions still in your mind
regarding this work. Where I can, with due regard to security
restrictions, I will frankly and honestly try to answer any questions
you desire to ask.

* Source: Central Intelligence Agency
Records, Job 86-B00269R, Box 2, Folder 3. Secret. The remarks were
prepared for presentation before the Committee on National Security
Organization (informally known as the Eberstadt Committee) of the Commission on
Organization of the Executive Branch of the Government (Hoover
Commission). The date on which the statement was delivered has not
been found, since this presentation was not recorded in the summary
of testimony prepared by the committee staff, but it appears to have
been in September 1948. (Truman Library, McCloy Manuscript, Box 17, Folder
119) See the Supplement under date of September 7.

1 Members of the staff of the Eberstadt Committee.

352. Memorandum From the Assistant Director for Policy Coordination (Wisner) to Director of Central Intelligence Hillenkoetter352. Memorandum From the Assistant Director for Policy Coordination
(Wisner) to
Director of Central Intelligence HillenkoetterSource

Washington, September 13,
1948.

SUBJECT

Appearance Before Eberstadt
Subcommittee of the Hoover Committee

1. Pursuant to the clearance which I obtained in advance from General
Wright and Admiral Souers, I appeared before the Eberstadt Subcommittee of the Hoover
Committee in response to the request communicated to me by Mr. Eberstadt via Admiral Souers. I was
called at 5:00 p.m., 10 September 1948, and was questioned extensively
by various members of the committee for approximately 40 minutes.

2. It was evident from Mr. Eberstadt's introductory remarks that he and various
members of his committee were already quite familiar with the
establishment of my new activity. Mr. Eberstadt cautioned the members of his committee
concerning the highly classified character by statements but beyond that
he did nothing to restrict the course of the inquiry. However, I was
able to adhere very closely to the pattern of presentation which had
been rehearsed in advance in conversations with Admiral Souers and
General Wright. That is, I concentrated upon the fact that the members
of the National Security Council regarded the new activity as being of
the greatest importance and urgency, and that various of the most
prominent members of that body had personally assured me of the
importance which they attached to the activity and of their intention to
give it their full support. In regard to the character of my activities,
I stressed the planned aspects and refrained from indicating that we are
now engaged in or presently contemplating actual operations.

3. The most inquisitive members of the subcommittee were Mr. Eberstadt himself, Mr. John McCloy and Mr. Hanson Baldwin.
They were particularly curious to know how the new activity ties in with
the structure of government; whether it might not better be placed under
the National Military Establishment; whether, in the event of war, it
would be necessary to create a new “OSS
type” organization for sabotage and guerrilla activities, etc. To this
line of questioning, I replied generally that I had not as yet devoted
sufficient consideration to these problems to have a definitive view and
that I was operating pursuant to a directive which had been carefully
considered by the National Security Council in accordance with which my activity has
been placed within the framework of the CIA organization.

4. Notwithstanding the fact, as indicated above, that I managed to adhere
very closely to the predetermined pattern of presentation, I should like
to register for the record my concern about the security aspects of this
appearance before the committee. It may well be that most if not all of
the members of the committee have some form of security clearance, and I
am duly aware of the fact that a substantial proportion of the committee
members are important and responsible individuals who well understand
and will respect Mr. Eberstadt's
admonitions on the score of security. The fact remains, however, that as
a result of this appearance, some 15 individuals who are not directly
connected with the intelligence organization of this government are now
aware of the exist-ence and much of the significance of the Office of
Policy Coordination. I consider it unlikely that all of these people
have been fully indoctrinated in the principles of security and it is,
therefore, reasonable to assume that some disclosure of the activity of
this office may result from this appearance. Should a leak occur, it
would be my recommendation that we continue to maintain the position
that our activity is one of “planning and coordinating policy.”

* Source: Central Intelligence Agency
Records, Job 86-B00269R, Box 2, Folder 3. Top Secret.

353. Letter From Director of Central Intelligence Hillenkoetter to Allen W. Dulles353. Letter From Director of Central Intelligence Hillenkoetter to
Allen W. DullesSource

Washington, November 17,
1948.

DEAR MR. DULLES: Thank you very
much for your letter of 12 November, advising that the Survey Group will
be in Washington on 22 and 23 November and will be available for any
suggestions or recommendations which the Central Intelligence Agency may
wish to make. I have discussed this question with all of our people, and
we feel that there are no suggestions or recommendations that the
Central Intelligence Agency wishes to make. However, if the Survey Group
desires to ask any questions or to receive further clarification on any
points, any or all of us will be most happy to appear before the Survey
Group at the convenience of the Survey Group.

In view of the shortness of time remaining, I am delivering this
personally to Mr. Robert Blum.

Very sincerely yours,

R.H. Hillenkoetter1
Rear Admiral, USN

* Source: Central Intelligence Agency
Records, Job 86-B00269R, Box 5. Confidential.

1 Printed from a
copy that indicates Hillenkoetter signed the original.

354. Memorandum From the Secretary of State's Special Assistant for Research and Intelligence (Armstrong) to the Intelligence Survey Group354. Memorandum From the Secretary of State's Special Assistant for
Research and Intelligence (Armstrong) to the Intelligence Survey
GroupSource

Washington, November 22,
1948.

The Department of State welcomes the opportunity to present a brief
statement on the intelligence activities of the Government, and in
particular on the Central Intelligence Agency and the relations of that
Agency to the Department. It is hoped that this statement summarizes the
discussions which members of the Department have had with the Group and
its staff over the past months.

In general, the Department believes that the experience of the past year
has shown that the principles and concepts of the National Security Act
of 1947 relating to intelligence are sound. The Department is in fact
encouraged and hopeful that with further effort and cooperation an
eminently successful governmental intelligence organization will evolve.
It is, therefore, in the light of this fundamental position that the
Department makes its comments on certain aspects of the working
arrangements.

In making its comments, the Department wishes to have it clearly
understood that in most areas of intelligence operations it feels that
an excellent effort is being
made by the Central Intelligence Agency and that the relationship with
the Department is wholly satisfactory. The comments which follow,
therefore, are directed at those areas of the CIA-State Department
relationship which the Department feels are in need of attention.

1. With respect to the Research and Evaluation
functions:

The Department agrees completely with the basic philosophy set forth in
the National Security Council Intelligence Directives which deal with
the production of intelligence. The Department believes, therefore, that
relations between CIA/ORE and the
Department could, under existing basic directives, be satisfactory.
Those directives divide up among the Departmental intelligence agencies
basic responsibilities for production within a number of generally
recognized fields of intelligence while allocating to CIA the
responsibility for producing “national” intelligence, which is defined
as “integrated departmental intelligence that covers the broad aspects
of national policy and national security, is of concern to more than one
Department or Agency, and transcends the exclusive competence of a
single Department or Agency or the Military Establishment.” CIA is
directed, furthermore, in preparing such national intelligence, to draw
upon Departmental facilities as much as possible, which must mean a
maximum effort to compose national intelligence by combining mutually
agreed contributions from the Departments interested in any national
intelligence problem.

The Department would construe these directives to mean that CIA/ORE should participate in, indeed should be
an essential element in, the coordinating responsibilities of CIA as a
whole. Thus CIA/ORE should, with respect
to the other agencies:

(1) constitute a center of information concerning all intelligence
activities in all fields, by means of surveys of departmental
agencies;

(2) be responsible for allocating projects among the agencies in accord
with their assigned responsibilities;

(3) stimulate in other agencies programs and procedures which appear
desirable;

(4) assist the agencies in developing means and facilities to meet their
responsibilities.

The Department finds, however, that in actual practice, CIA/ORE acts in few or none of the above ways.
It appears to the Department that, rather than confining its activities
to the foregoing and to the production of national intelligence,
CIA/ORE has tended to develop a
maximum production capacity for departmental intelligence which, in
turn, tends to duplicate the work of other agencies. CIA/ORE, the Department finds, has not as a
rule voluntarily forwarded requests received by it to appropriate
agencies, but has rather endeavored whenever possible to fill such
requests itself. The “national” or inter-agency participation is then
achieved through the procedure of “concurrences” which is, in the first place, after the fact of
planning and composition, and, in the second place, difficult of
accomplishment and generally unsatisfactory.

A notable exception to this tendency is found in the planning and
execution of the NIS program.

The Department should point out also that the unbalance described is
particularly evident in the fields of political, sociological and
certain economic intelligence, which are the fields allocated to the
State Department. It does not appear that duplication to the same degree
occurs in the various military fields. The result has been, for the
Department, both a conspicuous expenditure of time and effort in
avoiding duplication where possible and preventing deleterious
discrepancies in the finished, coordinated intelligence, and also an
absence of those forms of assistance and support which it feels the
directives give it a right to expect.

While desiring not to exaggerate, the Department feels that this
situation is serious and arises from an erroneous interpretation of the
basic philosophy of the NSC directives
and from the resulting series of policies adopted by CIA in
implementation of that philosophy. In the opinion of the Department,
CIA/ORE should treat Departmental
intelligence agencies more as the base of the intelligence production
pyramid of which it is itself the apex. It should seek to strengthen the
base, in the knowledge that upon it rests the whole structure. It should
conceive its coordination mission in broad terms, suggesting coverage,
gaps and projects of national interest. It should concentrate on a
national mission rather than on fields effectively allocated to
Departments. Finally, while the Department is not aware of the exact
size of CIA/ORE, it cannot help but feel
that the obviously growing staff represents a duplicative effort; that
CIA/ORE should, therefore, emphasize
quality rather than numbers in its own staffing.

[4 paragraphs (34 lines of source text) not
declassified]

3. With respect to the CIA “Daily Summary”:

The Department believes firmly that adjustment is needed in the CIA Daily
Summary. As presently issued, the Summary is composed almost exclusively
of briefs of State Department cables. Furthermore, no distinction is
made between cables dealing with intelligence and those presenting
policy matters (some of which are not crystallized and fully formulated)
so that the Summary is at once an operational and intelligence
publication.

It is admittedly difficult, when dealing with foreign affairs, to
separate clearly intelligence, as such, from policy or “operational”
matters. This is particularly true because in some instances telegrams
from the field contain elements of both. Nevertheless the Summary has
over the past months been composed, in almost half of its entries, of
items which are clearly and entirely policy and have no intelligence
aspects at all. Policy instructions to the field, position papers, and
recommendations on courses of
action fall into this category. This tendency has even reached the point
where CIA in its comment upon items has over-stepped the boundaries of
the field of intelligence by agreeing or disagreeing with policy or
operational determinations. The Department recognizes that policy
matters are of concern to members of the National Security Council and
should be conveyed in appropriate channels to them, but the Department
feels quite firmly that dissemination of this information along with
intelligence, and to officers not necessarily concerned with policy
formulation, is not the appropriate method. This is all the more true
since the information on policy already is being distributed by the
Department to the proper levels of the other agencies of the government
who have need for it. The inclusion of these items therefore represents
a serious duplication of effort as well as, in the opinion of the
Department, an inappropriate activity for CIA.

Treating the Summary as an intelligence organ, and apart from policy
matters, the Department believes that the source of information is
almost exclusively the Department itself and that this one-sided aspect
tends to destroy the purpose for which the Summary was instituted.
Moreover, the intelligence materials are also separately distributed by
the Department to the several agencies. Unless comparable contributions
from the other agencies are included, the Department itself derives no
benefit, nor, would it seem, do the other agencies, since they are
already receiving the State Department material.

The Department therefore suggests:

(a) That the Daily Summary not contain any matters of policy; that the
dissemination of information on policy to other agencies and, for that
matter, to the President, is the responsibility of each Department and
cannot be considered a suitable subject for centralized distribution or
for an intelligence publication.

(b) That the Daily Summary can serve no useful purpose for intelligence
dissemination unless a comparable contribution is made by the other
agencies which serve as a source of “national” intelligence.

For the Secretary of State:1

* Source: National Archives and Records
Administration, RG 59, Records of the Department of State, Records
of the Bureau of Intelligence and Research: Lot 62 D 42, Box 7385,
Dulles, Correa, Jackson Report and NSC 50. Secret. According to a covering note, “The
final hearing for the Department to give its views was held on
Monday, November 22, at which time the attached memorandum was
submitted.” (Memorandum from Armstrong to Daniels et al., November 22; ibid.) See
the Supplement.

1 Printed from an
unsigned copy.

355. Verbatim Minutes of a Meeting of the Intelligence Advisory Committee355. Verbatim Minutes of a Meeting of the Intelligence Advisory
CommitteeSource

Washington, December 3, 1948, 2:30 p.m.

PARTICIPANTS

Rear Admiral R.H. Hillenkoetter, Director of Central Intelligence,
in the chair

Members Present

Mr. W. Park Armstrong,
Special Assistant to the Secretary of State for Research and
Intelligence

Major General Stafford L. Irwin, Director, GSUSA

Rear Admiral Thomas B.
Inglis, Chief of Naval Intelligence

Colonel E.P. Mussett, acting for Director of Intelligence, Office
of Deputy Chief of Staff, Operations, USAF

Dr. Walter F. Colby, Chief, Office of Intelligence, Atomic Energy
Commission

Major General Walter E. Todd, Deputy Director, Joint Intelligence
Group, JCS

Also Present

Mr. Prescott Childs, Central
Intelligence Agency

Colonel Merritt B. Booth, Department of State

Mr. Philip Strong, Department of State

Lt. Col. Edgar J. Treacy, Department of the Army

Captain John M. Ocker, USN

Major W.C. Baird, Department of Air

Mr. William C. Trueheart, Atomic Energy Commission

Colonel Wendell G. Johnson, Joint Intelligence Group

Captain Henry C. Doan, USN, CIA

Mr. Shane MacCarthy, CIA

Colonel Charles C. Blakeney, CIA

Director: The paper we had on the agenda today was the Scientific Attach
é.1 You know that went
around and was approved by the IAC then
Mr. Forrestal disapproved it in
the Security Council. We tried to get earlier a proposed directive2 from the Research and Development
Board, but it didn't come around until the 1st of December. Copies were
handcarried to everybody. I don't know whether you have had time to
consider it or not. If not, we had better leave it until the next
meeting.

Mr. Armstrong: We are ready to
discuss it.

Director: This was made by Mr. Beckler of the Research and Development
Board. He said he thought Mr. Forrestal would approve it, but did not assure us he
would.

Adm. Inglis: Did it require the
approval of Mr. Forrestal
only?

Director: I don't know.

Adm. Inglis: He only has one
vote.

Director: What are State's comments on this Proposed Directive here?

Mr. Armstrong: We don't find that
the changes proposed are objectionable in a substantive way. In fact we
don't feel they change the intent and the spirit of the Directive as it
had been approved by the IAC to any
considerable extent. There are one or two minor corrections that I
propose for clarity, but the Department would be willing to accept the
Directive as revised by the Office of the Secretary of Defense.

Director: What are the changes? We have a few changes too.

Mr. Armstrong: In paragraph c,
page 2, unless you read that with great care you wouldn't get the full
significance of that phrase “for exchange purposes” and you wouldn't
relate that to the word “unclassified.” So change it to read as follows:
“for the purpose of inducing exchanges with other countries.”

Director: Yes.

Mr. Armstrong: That makes the
word “unclassified” fall into the context, where before it is of
gratuitous significance. That is the only language change we
propose.

Director: Tommy?

Adm. Inglis: The Navy agrees in
principle with the paper. We have a few editorial suggestions we would
like to make eventually when we get around to it, and one which would
possibly have substantive matter. Director: Dr. Colby?

Dr. Colby: Seems quite all right. I would say a little verbose.

Director: W.E.?

Gen. Todd: No.

Col. Mussett: Except one thing. We understood we were to discuss this
thing but not commit ourselves to the final paper.

Director: We will have a discussion here.

Gen. Irwin: We agree with the principle.

Director: We agree with the principle. It seems much the same as the
other one. I think they should put in mostly, it is an editorial change,
I think Navy has the same thing for the last paragraph. “The National
Military Establishment will assign specially qualified scientific
personnel” there should be a qualifying clause in there. “As
practicable,” or something. You may ask them to do an impossible
thing.

Mr. Armstrong: That is in
paragraph e.

Director: Paragraph e.

Adm. Inglis: We have one in d and
one in e and then we have a change in f all along the same line.

Director: That one there is saying they must do something and whether it
can be done is another thing. What are your changes, Tommy?

Adm. Inglis: In subparagraph a the
sentence: “The Departments of Army, Navy, and Air Force will collect
scientific and technological information” insert after “information,”
“including basic research when necessary.” Our Office of Naval Research
would like to have the right to collect its own information concerning
basic research, where and when this agency that is being set up here is
unable to satisfy our requirements, as well as the applied research.
That was the reason for that. Then I had another suggestion which
parallels Mr. Armstrong's in
subparagraph c. Just to clarify the language by “the Department of State
with available unclassified information pertaining to the basic
sciences.” We didn't think much of the grammar and construction of that
paragraph c. “… with available unclassified information pertaining to
the basic sciences,” and then delete the rest, from that through the
rest of the sentence.

Director: c will read then: “The National Military Establishment shall,
for the purpose of inducing exchanges with other countries, provide the
Department of State with available unclassified information pertaining
to the basic sciences.” And then delete the rest of it?

Adm. Inglis: Yes. And down in
paragraph d after the word “will”—“or from the agencies served, other
than the National Military Establishment”; after “will” insert “as
practicable.” “… will, as practicable, appoint specially qualified
scientific or technical personnel.”

Director: I think that is a good addition there.

Adm. Inglis: And the same thing in
paragraph e. “… appropriate measures to obtain the necessary funds from
the Congress and will”; then insert “as practicable,” “assign specially
qualified scientific” and change “or” to “and” “technical personnel.”
Then we had a change that might be more substantive in paragraph f. “The
Department of State shall call upon agencies of the Government which
require scientific or technological information for advice and
assistance” and then cross out the rest and substitute “for advice and
assistance as may be necessary
in connection with the requirements of this directive.” Now the reason,
that was given to me, for that suggestion was to broaden it out beyond
the advice and assistance of organizing and staffing offices in
Washington and abroad. It was felt possibly advice and assistance as to
collection and dissemination might be helpful also.

Director: Anybody got any comments on those changes? Park?

Mr. Armstrong: I am not certain I
got it.

Adm. Inglis: The suggestion is
that the entire paragraph read: “The Department of State shall call upon
agencies of the Government which require scientific or technological
information for advice and assistance as may be necessary in connection
with the requirements of this directive.” That broadens it out rather
than restricts it.

Dr. Colby: May I inquire about an early change. Technical information
also includes basic science?

Adm. Inglis: Including basic when
necessary. “The Departments of Army, Navy, and Air Force will collect
scientific and technological information, including basic research when
necessary, to meet the requirements of the National Military
Establishment.”

Gen. Todd: I would like to comment on paragraph e, if I may. The closing
part of that sentence seems to me should be qualified. That is, “will,
as practicable, assign specially qualified scientific or technical
personnel to the staffs of their respective attaches” and “at selected”
or “appropriate” “United States Missions.” You wouldn't want them in
many countries where we do have Missions. “Selected United States
Missions for this collection responsibility.”

Adm. Inglis: I certainly agree
with the sense of that. It shouldn't be a requirement. How would you
like “will, as practicable and necessary, assign specially qualified”?
“Will, as they find practicable and necessary.”

Director: I would rather have General Todd's “selected” on that.

Mr. Armstrong: That ties in with
paragraph b where the DCI is given the
responsibility.

Adm. Inglis: O.K.

Col. Mussett: Who does the selecting? Each individual's
responsibility?

Director: Yes.

Adm. Inglis: “The Departments of
the Army, the Navy, and the Air Force shall take measures.” There too,
who is going to do the selecting?

Col. Mussett: “Appropriate” might be better.

Director: I don't think it makes much difference.

Col. Mussett: Since this is by way of a directive that they shall do so
and so.

Director: Make it “appropriate” U.S. Missions.

Adm. Inglis: Who is going to
decide what is appropriate?

Col. Mussett: If we used your version “as practicable and necessary” it
puts it on the Department concerned up here. We will put it as you
suggest.

Adm. Inglis: It is tightening it
up to say “as they may find practicable and necessary.”

Col. Mussett: It seems to make it a little plainer if you put it in up
here.

Adm. Inglis: See, you have got a
subparagraph b “The Director of Central Intelligence, in collaboration
with pertinent agencies, shall determine those countries.”

Gen. Todd: “Such U.S. Missions as may be required for this collection
responsibility.” You are charging it definitely or at those U.S.
Missions as required for this collection responsibility.

Adm. Inglis: Your suggestion is
after “U.S. Missions” insert “as may be required”?

Gen. Todd: “At such U.S. Missions as may be required for this collection
responsibility.” “As required.”

Director: Will you give us your comments, Dr. Colby?

Dr. Colby: I am worried about the comment I asked about at first. You
mean on those occasions where there are no scientific attaches?

Adm. Inglis: The idea was where
the mechanism set up by this paper didn't fulfill the requirements. In
my case, in the Navy, in the field of basic research that we would
reserve the privilege of getting that ourselves if we couldn't get it
through the machinery that there is, as necessary.

Dr. Colby: Where the machinery was not necessary, it doesn't make the
collection responsibility lacking.

Adm. Inglis: In a sense it gives a
threshold area there. It does—we might consider it wasn't satisfactory
for our purposes where you or State Department might insist that it
was.

Gen. Todd: There might be periods of time when the scientific attaches
were not on station or present and wouldn't want to.

Dr. Colby: Or where they were not assigned?

Adm. Inglis: Or where given
priority to a particular field of research which overrode something we
thought was of a higher priority. That was the reason for putting it in.
If there is a rather serious objection from the other members of the
Committee, I wouldn't want to have a split of the paper over that. It is
not that important to us.

Dr. Colby: It struck me there would be occasions when basic research
collection was immediately assumed by the other attaches so the other
man became by-passed.

Adm. Inglis: The thought was only
that this clause would only be implemented when our requirements were
not satisfied by the State Department machinery that is set up here.

Dr. Colby: There is no machinery to direct an attach é, being instructed
by other agencies, toward items which are being neglected, because
attach és, of course, are appointed by their users.

Adm. Inglis: He might not even be
qualified in that particular field. The priority of his targets might
place the priority so far down the list he wouldn't get around to doing
it in time to satisfy our needs.

Mr. Armstrong: I presume, of
course, by the preceding sentence that the Navy would ask that its
requirements be satisfied only after finding that couldn't be the
case.

Director: In the following sentence there are “utilizing whenever
practicable the facilities.” It has a cover clause that seems to me it
doesn't take anything away, but it may add to it. I mean to get a thing
done. Have you any other comments?

Dr. Colby: “When requested.” That means it will be requested?

Director: W.E.?

Gen. Todd: No.

Director: Colonel Mussett?

Col. Mussett: No.

Director: General Irwin?

Gen. Irwin: No.

Director: Since this thing just came around and we know it was a very
short notice for you people here in the Committee, we will now write it
up and send it around for formal approval.

Mr. Childs: And send it back to the
Security Council as a substitute proposal for the other one.

Director: I don't know what we will do if they don't approve this
one.

Mr. Childs: We shall request in a
letter to Mr. Souers that he submit it to the Security Council since it
had been reconsidered by the IAC and the
enclosed proposal is suggested as a substitute.

Director: This one says practically the same thing.

Adm. Inglis: Since the
representative of the R&D Board has
agreed to this one, it will be helpful.

Director: He is going to be there. That is the last item of the formal
agenda.

We have some semi-formal ones we would like to bring up. One is the
meetings. We haven't had them very often and I would like to know—shall
we have them at fixed times?

Mr. Armstrong: I think it is a
good idea, Hilly, even if the interval is fairly large. My experience
has been that a machinery of this kind tends to get rusty and the weeds
grow over it if it isn't used and there is a tendency to bring more
problems before a Committee of this kind if there is a scheduled
meeting.

Director: I agree with you on that myself. Any other? The Navy?

Adm. Inglis: I agree with Mr.
Armstrong and will add
another to show for the record that we are alive to our responsibilities
and do meet once in awhile. If you allow five or six months in between,
the record doesn't look very good.

Dr. Colby: I agree.

Gen. Todd: I agree wholeheartedly.

Col. Mussett: I agree.

Director: Every two weeks, maybe?

Adm. Inglis: Not less than once a
month.

Mr. Armstrong: Yes.

Director: Not less than once a month?

Adm. Inglis: Regular, monthly,
routine meetings, and have them in between when some matter arises which
requires immediate attention.

Col. Mussett: I would like them once a month.

Director: The next thing is what day of the month? I would like to
suggest this, it may be a help, I would like to suggest, since it is
once a month, the third Friday. The Security Council has a meeting the
day before and there may be things you can bring up here the next
day.

Gen. Todd: That is good as far as JCS is
concerned.

Director: Morning or afternoon?

Mr. Armstrong: It doesn't make
any difference on Friday. The third Friday.

Gen. Irwin: I would prefer the afternoons.

Director: The third Friday of each month at this time. Sometimes, when
there is a lot to be done, we can get started earlier.

Col. Mussett: I am fairly sure I can accept that for General Cabell.

Director: Do we want another one this month? Let's have one, if it is
agreeable, there is not much to be done but just get out in the open
air. December 17 will be the next one. Unless you are otherwise
notified.

Let me get your views on a subject here that has come up. Admiral
Inglis and I are rather more
familiar with it because it came up through the Navy. We have a
letter/3/ addressed here from Commodore Greenman, Director of the Naval
Petroleum Reserves. The firm is a civilian firm of DeGolyer and MacNaughton and they are
making various estimates and other researches into petroleum. He wrote
to me that he wanted an exceptionally large report on the availability
of crude oil on a world-wide basis and the information he asked me for
in this letter he would turn over to this civilian firm. He asked if we
would turn over to him all the Naval Attach é reports on that. We wrote
back that we could not supply intelligence material to any civilian firm
or organization and that they could get those through the Navy. He then
came over to see me about it and said his letter had been a little
confusing and that he really didn't want Navy Attach é reports alone,
but our dope on crude oil reserves in the world. And I told him in that
case we would give it after taking it up with the Security Council members, about it going to a
civilian firm, and he assured me it had always been very discrete in its
dealing. Then we sent our man over to get the details of it and
Commodore Greenman came up then and said his objective was to obtain all
available raw intelligence material, particularly statistics on
exploration, discoveries of new fields, development and production of
crude petroleum. This on a continuing basis as reports come in.
Primarily MA, NA, AA, State, OO, and
OSO reports. That was the first we
had heard about that. I talked to Admiral Inglis about it and our opinion is that such reports
should not be given to a civilian firm. We will make him up a survey on
the information which we have on crude oil reserves and tell him that is
our estimate. I want to get your opinion. Do you want your reports going
out like that? We would much prefer not to give them. If you say give—I
would like to ask Admiral Inglis
to fill out on that because he was first approached on this.

Adm. Inglis: I can't add much to
what you said. What was represented to me by Commodore Greenman that
they are the outstanding experts in this country and possibly in the
world. They are consulting engineers on the subject of oil reserves. In
fact, not only proven reserves, but unproven reserves. It was
represented to me that this firm was entirely unbiased and unprejudiced.
That it wasn't obligated in any way to a particular oil company. It is a
high-principled firm so that we need not fear that any one company was
going to obtain any unfair competition over any other firm. It was also
represented as being discreet, American, patriotic citizens. And the
thing that bothers me about it is that they have a reputation which
probably no Government agency, even ICA, could compete with. That is, a
professional reputation as consulting engineers. So I think we may have
a chestnut in our hands that is going to have to be cracked along that
line. A case will be made if we refuse to give these reports over. We
can't hope to be able to evaluate them as his company could and if it
would be to the advantage of the country and the departments interested
in petroleum to allow them to do this work, as an alternative possibly
the Army-Navy Petroleum Board would swallow this pill more readily if it
were represented that CIA would enter directly into a contract with this
company. But still CIA could not retain control of this whole
proposition. Then if CIA wanted to give them five thousand dollars, or
ten thousand dollars for their advice the end product is a joint effort
of CIA and this very fine firm of consulting engineers without losing
control of the source material. But I don't think this is a simple
problem and I don't think any solution which will be entirely acceptable
to you will be acceptable by the users without argument. Commodore
Greenman is only acting for the Army-Navy Petroleum Board, and I might
also add that Commodore Greenman told me this was initiated a year or a year and a half ago
by Secretary Forrestal when he
was Secretary of the Navy. So there is a little pride of authorship
involved.

Director: All I can say on that same thing is that this firm
unquestionably must be very good, but if we give them all our
information they can make a re-estimate and come out with a report of
all the crude oil in the world. Our own people can come out with an
estimate and when you are dealing with two or three hundred billion
barrels, whether you are ten billion barrels off or not, or twenty
billion, when you are dealing with up to two hundred billion barrels it
wouldn't make much difference. When you get up there to where this thing
is, like in geometry, instead of taking the circle, you use the sine of
the circle. Any evaluation is going to be of not much import because
both of them are going to be estimates.

Gen. Todd: If that error occurred in one particular area, it would be of
considerable significance.

Director: It may be of significance but none of us around here would ever
know about it and whether it would be an exact error or not, an error
that actually occurred, for the world petroleum is going to last for
another 25 years.

Adm. Inglis: I think “Wee” has a
point though that the strategical importance of the area might have a
great significance as compared to the estimated oil that is in the
ground in that area. In other words, if we overestimate the oil in
Venezuela, an overestimate might make a tremendous difference.

Director: It might, but I think if he is using the same raw materials as
we are it is not going to be that much greater. We take the Middle East
and make an estimate from the raw material which we have, and we have a
petroleum engineer fairly high in the oil business who makes an
estimate. We estimate there is in that area one hundred billion barrels
of oil, and this boy comes out and says you have yours way up
there—there are only seventy-five billion barrels.

Gen. Todd: I was thinking of areas such as Brazil, who have been given
encouragement to develop that which is believed to be there. When our
estimate is wrong and Brazil goes ahead and develops it, it is
expensive.

Adm. Inglis: You might have United
States capital and the Petroleum Board puts a lot of Uncle Sam's money
down there. I wonder if we have all the raw material that is available.
I wonder if this consulting firm has some more? I think they would say
they have whether they have or not.

Gen. Irwin: Are you going to take these people's estimates in preference
to our own?

Director: No, add them to our own. What we want to do is know whether you
want us to give them your raw material reports on it.

Adm. Inglis: I don't like to
establish that precedent. Next it will be the consulting engineers in
chemistry or biology that are going to demand the same thing.

Gen. Todd: Would it be practicable for them to put in an integrated
working group or have access to the material?

Gen. Irwin: They could assist your evaluators.

Director: We may be able to do that.

Adm. Inglis: That is the idea I
had.

Gen. Irwin: I think that is a lot better.

Adm. Inglis: As an alternative to
a flat turndown.

Gen. Irwin: Then you feed them what you think they could use?

Adm. Inglis: Hilly would work with
them much as you are working with the University of Maryland.

Gen. Irwin: They do research jobs for us. That is fair enough.

Director: I prefer it much better that way. We have very good relations
with a number of the big oil companies, only in the past it has worked
that we wouldn't communicate what we get from one company to another.
This may be one place where the slip came and you would be licked on it.
We will go ahead then on that basis and suggest we hire this guy to do
the research.

Mr. Childs: He would want to keep
that for his own company.

Director: He would keep a copy of it. We can go ahead on that. There is
another proposal and this is one that touches us all very much. Admiral
Inglis suggested it and it
has been taken up indirectly with Admiral Souers who thinks it would be
a fine idea and approved it. That is, getting a request from us to the
Security Council to get out a directive that there will be no more
publicity and no more talking about intelligence. The Navy sent this
paper4 today, and we will go
through it.

“The current publicity concerning intelligence is of such a character and
volume as to defeat the efforts of all responsible agencies. Articles
are appearing in publications which deal entirely with intelligence as a
subject.”

A lot of them have come out—radio shows—they come out and talk about it
whether it is right or wrong. It doesn't help the country.

“Publicity concerning intelligence is definitely undesirable for many
reasons, some of which are as follows:

“Basically, the success of any intelligence system depends upon effective
security.

“Sources, methods, and degrees of success are highly classified and
publicity of any kind pertaining thereto defeats the purposes of
intelligence.

“Publicity serves to alert our potential enemies to intelligence
activities and increases the difficulty of collecting information by
focusing attention thereto. Favorable publicity is especially
detrimental.”

I think that is true.

“Failures and indiscretions in the matter of protecting intelligence can,
all too easily, be paid for with American lives.

“Although certain intelligence publicity is fictional, the connection
between the fact and fiction remains and can be analyzed by trained
foreign intelligence agents. Intelligence experience on the part of
certain writers nullifies to a major degree attempts to fictionalize, as
the background of any individual unconsciously colors his statements and
actions. The general public will often accept fictionalized material as
being reliable and are thereby misled.

“Virtually all persons who are engaged in intelligence work have a fund
of information which if organized into a narrative is saleable. This
applies to unclassified as well as classified information. Those who
have engaged in intelligence publicity have set a bad example for
others. Consequently the volume of publicity will grow.”

The directive that is proposed to be sent in to the National Security
Council, title, “Control of Publicity Concerning Intelligence.”

“1. Any publicity concerning intelligence factual or fictional is
potentially detrimental to the effectiveness of an intelligence activity
and to the national security. Accordingly, the following policy of the
National Security Council is announced.

“(a) Departments and agencies of the United States Government shall not
permit the disclosure for publication of any information concerning
intelligence or intelligence activities.

“(b) Departments and agencies of the United States Government shall use
every effort to inform the management of all privately owned media of
publicity of the danger to the National Security of any publicity
concerning intelligence and shall attempt to dissuade them from
permitting such publicity through their respective media.”

None of us have had time to look that over. I would like to turn that
over to the Committee and have them draw it up. I would like to have one
thing. The heads of the departments or agencies will not permit
disclosure for publication of any information, except by individuals
indicated by the head of the department or agency. There may be a time
when you would want to do it and that will be more acceptable if the
Secretary of the Navy says I will indicate Admiral Inglis to give out information. That
wouldn't do any harm. If it is agreeable we will turn this over to our
working boys and let them
draw something up. Maybe we can get it through, and maybe not. I don't
see any harm, do you?

Dr. Colby: I agree completely that we move in that direction.

Director: That is from the civilian standpoint.

Mr. Armstrong: Do we still have
in force that directive of the testifying before Congressional
Committees?

Director: Yes, each department head can give his orders like that. The
Attorney General rules on that. Each department head can forbid it; we
took that up and the Attorney General said that worked for each
department head, he didn't have to testify.

Adm. Inglis: It wasn't necessary
to have a Security Council directive, but haven't got a department.

Director: The Congress can call on that department head and he doesn't
have to testify, but as far as CIA's head is concerned, he would have to
stand and go to jail. Dr. Colby will be the same way.

* Source: Central Intelligence
Agency Historical Files, HS/HC-657. Secret. The meeting was held in
the Federal Works Building.

1 Not found.

2 Not found, but apparently a draft of NSCID No. 10, Document 429.

4 Not found, but from the ensuing
discussion it appears that this may have been an early version of
NSCID No. 12, Document 431.

356. Verbatim Minutes of Meeting of the Intelligence Advisory Committee356. Verbatim Minutes of Meeting of the Intelligence Advisory
CommitteeSource

Washington, December 17, 1948, 2:30 p.m.

PARTICIPANTS

Rear Admiral R.H. Hillenkoetter, Director of Central Intelligence,
in the chair

Members Present

Mr. W. Park Armstrong,
Special Assistant to the Secretary of State for Research and
Intelligence

Major General Stafford L. Irwin, Director, General Staff, United
States Army

Rear Admiral Thomas B.
Inglis, Chief of Naval Intelligence

Major General Charles P.
Cabell, Director of Intelligence, Office of Deputy
Chief of Staff, Operations, United States Air Force

Dr. Walter F. Colby, Director of Intelligence, Atomic Energy
Commission

Colonel Wendell G. Johnson, acting for Deputy Director, Joint
Intelligence Group, JCS

Also Present

Mr. Prescott Childs, Central
Intelligence Agency

Colonel Merritt B. Booth, USA(R), Department of State

Lieut. Col. Edgar J. Treacy, Department of the Army

Captain John M. Ocker, USN, Department of the Navy

Major W.C. Baird, Department of Air

Mr. William C. Trueheart, Atomic Energy Commission

Mr. Shane MacCarthy, Central Intelligence Agency

Colonel Charles C. Blakeney, Central Intelligence Agency

Mr. Fisher Howe, Department of State

Lieut. Col. James H. Skinner, Department of the Army

Lieut. Col. C.J. Stattler, Department of Air

Director: We do not have any formal things to take up. ICAPS is moving Monday up to the
Administration Building and I am moving the following Monday. The
telephone numbers will be the same. What is the status of the Scientific
Attach é paper?1

Mr. Childs: It is going to the
Security Council saying it has been reconsidered by the IAC and their staffs and the Research and
Development Board and the Office of the Secretary of Defense. The other
one has been withdrawn and the new proposal is enclosed.

Adm. Inglis: Does the R&D Board and Secretary Forrestal's Offices accept the
changes?

Mr. Childs: As far as we know. They
do not rate a formal voting slip from this group.

Col. Johnson: I saw Mr. Beckler
yesterday and I asked him about it and he said they were going to. There
were minor changes.

Director: Dr. Hafstad told me the same thing for the Research and
Development Board. That should take care of Mr. Forrestal's objections. Do we have
anything else to bring up? Do you have anything, Park?

Mr. Armstrong: I haven't anything
very pressing. You might allude to the incorrect impression, I might
call it, that the Department of Justice may have created about the
Department of State's position on the question of defectors in this
country, when they sent around a memo2 to the Service Agencies saying the Department of State
had seen and concurred in the proposal they presented. We have
circulated to each of the agencies a copy of our correspondence to
Justice on the subject and I hope that serves to correct the
misunderstanding because we had never concurred in the proposal. That
leaves me to wonder whether this Committee might discuss the question of
refugees and defectors of all kinds as intelligence targets. I know this
is a matter that the Army is concerned with and General Bolling has
given his attention to it. I know it is in the hands of a working group
under Kirkpatrick of your Office with representatives from each of the
offices, including Justice Department. We have been speculating, or
wondering, in our shop, as to whether that isn't a problem that has the
natural factors that would perhaps make it worthwhile to consider reviving the SANACC 395 Committee,3 since it
has already dealt with some phases of that particular series of
questions. We don't have any question at all as to the working committee
that is at present engaged on it, but wonder whether they are bringing
into play all of the experience and considerations that developed during
the SANACC 395 sessions; whether the
membership of the present committee, at the working level, should not
include for its purposes some of the members of the SANACC Committee which I don't believe
at present is the case. I have raised this question to see if anyone
here wants to discuss it. If the feeling is that it should go on under
the present group, that is entirely agreeable to us, but we feel that
the problem is an urgent one requiring an early solution and that it is
a very broad one and would like to see the greatest possible talent put
to work on it.

Gen. Irwin: Is that the Committee General Bolling is on?

Mr. Armstrong: I think it is Mr.
Todd of your organization.

Col. Treacy: That is right, and Lieut. Col. Edwin L. Clark is on the
other.

Gen. Irwin: Is that about the questioning? That is an important one.

Mr. Armstrong: It is very
important. It is not only a domestic problem of getting proper
intelligence handling for foreign intelligence out of the defectors in
this country, but it has been broadened to include the related problem
of defectors abroad and refugees.

Director: I saw Kirkpatrick and the two FBI people and they claim they are practically finished
with a solution everybody is agreed to, including the FBI. I think you had better wait to see
that and if we don't like that, refer it to the SANACC 395 Committee.

Mr. Armstrong: It is perfectly
agreeable with me and it is not a reflection of the working committee,
but to raise the question whether all past experience has been brought
to bear on it.

Director: This tentative thing looks like it ought to be all right.

Mr. Armstrong: On the domestic
only or also considering the foreign?

Director: The foreign too.

Adm. Inglis: Who is my man on
that?

Director: You have one, but I don't know who.

Adm. Inglis: Was the 395 series
that on broad civil defense?

Mr. Armstrong: The refugees,
displaced persons, and bringing in the Voice of America.

Director: This committee is so close to an answer we will see what they
have before we drag in someone entirely new on it.

Mr. Armstrong: It is entirely
agreeable to me.

Director: They ought to get the answer within a week or two unless
Christmas interferes and we will get it after Christmas. Tommy, do you
have anything?

Adm. Inglis: I don't know whether
anyone wants to discuss the intelligence about China or not, but it is
of interest to us. We have seen General Barr's (Chief JUSMAG) estimate
of the situation in China and we are inclined to agree with that, but I
would be reassured if I felt that the other members of the Committee had
the same appraisal of his estimate. Have you seen that?

Mr. Armstrong: I don't recognize
it by that name.

Adm. Inglis: The gist of it is
they think that the situation north of the Yangtze is hopeless and is
just a matter of days or weeks before the whole thing folds up. What
happens after that, of course, is a matter of terrible concern and
conjecture. Do you feel that this Li that is Vice President is going to
be successful in forming some kind of a coalition cabinet and if so just
how much Communist influence will be exerted in that? My people say they
have checked on the working level with Army, State and the rest and they
say that they believe he will be successful and in the beginning the
Communists will be in the minor position, but as time goes on will it
grow as it did in Czechoslovakia.

Gen. Irwin: I am not particularly briefed on the problem, but from what
you said I don't think you would find a disagreement.

Gen. Cabell: I don't think you
will find a disagreement among us, except I personally am confident that
Li will do that.

Adm. Inglis: We question that very
closely. Do you think the Communists would be satisfied with what
followed down from the Chiang regime? It might be the Communists would
feel it to their advantage to set up a coalition Government because it
would give them a certain prestige in international trade with the
USA.

Director: I think our people got the same answer. They said the
Communists would come into the government because they would be a
recognized government in the United Nations and, as a purely personal
thing, that the United States and the West could supply them with
articles of trade that they couldn't possibly get from Russia. They
would want that for a while.

Adm. Inglis: The United States
would be hard pressed for an excuse not to recognize it.

Gen. Irwin: You think the reason is they would not dominate with
ease?

Director: I think they could. The opinion our people got from Barr's
report is that they are not going to force the issue now. Maybe in six
months.

Mr. Armstrong: We can gain much
more by moving slowly.

Adm. Inglis: Do you have any ideas
on that?

Gen. Irwin: No. I think we could accept the Communists taking all to the
North of the Yangtze, but I doubt whether they go South for some
time.

Adm. Inglis: For some time?

Mr. Armstrong: Although they have
the capability?

Gen. Irwin: Yes.

Adm. Inglis: One thing that
puzzles us is the superiority and the strategic direction of the Chinese
Communists and their ability to support themselves logistically and in
communications. It just doesn't seem Chinese.

Gen. Irwin: I don't think it is.

Adm. Inglis: We wonder where the
beans and bullets are coming from.

Director: I think a lot of that strategic direction is—the fact that they
look so good—because they do not have any good fast opposition against
them. But it does not explain the beans and bullets; probably the
captured U.S. things that were turned over to the Nationalists. Perhaps
you can justify the strategic direction by some Russian influence, but
even so they would have to work through a lot of Chinese then. The thing
certainly has me stopped.

Gen. Irwin: They must have good communications. There was a report that I
saw today that said they were running rather low on supplies and that
their morale was low.

Adm. Inglis: My people didn't
believe that particular report because it was in conflict with other
reports.

Gen. Irwin: The Nationalists don't have the will to fight.

Adm. Inglis: And another thing,
turning our attention to the condition in Formosa. Does anyone know a
strong man in Formosa who we would do well to back instead of carpet
baggers from China or Chiang Kai-shek.

Gen. Irwin: Didn't we have a report that the Formosans were very bitter
against any movement of the Chinese? Someone must have fronted for
them.

Adm. Inglis: Park, do you know of
any Formosan who is capable of leadership?

Mr. Armstrong: No, the Formosans
are quite leaderless.

Director: There was a name on this Formosan People's Political Committee.
That report said they didn't want the Chinese there and intimated they might like the United
States to come in and take over those people. They seem to have the
thing in hand. But I don't remember the name.

Adm. Inglis: You think you have
some information?

Director: Yes. One thing I do remember is that this outfit, the
Communists, did start some kind of violence and they put it down with a
very heavy hand. It did not go to the grand jury, they just cut off
their heads. It is the same outfit that wanted a free and independent
Formosa under the United States. I know we have something on that.

Gen. Cabell: That would indicate
some kind of strong leadership—that quick and positive degree of
action.

Mr. Armstrong: Wasn't that the
Chinese Government?

Adm. Inglis: They assassinated the
first person that came over.

Mr. Armstrong: The second one was
run out.

Adm. Inglis: He wasn't quite as
brutal as the first one. He came over with a group of soldiers.

Gen. Irwin: There was some discussion about shipments to China, of
diverting one to Formosa. That would head it up and put the stuff in the
hands of the Chinese. Maybe we decided to do it for the benefit of the
Chinese.

Adm. Inglis: That has been
suspended for the time being.

Gen. Irwin: It was discussed.

Mr. Armstrong: Has the Chinese
Navy moved over there yet?

Adm. Inglis: Some have moved over
from Tsingtao and the naval training school is to go to Amoy. We had a
report that the move was now in progress, but there was no indication of
how long it would take.

Gen. Irwin: I wonder whether Chiang has surrendered yet?

Director: He hadn't yesterday afternoon and when we got our message from
there this morning.

Adm. Inglis: I had one other thing
that has no connection with China. I guess the newspapers last night and
this morning have been full of the Eberstadt subcommittee's report. And another thing he
mentioned was the lack of medical intelligence. We had a paper which was
prepared currently by an ad hoc committee of the three Surgeons General
of the Army, Navy, and Air Force that they had some idea of setting up a
medical intelligence agency in the Armed Services separate from the
present departmental agencies. We didn't think much of that idea. I
think it was stopped, but I was wondering if CIA was going to interest
itself in medical intelligence.

Director: It has been under way since about the 10th. The new head of our
Scientific Branch, Dr. Machle, has talked about that to some of the
people in the Medical Corps in the Army and Navy. I don't know whether it was Swanson or not.
We got him through Dr. Compton and he talked to him about it—medical
intelligence, BW intelligence and I think he will get around to that as
soon as he gets settled down. Public Health is in on this too.

Adm. Inglis: I hope you will
include the agencies which are represented by the members of the body
here in the spade work. We didn't know anything about this until we got
this big thing. It was about cooked and ready to go.

Director: He would do that because he knows Henderson and some of those
people that were working on it.

Gen. Cabell: I understand these
medical people prepared it. My people are not very much in favor of it.
The idea was suggested by somebody and it just grew to some length. We
could see no sense to it.

Adm. Inglis: A great deal of
unnecessary work could have been saved if they had just had a ten minute
talk between the three of us respectively and those who produced this
tremendous tome.

Gen. Irwin: You are currently getting medical intelligence from your
medical people?

Adm. Inglis: Yes. Apparently they
are unhappy about the quantity and the quality. I don't know that they
are unhappy, but I inferred they were unhappy or they wouldn't have
taken 400 pages to recommend something else.

Mr. Armstrong: The Foreign
Service is a regular contributor to medical intelligence and is supposed
to make an annual report on health and sanitation on its territories.
Every foreign post has to send in quarterly reports on health,
sanitation, diseases, and living conditions.

Gen. Irwin: We have medical and technical attaches. Speaking about the
Eberstadt Committee statement,
I don't know what backs that statement. I have heard no growls about our
medical intelligence.

Adm. Inglis: I hadn't either until
this paper confronted me. I have had some growls from the medicos on the
Doctor over in Moscow. That is purely a personal affair.

Gen. Cabell: My medicos didn't
feel sufficiently strong on it when we non-concurred in it to come
around and talk about it.

Adm. Inglis: That is all I
had.

Director: Doctor Colby?

Dr. Colby: No.

Director: General Cabell?

Gen. Cabell: No.

Director: Colonel Johnson?

Col. Johnson: No.

Director: General Irwin?

Gen. Irwin: We are getting out a good deal of political stuff in our
Weekly magazine. Things we think CIA or State Department ought to put
out. A weekly for general theaters and things like that. Do you put any
out?

Director: No.

Mr. Armstrong: We don't
either.

Gen. Irwin: It seems to me we are a little out of our field. If we could
get the material—I don't know how you would feel if that field were
taken over by either State or CIA and we could confine ourselves to
military intelligence. I know we are getting out a very expensive weekly
digest which is not cultural reading and not enough intelligence in my
opinion.

Mr. Armstrong: Is it
classified?

Gen. Irwin: Yes, secret.

Director: Ours is secret.

Gen. Cabell: I wonder if we don't
have to put out such a publication. We put out one monthly which started
within the last four months. We don't produce the basic material, we go
to the CIA publications and take some from yours (to DCI) and some from yours (to D/I, Army) but
we try to tailor it to fit the recipient.

Gen. Irwin: I thought the Admiral would pay for it and we would buy him
off.

Director: How many copies have you got?

Gen. Irwin: I will have to look that up.

Adm. Inglis: It seems to me that
is a job for ICAPS. I have often
wondered why ICAPS didn't interest
itself in more things of that kind.

Mr. Armstrong: I think it is a
very important question.

Director: You let me know how many copies and we will see.

Col. Blakeney: Between 600 and 700 a week are put out.

Gen. Irwin: At about $1.50 a piece.

Director: It is on slick paper.

Gen. Cabell: Might we not do
this—standardize a monthly publication and look to CIA to prepare
section (a) of our respective publications so that in other words it
would be a custom-built job for them for this purpose then we put in our
section (b), or whatever section we had, for that publication?

Adm. Inglis: There are two things
you have to worry about. One is the departmental intelligence, the other
is the classification. We have a sufficient variety of publications to
meet both of those requirements. It is rather complicated.

Gen. Cabell: We couldn't turn
over the job for preparing it. We still have a message to get across to
our recipients.

Gen. Irwin: So have we.

Gen. Cabell: We could do it on a
monthly basis and it would save us work and we could lean upon you (CIA)
to prepare a certain section.

Adm. Inglis: Or perhaps have CIA
put out a basic publication and each department come out with its own
publication or call particular attention to that which is of general
interest to all the departments.

Mr. Armstrong: Would that mean
CIA would be putting out the political and economic, and sociological?
That is in the bailiwick of the Department of State.

Adm. Inglis: I again say this is a
job for ICAPS, we can't settle the
details.

Gen. Irwin: Then State would be the best person to put that out.

Adm. Inglis: If State wants to
give us the dope through CIA at $1.50 a piece for 700 copies.

Mr. Armstrong: I am interested in
getting at a method to solve this. It would cure one problem we have of
overlap between CIA and ourselves, and we haven't readily grappled with
the problem yet. I would like to suggest that the Director assign that
to ICAPS or any appropriate committee
for study.

Director: It is assigned to ICAPS.

Gen. Irwin: It has a particular interest to our attaches and would be of
interest if they got the State Department's material as the basis.

Adm. Inglis: I don't think our
people, that is, the commanding officers of ships, and our naval
attaches, the customers, are getting the information they would like to
have and should have under the subjects that are State Department
stuff.

Mr. Armstrong: We are not getting
out a journal of any kind that can be distributed beyond the
departmental borders.

Adm. Inglis: I think there is a
little gap there which we try to fill in a very amateurish way, but it
also seems to me that the material that CIA puts out should supply
several different needs. The Top Secret business as it is now, it is all
right, but the distribution is so limited that its usefulness is
impaired. The Top Secret goes to 20 people, maybe 30. Another set of
customers may include 200 people and maybe another set of customers
2,000 people. Adopt the classification for the size of the body. There
seems to be a lack in the publications which is useful to a wider
distribution.

Gen. Irwin: I would like something with this political section and then
the military section.

Director: ICAPS, you have a job. You
get that out every week?

Gen. Irwin: It is a weekly. It is a pretty expensive operation and for
that they should get more. It ought to be the best we can furnish.

Mr. Childs: The Navy has a weekly
too?

Adm. Inglis: We have a daily,
weekly, and monthly. They are several different classifications.

Mr. Childs: I mean a similar
publication to that.

Adm. Inglis: No, the only slick
paper publication we get out is monthly and classified confidential.

Director: Well, we can go into that and see what we can do.

Adm. Inglis: We also get out a
quarterly classified restricted for reserve officers on inactive duty.
That is a quarterly.

Director: You get one out monthly?

Gen. Cabell: Yes.

Col. Treacy: Ours is the only one for distribution outside of the
Division.

Gen. Cabell: It is pretty
ambitious to have that weekly, isn't it?

Gen. Irwin: By the time it is distributed and all it is a little on the
cold side. Therefore, I would like to put more basic material in and the
military items in it that are of interest to field people.

Mr. Childs: You would rather stick
to the weekly?

Gen. Irwin: I would rather go into it more.

Director: A weekly comes around very quickly.

Adm. Inglis: We get out one, a
dispatch, and I think you do too; and we get out a weekly mimeograph
sheet of about eight pages.

Director: When you try to fill it up for the weekly you have to start
padding.

Gen. Irwin: It could be cut back to monthly and have it mimeographed. It
would be cheaper with the cooperation of State and so it could be more
or less uniform on the State Department material.

Adm. Inglis: That sounds as though
it is just what we are looking for.

Director: I think it should work out because in some of these you can see
the boys have to fill out on some of it. You can't help it when you do a
weekly.

Gen. Irwin: I was a customer of this before I came here.

Director: We will go into that and see if we can't do something about
it.

Mr. Childs: There are several State
publications.

Mr. Armstrong: We put out a
weekly summary that is SECRET level, but is distributed only in the
Department and to Ambassadors. Now, it is entirely possible that a lot
of that material can be written more as an operational summary. It is
entirely possible that a lot of that material can be readily adopted to
be used by the Services. I am very anxious and glad to look into
this.

Director: I think it would be a good idea to do it. Any other
subjects?

Mr. Childs: The attaches see that
which goes out to the field.

Mr. Armstrong: They probably
do.

Mr. Childs: That which goes to the
embassies.

Col. Johnson: They do some
places.

Director: They do most places.

Mr. Armstrong: It depends on the
Ambassador.

Gen. Irwin: They really should see them, shouldn't they? It would be a
means of getting the information into their hands.

Director: Anybody have anything else? I wish you all a Merry Christmas
and a Happy New Year, and we will see you after the first of the
year.

* Source: Central Intelligence
Agency Historical Files, HS/HC-657. Secret. The meeting was held in
the Federal Works Building.

1 See footnotes 1 and 2, Document 355.

2 Not
found.

3 SANACC 395 was a designation for
papers on Soviet refugees prepared by a working group of the
State-Army-Navy-Air Force Coordinating Committee.

357. Letter From the Executive Secretary of the Intelligence Survey Group (Blum) to Mathias F. Correa357. Letter From the Executive Secretary of the Intelligence Survey
Group (Blum) to
Mathias F. CorreaSource

Washington, December 18,
1948.

DEAR MAT: This is merely to tell you that twenty copies of the Survey
Group Report were delivered to Mr. Souers this afternoon.1 I spoke with him yesterday to ask him whether he
had decided how to handle the report. He said that he had not yet done
so, as he wanted first to see what the report looked like.

I have not yet shown the report to the Secretary,2 but will do so shortly. I am sure
that the question which still preoccupies him is that of “the man.”3 In this connection, Souers said yesterday that
in his conversations with the President, he (Souers) was taking the
position that no move should be made for a change until a suitable
successor had been found.

The report seems to be in good shape and I will keep my ears close to the
ground awaiting reactions.

Sincerely yours,

Bob

* Source: Central Intelligence Agency
Records, Job 86-B00269R, Box 5. No classification marking. The
source text is dated December 18, 1949, but from the context this is
clearly a typographical error.

1 Presumably these were advance copies. The report as
finally issued is dated January 1, 1949, on the cover sheet and
included a formal letter of transmittal to the NSC dated January 15,
1949. See the source note, Document
358.

2 Secretary of Defense Forrestal.

3 Director of Central Intelligence, Admiral
Hillenkoetter.

358. Report From the Intelligence Survey Group to the National Security Council358. Report From the Intelligence Survey
Group to the National Security
CouncilSource

Washington, January 1,
1949.

THE CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE ORGANIZATION AND NATIONAL
ORGANIZATION FOR INTELLIGENCE

Summary

The primary object of this survey has been the Central Intelligence
Agency, its organization and activities, and the relationship of these
activities to the intelligence work of other Government agencies.
Examination has been made of these other intelligence agencies only to
the extent that their activities bear upon the carrying out by the
Central Intelligence Agency of its assigned functions.

Section 102(d) of the National Security Act of 1947 creates the Central
Intelligence Agency as an independent agency under the direction of the
National Security Council. It gives to the Council broad powers in the
assignment of functions to the Central Intelligence Agency and creates a
framework upon which a sound intelligence system can be built. The
Central Intelligence Agency has been properly placed under the National
Security Council for the effective carrying out of its assigned
function. It should, however, be empowered and encouraged to establish,
through its Director, closer liaison with the two members of the
National Security Council on whom it chiefly depends and who should be
the main recipients of its product—the Secretary of State and the
Secretary of Defense.

The National Security Act, as implemented by directives of the National
Security Council, imposes upon the Central Intelligence Agency
responsibility for carrying out three essential functions:

(1) The coordination of intelligence activities;

(2) The correlation and evaluation of intelligence relating to the
national security, which has been interpreted by directive as meaning
the production of national intelligence;

(3) The performance centrally of certain intelligence services of common
concern. These include services of a static nature, such as research in
fields of common usefulness, and operational services such as the
collection through the central agency of secret intelligence.

These three functions constitute the basis of an integrated system of
intelligence and they have been used as the frame of reference for the
examination of the Central Intelligence Agency and the related
activities of other intelligence agencies of the Government represented
on the National Security Council, particularly the Department of State
and the Departments in the National Military Establishment.

No amendment to the provision of the Act relating to intelligence is
required at this time. What is needed is action to give effect to its
true intent.

The Responsibility of the Central Intelligence
Agency for Coordinating Intelligence Activities

Under the statute, the Central Intelligence Agency has broad
responsibility to coordinate intelligence activities relating to the
national security. In the discharge of this responsibility, the Central
Intelligence Agency should review the intelligence field and ascertain
where there are gaps or overlaps. The agency best equipped to do a
particular job should fill any gaps. Where two or more agencies are
doing similar work, the one best equipped ought to carry on the job and
the others drop out or their efforts be coordinated.

This vitally important responsibility for coordination is to be exercised
by recommending directives for approval by the National Security
Council. The Central Intelligence Agency has the duty of planning for
coordination and, in consultation with the other intelligence agencies,
of taking the initiative in seeking directives to effect it. Today this
coordinating function of the Central Intelligence Agency is not being
adequately exercised.

To assist it in carrying out this task the Central Intelligence Agency
has available the Intelligence Advisory Committee. This group includes
the Director of Central Intelligence as chairman, the heads of the
intelligence staffs of the Departments of State, Army, Navy and Air
Force, the Atomic Energy Commission and the Joint Intelligence Group of
the Joint Staff.

A number of formal directives for the coordination of intelligence
activities have been issued by the National Security Council upon the
recommendation of the Central Intelligence Agency and the Intelligence
Advisory Committee. These directives, except those specifically
assigning to the Central Intelligence Agency the carrying out of certain
common services described below, have not gone far enough in defining
the scope and limits of departmental intelligence activities. These
activities continue to present many of the same jurisdictional conflicts
and duplication which the National Security Act was intended to
eliminate. Consequently, the absence of coordinated intelligence
planning, as between the Central Intelligence Agency, the Service
agencies and the State
Department, remains serious. What is needed is continuing and effective
coordinating action under existing directives and also directives
establishing more precisely the responsibility of the various
intelligence agencies.

The field of scientific and technological intelligence is an example of
lack of coordination. Responsibilities are scattered, collection efforts
are uncoordinated, atomic energy intelligence is divorced from
scientific intelligence generally, and there is no recognized procedure
for arriving at authoritative intelligence estimates in the scientific
field, with the possible exception of atomic energy matters.

Another important example of lack of coordination is in the field of
domestic intelligence and counter-intelligence relating to the national
security. Jurisdiction over counter-intelligence and counter-espionage
activities is assigned to the Federal Bureau of Investigation in the
United States and the Central Intelligence Agency abroad. However, fifth
column activities and espionage do not begin or end at our geographical
frontiers, and our intelligence to counter them cannot be sharply
divided on any such geographical basis. In order to meet the specific
problem presented by the need for coordination of activities in the
field of domestic intelligence and counter-intelligence relating to the
national security, it is recommended that the Director of the Federal
Bureau of Investigation be made a permanent member of the Intelligence
Advisory Committee.

The Intelligence Advisory Committee so far has had little impact on the
solution of the problem of coordination, except in formally approving
proposed directives. It should be re-activated and called upon to play
an important role.

To assist the Director of Central Intelligence in carrying out his duties
to plan for the coordination of intelligence, the staff in the Central
Intelligence Agency known as the Interdepartmental Coordinating and
Planning Staff should be reconstituted and strengthened. It should be
composed of personnel definitely assigned to, and responsible to, the
Director of Central Intelligence and charged, on a full-time basis, with
carrying on continuous planning for the coordination of specific
intelligence activities. This staff, which might be called the
“Coordination Division,” should support the Director in fulfilling one
of his most important and difficult duties under the National Security
Act.

In concluding the consideration of this most vital problem of
coordination of intelligence activities, it should be emphasized that
coordination can most effectively be achieved by mutual agreement among
the various agencies. With the right measure of leadership on the part
of the Central Intelligence Agency, a major degree of coordination can
be accomplished in that manner.

The Responsibility of the Central Intelligence
Agency for the Production of Intelligence Relating to the National
Security

A long-felt need for the coordination, on the highest level, of
intelligence opinion relating to broad aspects of national policy and
national security was probably the principal moving factor in bringing
about the creation of the Central Intelligence Agency. The lack of any
provision for the prompt production of coordinated national intelligence
of this kind was one of the most significant causes of the Pearl Harbor
intelligence failure.

This type of national intelligence, expressed in the form of coordinated
national estimates, transcends in scope and breadth the interest and
competence of any single intelligence agency. Hence, such estimates
should be fully participated in by all of the principal intelligence
agencies. All jointly should share in the responsibility for them.

With one or two significant exceptions, whose occurrence was largely
fortuitous, the Central Intelligence Agency has not as yet effectively
carried out this most important function.

The Office of Reports and Estimates in the Central Intelligence Agency
was given responsibility for production of national intelligence. It
has, however, been concerned with a wide variety of activities and with
the production of miscellaneous reports and summaries which by no
stretch of the imagination could be considered national estimates.

Where the Office of Reports and Estimates produces estimates, it usually
does so on the basis of its own research and analysis and offers its
product as competitive with the similar product of other agencies,
rather than as the coordinated result of the best intelligence product
which each of the interested agencies is able to contribute.

The failure of this type of intelligence product to meet the requirements
of a coordinated national estimate is not substantially mitigated by the
existing procedure whereby the Office of Reports and Estimates
circulates its estimates to the intelligence agencies of State, Army,
Navy and Air Force and obtains a formal notation of dissent or
concurrence. Under this procedure, none of the agencies regards itself
as a full participant contributing to a truly national estimate and
accepting a share in the responsibility for it.

It is believed that this situation can be remedied if the Central
Intelligence Agency recognizes the responsibility which it has under the
statute and assumes the leadership in organizing its own work and in
drawing upon that of the other intelligence agencies of Government for
the production of coordinated intelligence. Thus, within its own
organization, the Central Intelligence Agency should have, in lieu of
the present Office of Reports and Estimates, a small group of
specialists, which might appropriately be called “Estimates Division.”
It would be the task of this group to review the intelligence products
of other intelligence agencies
and of the Central Intelligence Agency, and to prepare drafts of
national intelligence estimates for consideration by the Intelligence
Advisory Committee.

The final process of coordination should take place in the Intelligence
Advisory Committee which would review and discuss the proposed
estimates. The finished estimate should be clearly established as the
product of all of the contributing agencies in which all share and for
which all take responsibility. It should be recognized as the most
authoritative estimate available to the policy-makers.

Where particular scientific or technical intelligence matters are
involved, the Intelligence Advisory Committee should secure the views of
the best qualified technical experts available to them, including
experts from the Research and Development Board and the Atomic Energy
Commission.

There should also be provision for the prompt handling of major emergency
situations so that, as a matter of course, when quick estimates are
required, there is immediate consultation and collective appraisal by
the Intelligence Advisory Committee on the basis of all available
information.

The inclusion of the Federal Bureau of Investigation as a permanent
member should assure that intelligence estimates will be made in the
light of domestic as well as foreign intelligence. Provision should be
made for the representation on the Intelligence Advisory Committee of
other agencies of the Government when matters within their competence
are under discussion.

Performance Centrally of Services of Common
Concern

Under the National Security Act, the Central Intelligence Agency should
perform, for the benefit of the existing intelligence agencies, such
services of common concern as may be assigned to it by the National
Security Council.

These services, as now being performed by the Central Intelligence
Agency, can be broken down into (1) static services, consisting of
intelligence research and production on certain assigned subjects which
do not fall exclusively within the function of any one existing
intelligence agency, and (2) operating services, consisting of certain
types of intelligence collection and related secret operations.

Static Services of Common Concern

At the present time the static services of intelligence research and
reporting are carried out in the Office of Reports and Estimates. If the
duties of this Office in relation to the production of national
intelligence are assigned to a newly constituted Estimates Division, the
miscellaneous reporting functions presently carried out by the Office of
Reports and Estimates and a
part at least of the personnel engaged in them could be reconstituted as
the nucleus of a separate division of the Central Intelligence Agency to
be known as the “Research and Reports Division.” This Division would
also include the Foreign Documents Branch of the Office of Operations
and the various reference and library functions now carried on in the
Office of Collection and Dissemination.

The economic, scientific and technological fields are ones in which all
of our intelligence agencies have varying degrees of interest. At the
present time there is serious duplication in these fields of common
concern. Central production and coordination by the proposed Research
and Reports Division would result in great economy of effort and
improvement of the product. For example, the organization within this
division of a scientific branch, staffed by highly qualified personnel
and empowered to draw upon the scientific personnel of such
organizations of Government as the Research and Development Board and
the Atomic Energy Commission for the purpose of dealing with specialized
scientific problems, is a project which should have the highest
priority.

This division of the Central Intelligence Agency should be staffed in
part by representatives of the departmental intelligence services so
that the reports produced would represent authoritative and coordinated
opinion and can be accepted as such by the various consumer
agencies.

The Director's planning staff for coordination of activities, the
proposed Coordination Division, should review the question as to what
subjects might appropriately be assigned to the new Research and Reports
Division for central research and report and what services now centrally
performed in the Central Intelligence Agency might be eliminated. The
Intelligence Advisory Committee would be the agency to determine the
allocation of work, and in case of any failure to agree the matter would
be referred to the National Security Council.

Operating Services of Common Concern

The operating services of common concern presently performed by the
Central Intelligence Agency consist of the collection, through the
Office of Operations, of certain types of intelligence in the United
States—i.e., intelligence from private individuals, firms, educational
and scientific institutions, etc.; the collection of secret intelligence
abroad through the Office of Special Operations; and the conduct of
secret operations abroad through the Office of Policy Coordination.

All of these services are appropriately allocated to the Central
Intelligence Agency. These operating functions are so inter-related and
inter-dependent that they should have common direction at some point
below the Director of Central Intelligence.

The general administrative problems of these operating offices are unique
because of their secrecy and the consequent security requirements. They differ importantly from
that part of the work of the Central Intelligence Agency which is
concerned with the coordination of activities and the production of
intelligence. Accordingly, these three operating offices should have
common administrative services, separate from those of the balance of
the Central Intelligence Agency.

The three activities, with the possible addition of the Foreign Broadcast
Information Branch, should be responsible to one official charged with
their direction. The new “Operations Division” would be self-sufficient
as to administration and semi-autonomous. This would, to a large extent,
meet the criticism frequently voiced, and with a good deal of merit,
that it is essentially unsound to combine in a single intelligence
agency both secret operations and over-all coordinating and estimating
functions.

In its secret intelligence work, the Office of Special Operations
requires a closer liaison with the other intelligence agencies,
especially those of the military services and of the State Department
which are its chief consumers and which should be able to guide its
collection efforts more effectively than they do at present. The
counter-intelligence function of the Office of Special Operations
requires more emphasis and there is need for better coordination of all
its activities with the military, particularly in the occupied
areas.

The Organization and Direction of the Central
Intelligence Agency

The principal defect of the Central Intelligence Agency is that its
direction, administrative organization and performance do not show
sufficient appreciation of the Agency's assigned functions, particularly
in the fields of intelligence coordination and the production of
intelligence estimates. The result has been that the Central
Intelligence Agency has tended to become just one more intelligence
agency producing intelligence in competition with older established
agencies of the Government departments. Since it is the task of the
Director to see that the Agency carries out its assigned functions, the
failure to do so is necessarily a reflection of inadequacies of
direction.

There is one over-all point to be made with respect to the administration
of the Central Intelligence Agency. The organization is
over-administered in the sense that administrative considerations have
been allowed to guide and, on occasion, even control intelligence policy
to the detriment of the latter. Under the arrangements proposed in this
report, the heads of the newly constituted Coordination, Estimates,
Research and Reports, and Operations Divisions would be included in the
immediate staff of the Director. In this way the Director, who at
present relies chiefly on his administrative staff, would be brought
into intimate contact with the
day-to-day operations of his agency and be able to give policy guidance
to them.

In commenting on administration, the question of security should also be
stressed. The Director is charged under the law with protecting
intelligence sources and methods from unauthorized disclosure. One of
the best methods of achieving this is to correct the present situation
where the Agency is viewed and generally publicized as the collector of
secret intelligence and to bury its secret functions within a Central
Intelligence Agency whose chief recognized activities are the
coordination of intelligence and the production of intelligence
estimates.

In reviewing the work of the directorate, consideration has been given to
the question whether or not the Director should be a civilian. The work
of the Agency, from its very nature, requires continuity in that office
which is not likely to be achieved if a military man holds the post on a
“tour of duty” basis. For this reason, as well as because freedom from
Service ties is desirable, the Director should be a civilian. This
recommendation does not exclude the possibility that the post might be
held by a military man who has severed his connection with the Service
by retirement.

The Service Intelligence Agencies and the
Intelligence Functions of the State Department

The Service intelligence agencies and the intelligence organization of
the State Department have been reviewed from the point of view of the
over-all coordination of intelligence and of the contribution which
these agencies should make to the assembly and production of national
intelligence.

As regards the Service intelligence agencies, the active exercise by the
Central Intelligence Agency of its coordinating functions should result
in a more efficient allocation of effort than is presently the case. The
Service agencies should concern themselves principally with military
intelligence questions, leaving the Central Intelligence Agency to
perform agreed central services of common interest. In addition,
continuing responsibility of the Central Intelligence Agency for
coordination should be exercised with respect to certain Service
activities, for example, espionage and counter-espionage in occupied
areas. The Joint Intelligence Committee would continue to operate with
its membership unchanged and would concern itself exclusively with
military and strategic questions as directed by the Joint Chiefs of
Staff. The Services would participate in the formulation of national
intelligence estimates through their membership in the Intelligence
Advisory Committee and would share in the collective responsibility for
these estimates.

In the case of the Research and Intelligence staff of the State
Department, the conclusion has been reached that this staff, as at
present constituted, is not
sufficiently close to operation and policy matters in the Department to
furnish the necessary liaison or the political intelligence estimates
required by the Central Intelligence Agency for the preparation of
national estimates. Accordingly, it is desirable that a high official of
the State Department be designated as its Intelligence Officer to
coordinate these activities, to act as the Department's representative
on the Intelligence Advisory Committee and, in general, to act as
liaison with the Central Intelligence Agency with respect to the
intelligence and related activities of the two agencies and to develop
close working relations between them.

Conclusion

While organization charts can never replace individual initiative and
ability, the Central Intelligence Agency, reorganized along the
functional lines indicated in this report, should be able more
effectively to carry out the duties assigned it by law and thus bring
our over-all intelligence system closer to that point of efficiency
which the national security demands.

The foregoing summary is only a brief outline of the main points of the
report and does not take the place of the detailed discussion in the
report and the various conclusions and recommendations at the close of
the respective chapters.

[Here follows the remainder of the report.]

* Source: National Archives and Records
Administration, RG 59, Records of the Department of State, Records
of the Executive Secretariat, NSC
Files: Lot 66 D 148, Box 1555. Top Secret. The report includes a
January 15 letter transmittal to the Executive Secretary of the
NSC from the members of the
Survey Group, Allen W.
Dulles, Mathias F.
Correa, and William H.
Jackson; see the Supplement for the full text of the
report.

359. Letter From Robert Blum of the Office of the Secretary of Defense to Allen W. Dulles359. Letter From Robert
Blum of the Office of the Secretary of Defense to
Allen W. DullesSource

Washington, January 19,
1949.

DEAR ALLEN: Twenty copies of the
report were given to Mr. Souers yesterday, along with the signed letter
of transmittal.

As of this morning, it was Souers' intention to send one copy to each
Member of the NSC and one copy to
Hillenkoetter with a request for his comments. Because of the nature of
the report, it is pretty difficult for the NSC to take any simple action on it and the intelligent
handling of the report may
prove to be rather difficult unless the single question of personalities
is faced immediately.

Souers told me yesterday that in his conversations with the President, he
(Souers) took the view that nothing should be done to bring about a
change of Director until a qualified successor had been found. At a
meeting this morning, Hillenkoetter suggested that the Eberstadt Committee material on
intelligence should be circulated at the same time as the Survey Group
Report. He mentioned in particular that whereas the Eberstadt Committee recommended
simplification of administration in the interest of efficiency, he
understood from his conversation with you that the Survey Group would
recommend decentralization (Hillenkoetter had not yet seen a copy of the
report). However, this suggestion was not accepted by Souers, who said
that Hillenkoetter, in his comments on the Survey Group Report—the only
report officially before the NSC—could,
if he wished, refer to the Eberstadt Committee Report.

Forrestal has not yet seen the
report, but I hope to have him read it over the weekend.

I will keep you informed of any further developments.

Sincerely yours,

Bob

* Source: Central Intelligence Agency
Records, Job 80-M01009A, Box 1, Folder 12. No classification
marking.

360. Memorandum From Allen W. Dulles to Mathias F. Correa and William H. Jackson360. Memorandum From Allen W.
Dulles to Mathias
F. Correa and William H. JacksonSource

New York, January 21,
1949.

Attached is a copy of a letter1 from Bob Blum which
is self-explanatory.

I have examined a copy of the Eberstadt report on intelligence and do not feel that
Hillenkoetter's reference to a divergence of views on administration is
well founded. It is true that the chapter on intelligence in Volume II of the Eberstadt report (the chapter prepared
largely by John Bross) indicated over-administration and too much
administrative interference in certain operational matters. Here we
reached approximately the same conclusions.

The Eberstadt report states in
Section V(c):

“The present size of the Administrative Division seems excessive,
particularly in light of requirements for an administrative staff in
each of the offices in some of which security requires a large degree of
independence. On the other hand, an organization as large as CIA
requires a substantial amount of housekeeping, telephone service,
maintenance of personnel records, etc. The problem is complicated by the
fact that accommodations to house CIA centrally are not available and
could only be constructed at a substantial cost and with considerable
publicity. A certain amount of decentralization of CIA may be desirable
for security reasons. CIA is spread amongst twenty-two separate
buildings, including warehouses, all of which must be maintained and
serviced separately. Moreover, CIA maintains a large number of field
stations of one sort or another in various parts of the United States
and abroad which are supplied by the Administrative Division. Reduction
of the administrative overhead is possible and desirable. There is some
evidence of interference by administrative functionaries in matters of
primarily operational concern. A certain amount of such interference is
inevitable due to the fact that a Director will tend to entrust the
enforcement of budgetary controls to his immediate administrative
representatives. Too much interference of this sort is undesirable, but
this is an administrative problem that must be solved internally.”

AWD2

* Source: Central Intelligence Agency
Records, Job 80-M01009A, Box 1, Folder 12. No classification
marking.

1 Document 359.

2 Printed from a copy that bears
these typed initials.

361. Letter From Robert Blum of the Office of the Secretary of Defense to Allen W. Dulles361. Letter From Robert
Blum of the Office of the Secretary of Defense to
Allen W. DullesSource

Washington, February 7,
1949.

DEAR ALLEN: Since our telephone
conversation this morning, I have checked further regarding the
procedure being employed in handling the Survey Group Report.

There still seems to be some uncertainty on the subject which will not be
clarified at least until after the meeting of the IAC Standing Committee on Wednesday.

Mr. Souers included the following paragraph in his covering
memorandum1 when he
distributed the Report to the National Security Council and IAC members:

“The Director of Central Intelligence is being requested to submit, for
concurrent consideration by the Council, comments on the conclusions and
recommendations in the enclosed Report, together with the views, in
appropriate matters, of the members of the Intelligence Advisory
Committee.”

I am told that General Irwin has stated that he will not agree to having
the Director of Central Intelligence coordinate his comments except in
those cases where his comments can be reconciled with those of the other
agencies. As representative of the Army, he will submit independent
comments wherever he feels this is necessary.

I have talked with Park Armstrong
who feels very strongly on the subject. He accepts the principle of
joint, reconciled comments only insofar as they deal with the IAC. He will insist on submitting separate
comments (whether directly to Souers or through Acheson is not yet
clear) on the subject of CIA and internal State Department problems.
Armstrong's representative
at the Standing Committee meeting on Wednesday will have formal
instructions to state this policy and, in general, to try to clarify the
entire procedure.

In view of the above, I suggest that you take no further action at least
until after the Standing Committee meeting on Wednesday when the
situation should become somewhat clearer.

Sincerely yours,

Bob

* Source: Central Intelligence Agency
Records, Job 80-M01009A, Box 1, Folder 12. No classification
marking. Copies were sent to Jackson and Correa.

1  Souers' memoranda to the
NSC members and to
Hillenkoetter, January 24, are in National Archives and Records
Administration, RG 273, Records of the National Security Council,
NSC 50.

362. Letter From Allen W. Dulles to Robert Blum of the Office of the Secretary of Defense362. Letter From Allen W.
Dulles to Robert Blum of
the Office of the Secretary of DefenseSource

New York, February 8,
1949.

DEAR BOB: Many thanks for your letter of 7 February 1949.1 I agree that we
should take no further action with respect to the matter of handling the
report until we have further details. If the position of General Irwin,
Park Armstrong, etc. is
accepted, there would certainly be no reason for us to raise our voice
on the subject.

I enclose for your files signed receipt from Matt Correa for copy No. 21
and I enclose my own receipt for copy No. 22.

Also enclosed is a copy of a letter2 I just received from Justice Jackson with regard to Gisevius. It is
possible that he may call on you as I gave him your room and telephone
number in the Pentagon.

With best regards.

Sincerely,

A.W. Dulles3

* Source: Central Intelligence Agency Records, Job 80-M01009A, Box 1,
Folder 12. No classification marking.

1 Document 361.

2 Not
found.

3 Printed from a copy
that bears this typed signature.

363. Memorandum From the Chief of the Intelligence Coordinating and Planning Staff (Childs) to Director of Central Intelligence Hillenkoetter363. Memorandum From the Chief of the Intelligence Coordinating and
Planning Staff (Childs) to Director of Central Intelligence HillenkoetterSource

Washington, February 8,
1949.

SUBJECT

“Coordination of Intelligence”

1. With reference to the recurring statements throughout the Dulles Report that the IAC Agencies should more actively
participate in CIA's production
of intelligence estimates, we think that complaints by State are
justified that it is not being consulted in the production of
Intelligence Memoranda, when the subject is obviously within the field
of State's dominant interest. Furthermore, the Air Force received no
prior notification on two recent papers1 produced in ORE—“Reinforcing the Israeli Air Force,” and “Uncontrolled
International Air Traffic”. Obviously these were both within the field
of dominant interest of the Air Force.

2. NSCID No. 3 paragraph 1c (5) states
that CIA and the Agencies shall for purposes of coordination, exchange
information on projects and plans for the production of staff
intelligence, and paragraph 1e (4) states that the DCI shall request and receive such special
estimates, etc., etc. prepared by the individual departments in their
fields of dominant interest, etc., etc.

3. In October we discussed this with Messrs. Babbitt and Borel when State first brought up the
subject of not participating, and of not being consulted orally when the
subject of the IM was obviously within their field of dominant interest.
(See October memoranda.)2 Again State brought up this complaint at the end
of December, so we again, in a memo of January 72 referred this matter
to Mr. Babbitt. All State wants is
to be consulted orally or advised of the subject under consideration. We
think it would be no hardship, and not at all difficult for ORE to advise State, or Air, or any IAC member of the subject under
consideration, even if it is so urgent that there is not time for actual
participation by the IAC Agency. DCI 3/1
covers the way this should be done under normal procedures, under urgent
procedures, and under exceptional circumstances. We think ORE should follow these instructions.

4. State says that it very recently began to receive mimeographed slips
about the subject that is to be considered, but that these slips usually
reach it after the dead-line specified therein. It would be better
pleased if it could be given prompt oral information on the subject to
avoid future confusion like the recent case of Manganese (?).3

5. ORE claims that State never meets its
dead-lines, but we think that should not be used as an excuse for CIA
not doing its part in accord-ance with the established regulations.
Furthermore, we wonder if 100% of the IM's are so urgent that the subject matter cannot be at least
orally given to State before production is completed.

6. We also think that the “Review of the World Situation” which is now
published regularly for the National Security Council would carry a lot
more weight and be more in accordance with the laws and regulations if
it were coordinated at least orally in advance of publication. Formerly,
there was an irregular dead-line making such a procedure too difficult,
but now that it has a fixed date of publication each month, we should
think that the IAC members could
participate in this publication also.

7. The feeling that CIA has a free hand in current and staff
intelligence, we think has gone too far, because the basic law and
regulation under which we function give to CIA the responsibility for
only national intelligence, and the method for setting up national
intelligence is participation by the various established intelligence
agencies in the National Military Establishment and State. We think that
CIA should stick to the rules of the game and not by-pass them. Then
after we have no mote in our own eye, we can with justification get
after the beam in the other fellow's.

Comments:5

If there actually is the fullest flow to CIA from the IAC, CIA's files would be complete for
hurry-up preparation of an Estimate requested by Ad. Leahy or Mr. Forrestal. They at least look upon CIA
as the central agency for “intelligence.”

Should be more oral coordination, at any rate, in almost everything and
DCI will give instructions to this
effect.

Prescott Childs4

* Source: National Archives and Records
Administration, RG 59, Records of the Department of State, Records
of the Bureau of Intelligence and Research: Lot 62 D 42, Box 7385,
Dulles, Correa, Jackson Report and NSC 50. Confidential. The words “but Eyes Only!” have
been added by hand after the classification.

1 Neither found.

2 Not further
identified.

3 The reference is not clear but it may be two
Central Intelligence Agency memoranda of December 1948 suggesting
that the USSR would reduce manganese exports to the United States,
leading to a serious shortfall in U.S. supplies (memorandum from
Hillenkoetter to the President, December 10, 1948; Truman Library,
Papers of Harry S. Truman,
President's Secretary's Files) and Intelligence Memorandum No. 99,
dated December 22, 1948. (National Archives and Records
Administration, RG 218, Records of the Joint Chiefs of Staff,
Leahy Files)

5 The following “Comments” are a
handwritten addendum, possibly in Childs' hand.

4 Printed from a copy that bears this
typed signature.

364. Memorandum From the Chief of the Intelligence Coordinating and Planning Staff (Childs) to Director of Central Intelligence Hillenkoetter364. Memorandum From the Chief of the Intelligence Coordinating and
Planning Staff (Childs) to Director of Central Intelligence HillenkoetterSource

Washington, February 9,
1949.

SUBJECT

Standing Committee Meeting of 9 February 1949

1. Herewith are some side-lights on the Standing Committee meeting this
morning. As indicated in the attached memo,1 they agreed or concurred in most of the
Conclusions and Recommendations.2 They did not wish, however, to take up every item
in the Report about the IAC. It is
thought that the Navy will comment on some of the IAC references throughout the Report, but
that the others will confine their comments largely to the Conclusions
and Recommendations in the attached memo.

2. Whereas in many of the recommendations in the attached memo there is
merely a statement of concurrence or agreement with the Report, there
was, needless to say, discussion on most points, as the meeting lasted
three hours. Here follow some of the side-lights on the
recommendations.

3. On page 63, paragraph 3: Some thought the DCI should do what he wishes about bringing the FBI into the IAC. Navy and State seem to have the only positive feeling
on this, and the others have “no objections.” They all, more or less,
agreed that the FBI would probably not
accept an invitation to become a permanent member, and/or would probably
not attend meetings. They feel sure that Mr. Hoover would not come, and
that anyone he designated to come might carry the ball to the detriment
of pure intelligence discussions among the intelligence agencies.

On page 63, paragraph 5: The Navy is still holding out for its Board of
Directors theory about the IAC and will
advocate that in its reply. No one else agrees to this theory, although
they all favor more active participation by the IAC in substantive intelligence.

On page 81, paragraph 4: All members of the Standing Committee vehemently
said that CIA is not doing this and should do it. The general consensus
of opinion seemed to be that CIA should follow the JIC procedure, whereby papers would be
submitted to the IAC and if they were
approved no discussion
would be necessary, but if there were a dissent, they would be
reconsidered and a discussion would be held with a view toward
dissolving this dissent. Then the new paper would be re-submitted, with
or without a dissent, depending upon a result of the discussions. It was
even suggested that the Standing Committee would do this approval of
estimates as well as its policy work!!! Also some thought if it were not
resolved on lower levels this would go to the IAC members themselves at a meeting for discussion. But no
one would really commit himself, other than saying this should be done,
and they would not permit an inclusion in the recommendations to the
IAC that it was not being done at
present. Furthermore, about “assuming collective responsibility,” the
Army and the Air Force think that they do this only in a limited way as
it pertains to their own affairs, not as it pertains to the whole
estimate.

There was such a diversity of views on this one paragraph that we tried
to get them all to say that they would submit their individual comments,
but they would not commit themselves even on this point.

In connection with the discussion and approval of estimates, State was
vehemently opposed to the things which CIA is producing without
consulting the IAC Agencies, and the
Army was not pleased either. See my memo of February 83 about Coordination of
Intelligence,” i.e., CIA as well as the agencies really working under
NSCID No. 3 and DCI 3/1 and 3/2, and not by-passing
them.

On page 81, paragraph 5: None of them agrees that General Irwin's
statements at the IAC meeting the other
day provided arrangements for handling “crisis situations.” Booth wants
you to march right into the Secretary of State with a club and tell him
to give you his “Eyes Only” telegrams and, incidentally, to give them to
Booth's office also!!!

On page 81, paragraph 6: The Standing Committee thought this was a
desirable feature and would be a boost for CIA if it were issued by the
NSC to the various departments. They
agree, however, that a horse may be led to water but cannot be made to
drink.

PC

* Source: Central Intelligence Agency
Records, Job 86-B00269R, Box 5. Top Secret.

1 Not found.

2 The
Conclusions and Recommendations of the Dulles Report; see Document
358. All of the page and paragraph references below are to
the Conclusions and Recommendations of Chapters IV, Coordination of
Intelligence Activities, and V, National Intelligence
Estimates.

3 Document 363.

365. Letter From Robert Blum of the Office of the Secretary of Defense to Allen W. Dulles365. Letter From Robert
Blum of the Office of the Secretary of Defense to
Allen W. DullesSource

Washington, February 11,
1949.

DEAR ALLEN: I am sure that you
would like to hear from time to time about further developments in the
handling of the report.

The IAC Standing Committee met on
Wednesday,1 at which
time it was decided to submit a coordinated IAC reply on certain recommendations in the report. It was
also agreed to submit separate views on other recommendations in the
report. There was discussion of the various questions involved and some
agreement was reached as to the comment to be submitted. This might be
roughly summarized as follows:

1. The Director of CIA will submit separately whatever comments he
wishes.

2. The IAC will submit joint comments on
the following questions:

a. There should be a closer relationship between the IAC and JIC
(general agreement on this recommendation)

b. CIA should establish a closer relationship with the Secretary of State
and the Secretary of Defense (general agreement)

c. The FBI should be added to the
membership of the IAC (general agreement)

d. The concept of the IAC is sound, but
the IAC should be more active (agreement
except for Navy dissent on grounds yet unspecified)

e. The IAC should assume collective
responsibility for national intelligence estimates (general agreement by
all Standing Committee Members except CIA, whose position is still in
doubt)

f. Provision should be made for handling estimates in crisis situations
(same as under “e” above)

g. Joint Staff and Atomic Energy representation on the IAC should not be terminated (general
agreement to dissent on this point)

3. It was agreed to submit separate comments on the following points:

a. The performance by the Director of CIA of his responsibility to
coordinate intelligence activities (apparently State holds that he
should “crack the whip” whereas the military people held that he should
not and could not do so insofar as the Military Establishment is
concerned)

b. The preparation by CIA of separate, independent reports and
estimates

That is a summary of the discussion in the IAC Standing Committee meeting. There is to be an IAC meeting next Friday, at which,
presumably, decisions on the above questions will be reached.

It is obvious that comments limited to the above points will not get to
the heart of the matter, as the IAC is
avoiding commenting on all those recommendations which concern internal
CIA organization as well as the competence of CIA direction. The State
Department, in particular, is well aware of this drawback and is
proposing to submit independently of the above a general departmental
comment on the entire report over the Secretary's signature. The report
has not yet been studied by Acheson and Webb,
but has met with a very favorable reception among all those in the State
Department who have seen it (this includes Kennan, Armstrong and Humelsine, who is Head of the Secretariat). In order to
elicit overall comments from the other departments, Mr. Souers may be
asked (probably by Mr. Ohly) specifically to request individual
departmental comments on the entire report, separate from the IAC comments. Incidentally, Webb, the new
Under Secretary of State, called Mr. Souers earlier this week to express
his disapproval of the procedure whereby comments were being channeled
through Hillenkoetter and to tell him that the State Department was
proposing to submit separate comments to the National Security
Council.

I think that about summarizes the present position. You can see that the
procedure is a confused one, although I believe it can be prevented from
getting out of hand. It is my estimate that the NSC will probably meet to review the situation toward the
end of the month, and I think that, at that time, Forrestal and Acheson should be asked to come back to
the NSC with formal recommendations on
action to be taken. I hope that the members of the Survey Group will be
asked to attend the initial NSC meeting
when the report and comments are discussed.

Sincerely yours,

P.S. Gisevius came to see me yesterday and spoke to me of the importance
of properly exploiting the captured German documents which are here and
in St. Louis. I promised to inquire just what was being done with them,
and we are planning to meet again next week.

Bob

* Source: Central Intelligence Agency
Records, Job 80-M01009A, Box 1, Folder 12. Confidential. Copies were
sent to Jackson and Correa.

1 February 9.

366. Memorandum by the Office of Reports and Estimates, Central Intelligence Agency366. Memorandum by the Office of Reports and Estimates, Central
Intelligence AgencySource

Washington, February 14,
1949.

COMMENTS ON THE DULLES COMMITTEE REPORT TO THE NATIONAL
SECURITY COUNCIL ON THE CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY AND NATIONAL
ORGANIZATION FOR INTELLIGENCE

I. General Statement

1. The Objectives of ORE in Reviewing the Dulles Report.

In reviewing the Dulles Report,
the Office of Reports and Estimates has as its basic objective, not
self-justification or the denial of admitted shortcomings, but a
genuinely constructive effort to shed the light of practical working
experience upon the problem of improving the production of the
intelligence upon which United States policy should be based.

ORE has, therefore, proceeded to examine
the recommendations contained in the Dulles Report, has pointed out certain impractical
aspects, and has indicated how the recommendations might be most
effectively implemented. ORE considers
that its intimate acquaintance with the actual problems involved in the
production of national intelligence enable it, with the help of the
detached perspective of the Dulles Report, to suggest concrete means for
carrying out the principles underlying the Report.

2. ORE Reaction
to the Report as a Whole.

The Dulles Report is an admirable
effort to re-direct CIA to fundamentals and first principles in the
production of national intelligence; it proposes in effect a return to
the concepts developed at the close of the war during two years of
earnest and intense discussion among the most experienced intelligence
personnel in Washington. The observations of the Committee appear
accurate, and its objectives are sound; but its conclusions are in many
respects faulty, and the recommendations for their attainment are in
many cases impracticable. Although the proposals bearing on this Office
lack, perhaps by intent, both precision and detail, ORE believes that sound administration
of the suggested organization, combined with strong NSC direction to the IAC agencies to make their facilities
available to CIA, could bring about improved intelligence
production.

The Report's greatest weakness stems from the Committee's restricted
concepts of the extent to which the departmental intelligence activities
needed to be investigated in order to appraise their relationship to the
operations of CIA. Although the Committee claimed to appreciate the
danger of considering CIA activities alone and frankly stated that some
correctives were needed outside CIA, specific recommendations were
addressed only to CIA and an indefensible share of responsibility for
CIA's admitted shortcomings was attributed to the Director. The
resulting Report contains many acute observations but it also embodies
recommendations which could not by themselves bring about the desired
results.

3. Summary of ORE
Recommendations.

On the basis of the detailed comments (to be found in Section II) on the
conclusions and recommendations of the Dulles Report, ORE makes
the following summary recommendations.

(1) NSCID #1 and NSCID #31 should be revised to:

(a) redefine CIA's intelligence production responsibilities as set forth
in Section II, paragraph 1 b;

(b) define those intelligence categories, in fields of common interest,
which should be produced centrally by CIA;

(c) clarify and define departmental intelligence responsibilities to
CIA;

(d) require departmental intelligence agencies to grant priority to the
production of intelligence required by CIA; and

(e) clarify IAC coordination procedures
on CIA estimates as recommended in Section II, paragraph 4.

(2) Reorganization of ORE may be required
to provide for the production of national intelligence estimates, as
distinguished from central research in intelligence fields of common
concern. Such reorganization should not be attempted, however, until the
action in paragraph (1) above has been completed. ORE should not be divided into two separate
CIA Offices for the purpose of separating the two types of intelligence
production unless the need for such action is proved and
demonstrated.

(3) ORE agrees that ICAPS should be responsible solely to CIA
and not to the departmental agencies its members are supposed to
represent. It strongly recommends, however, that ICAPS should not be reconstituted along
the lines suggested in the Report, but should be replaced by a working staff acting for a
Council, composed of the DCI and his
Assist-ant Directors, and established to deal with intelligence problems
of concern to two or more offices of CIA. The Assistant Directors
concerned should attend all meetings of the IAC standing committee.

(4) ORE has not desire to operate the CIA
library nor to assume the functions of the Foreign Documents Branch, as
long as such services continue to be conducted in support of ORE. It is recommended, therefore, that
these two functions remain where they are or be merged as a library
service within OCD.

(5) ORE regards as one of its major
responsibilities the furnishing of specific and long-range guidance to
OO and OSO collection facilities, through the development of
coordinated interdepartmental requirements for information. It
recommends that this function should not be decentralized to OO and OSO.

(6) ORE direct working-level relations
with NSC, JCS, and the State Department Policy Planning Staff should
be authorized in order (a) to enable ORE
to receive the guidance necessary for its production effort, and (b) to
give more direct and effective intelligence support to policy and
operational levels.

* Source: Central
Intelligence Agency Records, Job 86-B00269R, Box 15. Top Secret.
Transmitted to the Director of Central Intelligence by the Assistant
Director for Reports and Estimates, Theodore Babbitt, under a memorandum of February 14.
The February 14 memorandum and the full text of the comments are in
the Supplement. (Central Intelligence Agency Records, Job
86-B00269R, Box 5)

1 Documents 432 and 426.

367. Memorandum From the Assistant Director for Policy Coordination (Wisner) to Director of Central Intelligence Hillenkoetter367. Memorandum From the Assistant Director for Policy Coordination
(Wisner) to
Director of Central Intelligence HillenkoetterSource

Washington, February 14,
1949.

SUBJECT

Observations upon the report of the Dulles-Jackson-Correa report to the National Security Council1

1. I return to you herewith copy #17 of the report of the Dulles-Jackson-Correa
committee to the National Security Council, dated 1 January 1949.
Pursuant to your request, I am submitting to you in this memorandum my comments upon those
portions of the report which pertain specifically to the Office of
Policy Coordination, its activities and its relationships to various of
the other offices of the Central Intelligence Agency. I understand that
you have likewise solicited the comments of the chiefs of other offices
and divisions of the Agency which are applicable to their respective
areas of responsibility and I trust that my rather limited observations
may be of some assistance to you in your overall consideration of this
matter.

2. The most important feature of the report having direct application to
OPC is the recommendation that the Office of Policy Coordination, the
Office of Special Operations and the Contact Branch of the Office of
Operations be integrated under a single overall direction in a new
“Operations Division”. I agree with this recommendation and with the
reasoning which supports it and I further agree that any such new office
should be established and should operate as a distinctly separate
entity, having a considerable degree of autonomy within the Agency. The
considerations which are marshalled in support of this conclusion and
recommendation appear at pp. 94, 96, 97, 99, 100 and 131 through 134 in
the report. It was my original conviction that a very close degree of
coordination between the three activities mentioned was essential and
inevitable and I believe that our experience to date has furnished many
proofs of this basic premise.

The report itself takes cognizance of a technical difficulty in this
regard which arises from the anomalous setup of the Office of Policy
Coordination within the Central Intelligence Agency. This arrangement,
which was originally ordained by the National Security Council, could
doubtless be revised as a part of the very important readjustment which
is the substance of this recommendation.

3. Of particular importance to the effective and secure operation of
OPC—or of OSO or the proposed new “Operations Division”—is the
recommendation that these covert operations have their own
administrative support services. The arguments which support this
recommendation are, I believe, conclusive and are set forth at pp. 10,
32, 116 and 136. The gist of these contentions is as follows.

The general administrative problems of these covert operating offices are
unique because of their secrecy and consequent security requirements.
They differ importantly from that part of the work of CIA which is
concerned with the coordination of activities and the more or less overt
work of research and analysis. The security of covert operations is
inevitably prejudiced when overt and covert administrative units are
placed together. Of equal importance is the fact that the unique
character of secret operations renders inapplicable most ordinary rules
of administration. One of the results of the moving of the
administrative support from the direct authority of the officials
responsible for secret operations is that administrative considerations are hard to guide and
even control intelligence and operational policy. Any gains in overall
efficiency which may appear to result from the centralization of all
administrative services are much more than offset by the resultant
losses in the efficiency, effectiveness and security of operations—and
it is submitted that the latter should be the paramount
consideration.

4. Although the comment at p. 37 in regard to the serious results of
delay in obtaining security clearances is obvious, it is nevertheless of
sufficient importance to warrant mention in this memorandum. While
recognizing the essentiality of care and thoroughness in personnel
investigations, it is imperative that a degree of flexibility be
retained in the system of security clearances if the agency is to
fulfill its responsibilities. In a limited number of cases, it will be
necessary to request waivers on persons who have long and well known
records of loyalty and responsibility in the public service. The seven
way name check is no doubt desirable in all cases but the full
investigation in cases of the kind mentioned should be allowed to go on
after the individuals have entered upon their duties. Moreover, there
must be a balancing of interests as between absolute security on the one
hand and the necessity of obtaining talent, imagination, initiative and
knowledge in certain fields.

5. A relatively small but nevertheless important point which I should
like to raise for the record is that the report appears to suggest that
the role of OPC is subordinate to that
of OSO in the field of encouraging the
defection of strategically placed personnel in the Soviet and satellite
government services. It is our interpretation of our charter (NSC 10/2) that OPC is given this responsibility, but we fully recognize
the special interests of both OSO and
the Contact Branch of OO. You will recall
the memorandum2 which was
prepared by my office and concurred in by the other two branches, which
outlined a proposed method of coordinated activity both within and
without the Central Intelligence Agency in this increasingly important
field. I hope that you will be able to reconsider your adverse decision
in this matter in the interest of enabling the three interested branches
to discharge their respective responsibilities in a coordinated and
effective manner. (See recommendation #3 at p. 129.)

6. I should also like to make a comment for the record upon the
observations of the committee at p. 123 about the insecurity of the
present physical setup of the Washington Headquarters of OSO (and OPC). I agree that it is very prejudicial to the security
of the personnel and contacts of these secret operations offices to be
isolated in a conspicuously identifiable building, and that it would be
vastly preferable for them to be covered in a large establishment having
no previous OSS and CIA taint and having so many services and
visitors that the identification of the staff members and their visitors
would be rendered most difficult. I fully recognize that because of the
drastic shortage of government housing space in Washington, this
criticism is easier to make than to remedy, but I nevertheless believe
that it should be made the subject of serious and continued
consideration by all concerned. The problem is aggravated by the
inability to date of the Services Branch to provide sufficient space for
present OPC staff personnel even in
Temporary L Building.

7. The observations of the committee at pp. 148 and 149 of the report
concerning the repute of intelligence as a career within the armed
services has an important bearing upon the work of the Central
Intelligence Agency and OPC. Because of
the important use which CIA should always make of military intelligence
personnel, as well as the many relationships which CIA must have with
the armed services in order to be an effective and useful agency, it
would be to the interest of all concerned if steps could be taken to
improve the lot and prospects of service intelligence personnel.

8. My final comment is made in connection with the recommendation of the
committee that a so-called “Intelligence Officer” within the Department
of State be created to serve as the principal liaison between that
Department and the Central Intelligence Agency, including the Office of
Policy Coordination. My reaction to this proposal would depend very
largely upon the identity of the individual selected for this new
position and the level at which he is placed in the hierarchy of the
State Department. Unless this Intelligence Officer is situated at a very
high policy level within the Department of State, the result would be
very detrimental. Under no circumstances should the liaison between
OPC and the Department of State be
tied in with the research and intelligence staff of the Department.

Frank G. Wisner

* Source: Central Intelligence Agency
Records, Job 86-B00269R, Box 5. Top Secret. Another copy bearing a
typed signature is reproduced in CIA Cold War
Records: The CIA under Harry Truman, pp. 247-250.

1 Document 358.

2 Not found.

368. Memorandum From Daniel DeBardeleben to the Acting Deputy Assistant Director for Special Operations, Central Intelligence Agency368. Memorandum From Daniel
DeBardeleben to the Acting Deputy
Assistant Director for Special Operations, Central Intelligence
AgencySource

Washington, February 17,
1949.

SUBJECT

The Dulles Report

Below are listed my comments on certain passages in the body of Chapter
VIII, “The Collection of Secret Intelligence,” and my remarks concerning
the conclusions and recommendations which appear at the end of the
chapter.

1. It is recommended that representatives of State, War and Navy be
assigned to ICS in order more effectively to direct our activities in
the collection of intelligence and more helpfully to evaluate the
information which we collect. Both in direction and evaluation we can
reasonably expect to receive greater assistance from the user agencies.
Several schemes have been tried in the past to stimulate more detailed
direction and more conscientious evaluation. Regrettably there still
remains much to be desired and this proposal may be the answer to the
problem. British MI-6 has for a long time followed such a general
principle with, I understand, gratifying results. Certainly this
possibility should be explored to the fullest.

2. It is recommended that administrative services be an integral part of
the OSO organization for several obvious
reasons. I agree.

3. It is true that no plan for rotation of personnel on a world-wide
basis has yet been worked out. It is doubtful whether this organization
should ever attempt wholesale rotation of operating personnel between
continental areas except in those unusual cases where individuals have
equal qualifications for work in more than one area. Our present
rotation plan of encouraging our people to remain at their present posts
as long as possible, consistent with cover, is entirely sound during
this formative stage of our existence. Consistent with cover, the longer
an individual can remain in his area of assignment, the more valuable he
becomes to us. This fact will be more greatly emphasized as we succeed
in placing our representatives under unofficial cover where they can
remain as a part of the community for indefinite lengths of time without
arousing curiosity and suspicion. Rotation in OSO must be very carefully
considered to the end that we will not deprive ourselves of the
knowledge and experience of our
representatives concerning various areas simply to adopt an appealing
policy of world-wide rotation. The latter would require starting from
scratch in new jobs which would greatly retard the accomplishments of
this organization.

4. It is recommended that OSO, OPC and Contacts Branch, all covert
activities, be combined in one covert office and placed under a
responsible head. There seems to be much to recommend such an
organization provided the peculiar demands of these three offices be
provided for and no attempt be made to perform centrally certain
functions for the three offices which are in no sense common to
them.

5. It is recommended that closer coordination be effected in occupied
areas between OSO and to clandestine
operations of the occupying authority. Such coordination is highly
desirable and I believe is gradually improving. [2
lines of source text not declassified]

6. It is recommended that procedures for handling defectors be worked out
with the concurrence of the interested agencies. Such a procedure is
very important and is now in the process of being determined through the
work of two committees—one dealing with the problem of defectors abroad,
the other considering the handling of defectors in the United States.
The work of these two committees will eventually be drawn together and
overall policy and procedures will result.

7. It is pointed out that contact between agents and our official
representatives abroad should be avoided. Such avoidance is OSO policy and steps are continuously being
taken to observe and follow strictly such policy; however, there will
always be certain cases where this policy must be violated and a
calculated risk taken. There is no way in which the conduct of espionage
can be made entirely safe. It should be our endeavor to avoid
unnecessary risks.

8. It is pointed out that cover for OSO,
CIA here in Washington is unsatisfactory. The conditions as to housing
and the admission by employees of OSO
that they are CIA are undesirable, but there appears to be no immediate
solution. When the activities of OSO
were placed in a separate office in CIA it was assumed that CIA would
provide cover for OSO. This assumption
seemed reasonable at the time because it was expected that CIA would be
recognized by the public and the other departments of the Government as
primarily a research organization performing centrally an overt function
for the Government; however, because of unfortunate publicity, CIA is
rather recognized as a clandestine organization with the result that
OSO is regrettably providing cover
for the overt activities of CIA. It does seem desirable to have OSO quartered in a large building where
other activities are conducted and where OSO personnel are not singled out. Further, it would be
advantageous to adopt some cover name for OSO and its allied activities which would not bring to mind
espionage and clandestine activity.

9. It is recommended that the CE
activities of OSO be expanded and that
closer cooperation with FBI be realized.
This is an entirely sound recommendation and every possible effort will
be made to accomplish such ends.

Conclusions and Recommendations1

(1) Referred to above.

(2) Referred to above.

(3) Referred to above.

(4) In process.

(5) Every effort is presently being made to increase the use of
unofficial cover for our representatives abroad. [13
lines of source text not declassified]

(6) Referred to above.

(7) Referred to above.

(8) No comment.

(9) Agree. It seems reasonable that OSO
should enjoy the privilege of disseminating its product in a fashion
comparable to the procedures followed by other collectors.

(10) Accomplished.

(11) Agree—highly important.

DDeB

* Source: Central Intelligence Agency
Records, Job 86-B00269R, Box 5. Top Secret. The addressee has not
been further identified.

1 This refers
to the Conclusions and Recommendations of Chapter VIII of the
Dulles Report. (National
Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Records of the Executive
Secretariat, NSC Files: Lot 66 D
148, Box 1555) See the Supplement.

369. Memorandum From the Assistant Director for Reports and Estimates (Babbitt) to Director of Central Intelligence Hillenkoetter369. Memorandum From the Assistant Director for Reports and Estimates
(Babbitt) to
Director of Central Intelligence HillenkoetterSource

Washington, February 17,
1949.

SUBJECT

“Coordination of Intelligence”

REFERENCE

Memorandum, 8 February 1949, to Director from Chief, ICAPS1

1. Reference memorandum lends considerable weight to the recommendations
concerning the functions of ICAPS
contained in ORE's comments on the
Dulles Report.2 It should be pointed
out that ICAPS, in reference
memorandum, is representing the point of view of OIR and is passing on this point of view to the Director
without consultation with the interested Office in CIA, to-wit: ORE.

2. Reference memorandum refers, first, to intelligence memoranda, and
second, to the monthly Review of the World Situation. In regard to the
IM's, as the Director is well aware, requests for these reports come in
from a variety of sources but in almost all cases it can be said that
the normal procedure is “Urgent” because of the short time factor
permitted. ORE is currently informing
OIR of the subject of each IM as
expeditiously as possible. Such notices of the subject matter and scope
of reference cannot be done by telephone for security reasons in a vast
majority of cases. Delays in communication being what they are, it is
quite true that OIR frequently gets its
information after the report is prepared and sometimes even after it has
been forwarded to the Director. Attempts are being made, whenever
possible, to give advance information to OIR as well as to the other
IAC agencies concerned.

3. Paragraph 5 of reference memorandum more than implies that ORE is not “doing its part in accordance
with the established regulations.” In spite of the fact that the
regulations prescribe a cumbersome and time-consuming procedure, ORE is endeavoring to comply with them as
fully as possible. It is obvious that the observance of the “normal”
coordination process, or even the “urgent” one, would in many cases
place the Director in the position of having to reply to a request from an officer of Cabinet rank
that while CIA had the information requested, it was unable to forward
it until the departments had been consulted.

4. The reference, paragraph 6, implicitly recommends that the CIA
Series3 be subjected to the same
processes of coordination as are required in the case of the ORE Series.4 The basis of this recommendation is indicated in
paragraph 7 which says:

… the basic law and regulation under which we function give to CIA the
responsibility for only national intelligence, and the method of setting
up national intelligence is participation by the various established
intelligence agencies… .

CIA is also specifically authorized by “regulation” to produce current
intelligence in NSCID #3, paragraph
1b(2).

5. The concept of national intelligence indicated in the foregoing
quotation is obviously taken from the Dulles Report, where, I believe, it finds official
expression for the first time. It is entitled to respectful
consideration, but is, in my opinion, the most controversial aspect of
the Dulles Report and certainly
has not yet the force of “basic law and regulation.”

6. This controversial concept equates “national intelligence” to
“coordinated intelligence” in terms that make “coordinated intelligence”
mean nothing more than “joint intelligence.” In the minds of those who
took part in the early post-war discussions and conferences on the
subject, the central intelligence organization to be set up was to
produce, as “strategic and national policy intelligence,” something
above and beyond joint intelligence. “Strategic and national policy
intelligence” (now called “national intelligence” for short) was
understood in terms of the function such intelligence was intended to
serve, not in terms of a particular method of production. The essential
idea with respect to the production of such intelligence was expressed
in the term “final synthesis”: it was to be an authoritative final
evaluation and synthesis of all available intelligence, free from the
influence of departmental bias. A process of “coordination” was
retained, not because joint intelligence was the end in view, but as a
means of discovering and noting any departmental position substantially
different from the essentially independent final analysis and
interpretation of CIA.

7. This clear concept has been somewhat lost sight of since June 1946. It
is still valid, however, and is consonant with the existing “basic law
and regulation.” Moreover, the Dulles-ICAPS concept
finds no explicit support in the existing law and regulations.

8. The law says only that CIA shall “correlate and evaluate intelligence
relating to the national security.” It makes no stipulation with respect
to “coordination”: it is CIA that is to correlate and evaluate, language
originally used to express the concept of independent final analysis and
interpretation set forth above.

9. NSCID No. 1 defines “national
intelligence” in terms of the national security (its function), not in
terms of “coordination” or any other process of production. It specifies
that, insofar as is practicable, CIA shall not duplicate departmental
research, but shall make use of departmental facilities and production.
It says nothing whatever about any coordination of interpretation.

10. NSCID No. 3 describes “national
intelligence” as “integrated” (not “coordinated”) departmental
intelligence. This distinction appears to be deliberate and points
toward the original concept (“final synthesis”) rather than the
Dulles-ICAPS concept of CIA's function.
Coordination is referred to only with respect to the procurement of
departmental contributions for CIA consideration, not with respect to
any process of joint interpretation.

11. DCI 3/1, intended to “facilitate
departmental participation in the preparation of national intelligence,”
is the highest law or regulation pertinent to the subject and the
reference. In view of the preceding demonstration, its relevant
provisions must be regarded as a matter of current policy rather than of
compliance with the law or with NSC
direction. DCI 3/1 prescribes various
procedures for obtaining departmental contributions to and concurrence
or dissent on “national intelligence reports and estimates” (the SR5 and ORE Series). It specifically provides that coordination is
not required with respect to current intelligence.

12. DCI 3/1, dated 8 July 1949, was
contemporary with the tenth number in the CIA Series (CIA 7-48). It was
specifically understood at that time that the procedures prescribed
therein with respect to the ORE Series
were not intended to apply to the CIA Series, which, by mutual agreement
with the departmental agencies, was already accepted, for these
purposes, as current intelligence.

13. This agreement was not reached on any basis of abstract
consideration, but as a result of practical experience. Initially we
undertook to coordinate items in the CIA Series as though they were
items in the ORE Series. CIA-1
(September 1947) was so coordinated, at a cost in time and effort, to the agencies as well as to
ourselves, far in excess of any resultant benefit. CIA-2 was not
coordinated, for absolute lack of any time in which to do so. I do not
recall precisely when the agencies begged off. They may well have been
prompted to do so by their relief on those occasions when coordination
proved impossible to accomplish for want of time. In any case, I do
recall distinctly that agreement to regard the CIA Series as current
intelligence was reached on agency initiative and was as much for the
relief of agency analysts as for our benefit. If any agency
representative now wants to resume coordination, he is presumably
arguing in the abstract without appreciation of the practical
consequences of his proposal.

14. This observation has particular application in the case of the
Department of State. One obstacle to the efficient coordination of any
appreciation of global scope, such as items in the CIA Series, is the
lack of any unit in the IAC agencies
comparable to the Global Survey Group, ORE. To coordinate with us in such a case OIR has to employ a team of half a dozen
area specialists. Each such specialist is inclined to demand that his
area be treated as though it were the sole subject of consideration. The
net result is vexatious delay and diversion of effort for ORE and a much greater loss in man-hours
for OIR, without substantial effect upon
the tenor of the estimate.

15. The Series is presently prepared with cognizance of departmental
views as conveyed to us through various media and in discussions
relative to estimates in the ORE Series.
Specific prior consultation with departmental specialists would consume
their time and ours without contributing materially to the preparation
of the initial draft. Moreover, experience shows that the comment
elicited in the process of coordinating a draft of such scope and
character as an item in the CIA Series is essentially editorial in
character and without significant substantive effect.

16. It is, of course, quite feasible to coordinate items in the CIA
Series as though they were items in the ORE Series, but it can be done only at considerable cost in
loss of timeliness and in terms of man-hours expended, without
commensurate gain. Under present procedures, which include elaborate
coordination within ORE, it is necessary
to write in terms of the situation existing ten days in advance of the
publication date. The imposition of external coordination would require
allowance of at least an additional week, very definitely impairing the
timeliness of the appreciation as of its date of publication. (In this
connection, ICAPS should be advised
that there is not, and cannot be, in real life any such thing as a
meaningful oral coordination.) Moreover, in view of the fact that the
Global Survey Group is already experiencing difficulty in giving proper
attention to its many and various commitments, the additional
consumption of time (approximately one man-week) would require the provision of an additional
member to the Group. If consultation and coordination with the
departmental agencies (including consultation with half a dozen area
specialists in OIR) is the controlling
consideration, the best procedure would be to set up a permanent
interdepartmental committee to produce the monthly review for the
Security Council.

17. The issue is, in essence, whether the CIA Series is intended or
desired to be (as we suppose) a responsible synthesis and interpretation
of the developing global situation, written with cognizance of
departmental views, but with independent judgment, or merely a routine
joint intelligence periodical.

18. It is recommended that no action be taken on reference memorandum
pending a basic policy decision by the National Security Council with
respect to the Dulles Report.

Theodore Babbitt6

* Source: Central Intelligence Agency
Historical Files, HS/HC-100, Item 17. Confidential. The source text
is a transcript made for the CIA Historian on October 1, 1953. This
memorandum draws heavily on a February 16 memorandum from Ludwell L. Montague to Babbitt. (Ibid., HS/HC-450, Item 30)
See the Supplement.

1 Document 363.

2 Document 366.

3 Reference is to a monthly CIA
publication entitled Review of the World Situation as it Relates to
the Security of the United States, which was regularly considered at
NSC meetings during 1947-1950. The first issue, which carried the
designation “CIA 1,” was prepared for the NSC's first meeting on September 26, 1947. See the
Supplement for selected issues.

4 Reference is to intelligence estimates and coordinated intelligence
reports, which at that time were identified by a series designator
that included the prefix “ORE,”
e.g., ORE 3-48, ORE 1-49,
etc.

5 Situation Reports, a series of periodic
reports on individual countries.

6 Printed from a copy that bears this
typed signature.

370. Memorandum From the Chief of the Intelligence Coordinating and Planning Staff (Childs) to Director of Central Intelligence Hillenkoetter370. Memorandum From the Chief of the Intelligence Coordinating and
Planning Staff (Childs) to Director of Central Intelligence HillenkoetterSource

Washington, February 21,
1949.

SUBJECT

Crisis Situations

REFERENCE

Section 102(d), (1), (2), and (5) National Security Act
1947

1. ICAPS has given consideration to the
above subject and thinks the real problem is in the delay and difficulty
in the intelligence agencies' obtaining promptly within their own
Departments information indicating that a crisis is developing.

2. If this information were in the intelligence offices, the provisions
prescribed in NSCID 1, paragraph 8 and
the procedures set forth in DCI 1/1,
paragraph 2 would cover the expeditious handling of this material, and
the calling of an IAC meeting to give it
proper attention.

3. Furthermore, any facts or information of this category coming to the
attention of executive departments and agencies outside the IAC, should be transmitted without delay to
the DCI who will process the material as
outlined in the same directives just mentioned.

4. We think, therefore, that the NSC
should give consideration to this matter so that the Heads of all
Federal Departments and agencies, Chiefs of Staff, etc. would be
instructed to make available to their intelligence officers, or to the
DCI as appropriate, facts or
knowledge regarding any potential international crisis affecting the
national security.

5. We suggest, therefore, that you discuss this important problem with
the Executive Secretary of the NSC with
the objective of issuance by the President of a directive covering this
subject adequately.

Prescott Childs1

* Source: Central Intelligence Agency
Records, Job 86-B00269R, Box 5. No classification marking. The
source text indicates it was prepared for discussion with Mr.
Souers.

1 Printed from a copy that bears this
typed signature.

371. Central Intelligence Agency Memorandum of Comments on the Dulles Report371. Central Intelligence Agency Memorandum of Comments on the
Dulles ReportSource

Washington, February 28,
1949.

The Committee's report is an admirable effort to direct the Central
Intelligence Agency to fundamentals and is a genuinely constructive
effort to improve the production of intelligence on which the policy of
the United States should be based. The observations of the Committee
are, in general, accurate, and its objectives are sound; its
conclusions, however, are, in
many respects, faulty, and the recommendations for their attainment are,
in many cases, impracticable.

The larger part of the Report is concerned with the amount of
coordination exercised by the Central Intelligence Agency in regard to
the other intelligence activities of the Government. It is realized that
an optimum coordination has not yet been reached; however, not only a
start, but considerable progress along the path of complete coordination
has been attained. No gaps remain even though all duplication has not
yet been abolished. On this subject of coordination, I am sure the
members of the National Security Council realize the difficulties
encountered; particularly, those members having to do with the
unification of the Armed Services. A comparable problem has confronted
the Central Intelligence Agency with the added obstacle that one
additional department is involved.

The Committee states (page 5): “—coordination can most effectively be
achieved by mutual agreement among the various agencies.” There is no
question as to the validity of that statement. However, to achieve
coordination in such a manner, compromises of wording, emphasis, etc.,
have to be accepted. For example, three months were required to secure
agreement on most of the present NSCID's, while it required one year to resolve the differences
between the Air Force and the Navy on one NSCID.

The Committee begins its discussions on coordination with the
above-mentioned declaration, but, in numerous cases thereafter,
throughout the Report, the element of “direction” in coordination is
intimated and even stressed. This element of “direction” has usually
been entirely unacceptable to the interested agencies. Further, the
Director of Central Intelligence, per se, has no authority to enforce
coordination, and, indeed, the Committee (page 41) recognizes this when
it says, “The Act does not give the Central Intelligence Agency
independent authority to coordinate intelligence activities.” Yet many
of the Committee's recommendations hinge upon having such authority, and
many of the alleged shortcomings are due to this lack of authority. The
phrase, “such procedure would violate the chain of command,” was
repeated over and over again in the discussions during the drawing-up of
the present NSCID's.

In view of this lack of explicit authority, in view of the progress made
in the relatively short time this activity has been in operation, and in
view of the progress already made in coordination by mutual agreement,
it is considered that in not too long a period the continued
augmentation of such a program will more than justify any delays
incurred.

A second alleged shortcoming is that the Central Intelligence Agency is
“overadministered in the sense that administrative conditions have been
allowed to guide and, on occasion, even control intelligence policy, to the detriment of the
latter.” The administration of the Central Intelligence Agency has been
developed on the following pattern:

(1) Budget, personnel, and other support services are essential to any
operation, and are centralized to serve all components of the
Agency.

(2) Control procedures are restricted to keeping within the budget
requirements, insuring that illegal transactions are not permitted,
avoiding waste and duplication in expenditures, and maintaining certain
standards required by security, the Civil Service Commission, the Bureau
of the Budget, and the General Accounting Office. No agency, regardless
of its nature, and most emphatically one that handles confidential
government funds, can possibly avoid such controls.

Administration has advised on policy matters and should continue to do
so, particularly, in the determination of the ability to support
operational proposals and in the achievement of greater efficiency with
the means available for operations. Administration has no voice in
determining the substance of operational direction, guidance, and
production, nor should it ever have.

There is a never-ending argument on the merits of administration versus
operations. The operating people would like to be given a lump sum for
their operations and complete latitude with regard to numbers and grades
of personnel, travel authorities, new projects, etc. The results of such
action, without controls, is obvious—chaos—and, again, it simply cannot
be done where government funds are involved.

The Committee further declares: “Administrative arrangements which do not
at first appear to be efficient or economical may be necessary in the
Central Intelligence Agency. Personnel requirements for certain types of
work cannot conform to normal civil service standards, and the demands
of security often impose special and unusual procedures. This situation
must be understood not only by those responsible for the internal
organization of the Central Intelligence Agency but also by Congress and
the Bureau of the Budget.”—“The centralization of all administration in
one office is undesirable since secret operations require their own
separate administration.”

The Committee's report seems to indicate undue emphasis and alarm in
connection with complete autonomy for covert components of the Central
Intelligence Agency. There has to be an umpire some place, and no one,
directly responsible for operations, should be his own final authority
and judge in the utilization of funds and personnel.

Security is adequately served through the physical segregation of covert
administrative branches and the establishment of direct channels, both
to the covert operational officials and to the responsible administrator
who is the third senior official in the Agency. Covert and overt support
activities are not intermingled, but a single administrative chief over
each phase insures adequate mutual support and minimizes duplication.
The Central Intelligence Agency saved over sixty positions by the new organizational approach and
so far has had few complaints. From a strictly security point of view,
there will be better security than before because of not pointing up
autonomous separate support functions in a single agency.

It is all very well for a group with no responsibilities or authority to
state that both Congress and the Bureau of the Budget must understand
that the Central Intelligence Agency must be given, in effect, a blank
check and a free hand. In practice, the Central Intelligence Agency must
justify its demands with some reason and logic and must reassure both of
those bodies that the Central Intelligence Agency is, at least, somewhat
careful with government funds and does its best to guard against waste
and fraud.

Another Committee comment is: “Many able persons have left the
organization and few qualified ones have been attracted to it. On the
higher levels, quality is uneven, and there are few persons who are
outstanding in intelligence work.”

The above statement seems to be totally unwarranted, as well as to have
no actual basis in fact. Out of 267 employees in the three top grades
(P-6 to P-8 and CAF-13 to CAF-15, both inclusive), 20 employees have
left, not all of them voluntarily. The following table shows this
turnover.

[Here follows a table of losses of CIA personnel in the top three grades
for CY 1948.]

For the calendar year 1948, the turnover in the Central Intelligence
Agency for all personnel, for all causes—death, sickness, maternity
leave, and all other voluntary or involuntary separations—has averaged
1.6% per month. This is a considerably lower rate than for most other
government agencies.

The charge that there are few persons outstanding in intelligence work is
another general one and is difficult to sustain. It is admittedly
difficult to establish an absolute criterion as to ability, but, if
scholarship and experience do have some bearing, the following tables
will demonstrate that the Central Intelligence Agency is not totally
devoid of capable people.

[Here follow two tables showing the qualifications of professionals in
the CIA and ORE as of September 1948.]

Another error, states the Report, is “The placing in key positions of a
large percentage of military personnel, many of them on relatively short
‘tour of duty’ assignment, tends to discourage competent civilian
personnel from looking to employment in the Central Intelligence Agency
as a career.”

Omitting the post of Director, which is considered in another part of the
Report, there is only one—out of six—Assistant Director who is a
military man. Four—out of six—Deputy Assistant Directors are from the
military services, but, considering the fact that the military services
are both the greatest suppliers
and the greatest customers, this does not appear unreasonable. The
overall figure is 58 military personnel, or less than 2% of the total
number of employees in the Central Intelligence Agency.

The above Committee statement seems somewhat inconsistent with
recommendations in other parts of the Report which urge the assignment
of military personnel to various branches of the organization.

Budget

On page 33 of the Report is the statement: “Both Congress and the Bureau
of the Budget have refrained from examining in detail the internal
workings of the Central Intelligence Agency in order to determine the
justification for the budget.” This statement is only partially correct
as, while Congress, so far, has not inquired into detail, the details
have been gone over in the Bureau of the Budget by an official who has
full security clearance. It was at the insistence of the Bureau of the
Budget that a centralized administrative staff was set up.

Security

The Committee recognizes the need for security, “—in the Central
Intelligence Agency which has unfortunately become publicized as a
secret intelligence organization.” The Central Intelligence Agency
concurs completely in this, and the publicity received has neither been
sought nor encouraged, but has been actively discouraged. By special
plea of the Director, various periodicals and newspapers (Life, Time, Newsweek, U.S. News, New York Herald
Tribune, among others) have refrained from publishing articles.
Under the existing conditions of press and radio, it would be
practically impossible to conceal completely, desirable as it
undoubtedly would be, activities of the Central Intelligence Agency. The
more practicable manner, which has been adopted, is to conceal the
covert sections by allowing the overt sections to serve as a “lightning
rod” and draw off attention from the clandestine activities.

Concise comments on the individual conclusions and recommendations of the
Committee follow:

[Here follow 11 pages commenting on Chapters II-IV.]

Chapter 7, page 81.1

“(1) In the Central Intelligence Agency there has been confusion between
the responsibility of producing coordinated national intelligence
estimates and responsibility for miscellaneous research and reporting
activities.”

This is a broad statement that needs qualification. Both types of
activities may have been performed, but there has been no confusion
between them, and both were found to be necessary. It is believed that
what the Committee describes as “confusion” has resulted from the
Central Intelligence Agency's recognition of its threefold
responsibilities as the producer of national intelligence estimates, as
the intelligence facility of the National Security Council, and as the
agency responsible for performing services of common concern. The
Committee has failed to recognize the gap that exists between the
Central Intelligence Agency's explicit responsibilities, as set forth in
NSCID #3, and the Central
Intelligence Agency's implicit responsibilities as the intelligence
facility of the National Security Council. Moreover, NSCID #3 is so rigid with respect to the
Central Intelligence Agency's production responsibilities and so
flexible with respect to those of the departmental intelligence agencies
that its usefulness as a working document is seriously impaired. The
Committee's conclusion is made on the basis of a dangerously limited
view of the Central Intelligence Agency's responsibilities for
intelligence production. Such responsibilities should be considered not
solely in terms of the production of “coordinated national intelligence
estimates” and “intelligence in fields of common interest” but also in
terms of the Central Intelligence Agency's role as the intelligence
facility of the President, the National Security Council, and such
agencies as may be designated by them.

The Central Intelligence Agency's intelligence production
responsibilities should include the following, and NSCID #1 and NSCID #3 should be modified accordingly to include a
revised and more appropriate definition of national intelligence:

(1) To produce intelligence required to reduce to a minimum the element
of surprise in foreign situations and developments which affect United
States national security.

(2) To produce coordinated intelligence estimates required for national
planning, policy, and operational decisions.

(3) To produce intelligence required to support those agencies designated
by the National Security Council to receive it.

(4) To produce intelligence in fields of common interest to the Central
Intelligence Agency and the departmental intelligence agencies,
including economic and scientific intelligence.

(5) To produce intelligence required for Central Intelligence Agency
estimates not normal to any departmental responsibilities.

(It should be noted that paragraph (2) above is the only category of
intelligence which conforms to the definition of national intelligence
in NSCID #3.)

“(2) The provisions of the National Security Act for the production of
national intelligence estimates, as interpreted by the National Security Council Intelligence
Directives, are sound but have not been effectively carried out.”

Concur in the assertion that the provisions of the National Security Act
for the production of national intelligence estimates are sound, but,
after almost a year's experience, believe that NSCID #1 and NSCID #3
should be revised for the reasons cited immediately above and for the
following reasons:

(1) The directives do not provide for adequate treatment of the matter of
priority within the departmental intelligence agencies with respect to
their support of the Central Intelligence Agency. Consequently, the
Central Intelligence Agency is unable to make optimum use of
departmental intelligence and cannot depend upon timely departmental
action in meeting Central Intelligence Agency commitments and
deadlines.

(2) The directives do not adequately allocate production responsibilities
and do not define intelligence fields of common concern.

“(3) There should be created in the Central Intelligence Agency a small
Estimates Division which would draw upon and review the specialized
intelligence product of the departmental agencies in order to prepare
coordinated national intelligence estimates.”

The Report is vague concerning the details of the proposed
reorganization, and, therefore, opinion is divided on the necessity or
desirability of a drastic internal reorganization now. However, if the
Committee's recommendation means that the Estimates Division is to be
large enough to provide its own relatively high level research support,
the recommendation is workable and might result in simplification of the
process of producing estimates. The problem of a greater duplication of
effort, than now exists, immediately arises. It is believed, therefore,
that this recommendation is premature and should be considered only
after a revision of NSCID #1 and
NSCID #3.

“(4) Under the leadership of the Director of Central Intelligence, these
estimates should be submitted for discussion and approval by the
reconstituted Intelligence Advisory Committee whose members should
assume collective responsibility for them.

“(5) Provision should be made in these arrangements for the handling of
crisis situations when coordinated estimates are required without
delay.

“(6) Coordinated intelligence estimates produced in this way must, in
order to be effective, be recognized as the most authoritative estimates
available to the policy makers.”

These three recommendations have been considered together as parts of the
same problem. The Central Intelligence Agency cannot agree with the view
that members of the Intelligence Advisory Committee should assume
collective responsibility for Central Intelligence Agency estimates. It
is considered that the main question is what sort of estimates should
emerge from the national intelligence structure. Those who developed the original concept of a
central intelligence group had clearly in mind the ever-present factor
of departmental bias as well as the shortcomings of joint intelligence,
which often produces estimates so watered down in the process of
reaching agreement as to be valueless. The Central Intelligence Agency
estimates can be free from such faults only if they are produced with
full cognizance of departmental views but without subservience to
departmental prejudices. Intelligence Advisory Committee review of the
Central Intelligence Agency drafts should undertake to eliminate minor
or apparent differences but not to gloss over divergences of informed
opinion. The resultant estimate must be essentially that of the Central
Intelligence Agency and not that of the Intelligence Advisory Committee
collectively. Any statements of dissent should be limited to substantial
and well-defined issues, as the directives now provide. Moreover, these
directives should be further modified to restrict dissent to the field
of responsibility of the dissenting agency. (For example, the Office of
Naval Intelligence has an interest in political matters but is not
responsible for estimates in that field, and the Central Intelligence
Agency should not be required to publish a dissent by the Office of
Naval Intelligence on purely political matters if the State Department
concurs in the Central Intelligence Agency position.) The logic of this
contention is simply that, just as a dissenting member of the
Intelligence Advisory Committee cannot be expected to share in the
responsibility for a Central Intelligence Agency estimate in which he
dissents, so, by extension, the Central Intelligence Agency has sole
responsibility for its estimates, even when Intelligence Advisory
Committee concurrence is complete, and does not share this
responsibility collectively with the members of the Intelligence
Advisory Committee. Concurrence should fortify the estimate; it should
not create an artificial responsibility. The Report does not reflect a
clear understanding of this vital aspect of the coordination theory. To
the Committee, “national” intelligence is merely “coordinated”
intelligence, and coordinated intelligence is joint intelligence, at the
mercy of departmental bias.

Although the Report favors the method of preparing drafts in an ad hoc
committee, experience shows that this procedure is time-consuming and
inefficient. The Central Intelligence Agency believes that coordination
procedures will be effective only if its own estimates personnel produce
the initial draft as a basis for discussion with a permanent, full-time
substantively competent Intelligence Advisory Committee sub-committee,
prior to the submittal of the estimates to the Director for Intelligence
Advisory Committee action.

There must be effective means for handling crisis situations. In the
past, an informal procedure, which worked, was in effect. This procedure
is now in process of being formalized by agreed, written
understanding.

The Central Intelligence Agency's estimates must earn their distinction
as the most authoritative intelligence available to the policy makers.
It is, however, recommended that the National Security Council enjoin
the policy makers to give the Central Intelligence Agency such guidance
in matters pertaining to national policy that Central Intelligence
Agency support will be more directly responsive to their needs.

[Here follow 16 pages commenting on Chapters VI-IX.]

Chapter X, page 138.

“(1) The directing staff of the Central Intelligence Agency has not
demonstrated an adequate understanding of the mandate of the
organization or the ability to discharge that mandate effectively.”

Do not concur. Had the Central Intelligence Agency been constituted in a
vacuum, where relations with other established agencies need not have
been taken into account, progress in coordination, organization, and
production might have been much more rapid. However, the relationships
and impacts between not only the other intelligence agencies, but also
the administrative agencies of the Government—the Bureau of the Budget,
the General Accounting Office, the Civil Service Commission, etc.—had to
be adjusted and had to be lived with. Dismissing the theoretical
conditions which one might have liked to enjoy, and considering the
realistic conditions which have confronted the Central Intelligence
Agency, it is believed that much progress along sound lines has been
made. And, what is more gratifying, this tendency is increasing in both
scope and in the right direction.

“(2) Administrative organization and policies tend to impede the carrying
out of the essential intelligence functions of the Central Intelligence
Agency under the Act.”

Do not concur. The development of our organization and functions has been
based on a policy of centralization of specific responsibilities in
single offices and the coordinated work of the offices as a team, each
concentrating in its own field and looking to the others for support
from other fields. Only in this manner can we avoid the confusion,
duplication of effort, inefficiency, and major frictions which always
attend a situation wherein every component tries to be self-sufficient
and attempts to do the same things, at the same time, in the same
sphere, and in constant competition. Our organizational policy has
resulted in the centralized groupings shown below:

(1) Research, evaluation, and production, and coordination in these
fields:

Office of Reports and Estimates (except science)

Office of Scientific Intelligence

(2) Collection and liaison control, dissemination, liaison service, and
information service, and coordination in these fields:

Office of Collection and Dissemination

(3) Overt field collection:

Office of Operations

(4) Covert field collection and counterespionage:

Office of Special Operations

(5) Covert field operations:

Office of Policy Coordination.

(The last two functions which had been integrated into one covert office
were separated as a result of a directive issued by the National
Security Council.)

“(3) Continuity of service is essential for the successful carrying out
of the duties of Director of Central Intelligence.”

Concur. This principle is obvious, and a lack of the assurance of
continuity works a hardship on both the personnel of the Central
Intelligence Agency and the quality of work performed. Changes of
Directors with the following changes of organization tend to make the
Central Intelligence Agency employee feel uncertain and insecure in his
job with consequent harm to the quality and quantity of his output. This
was particularly noticeable last Fall just before election when
literally dozens of rumors were extant in Washington that one of the
Committee members was to become Director of Central Intelligence as soon
as the election was over.

“(4) As the best hope for continuity of service and the greatest
assurance of independence of action a civilian should be Director of
Central Intelligence. If a Service man is selected for the post he
should resign from active military duty.”

This is a question that has arisen time and time again. Perhaps the best
discussion of this problem is that stated in the report of the Eberstadt
Committee which is quoted, as follows:

“A moot question is whether the Director should be a civilian or a
professional military man. The argument in favor of a service man is
that he will command more confidence from the armed services who talk
his language and will respect his position and security. With a military
man, the present pay scale will not prove a deterrent. The job could be
developed into one of the top staff assignments available to members of
the three services.

“Against this, it is said that the position requires a broader background
and greater versatility and diplomatic experience than is usually found
in service personnel; that the best qualified and most competent
officers would not accept the position if to do so meant permanent
retirement and an end of the road to important command or operational
responsibility. If a military man is assigned to the position as a tour
of duty, he will, it is said, inevitably be influenced to some degree,
in the execution of his duties,
by his rank and status as compared with that of other officers with whom
he deals. He may also be influenced by concern for his next billet.

“The principal argument against a civilian is the difficulty of getting a
good one. It will be difficult to attract a man of force, reputation,
integrity, and proven administrative ability who has an adequate
knowledge of foreign history and politics and is familiar with
intelligence technique and the working machinery of the Government and
the military establishment. Not only is the pay low in comparison to
industry and the professions, but the reward of success is anonymity.
The wisdom of putting an individual who lacks intelligence experience in
charge simply because he is a competent administrator is dubious. A
civilian would have the advantage of being free from taint of service
ambitions or rivalries. On the other hand a civilian may be more subject
to political pressure than a military man. In certain foreign countries
this has occurred. In any event a civilian would have to be a man of
commanding reputation and personality in order to secure the respect and
cooperation of the services. CIA's relations with the State Department
would undoubtedly benefit from the presence of a civilian director,
known and respected by the Secretary of State and his assistants.

“The intrinsic interest of the work, its potential influence on policy,
and recognition of public service to be performed might combine to
persuade a competent civilian to accept the position. If so, his
appointment would seem desirable. A change in the statute that would
disqualify a military man is not, however, recommended.

“Moreover it would not be wise, at this time at least, to amend the
statute to include a mandatory requirement that a military man,
appointed as Director, must retire from the service. A competent officer
could be persuaded to retire from his service and abandon his career to
become Director of CIA only if he felt some assurance of a reasonable
tenure of office. That no such assurance exists today appears from the
fact that three different Directors have been appointed since January of
1946. A provision requiring the retirement from service of any
commissioned officer appointed Director might appropriately be included
in the statute—if coupled with the provision for adequate retirement pay
in case he is removed as Director.”

[Here follow 9 pages commenting on Chapters XI and XII and charts showing
the organization of the CIA.]

* Source: Central Intelligence Agency Records, Job
86-B00269R, Box 5. Secret. The full text, including the tables not
printed here, is in the Supplement. Sent to the Executive Secretary
of the National Security Council who transmitted copies to the
members of the NSC. (Memorandum from
Souers to the NSC, March 2; Central
Intelligence Agency Records, Job 86-B00269R, Box 5) See the
Supplement.

1 This and similar chapter, page, and
paragraph references are to the text of the Dulles Report; see Document 358.

372. Memorandum From the Secretary of State's Special Assistant for Research and Intelligence (Armstrong) to Secretary of State Acheson372. Memorandum From the Secretary of State's Special Assistant for
Research and Intelligence (Armstrong) to Secretary of State AchesonSource

Washington, March 3,
1949.

SUBJECT

Comments on the Dulles
Committee Report and Recommended Action for the NSC

Discussion.

1. There are attached:

(a) A proposed action paper for the NSC
on the Report (Tab A).

(b) The comments of the Department on the several recommendations of the
Report (Tab B).1

(c) A briefing of the Report and Summary (Tab C).

(d) The Dulles Committee Report
(Tab D).2

2. The Department strongly endorses the Report and believes it desirable
to propose to the NSC a positive course
of action to carry out certain of the recommendations.

3. The Director of Central Intelligence expresses disagreement with
important parts of the Report on grounds of undesirability,
unworkability, etc.; he states that a number of the Report's
recommendations have already been effected.

4. The Navy takes the position that the Intelligence Advisory Committee
(IAC) should be constituted as a
“board of directors” over the Director, thus assuming more the status of
a sub-committee of the NSC on
intelligence matters, in contrast to its present function of a
coordinating element in conjunction with, and advisory to, the Director.
Its position is based on the theory that the Dulles Report tends to give the IAC responsibility without comparable authority. The
Department believes that such a concept is in contravention of the
National Security Act, which places the Director immediately under the
NSC.

5. The NSC will almost certainly be
confronted with a diversity of views on the implementation of the Report
which it cannot itself take the time to reconcile. For the resolution of
such differences, the Staff of the NSC
would hardly be the most competent body in the face of the technical character of the subject. If an
ad hoc sub-committee of the NSC is
appointed to review the several comments and views of the agencies, it
should not include the Director as a number of the conclusions and
recommendations bear upon his position and person. The same
consideration applies to a referral to the IAC, of which the Director is chairman.

Recommendations:

1. That the attached letter be sent to the NSC enclosing:

(a) A paper for the consideration and action of the Council, and

(b) The comments of the Department in accordance with the request of the
Executive Secretary.

2. That in order to resolve the differences of views submitted to the
NSC, you suggest that the Council
constitute a representative each of the Secretaries of State and Defense
and possibly a representative of the JCS
as an ad hoc subcommittee to review the proposals of the Department in
the light of the comments from the several agencies and to recommend
further action to the Council.

Tab A3

FOR NSC CONSIDERATION

Problem:

To take the necessary action to implement the recommendations of the
Dulles Report.

Analysis:

1. The Dulles Committee has
performed an extremely useful serv-ice in producing, after diligent
study and analysis, a comprehensive report on the Central Intelligence
Agency, and the organization for national intelligence.

2. Certain of the conclusions and recommendations can and should be the
subject of immediate implementation. Other recommendations will require
further study and their implementation will take some time.

3. The all important conclusion reached by the Report is that if we are
to have an effective Central Intelligence Agency continuity of tenure
of the Director is
essential and that to achieve this the Director of Central Intelligence
should be a civilian. Although the ultimate objectives of the Report
cannot be reached until such time as a properly qualified civilian
assumes responsibilities as Director of Central Intelligence, immediate
steps should be taken to implement as far as possible those
recommendations of the Report as can be effected promptly.

Conclusions and Recommendations:

1. That the Executive Secretary be directed to commend, in the name of
the Security Council, the members of the Dulles Committee and its staff for the extremely able
and objective study and report, on which the Security Council is taking
immediate action.

2. That the President give consideration to the early selection of a
highly qualified civilian as Director of Central Intelligence.

3. That the Director of Central Intelligence be instructed to take the
necessary steps immediately to effect changes in accordance with the
following recommendations of the Dulles Committee Report, and to report on a monthly
basis to the Council, with the Intelligence Advisory Committee (IAC) the progress made:

(Note: The recommendations of the Dulles Committee are summarized by chapters for
identification only, and in no sense as an interpretation.)

Chapter III—Organization and Administration of
CIA:

(3) The Director should refer to NSC
questions of compliance with requests for disclosure of information.

(4) CIA should accent role as coordinator rather than as organization for
secret activities.

Chapter IV—Responsibility of CIA for
Coordination:

(5) The IAC is soundly conceived, but
should participate more actively with the Director in continuing
coordination of intelligence activities.

(7) The Interdepartmental Coordinating and Planning Staff should be
reconstituted as a staff responsible only to the Director with task of
developing plans for coordination.

(8) Responsibilities of Office of Collection and Dissemination (OCD) re collection and dissemination should
be carried out under a new Coordination Division.

Chapter V—Responsibility of CIA for National
Intelligence Estimates:

(3) There should be a small Estimates Division in CIA to prepare
coordinated national intelligence estimates (draw upon specialized
intelligence product of the agencies).

(4) Under the Director these estimates should be discussed and approved
by the IAC, whose members should be
collectively responsible.

(5) Provision should be made to handle crisis situations.

Chapter VI—Services of Common Concern,
Intelligence Research and Reports:

(1) A Research and Reports Division in ORE should accomplish research in
and coordinate production of intelligence in fields of common interest.
Staff should include representatives from State and the Services.

(2) The Coordinating Division (reconstituted Interdepartmental
Coordinating and Planning Staff) should be responsible for studying the
scope of the Research and Reports Division and for recommending the
services of common concern which should be performed centrally.

(4) Various reports, studies and summaries which are not national
intelligence or recognized services of common concern should be
discontinued.

Chapter VII—Services of Common Concern, Overt
Intelligence:

(3) The Director and IAC should take
steps for more active coordination of efforts to exploit intelligence
from foreign nationality groups and individuals in U.S.

(4) The Foreign Documents Branch should be made part of proposed Research
and Reports Division.

(5) If retained in the CIA, the Foreign Broadcast Information Branch
should be administered by the new Operations Division, but its product
should be available for analysis in the new Research and Reports
Division.

Chapter VIII—Services of Common Concern, Secret Intelligence:

(1) Covert operations of the Office of Special Operations (OSO), the Office of Policy Coordination
(OPC) and the activities of the
Contacts Branch of the Office of Operations (OO) should be integrated under the single direction of an
Operations Division.

(3) CIA should seek methods for better coordination in handling defectors
[from] intelligence agencies abroad and in the continental U.S.

(5) Cover policies of OSO in field should
be reviewed and tightened. Consideration should be given to increasing
use of non-official cover as demands for diplomatic or military cover
are reduced.

(6) Counter-espionage of OSO should be
increased and closer liaisons established with the FBI.

(7) Relations between departmental agencies should be brought closer and
the guidance which OSO receives from the
intelligence consumers should be strengthened.

(8) The Director should assure that OSO
is receiving adequate information on current and strategic intelligence
needs of the Government. Closer relations might be established with the
Secretaries of State and Defense.

Chapter IX—Services of Common Concern, Secret
Operations:

(2) OPC should be integrated with OSO and Contacts Branch of the CIA, all
under single direction of an Operations Division.

4. That in accordance with Chapter IV, Recommendation 6, the FBI be added to the IAC, but that the AEC and
JIG be retained on the IAC, which
revisions appear acceptable to the other IAC members.

5. That the Director of Central Intelligence be directed to begin the
necessary steps and to plan for the implementation of the following
other recommendations of the Dulles Report which will require a longer time to
accomplish and to report monthly to the NSC, with the IAC, on
progress:

Chapter III—Organization and Administration of
CIA:

(5) Large percentage of military personnel in CIA key positions
discourages competent civilian personnel from looking to employment in
CIA as a career.

Chapter VIII—Services of Common Concern, Secret
Intelligence:

(4) OSO (or new OP Div) should give
primary attention to building a corps of trained personnel for
operations abroad.

6. That the Director of Central Intelligence be directed to review, in
conjunction with the IAC, such
recommendations and conclusions other than those listed above, with a
view to implementation where desirable, and to recommend further action
to the Security Council when appropriate.

Tab C4

Memorandum From the Special Assistant for Research and Intelligence
(Armstrong) to Secretary of
State Acheson

Washington, February 9, 1949.

SUBJECT

Report of the Dulles-Jackson-Correa Committee to the National Security Council
entitled “The Central Intelligence Agency and National Organization for
Intelligence”

Discussion:

1. The Report was made by a committee comprised of Allen Dulles, William H. Jackson, and Mathias F. Correa, on the authority of
the National Security Council (NSC)
dated February 13, 1949. It consists of 163 pages, with a concise
summary of 13 pages at the beginning. The State Department figures in
the Report throughout, essentially in its relations on intelligence matters with CIA, the
military services, and the intelligence functions of the Department
itself. A very condensed summary5 of the Report is attached hereto.

2. The NSC Secretariat has asked for the
comments of each agency, including the CIA.

3. The exhaustive character of the Report, including sections on certain
very sensitive activities, presents a security problem in distribution
even beyond its Top Secret classification, necessitating a handling on
the basis of “need to know,” rather than simply “Top Secret
clearance.”

4. Particular attention is drawn to the following sections which have a
direct bearing on the Department, aside from the specific organization
of intelligence:

The Intelligence Problem (Chapter I)

The Relation of Coordinated National Intelligence to Policy Formulation
and to the NSC (pp. 55, 68, 69, 72, 73,
79)

Current Intelligence Summaries (p. 84)

Domestic (FBI) vs. Foreign Intelligence
(pp. 56-58; 98, 99)

Department and Secret Intelligence, particularly field representation
(pp. 117-119; 122-124; 127)

Department and Secret Operations (p. 131)

5. It is of particular importance to realize the budgetary significance
of the CIA and therefore its position in the governmental organization.
At a rough estimate, the total budget for all government foreign
intelligence is approximately $82,500,000. Of this, the State Department
budget is approximately 2-1/2 million, the CIA, including Secret
Operations (OPC), 50 million, and the
other services combined, 30 million. This budgetary predominance, when
viewed in the light of the central and coordinating position which the
CIA holds in the intelligence field, indicates the overwhelming
significance of any determination of CIA function and operation.

6. Since the Report is rather strongly condemnatory of the direction of
CIA and of the CIA's present effectiveness, it raises an embarrassing
problem for the Director of CIA in making appropriate comments upon it.
It may be anticipated, however, that the reaction to the Report by the
Director of CIA will, on the whole, be belittling of its significance.
He has already indicated the view that the Report is (a) academic, (b)
non-professional, in the sense that it was written by a staff not expert
in intelligence matters, and (c) inconsequential, because its
recommendations are only slightly at variance with present conditions
and organization.

7. The Department, on the other hand, would strongly concur in the Report
and most of the recommendations therein. The Department believes the
Report to be penetrating and objective, the result of exhaustive study by the Committee and its
staff members, all of whom in one way or another have excellent
background both in intelligence matters and governmental organization.
The Department furthermore believes that the recommendations represent a
drastic change in the concept and organization of Central Intelligence
and are by no means inconsequential. Finally, the Department believes
that the Report may well serve as a strong incentive toward effecting
sorely-needed changes in CIA and its relations with the other agencies,
and particularly the Department.

8. The attitude of other agencies—specifically the military
serv-ices—toward the report is as yet unknown, but it can be anticipated
that they will endorse the report in general, and possibly most of its
recommendations, although with less interest and force than the
Department.

Recommendations:

1. That, on the basis of “need to know,” this report be circulated, at
the outset, only to the following (aside from the Secretary and Under
Secretary):

S/S—Messrs. Humelsine, McWilliams, Barnes

S/P—Messrs. Kennan, Davies,
Joyce

A—Messrs. Peurifoy and Hulten

EUR—Messrs. Hickerson and Thompson

FE—Messrs. Butterworth and Allison

NEA—Messrs. Satterthwaite and Hare

ARA—Messrs. Daniels and Woodward

2. That R prepare, in collaboration with
S/P and with the concurrence of the appropriate offices of the
Department, a paper for the Secretary to submit to the NSC, which will include

(a) The Department's comments in accordance with the request of the
NSC Secretary

(b) An action paper for the consideration of NSC, recommending directives for immediate implementation
of certain recommendations in the Report, and eventual implementation of
others.

* Source: National Archives and Records
Administration, RG 59, Records of the Department of State, Records
of the Executive Secretariat, NSC
Files: Lot 63 D 351, NSC 50, Box
4207. Top Secret. Drafted by Armstrong. Cleared in C, A, S/P, EUR, NEA, ARA, and FE.

1 See the Supplement.

2 See Document
358.

3 Top Secret.

4 Top Secret.

5 See the
Supplement.

373. Memorandum From the Director of the Executive Secretariat (Humelsine) to the Under Secretary of State (Webb)373. Memorandum From the Director of the Executive Secretariat
(Humelsine) to
the Under Secretary of State (Webb)Source

Washington, March 8,
1949.

Mr. Webb:

I had a good conversation with Frank Wisner about the possibility of Mr.
Gordon Gray being made head of
the CIA. In the course of this conversation I went into the question of
whether Mr. Wisner would like to
have this assignment. Wisner
indicated that he was well satisfied to stay where he was, if he could
look forward to having a person of the caliber of Gray as head of the organization. He
said that Gray would be perfect in
his estimation for the assignment and that he was certain that under
such a set-up CIA could really become an effective instrumentality.

In querying him further as to how well he knew Gordon Gray he said he knew him quite well and that he
would recommend as people we could check with to get recommendations for
Gray the following:

Mr. John Graham, Assistant Secretary of the Treasury

Mr. Thurmond Chatham, Congressman from North Carolina

Mr. William Jackson, member of the
Jackson-Dulles-Correa group

I talked to Mr. Lovett on the
telephone to get his reaction to Mr. Gordon
Gray. Mr. Lovett
said “I know Gray and my hunch is
that he would do a good job”. Mr. Lovett said that he has had a chance to look into the
CIA since leaving the Department as Under Secretary.1 He said, in fact, it was the
first real opportunity that he had had to consider this problem. He said
he had talked to Bill Jackson and to Allen
Dulles, separately, and he certainly concurred in their
view that, unless something drastic was done with the CIA, Mr. Truman was in a position to be “let
down worse that any President ever was” in this particular field.

Mr. Lovett said that this required
“damn fast action” and that the area should “be tidied up” as soon as
possible. He said under the present circumstances anything could
happen.

Mr. Lovett went on to say that he
had better intelligence information in many respects available to him in
New York through the Bank than he had while Under Secretary. He said
that in his estimation Admiral Hillenkoetter was a very ineffective and
pedestrian officer. He said this comment applied to the Admiral only in
his present assignment and he had no opinion or idea as to his worth as
a Naval officer.

Mr. Lovett went on to say that
Frank Wisner was first class
and that Gray and Wisner should make an excellent team.
He did say that in his opinion careful consideration should be given as
to whether or not Colonel Carter Clark should not be used in some
capacity in the CIA. He said he knows of Clark's weaknesses but that in
his opinion his strength far exceeds any weaknesses. He said to tell Mr.
Webb that he had been
considering this matter and was about to call him on it when he got the
call from me.

I think it is significant that throughout my conversation with Mr.
Lovett he used the word
“lousy” to characterize the CIA operation.

CH

* Source: National
Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Records of the
Department of State, Records of the Executive Secretariat, NSC Files: Lot 66 D 148, Box 1555. No
classification marking.

1 Lovett resigned as Under
Secretary on January 20, 1949.

374. Memorandum From the Acting Director of the Policy Planning Staff (Butler) to the Secretary of State's Special Assistant for Research and Intelligence (Armstrong)374. Memorandum From the Acting Director of the Policy Planning Staff
(Butler) to the
Secretary of State's Special Assistant for Research and Intelligence
(Armstrong)Source

Washington, March 17,
1949.

It was suggested at a recent meeting of the Under Secretary's staff that
suggestions be submitted to you regarding what the Department wants and
needs from CIA. The following points are of interest to S/P:

1. Continued close liaison between OPC
and S/P, in order that the former may receive policy guidance from the
Department.

2. S/P needs and wants secret intelligence from all sources just as soon
as it becomes available to CIA.

3. Better clearance with State before the publication of CIA estimates of
situations. Clearance of summaries of information and similar CIA
reports is not of great concern to S/P, but it is considered important
that State have an opportunity to express its views regarding
interpretations of or judgments about information obtained by CIA.

George H. Butler1

* Source: National Archives and Records
Administration, RG 59, Records of the Department of State, Records
of the Policy Planning Staff, NSC
Files: Lot 62 D 1, NSC Intelligence
Directives, Box 2517. Secret.

1 Printed from a copy that bears this
typed signature.

375. Memorandum From the Assistant Director for Policy Coordination, Central Intelligence Agency (Wisner) to the Under Secretary of State (Webb)375. Memorandum From the Assistant Director for Policy Coordination,
Central Intelligence Agency (Wisner) to the Under Secretary of State (Webb)Source

Washington, March 18,
1949.

SUBJECT

NSC Consideration of the Dulles Report; selection of special
issues for consideration

1. Pursuant to one of the two instructions which you gave Carl Humelsine
and myself at the conclusion of our conversation of last Thursday, March
17, I have had a further discussion with Carl and I am submitting to you
in this memorandum a number of issues which Carl and I have agreed would
be appropriate for presentation and disposition at an early meeting of
the National Security Council. I understand that you may want to call a
special meeting for this purpose and that you might deem it advisable to
discuss these issues with Mr. Souers in advance of the meeting.

2. In the selection of these issues an effort has been made to avoid
recommendations in the Dulles
report which are both controversial and difficult to comprehend.
Emphasis has been placed upon broad issues which are important and at
the same time capable of being understood and decided upon without the
necessity of extensive briefing or examination into the intricate
workings of the Central Intelligence Agency. For your own information, I
have included brief parenthetical explanations following the statement
of each issue. By all odds the most important of the issues selected is
that concerning the character of the Director and if this one could be
decided and acted upon with reasonable expedition, all other aspects of
the matter will fall into their proper places. I have not placed it at
the head of the list for tactical reasons which I believe will be
apparent to you.

3. I understand that in bringing these issues to the National Security
Council, you and Mr. Souers may use the approach that the Dulles report raises so many detailed
points that a full discussion of it by the National Security Council
would be a very lengthy and tedious proceeding; and that in order to get
underway with this very important matter, you have attempted to single
out certain aspects of the report which you consider to be susceptible
of relatively easy resolution.

4. The following are the recommended issues:

(a) That the Central Intelligence Agency is properly placed in the
governmental structure under the National Security Council. (This may
appear self-evident but as it is one of the leading recommendations of
the Dulles report, it would
appear worthy of confirmation and reaffirmation in connection with any
general consideration of the report.)

(b) That the Intelligence Advisory Council is soundly conceived and that
its present advisory relationship to the Director of Central
Intelligence is correct, but that the IAC should participate more actively with the Director of
Central Intelligence in the continuing coordination of intelligence
activities. (It would lead to the complete frustration of the
centralizing and coordinating functions of the Director of Central
Intelligence if he were to be made subordinate to the IAC. This in turn would defeat the purposes
of the legislation which created the CIA. The IAC is comprised of the service intelligence chiefs and
human nature and bureaucracy being what they are—and this is most
applicable in the field of intelligence—it would not be long before the
CIA would be largely defunctionalized and rendered both impotent and
insignificant.)

(c) That in order to improve coordination in the overall intelligence and
security field, the Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation
should be made a member of the IAC. (It
is impossible to draw a clear and satisfactory dividing line between
foreign and domestic intelligence activities for the reason that there
is an inevitable interplay and interaction between developments within
the United States and developments overseas. In order to insure an
overall coordinated effort and to reduce the possibilities of confusion,
duplication of function and friction, it would be highly desirable for
the Director of the FBI to become a
member of the IAC. As matters now stand
the foreign and domestic intelligence activities are dealing with each
other at arm's length and there is no satisfactory forum for the
resolution of arguments and conflicts.)

(d) That in order to assist the Director of Central Intelligence in
carrying out his statutory duty in protecting intelligence sources and
methods, he should, in cases where the disclosure of secret information
is sought from him (for example by a member of the Congress) and he has
doubt as to whether he should comply, refer the question to the National
Security Council for a determination as to whether or not disclosure is
in the public interest. (It would be a most helpful protection to the
Director for the NSC, with all its
authority and prestige, to act as a buffer between him and persons
making demands for the disclosure of secret information. It would also
aid him to have the benefit of the collective judgment of the NSC in questions of this character.
Finally, it would provide necessary insurance against a duplication of
the Bogota fiasco which ended up in a name-calling performance as
between the Director for Central Intelligence and the State Department—Mr. Humelsine can supply the
particulars.)

(e) That the Central Intelligence Agency be empowered and encouraged to
establish through its Director a closer liaison with the two members of
the NSC upon whom it chiefly depends,
namely the Secretaries of State and Defense. (This might not seem
necessary but it is believed to be advisable in view of the tendency
which the CIA has developed toward establishing itself as an independent
free-wheeling organization. Note in this connection the recent cable
from Minister Jacobs in Praha complaining of an almost total lack of
cooperation or mutual confidence as between himself and the CIA
representative there. This same story has been told repeatedly by the
chiefs of our missions throughout the world. This is evidence of unsound
indoctrination of the OSO
representatives. Distinctions can be drawn between operational matters
which should be kept secret and policy matters which are primarily the
concern of the State Department chiefs of mission.)

(f) That the Director of Central Intelligence shall be a civilian and
that the President should be invited to give his early consideration to
a person of considerable stature and prominence, possessing the
requisite qualifications of experience and willingness to serve. (As
stated above this is the crucial issue, for upon the determination of
this depends the question whether the United States is or is not to have
a sound and useful intelligence agency. Virtually every individual who
has had occasion to deal with or look into the activities of the CIA has
recognized that the system of rotating the Director and top staff
personnel at frequent intervals has disastrous consequences, and that
the status and reputation of the CIA can best and most quickly be
revived by the appointment to the top position of a civilian director of
outstanding qualifications. The appointment of such an individual would
bring to the entire organization the leadership and inspiration which it
so badly needs, and only in this manner can the organization be elevated
from its state of low repute among the government agencies with which it
must work closely in order to be successful. Continuity of direction is
essential for the CIA not only for the reasons which make it desirable
in any governmental department but because secret intelligence and
secret operations are the most highly specialized undertakings and it is
very harmful to be constantly educating a series of rapidly moving heads
and their immediate staffs—especially when many of them regard their CIA
assignment simply as an unwelcome stopgap to fill in between more
desirable Army, Navy and Air Force commands.

With a military director, progress in the direction of real coordination
of the national intelligence effort will be painfully slow. It is
submitted that any military man, with his ingrained sense of awe in the
presence of superior rank and his absolute dependence upon the good will of the top military
hierarchy for his own future advancement, must be expected to make all
of the “necessary compromises”.

If this principle is bypassed or compromised, all the rest of the effort
to straighten out and improve the CIA becomes relatively meaningless. It
is believed that the President would not be unfavorably disposed toward
the appointment of a permanent civilian director if a means for
accomplishing the changeover can be devised which would not have the
appearance of a “vote of no confidence” in the existing management. The
issue of a civilian as against a military director provides this
means.

FGW

* Source: National Archives and Records
Administration, RG 59, Records of the Department of State, Records
of the Executive Secretariat, NSC
Files: Lot 63 D 351, NSC 50, Box
4207. Top Secret.

376. Memorandum for the President of Discussion at the 36th Meeting of the National Security Council376. Memorandum for the President of Discussion at the 36th Meeting of
the National Security CouncilSource

Washington, March 22,
1949.

[Here follows discussion of agenda items 1-4, internal security, U.S.
position with respect to Korea, U.S. objectives with respect to Greece
and Turkey to counter Soviet threats to U.S. security, and airfield
construction.]

5. The Central Intelligence Agency and National
Organization for Intelligence (Memos for NSC from Executive Secretary, same subject,
dated January 24, March 2, and March 8, 1949)1

Mr. Souers reported that there was such a volume of comments on the
Survey Group Report that he felt a meeting should be held shortly
devoted solely to this subject. He suggested that the Council might care
to appoint a committee of three, including representatives of the
National Military Establishment and the Department of State to point up
the issues for Council action.

Secretary Acheson said he had found
the basic report difficult to read and, in addition, had comments by his
staff almost twice as long as the report. He wondered if the Council could have the analysis of the
issues before a meeting.

Mr. Souers said there would be great suspicion of such an analysis, but
he felt that the papers included a lot of administrative matters which
the Council need not concern itself with. He felt the Council might
approve certain concepts and even set up a mechanism to watch over the
execution of these concepts. One such issue was the question of a
civilian director.

Mr. Acheson inquired if the NSC Staff could not prepare the
analysis.

Mr. Souers replied that the Staff would tie back to the representative
intelligence chiefs once again, whereas what was needed was a fresh
appraisal by two or three good neutral men backed up by the Secretary of
State and the Secretary of Defense, in order to avoid departmental
partisan feeling.

Secretary Forrestal commented that
the Department of Justice would probably add some acid remarks.

Mr. Lay said that the Hoover
Commission Reports had made recommendations in intelligence matters,
and, in effect, these were also before the Council for consideration in
connection with the present study.

Mr. Souers remarked that there had been some informal indication that
State might undertake such an analysis of the issues.

Secretary Acheson agreed that the
Department of State, with the assistance of the Executive Secretary,
could prepare an analysis purporting to be its judgment of the main
concepts. This could then be used more or less as an agenda for a debate
on the issues.

Mr. Lay added that there was also
a need for a statement of recommended Council actions.

Secretary Acheson suggested that
the Council consider two meetings on the subject: the first to discuss
the problems, and the second to sharpen the issues to decisions.

He added that his Hoover Commission experience had shown that it was
profitable to spend three-fourths of the time on an examination of the
problem, after which the solution would arise in the remaining
quarter.

The National Security Council:2

Agreed that the Department of State should prepare, for Council
consideration at an early meeting, a statement of the issues involved in
the reference papers on this subject.3

Note: The above action subsequently transmitted to the Secretary of State
for implementation.

[Here follows discussion of agenda items 6 and 7, review of the world
situation and NSC status of
projects.]

* Source: Truman
Library, Papers of Harry S. Truman, President's Secretary's Files,
Subject File. Top Secret. Prepared on March 23.

1 The January 24 and March 8 memoranda were not
found. Regarding the March 2 memorandum, see the source note, Document 371.

2 The paragraph and note that follow constitute
NSC Action No. 198. (National
Archives and Records Administration, RG 273, Records of the National
Security Council, Record of Actions, Box 55)

3 See
Document 378. For NSC consideration, see Document 380.

377. Memorandum From the Secretary of State's Special Assistant for Research and Intelligence (Armstrong) to the Assistant Secretary of State for Occupied Areas (Saltzman)377. Memorandum From the Secretary of State's Special Assistant for
Research and Intelligence (Armstrong) to the Assistant Secretary of State for
Occupied Areas (Saltzman)Source

Washington, March 24,
1949.

Charlie:

After reviewing your draft memorandum1 on the State-JCS relationship, I would like to suggest for your
consideration the inclusion of the question of intelligence relations
between the Department and the JCS as
one facet of the general problem that is distinctly susceptible of
improvement. If you agree, a section might be included under Discussion
along the following lines, perhaps to be inserted between your Sections
9 and 10:

Intelligence Relations

During the war and for some time thereafter the Department maintained
formal membership upon the Joint Intelligence Committee and the Joint Intelligence Staff, JCS. In 1947, following the enactment of
the National Security Act and the establishment of the National Security
Council and the Central Intelligence Agency and the reorganization of
the structure of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, the Department relinquished
its representation in the intelligence echelons of the JCS, although it has maintained informal
liaison with the Joint Intelligence Group (successor to the Joint
Intelligence Staff). In theory, the expression of the Department's
intelligence viewpoint is made to the JCS through the Central Intelligence Agency and,
conversely, the intelligence requirements of the JCS are supposed to be conveyed to the Department through
that Agency. The experience of the past 18 months, however, has proven
this arrangement to be unsatisfactory and impracticable.

It is not believed necessary that the Department be specifically and
formally represented upon the Joint Intelligence Committee, since its
intelligence relations with the military intelligence services can be
satisfactorily accommodated in the Intelligence Advisory Committee
(established under the National Security Council to advise the Director
of Central Intelligence), but it is believed desirable that a direct
channel be re-established between the Department and the Joint
Intelligence Group. Such a channel would permit the continuous
conveyance of Departmental intelligence of interest to the military to
its joint intelligence units and the expression of the joint
requirements of the military for politico-economic intelligence.

If you agree that the foregoing should properly be included in your
memorandum, it would probably follow that a brief recommendation also be
included to cover the re-establishment of direct and official liaison
relations between the intelligence area of the Department and the Joint
Intelligence Group, JCS.

W. Park Armstrong, Jr.2

* Source: National Archives and Records
Administration, RG 59, Records of the Department of State, Records
of the Bureau of Intelligence and Research: Lot 58 D 776.
Restricted.

1 Dated
March 16. (Ibid.)

2 Printed from a copy that bears this
typed signature.

378. Memorandum From the Under Secretary of State (Webb) to the Executive Secretary of the National Security Council (Souers)378. Memorandum From the Under Secretary of State (Webb) to the Executive
Secretary of the National Security Council (Souers)Source

Washington, April 4,
1949.

Pursuant to NSC Action No. 198 and your
memorandum dated March 23, 1949, the Department of State considers that
the following are the basic issues raised by the Dulles-Jackson-Correa
report:

1. That the Central Intelligence Agency is properly placed in the
governmental structure under the National Security Council.

2. That the Intelligence Advisory Committee is soundly conceived and that
its present advisory relationship to the Director of Central
Intelligence is correct, but that the IAC should participate more actively with the Director of
Central Intelligence in the continuing coordination of intelligence
activities and in the production of finished estimates.

a. With respect to coordination of intelligence activities, the
allocation of responsibilities among the agencies should be carried out
under the forthright leadership of CIA.

b. With respect to the production of estimates for the President and the
National Security Council, CIA should utilize the facilities of the
IAC members who should assume
collective responsibility for them.

3. That in order to improve coordination in the overall intelligence and
security field, the Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation
should be made a member of the IAC.

4. That secret operations should be integrated with secret intelligence
and domestic exploitation of foreign intelligence in a single
self-administered office within CIA, rather than being a separate office
directly under the Director of Central Intelligence independent of but
coordinated with other components of CIA.

5. That the Director of Central Intelligence should be a civilian and
that the President should be invited to give his early consideration to
a person of considerable stature and prominence, possessing the
requisite qualifications of experience and willingness to serve.

James E. Webb1

* Source: Truman Library, Papers of Harry S. Truman,
President's Secretary's Files. Top Secret. Souers circulated
Webb's memorandum to
Council members on the same day. (Ibid.) See the Supplement.

1 Printed from a copy that indicates
Webb signed the
original.

379. Memorandum From the Chief of the Intelligence Coordinating and Planning Staff (Childs) to Director of Central Intelligence Hillenkoetter379. Memorandum From the Chief of the Intelligence Coordinating and
Planning Staff (Childs) to Director of Central Intelligence HillenkoetterSource

Washington, April 6,
1949.

1. With reference to the Under Secretary of State's memo1 to Mr. Souers, dated
April 4, about the basic issues raised by the Dulles Report, I hope you will have a
chance to express your opinion at the NSC meeting tomorrow and that you will be able to say—with
reference to Paragraph 2 it is fine to have the Intelligence Advisory
Committee “participate more actively”, but as you will recall, there
have been very few, if any, positive results reached at the meetings of
this Committee, who prefer to have staff work done before and/or after
any subject is brought up (and they usually disavow or do not agree with
the result of such staff work!!). Certainly, such meetings could never,
around that table, “produce finished estimates”. Their “facilities” now
do participate in the production of estimates by staff meetings at
working levels, etc., and by concurrences, etc., but according to
Admiral Inglis this is assuming no collective responsibility for these
estimates. I think that “collective responsibility” phrase is
misleading. The DCI and CIA have the
responsibility for coordinating, etc., but the various intelligence
agencies may well assume responsibility for their portions of the whole.
If they would stick to their dominant interests, we would like it
better.

2. We hope any decision by the NSC on
these “basic issues” will be very carefully and precisely worded (not
generalities) as each IAC Agency will
interpret it in its own light and in accordance with its established
wishes if it can possibly do so. To clear up the ambiguities, definite
instructions will have to come down from the top to the Intelligence
Agencies. For example, we assume under CIA's “forthright leadership”
mentioned in Paragraph 2a, we can prepare original drafts or indicate
what we are going to do and tell the boys to follow on, i.e., take it or
leave it just as much as though that paragraph said under the
“direction” of CIA. Our own eager beavers will certainly interpret it
that way.

PC

* Source: Central Intelligence Agency
Records, Job 86-B00269R, Box 5. No classification marking.

1 Document 378.

380. Memorandum for the President of Discussion at the 37th Meeting of the National Security Council380. Memorandum for the President of Discussion at the 37th Meeting of
the National Security CouncilSource

Washington, April 7,
1949.

The following notes contain a summary of the discussion at the 37th
meeting of the National Security Council.

Mr. Webb called the meeting to
order and remarked that the President had asked him to preside in the
absence of the Secretary of State.

1. The Central Intelligence Agency and National Organization for
Intelligence (Memos for NSC from
Executive Secretary, same subject, dated January 24, March 2, March 8,
and April 4, 1949, respectively)1

Mr. Webb suggested, and the
Council agreed, that Admiral Hillenkoetter should remain during the
discussion of the first four points in the Department of State's
memorandum,2 but that he should
retire during the discussion of point five, with respect to whether the
Director of Central Intelligence should be a civilian, after making a
statement with respect thereto.

Mr. Souers reviewed the action of the Council at its last meeting, when
it was agreed that the Department of State should prepare a statement of
the issues involved in the reference papers.

Mr. Webb then proposed that the
Council consider whether each of the issues was properly stated, and
turn to point one, that CIA is properly placed in the Government under
the NSC.

Secretary Johnson referred to the
comment in the Dulles Report,
that CIA might be just another intelligence agency, and asked if it was
intended that the Report be released to the public.

Mr. Souers said that the Report contained considerable highly classified
information and that he knew of no intent to release it.

Secretary Johnson then said that he
agreed with the statement of the first issue.

Since there was no other comment on that issue, Mr. Webb turned to point two, with respect
to the Intelligence Advisory Committee.

Secretary Johnson said he did not
agree with the statement of this issue and that he reserved the right to
be heard. Although he did not concur now, he said he might later, and
that he had the backing of the President to reserve his opinion until he had an opportunity to
formulate his views. He mentioned that he wished to consider the problem
in relation to the broad question of peace or war. In response to Mr.
Webb's suggestion that only
an agreement as to the statement of the problem was involved, Secretary
Johnson replied that he wished
no implications to flow from his remarks and that he did not wish to be
stampeded into taking a position.

Mr. Ford said the Attorney General had some doubts about this point,
too.

Mr. Webb then suggested, and the
Council agreed, to defer consideration of the second issue until
Secretary Johnson had formulated
his views. He then turned to point three with respect to the proposal
that the Director of the FBI be made a
member of the IAC.

Mr. Ford remarked that the Attorney General had not been consulted in the
drafting of the Dulles Report,
and said he would speak briefly on the issue and then file a memorandum
by the Department of Justice on the whole Report. He accepted, however,
the statement of the issue.

Since there was no other comment, Mr. Webb then turned to point four, with respect to the
integration of secret operations with secret intelligence. He suggested
that perhaps the Secretaries of State and Defense, in seeking an answer
to this issue, should follow closely the secret operations work and
consult with the Director of Central Intelligence.

The Council accepted the statement of the fourth issue, and Mr. Webb turned to point five, with respect
to the recommendation that the Director of Central Intelligence be a
civilian. Mr. Webb remarked that
the Department of State was inclined to feel that a civilian Director
was preferable, but did not wish to tie the hands of the President in
getting the best person available, civilian or military. He suggested
that we might have a civilian Deputy Director if the Director was a
military man. He then asked Admiral Hillenkoetter to comment on this
issue.

Admiral Hillenkoetter said he felt that the whole question was
unnecessary and that the question of a uniform should not enter into the
selection of a Director. Only the man himself and his qualifications
should be considered, he said. If he had any leaning, he said, it would
be for a military officer. [5 lines of source text not
declassified] CIA, he said, is primarily a military operation
intended to foretell possible attacks on our national security and to
provide information to beat our enemies in the event of war. If peace
could be assured by the United Nations or other means, then there would
be no need at all for a CIA. He concluded that the Director should be
chosen solely as the man to do the job. He agreed, however, that the
issue was correctly stated.

(Admiral Hillenkoetter retired at this point.)

Secretary Johnson said he was not
sure that the issue was correctly stated, because it did not take into
account the added issue as to whether the Director of Central
Intelligence was to be the permanent chairman of the U.S. Communications
Intelligence Board.

Mr. Webb inquired, if the Director
were to be chairman of the USCIB,
whether he would have to be a military officer.

Secretary Johnson said that would
pre-judge the issue. He added that the Dulles Report recommended that the Director be permanent
chairman of the USCIB and suggested
that Mr. Souers prepare and circulate a restatement of this issue for
consideration by the Council.

Mr. Souers referred to the growing stack of papers that had accumulated
on the whole subject and the difficulty of the Council in dealing with
any one or all of the issues which had been raised. Accordingly, he
suggested that the Council refer all these papers to the Secretaries of
State and Defense, as the most interested parties. They, in turn, might
designate officers to sift through all the material and prepare specific
recommendations in appropriate form for Council action.3

Secretary Johnson thought this was a good suggestion and said he would
designate General McNarney to do the job.

Mr. Souers also suggested that State and Defense consult with Treasury
and Justice in preparing recommended actions for the Council.

Secretary Johnson said he felt that Justice had a general stake in the
whole intelligence problem.

The National Security Council:4

Considered the reference papers on the subject and referred them to the
Secretaries of State and Defense to prepare, in consultation with the
Secretary of the Treasury and the Attorney General and in the light of
the discussion at this meeting, specific recommendations for Council
action.

Note: The above action subsequently transmitted to the Secretaries of
State and Defense.

[Here follows agenda item 2, NSC status
of projects.]

* Source: Truman
Library, Papers of Harry S. Truman, President's Secretary's Files,
Subject File. Top Secret. Prepared on April 8.

1 Regarding
the memoranda dated January 24, March 2, and March 8, see footnote 1, Document 376; regarding the
April 4 memorandum, see the source note, Document 378.

2 Document 378.

3 The State-Defense recommendations are in NSC 50, July 1; Document 384.

4 The following paragraph constitutes NSC Action No. 202. (National Archives
and Records Administration, RG 273, Records of the National Security
Council, Record of Actions, Box 55)

381. Memorandum From the Assistant Director for Policy Coordination, Central Intelligence Agency (Wisner) to the Counselor of the Department of State (Bohlen)381. Memorandum From the Assistant Director for Policy Coordination,
Central Intelligence Agency (Wisner) to the Counselor of the Department of State
(Bohlen)Source

Washington, April 15,
1949.

SUBJECT

Material for use in connection with proposed conversations with
General McNarney, et al.

1. Pursuant to your oral request of last evening, I am submitting to you
herewith a number of points which I believe could be employed to great
advantage in your forthcoming conversations with General McNarney.1 These points all relate to the
central issue which is involved in this matter. This issue is a fairly
delicate one, not merely because of the anticipated opposition, but also
because of the disposition on the part of the service people to feel
that there is an implied criticism of the competence of the services as
a whole in the suggestion that there should be a civilian director of
the Central Intelligence Agency. The following points have been drafted
in the light of these “angles”.

2. In the first place, I should like to call your attention again to the
arguments set forth in subparagraph (f) of paragraph 4 of my
memorandum2 to Mr. Webb dated 18 March. Although I agree with you that not
all of these statements are appropriate for use in connection with your
proposed conversation with General McNarney, there are, nevertheless,
some points here which are very important and which could and should be
used. For example, I think that you should point out the fact that
virtually every individual who has had occasion to deal with or to look
into the activities of the Central Intelligence Agency has recognized
that the system of rotating the director and the top staff personnel at
frequent intervals has had disastrous consequences. This is the argument
about continuity. I am convinced that continuity of direction is
essential for the Central Intelligence Agency “not only for the reasons
which make it desirable in any governmental department but also because
secret intelligence and secret operations are the most highly
specialized undertakings, and it is very harmful to be constantly
educating a series of new chiefs and their immediate staffs”. It should
take a new chief up to at least a year to begin to understand the very technical and complicated
ramification of this business and to learn about the personalities
throughout his own service and also in the foreign intelligence services
sufficiently well to be able to deal with them intelligently and
incisively. The service system of rotation renders it inevitable that
just about the time a man becomes proficient at this new complex job, he
can expect to be relieved. Apart from the question of secret operations
(OPC), the significance and
character of a sound secret intelligence operation is a very slow and
long range affair. In order to accomplish really valuable penetrations,
it is sometimes necessary to allow the operatives to lie completely
dormant for a period of years, gradually working their way into the
confidence of their chiefs. Such operations are not apt to have much of
an appeal to people who will only be with the outfit for a short period
of time, for they will regard themselves as only sowing the seeds for a
harvest to be reaped by a successor. The tendency, as already
demonstrated, is to achieve quick and spectacular results in order that
the incumbent may have something to show for what he has done while in
office. Along with this comes the very strong tug to allow or even
stimulate publicity. The recent series of articles and news items which
have appeared in a number of magazines and newspapers can no doubt be
traced to this, at least in part. The absolute requirement of this
particular profession is a “passion for anonymity”.

3. A related security argument is that the chief of the CIA must
necessarily come to know all of the most significant secrets of the
organization, and upon his departure it is inevitable that he will take
many of these with him and outside the organization. It is generally
impossible to predict what his next duty will be but it may well turn
out to be such as to place him in an exposed position. He might become a
military attache in a sensitive area or be placed in command of a
battleship or division in some forward area with the incident risk of
capture. He would obviously be a prize target for capture and it would
be foolish to suppose that the enemy would not make a concerted effort
to pick him off and to squeeze out of him all possible information which
he might have.

4. The next argument proceeds from the regrettable but very definite fact
that the services generally have never in the past and do not now
acknowledge that intelligence is a function which requires (a)
specialization, (b) continuity, or (c) particular recognition. (There
are, of course, many in all the services who disagree with this
standardized point of view—such as Generals Gruenther and Wedemeyer—but
even they acknowledge the existence of this condition.) It is the
natural consequence of this general approach toward intelligence within
the services that the best service people shun an intelligence service
assignment like the plague—and are even less prone to accept an outside
intelligence assignment than one within the services, such as G-2, ONI and
A-2. Al Gruenther has told me
that unless and until recognition in terms of both rank and influence is
given to the function of intelligence in far greater measure than is now
the case, it is unreasonable to expect and unfair to ask the people with
bright futures in the services to go into it. [I think that this is a
particularly good line of argument to use with General McNarney, and
even more so with Mr. Johnson,
because Mr. Johnson has already
recently taken issue on this precise point with the various service
representatives with whom General McNarney is discussing this matter.
When these persons told him that they did not think much of the argument
of continuity, he replied, with Johnsonian firmness and some heat, that
intelligence is a highly specialized business which requires experience
to learn. Obviously this bracketed material is for your own information
and guidance, since it would be unwise to reveal our knowledge of the
argument which took place in the other camp.]3 You should also
be careful to make it clear that the arguments in favor of a civilian
chief do not mean that the State Department does not fully recognize and
heartily subscribe to the importance and necessity of the fullest
service participation in the CIA enterprise. The argument has been used
and will be used again and again by the military that the CIA is a joint
venture and that even under present circumstances the percentage of
military personnel on duty with CIA is very small (2 or 3% of the
total). I would suggest a response that the number of military personnel
should be much increased—and that is certainly the line which I am
taking in my activity. This is the best way that I can think of to
dispose of this very specious argument.

5. There is also the argument which you yourself suggested concerning the
fact that no representative of one of the services could adequately and
fairly reflect the point of view of the other two services. I shall not
develop on this argument because it is already well known to you.
However, I should like to point out that there may be some loopholes in
this general argument which should be well plugged in advance of use.
For example, it is conceivable that the service reply to this argument
might be that the directorship should consist of a director with two
deputies and a periodic rotation as between the services for these three
spots. This is admittedly a weak counter to your argument because it
overlooks entirely the essentiality of continuity—but it might
nevertheless be used by persons who are no respecters of continuity.

6. Here is a tricky one which I am a bit uncertain about myself and which
I would not suggest at all but for the fact that General McNarney is the
person with whom you will be dealing. I am reliably and I believe
accurately informed that notwithstanding the dressing down which General
McNarney received at the hands of General Marshall in connection with McNarney's UN
responsibilities, he is very beholden to General Marshall for his rapid
advancement in rank during the war, for his elevation to the position of
Mediterranean Theater Commander and for many other things. Moreover, he
well knows General Marshall's great abilities of mind and is believed to
hold his judgment in some degree of veneration. General Marshall has
constantly been concerned, and he reiterated this concern to me only
yesterday, about the damage to the services which can result from the
popular distrust of too much brass in too many high places in the
government. This is the “military mind” line which has been so heavily
played by certain columnists and editorial writers and General
Marshall's views on this can best be summarized as a conviction that it
is best for the country and best for the services themselves for the
military—and most particularly those still on active duty—to stick to
their last and not allow themselves to become too deeply and personally
involved in other governmental affairs. I say that this is a tricky
argument because it is difficult for a non-service person to make it to
a service person—and accordingly, I leave it to your own best judgment
as to whether and if so how to employ it.

7. In conclusion, I should like to take the liberty of suggesting to you
that the happy issue out of these present afflictions can be a matter of
great importance to yourself in the new position to which you are going.
You are no doubt aware of the fact that the Western Union and Atlantic
Pact setups and apparati in France will include as a very significant
part thereof a mechanism for the coordination of clandestine efforts on
both the secret intelligence and secret operations sides. If at Paris
you should find yourself in a position of having to deal with
unenlightened and unsympathetic individuals on the American side in the
intelligence side of the show, it will render your overall job much more
difficult. As a concrete illustration of what I mean, the present chief
of this service had already designated General Pinkie Wright as the top
CIA representative upon the Western Union Clandestine Committee, and
this would have become effective but for the fact that General Wright
was “rotated” to some relatively minor duty in Japan. If you are not
personally acquainted with Pinkie and desire further information about
him, I suggest that you speak to George
Kennan or John Davies. In a word, however, he is the
Regular Army top-sergeant type, the smallness of whose knowledge and
comprehension of foreign affairs and foreign personalities is matched
only by his certainty that he knows these and all the other answers.

FGW

* Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59,
Records of the Department of State, Records of the Executive
Secretariat, NSC Files: Lot 63 D
351, NSC 50, Box 4207. Secret; Eyes
Only.

1 No record of these conversations has been
found. McNarney was an adviser to the Secretary of Defense who
subsequently prepared the comments and recommendations on the
Dulles Report embodied in
NSC 50, Document 384.

2 Document 375.

3 Brackets in the source text.

382. Memorandum for the President of Discussion at the 38th Meeting of the National Security Council382. Memorandum for the President of Discussion at the 38th Meeting of
the National Security CouncilSource

Washington, April 20,
1949.

[Here follows discussion of agenda items 1 and 2, construction of
airfields and stockpiling of aviation gasoline in Turkey and Japanese
reparations.]

3. Value to the President of the National
Security Council and the Central Intelligence Agency

The President said that the National Security Council was one of the best
devices available to him in helping him to make decisions on the basis
of coordinated papers. Before the establishment of the National Security
Council and the Central Intelligence Agency, there was a great vacuum in
obtaining coordinated advice and information on which to base decisions.
Without the National Security Council the President would have to confer
individually with everyone at the meeting on the questions which had
just been discussed. He said he was anxious to see the National Security
Council continue to operate as it had been operating. He added that when
he assumed office during the war there had been no coordinated
intelligence either; he received reports from various agencies and had
to try to coordinate these reports himself. The coordination was now
accomplished by the Central Intelligence Agency.

Secretary Johnson said he had noted
a good illustration of such coordination this morning in connection with
the problem of national organization for intelligence. General McNarney
had told him that the differences of views on this matter would be
reconciled before the question came before the Council again.

The National Security Council:1

Noted the oral remarks by the President that the reports of the National
Security Council and the Central Intelligence Agency have proved to be
one of the best means available to the President for obtaining
coordinated advice as a basis for reaching decisions.

[Here follows discussion of agenda items 4 and 5, review of the world
situation and NSC status of
projects.]

* Source: Harry
S. Truman Library, Papers of Harry S. Truman, President's
Secretary's Files, Subject File. Top Secret. Prepared on April
21.

1 The following paragraph constitutes NSC Action No. 207. (National Archives
and Records Administration, RG 273, Records of the National Security
Council, Record of Actions, Box 55)

383. Memorandum From Secretary of Defense Johnson to the Secretaries of the Army (Royall), the Navy (Sullivan) and the Air Force (Symington)383. Memorandum From Secretary of Defense Johnson to the Secretaries of the Army
(Royall), the Navy
(Sullivan) and the
Air Force (Symington)Source

Washington, April 27,
1949.

1. Reference is made to the Report1 on the Central
Intelligence Agency and the National Organization for Intelligence
submitted to the National Security Council by the Survey Group known as
the “Dulles” Committee. Chapter V
of this Report deals with “crisis” intelligence estimates and the
coordination relationship of various intelligence agencies of the
government. In one particular “crisis” situation there was a delay of
twelve days before the President and top policymakers were provided with
an authoritative intelligence estimate.2

2. It is believed that this delay was due in part to the fact that an
“Eyes Only” message did not come immediately to the attention of
appropriate intelligence agencies, and in part due to the lack of
established procedures for dealing with such matters. However, proper
coordination did ultimately result in the production of an estimate of
the situation.

3. I have been informed that the members of the Intelligence Advisory
Committee have agreed that critical information coming to the attention
of any one of them will be referred immediately to the Director, Central
Intelligence Agency, in order that evaluation by the Committee may be
undertaken at once. I, therefore, desire that provision be made for the
immediate distribution of critical information to your respective
Intelligence Agencies for appropriate action.

4. Copies of this communication are being forwarded to the Secretary of
State, the Attorney General, the Executive Secretary, National Security
Council, and the Director, Central Intelligence Agency.

Louis Johnson3

* Source: National
Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Records of the
Department of State, Decimal File 1945-49, 101.61/4-2749. Top
Secret. The source text is the copy sent to the Secretary of State.
It was covered by a brief note from the Assistant Director of the
Executive Secretariat, forwarding it to the Counselor and asking him
to read and transmit it to the Special Assistant for Research and
Intelligence.

1 Document 358.

2 The
episode referred to, which is discussed briefly in the Dulles Report, concerns General
Clay's message of March 4, 1948, and the intelligence estimates
given the President on March 16.

3 Printed from a copy that indicates
Johnson signed the
original.

384. Report by Secretary of State Acheson and Secretary of Defense Johnson to the National Security Council384. Report by Secretary of State Acheson and Secretary of Defense Johnson to the National Security CouncilSource

Washington, July 1,
1949.

NSC 50

COMMENTS AND RECOMMENDATIONS TO THE NATIONAL SECURITY
COUNCIL ON THE REPORT OF THE DULLES-JACKSON-CORREA
COMMITTEE PREPARED BY THE SECRETARY OF STATE AND SECRETARY OF
DEFENSE

The Report on “The Central Intelligence Agency and National Organization
for Intelligence”1 includes 57
individual conclusions and recommendations which we have regrouped in
order to facilitate Council consideration. Although some of the
conclusions do not require Council action, we wish to bring them to the
Council's attention with our comments. Other conclusions and
recommendations call for concurrence or non-concurrence by the Council
and appropriate implementing action.

1. Legislative Provisions Governing CIA and its
Position Under the National Security Council.

a. Summary of the Report.

The Survey Group report concludes that:

(1) Section 102 of the National Security Act of 1947 which sets up CIA is
sound and that no amendments are necessary at this time;

(2) CIA is properly placed under the National Security Council, but that
its Director should establish closer liaison with the two members of the
Council on whom the Agency chiefly depends, namely, the Secretaries of
State and Defense.

b. Comments.

We concur in these conclusions and recommendations which do not require
specific Council action or authorization. It should be noted, however,
that the National Military
Establishment and CIA are presently studying the wartime status and
responsibilities of CIA and that recommendations may be presented at a
later date on this subject. It may be determined that certain functions
and responsibilities should be under the control of the military in time
of war.

c. Recommended Action.

That the National Security Council concur in the Survey Group conclusions
on this subject, with the understanding that study may determine that
certain functions and responsibilities should be under the control of
the military in time of war.

2. The Coordination of Intelligence
Activities.

a. Summary of the Report.

The Report concludes that:

(1) The responsibility of CIA with respect to the coordination of
intelligence activities has not been fully discharged;

(2) The Intelligence Advisory Committee is soundly conceived as an
advisory body, but should, under the forthright initiative and
leadership of the Director of Central Intelligence, participate more
actively in the continuing coordination of intelligence activities and
in the discussion and approval of intelligence estimates.

b. Comments.

We concur in the observations and conclusions of the Report on this
general subject. We believe that the objectives sought for can be
achieved by the recognition and implementation of these principles and
by the organizational and operational improvements recommended elsewhere
in the Report.

In accordance with these principles and as partial implementation
thereof, we recommend certain amendments to National Security Council
Intelligence Directive No. 1, as indicated in Annex “A”, appended
hereto. These amendments would (1) define the status of the Director of
Central Intelligence as a member of the Intelligence Advisory Committee
and (2) clarify the procedure whereby dissents are included in
coordinated intelligence estimates.

c. Recommended Action.

That the National Security Council (1) concur in the conclusions and
recommendations stated under para. 2 a above as a statement of
principles to be followed by the Director of Central Intelligence and
the Intelligence Advisory Committee; (2) amend National Security Council
Intelligence Directive No. 1 in accordance with the changes proposed in
Annex “A” appended hereto.

3. Membership of the Intelligence Advisory Committee.

a. Summary of Report.

The Report recommends that the Federal Bureau of Investigation be added
to the membership of the Intelligence Advisory Committee and that the
Joint Staff (JCS) and Atomic Energy
Commission be dropped from membership.

b. Comments.

We concur in the proposal that the Federal Bureau of Investigation be
added to the membership of the Intelligence Advisory Committee, but do
not agree that the Joint Staff (JCS) and
Atomic Energy Commission be dropped from membership. A sufficient number
of problems arise which are of joint concern to foreign intelligence and
domestic security intelligence to warrant the membership on the IAC of the FBI in order that coordination and cooperation in the
national interest may be achieved.

We also wish to point out that the Recommended Action under para. 2 c
above would, if approved, have the effect of clarifying the status of
the Director of Central Intelligence as a member of the Intelligence
Advisory Committee.

c. Recommended Action.

That the National Security Council (1) invite the Attorney General to
have the Federal Bureau of Investigation become a member of the
Intelligence Advisory Committee; (2) if this invitation is accepted,
amend National Security Council Director No. 1 accordingly, as provided
in Annex “A” appended hereto.

4. Particular Intelligence Questions Requiring
Coordination or Attention.

a. Summary of the Report.

Throughout the Conclusions and Recommendations of the Survey Group
Report, attention is drawn to a number of particular intelligence
questions requiring special attention or coordination. These may be
listed as follows:

(1) Scientific Intelligence.

(2) Domestic Intelligence and counter-intelligence insofar as they relate
to the national security.

(3) Provisions for prompt coordinated intelligence estimates in crisis
situations.

(4) The proper allocation of responsibility for political summaries.

(5) The exploitation of intelligence from foreign nationality groups and
foreign individuals in the United States.

(6) The coordination of covert intelligence activities in occupied
areas.

(7) Coordination of the handling of defectors.

(8) Increased emphasis on the counter-espionage activities abroad of the
Central Intelligence Agency and closer liaison for counter-espionage
matters with the Federal Bureau of Investigation.

b. Comments.

We concur in these conclusions and comments as interpreted above and
point out that recent progress has been made in some of these fields.
For example, that of scientific intelligence through the creation of the
Office of Scientific Intelligence, by an agreement on a procedure for
providing prompt coordinated national intelligence estimates in crisis
situations, and by an agreement under consideration by the IAC agencies and the FBI with respect to the exploitation of
defectors and other aliens.

For the purpose of clarity and guidance:

Paragraph 4 a (2) is considered to refer to the coordination of foreign
intelligence and foreign counterintelligence with domestic intelligence
and domestic counterintelligence for the purpose of correlating and
evaluating intelligence relating to national security.

Paragraph 4 a (3) is considered to refer to provision for prompt
coordinated national intelligence estimates in crisis situations.

Paragraph 4 a (5) is considered to refer to the exploitation of foreign
nationality groups and foreign individuals in the United States for the
purposes of foreign intelligence.

We anticipate that the addition of the Federal Bureau of Investigation to
the membership of the Intelligence Advisory Committee will contribute
particularly to the objectives under points (2), (3), (5) and (7) above.
With respect to paragraph 4 a (8) above, we believe the maintenance of
close liaison for these purposes is essential.

c. Recommended Action.

That the National Security Council:

(1) Draw the particular attention of the Director of Central Intelligence
and Intelligence Advisory Committee to the need for early and sustained
action for more effective coordination in the fields listed under para.
4 a above as discussed in the Survey Group Report;

(2) Request the Director of Central Intelligence to submit to the Council
within a period of six months a report on progress in these matters.

(3) Invite the Attorney General to have the Federal Bureau of
Investigation become a member of the Intelligence Advisory
Committee.

(4) If this invitation is accepted, amend National Security Council
Directive No. 1 accordingly, as provided in Annex “A” appended
hereto.

(5) Note that nothing contained in NSCID1, as amended, is intended to affect or change NSC 17/4, approved by the President on
March 23, 1949 and the Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation
is a member of the Intelligence
Advisory Committee for the purpose of coordinating domestic intelligence
and related matters with foreign intelligence matters and his relations
with the CIA shall be as provided in Section 102 of the National
Security Act of 1947.

5. National Intelligence Estimates.

a. Summary of the Report.

The report concludes that in CIA there has been a confusion between the
responsibility for producing coordinated national intelligence estimates
and the responsibility for miscellaneous research and reporting. It
finds further that the Council's Intelligence Directives on this subject
are sound, but have not been effectively carried out. It recommends,
aside from organizational changes described in the following section,
that CIA should draw upon and review the specialized intelligence
production of the agencies in order to prepare coordinated national
intelligence estimates and that these estimates should be discussed and
approved by the IAC, whose members
should be collectively responsible. Such estimates should be recognized
as the most authoritative available to policy makers.

b. Comments.

We concur in these conclusions except that we do not believe that the
Director and the IAC should be bound by
the concept of collective responsibility, because this would inevitably
reduce coordinated national intelligence to the lowest common
denominator among the agencies concerned. A procedure should be adopted
which would permit the Director and the IAC to fulfill their respective responsibilities to the
President and the NSC regardless of
unanimous agreement, but providing for concurrent submissions of
dissent. The CIA, however, should interpret and follow the NSC Intelligence Directives so as to
refrain as far as possible from competitive intelligence activities in
the production of research intelligence estimates.

c. Recommended Action.

That the National Security Council concur in the conclusions and
recommendations stated above, as interpreted by our comments, as a
statement of principles to be observed by the Director of Central
Intelligence and the IAC.

6. Organization of the Central Intelligence
Agency.

a. Summary of the Report.

The Survey Group Report proposes a number of major changes in the
internal organization of CIA with a view to supporting the objectives
set forth in the Report. These changes are the following:

(1) The operations of the Office of Special Operations, the Office of
Policy Coordination and the Contact Branch of the Office of Operations
should be integrated under
single overall direction in an operations division, with its separate
administration, within CIA.

(2) Out of the present Office of Reports and Estimates there should be
created (a) a small estimates division which would draw upon and review
the specialized intelligence product of the departmental agencies in
order to prepare coordinated national intelligence estimates and (b) a
research and reports division to accomplish central research in, and
coordinated production of, intelligence in recognized fields of common
interest.

(3) The Foreign Documents Branch of the present Office of Operations
should be included in the proposed research and reports division.

(4) The Foreign Broadcast Information Branch should be included in the
proposed operations division.

(5) The Interdepartmental Coordinating and Planning Staff should be
reconstituted as a staff responsible only to the Director of Central
Intelligence, with the task of developing plans for the coordination of
intelligence activities. It would also perform the present tasks of the
Office of Collection and Dissemination with respect to the coordination
of collection requirements and requests and the dissemination of
intelligence.

b. Comments.

We concur in these recommendations with the exception that we do not
agree that the Foreign Broadcast Information Branch should be included
in the proposed operations division. This division should include those
activities (the present Office of Special Operations, Office of Policy
Coordination and Contact Branch of the Office of Operations) which
conduct covert or semi-covert field intelligence and related operations
which are closely interdependent and have similar administrative and
security problems.

With regard to the recommendations regarding the Office of Reports and
Estimates, the Interdepartmental Coordinating and Planning Staff and the
Office of Collection and Dissemination, we concur in them and in the
concept of CIA upon which they are based. However, we recognize that
there may be other methods of organization which will accomplish the
same objectives.

c. Recommended Action.

That the National Security Council (1) approve the recommendations of the
Survey Group Report on the reorganization of CIA as listed in para. 6 a
above, subject to the exception and comments noted in para. 6 b; (2)
direct the Director of Central Intelligence to carry out these
recommendations, as approved by the Council, and report to the Council
in ninety days on progress toward their implementation.

7. The Security of Information and the Avoidance
of Publicity.

a. Summary of the Report.

The Report recommends that (1) the Director of Central Intelligence
should, in cases where the disclosure of secret information is sought
from him and he has doubt as to whether he should comply, refer the
question to the National Security Council; (2) in the interest of
security, the Central Intelligence Agency should increasingly emphasize
its duties as the coordinator of intelligence rather than its secret
intelligence activities in order to reverse the present unfortunate
trend where it finds itself advertised almost exclusively as a secret
service organization.

b. Comments.

We concur in these recommendations with the reservation that, in
principle, all publicity is undesirable and that only where it is
unavoidable should the procedure set forth in subparagraph 7 a (2) above
be followed.

c. Recommended Action.

That the National Security Council (1) approve the recommendations of the
Survey Group Report on the security of information and the avoidance of
publicity, subject to the reservation noted in para. 7 b above; (2)
instruct the Director of Central Intelligence to prepare appropriate
National Security Council Intelligence Directives covering these points
and submit them for approval within a period of thirty days.

8. Chairmanship of the United States
Communications Intelligence Board.

a. Summary of the Report.

The report recommends that the Director of Central Intelligence should be
made permanent chairman of the United States Communications Intelligence
Board.

b. Comments.

We do not concur in this recommendation. This matter was considered when
the U.S. Communications Intelligence Board was set up and the present
arrangements decided on. These arrangements, which provide for a
rotating chairmanship, are operating satisfactorily and it seems
undesirable to make a change.

c. Recommended Action.

That the National Security Council not concur in the recommendation
contained in the Report.

9. Operating Problems Relating to Clandestine
Activities.

a. Summary of the Report.

The Report sets forth certain recommendations regarding individual
operating problems of the clandestine activities of CIA. These are
questions which, according to the Report, require particular emphasis or
have been neglected in the
past. The principal questions so indicated may be summarized as
follows:

(1) [5 lines of source text not declassified]

(2) Relations with departmental agencies should be brought closer and the
guidance which the Office of Special Operations receives from
intelligence consumers should be strengthened. This might be achieved by
including representatives of the Service agencies and the State
Department in appropriate sections of the Office of Special
Operations.

(3) The Director of Central Intelligence should assure himself that the
operating services of CIA receive adequate guidance on the current and
strategic intelligence and policy needs of the Government.

(4) The operating services of CIA should have access to communications
intelligence to the full extent required for guidance in directing their
operations and for the more effective conduct of counterespionage.

b. Comments.

We concur in these recommendations all of which point to significant
operating problems relating to clandestine activities which require
particular and constant emphasis.

c. Recommended Action.

That the National Security Council (1) approve the recommendation of the
Report as listed in para. 9 a above; (2) direct the Director of Central
Intelligence to carry them out with the assistance of the other
departments and agencies concerned and report to the National Security
Council on any difficulties encountered.

10. The Question of Civilian or Military
Personnel in Key CIA Positions.

a. Summary of the Report.

The Report concludes that:

(1) The placing in key positions in CIA of a large percentage of military
personnel, many of them on relatively short tour of duty assignment,
tends to discourage competent civilian personnel from looking to
employment in the Agency as a career.

(2) Continuity of service is essential for the successful carrying out of
the duties of Director of Central Intelligence. The best hope for
insuring this continuity and the greatest assurance of independence of
action is for a civilian to be Director of Central Intelligence. A
serviceman selected for the post should resign from active military
duty.

b. Comments.

We do not wholly concur in these conclusions. It is most important that
both civilian and military personnel be represented in the key positions
in the Central Intelligence Agency although we do not believe it is
desirable to attempt to fix any precise ratio for the two. This is a
matter to be worked out by the
Director in consultation with the Secretaries of State and Defense.

We agree that continuity of service is essential for the post of
Director. The most qualified person available should be selected for the
post. In order to insure continuity and independence of action, he
should be either a civilian, or if a service man or a foreign service
officer, he should be either retired or one whose service as Director
will be his final tour of active duty.

c. Recommended Action.

That the National Security Council:

(1) Concur in the above comments as an expression of its views on this
question.

(2) Inform the President of these views insofar as they concern the post
of Director of Central Intelligence.

(3) Inform the Director of Central Intelligence of these views insofar as
they concern the staffing of other key positions in CIA.

11. General Appraisal of the Leadership and
Policies of the Central Intelligence Agency.

a. Summary of the Report.

The Report concludes that:

(1) The directing staff of CIA has not demonstrated an adequate
understanding of the mandate of the organization or the ability to
discharge that mandate effectively.

(2) Administrative organization and policies tend to impede the carrying
out of the essential intelligence functions of CIA under the Act.

b. Comments.

We do not wholly concur in these conclusions. While we recognize the
existence of important defects in the organization and operation of CIA,
we believe that these conclusions are too sweeping. Complicating factors
in appraising CIA's efficiency have been the shortness of time during
which to develop an effective organization and a lack of common
understanding as to the respective missions of CIA and the departmental
intelligence agencies. However, as indicated in the Report and concurred
in by us, numerous and important improvements are necessary and need to
be carried out promptly and effectively.

c. Recommended Action.

That the National Security Council (1) note the Conclusions and
Recommendations of the Report on this subject; (2) approve the above
Comments thereon.

12. The Service Intelligence Agencies.

a. Comments.

The National Military Establishment concurs in the Conclusions and
Recommendations of Chapter 11 of the Report except that it does not
agree that the Service intelligence agencies should be staffed with
personnel who concentrate in intelligence over the major portion of
their careers. It is the policy of the Military Establishment to assign
qualified personnel to intelligence duties even though they have not had
previous intelligence experience. However, continued efforts are made to
attract the highest type personnel to intelligence duty.

b. Recommended Action.

That the National Security Council note the above Comments by the
National Military Establishment.

13. The Department of State.

a. Comments.

The Department of State concurs in the Conclusions and Recommendations of
Chapter 12 of the Report and is undertaking to put them into effect as
part of general plans for reorganization within the Department.

b. Recommended Action.

That the National Security Council note the above Comments by the
Department of State.

Annex A

1. To maintain the relationship essential to coordination between the
Central Intelligence Agency and the intelligence organizations, an
Intelligence Advisory Committee consisting of the Director of Central
Intelligence, who shall be Chairman thereof, Director of Federal Bureau
of Investigation, and the respective intelligence chiefs from the
Departments of State, Army, Navy, and Air Force, and from the Joint
Staff (JCS), and the Atomic Energy
Commission, or their representatives, shall be established to advise the
Director of Central Intelligence. The Director of Central Intelligence
will invite the Chief, or his representative, of any other intelligence
Agency having functions related to the national security to sit with the
Intelligence Advisory Committee whenever matters within the purview of
his Agency are to be discussed.

5. The Director of Central Intelligence shall disseminate National
Intelligence to the President, to members of the National Security
Council, to the Intelligence
Chiefs of the IAC Agencies, and to such
Governmental Departments and Agencies as the National Security Council
from time to time may designate. Intelligence so disseminated shall be
officially concurred in by the Intelligence Agencies or shall carry an
agreed a statement of substantially dissent differing
opinions.*

*“An agreed” and “dissent” are in canceled text on the source text.

* Source: National Archives and Records
Administration, RG 59, Records of the Department of State, Records
of the Executive Secretariat, NSC
Files: Lot 63 D 351, NSC 50. Top
Secret. When the Dulles
Report and agency comments thereon were submitted to the NSC, the Council decided at its 37th
meeting (see footnote 4, Document 380)
that the Secretaries of State and Defense should recommend specific
actions. To prepare these recommendations, Johnson designated General Joseph T.
McNarney and Acheson appointed
Carlisle H. Humelsine.
According to Darling, the report is largely McNarney's work, which
explains why NSC 50 was commonly
referred to as the McNarney Report. (The Central
Intelligence Agency, p. 347) Filed with the source text was
a July 1 covering note from Souers to the members of the Council
briefly summarizing the background of the report and indicating it
would be considered at the next NSC
meeting. See the Supplement. A cover sheet attached to the source
text indicates it was approved on July 7 by the President. See the
Supplement. The report, the covering note and the title page,
without a notation of Truman's approval, are reproduced in
CIA Cold War Records: The CIA under Harry Truman, pp. 295-313.

1 Document 358.

385. Memorandum for the President of Discussion at the 43d Meeting of the National Security Council385. Memorandum for the President of Discussion at the 43d Meeting of
the National Security CouncilSource

Washington, July 7,
1949.

The following notes contain a summary of the discussion at the 43rd
meeting of the National Security Council. Under Secretary Early attended
the meeting in the absence of Secretary Johnson. The Attorney General,
who had been invited to participate as a member for consideration of the
first item, informed the Executive Secretary prior to the meeting that
he fully approved NSC 50 and requested
the Executive Secretary to state his action at the meeting, since he
would not be able to attend.

1. The Central Intelligence Agency and National
Organization for Intelligence (NSC
50)1

Secretary Acheson explained the
background of the report and praised the able staff work which it
represented.

Mr. Souers reported that the Attorney General wished to have his approval
of the paper recorded in the minutes.

In response to Secretary Acheson's
request for any queries, Admiral Hillenkoetter stated that there was a
dilemma in the recommendation for a separate administration for an operations division,
as recommended in paragraph 6 a (1). He remarked that both the Bureau of
the Budget and the Congress last year had questioned duplication in the
administration of the Central Intelligence Agency. Consequently, last
December CIA had changed to a single administration for both operational
and administrative affairs. Separate administration for secret
operations had not worked well, and he added that OSS had combined them
towards the end of its activities. By changing to a single
administration, CIA had saved [less than 1 line of
source text not declassified] jobs or [less
than 1 line of source text not declassified] and had stopped
considerable fighting for space and personnel.

General McNarney said that, due to the special nature of the operations
concerned and the bad effects of any publicity, he felt the Council
should approve the recommendation and that the Director should not
attempt to explain this in detail to the Congress, but should state that
a separate administration was ordered by the NSC in the interests of the security of the special
operations. Both the original survey group and the staff team which had
prepared the present paper had agreed that this would be the proper
course of action.

Secretary Acheson said he did not
know enough of the merits of the issue to have a strong view one way or
the other, and suggested that the point be deferred for further
study.

Mr. Souers inquired if it might not be possible to steer an in-between
course, using only certain people within a single administration to
handle the special operations.

Secretary Gray remarked that the
present language would be too inflexible to permit such a course.

Admiral Hillenkoetter asked for guidance from the Council as to the
proper proportion of military personnel in CIA, in the light of the
recommendations in paragraphs 9 and 10.

Mr. Souers pointed out that, if the Council approved the paper, it would
then be in order for the Director to work out this matter in
consultation with the Secretaries of State and Defense. General McNarney
agreed and added that a ratio could not be fixed since the proportion of
military and other personnel would depend on circumstances.

Secretary Acheson also agreed with
Mr. Souer's interpretation.

The National Security Council:2

Approved the recommendations by the Secretaries of State and Defense in
NSC 50, subject to further study and
recommendation to the Council
by representatives of the Secretaries of State and Defense as to the
desirability of a separate administration for the operations division
proposed in paragraph 6 a (1) thereof.

Note: The President subsequently informed of the Council's action on
paragraph 10; the Attorney General invited to have the Director, Federal
Bureau of Investigation assume membership on the Intelligence Advisory
Committee, pursuant to paragraph 3;3 NSCID No. 1, as amended, issued in
revised form as of July 7, 1949;4 and the other
approved actions transmitted either to the Director of Central
Intelligence, or to the Director of Central Intelligence and the
Intelligence Advisory Committee, as appropriate.

[Here follows discussion of agenda items 2-4, future course of U.S.
action with respect to Austria, possible U.S. courses of action in the
event the Soviet Union reimposes the Berlin blockade, and NSC status of projects.]

* Source: Truman
Library, Papers of Harry S. Truman, President's Secretary's Files,
Subject Files. Top Secret. Prepared on July 8. According to the
minutes of the meeting, the following members were present: Acheson;
Edward H. Foley, Jr., Under Secretary of the Treasury; Stephen
Early, Under Secretary of Defense; Gordon
Gray, Secretary of the Army; Francis P. Matthews, Secretary of
the Navy; W. Stuart
Symington, Secretary of the Air Force; and John R.
Steelman, Acting Chairman of the National Security Resources Board.
Also present were Hillenkoetter, Carlisle Humelsine of the Department of State, and
General Joseph T. McNarney and John H. Ohly, both of the Office of
the Secretary of Defense. Three members of the NSC Secretariat attended: Souers,
Lay, and Hugh D. Farley.
(National Archives and Records Administration, RG 273, Records of
the National Security Council, NSC
Minutes, 43rd Meeting)

1 Document 384.

2 The following
paragraph and note constitute NSC
Action No. 231. (National Archives and Records Administration, RG
273, Records of the National Security Council, Record of Actions,
Box 55)

3 Documents 387 and 388.

4 Document 432.

386. Memorandum From the Executive Secretary of the National Security Council (Souers) to President Truman386. Memorandum From the Executive Secretary of the National Security
Council (Souers)
to President TrumanSource

Washington, July 7,
1949.

The National Security Council, as agreed at its 43rd meeting on July 7,
1949, wishes to inform you of its views with respect to the post of
Director of Central Intelligence, that continuity of service is
essential for the post of Director; that the most qualified person
available should be selected for the post; and that, in order to insure
continuity and independence of action, the Director should be either a
civilian, or, if a service man or a foreign service officer, he should
be retired or one whose service as Director will be his final tour of
active duty.

Sidney W. Souers

* Source: Truman Library, Papers of Harry S.
Truman, President's Secretary's Files. Top Secret.

387. Letter From the Executive Secretary of the National Security Council (Souers) to Attorney General Clark387. Letter From the Executive Secretary of the National Security
Council (Souers)
to Attorney General ClarkSource

Washington, July 7,
1949.

MY DEAR MR. ATTORNEY GENERAL: Pursuant to the action of the National
Security Council at its 43rd meeting on Thursday, July 7,1
in which you participated as a member, you are cordially invited to have
the Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation assume his
membership on the Intelligence Advisory Committee as of this date.

For your records, a copy of NSCID No.
1,2 revised as of July 7,
1949, which states the membership and functions of the Intelligence
Advisory Committee, is transmitted herewith.

Furthermore, in approving the attached revised NSCID No. 1, the Council noted that nothing contained
therein is intended to affect or change NSC 17/4, “Internal Security”, approved by the President on
March 23, 1949,3 and that
the Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation is a member of the
Intelligence Advisory Committee for the purpose of coordinating domestic
intelligence and related matters with foreign intelligence matters, and
that his relationships to the Central Intelligence Agency shall be as
provided in Section 102 of the National Security Act of 1947.

Sincerely yours,

Sidney W. Souers4

* Source: National Archives and Records
Administration, RG 273, Records of the National Security Council,
NSC Minutes, 43rd Meeting.
Secret. Copies were sent to Hillenkoetter and Hoover.

1 See Document 385.

2 Document 432.

3 Not printed.

4 Printed from a
copy that bears this typed signature.

388. Letter From Attorney General Clark to the Executive Secretary of the National Security Council (Souers)388. Letter From Attorney General Clark to the Executive Secretary of the
National Security Council (Souers)Source

Washington, July 15,
1949.

MY DEAR ADMIRAL: Reference is made to your letter of July 7, 1949,1 inviting me to have
the Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation assume his
membership on the Intelligence Advisory Committee as of that date. I am
pleased to advise that the Director of the Federal Bureau of
Investigation is ready to assume his membership on this Committee
immediately on the basis set forth in your letter.

It should be noted that the Director of the Federal Bureau of
Investigation is becoming a member of the Intelligence Advisory
Committee for the purpose of coordinating domestic intelligence and
related matters with foreign intelligence matters, and it is understood
that nothing contained in NSCID No. 1,
dated July 7, 1949, is intended to affect or change NSC 17/4, “Internal Security,” approved by
the President on March 23, 1949. It is also understood that the
relationship of the Federal Bureau of Investigation to the Central
Intelligence Agency shall be as provided in Section 102 of the National
Security Act of 1947.

Sincerely yours,

Tom Clark

* Source: National
Archives and Records Administration, RG 273, Records of the National
Security Council, NSC Minutes, 43rd
Meeting.

1 Document 387.

389. Memorandum From General Joseph T. McNarney to the Executive Secretary of the National Security Council (Souers)389. Memorandum From General Joseph T.
McNarney to the Executive Secretary of the National
Security Council (Souers)Source

Washington, July 22,
1949.

SUBJECT

Recommendation of Dulles
Survey Group Report that there be established an Operations
Division, with its separate administration, within CIA

At the last meeting of the National Security Council the “Comments and
Recommendations on the Report of the Dulles-Jackson-CorreaCommittee Prepared by the
Secretary of State and the Secretary of Defense” were approved with a
substantial exception which was to be reconsidered by the
representatives of State and Defense. The exception involved the
question of whether the administrative services in support of the
agreed-upon Operations Division should be separate, as recommended, or
derived as at present from a centralized administrative office reporting
directly to the Director, CIA.

The representatives of the Secretaries of State and Defense have
reexamined this problem and have discussed it with Rear Admiral
Hillenkoetter and two of his Assistant Directors who will be responsible
for carrying out the recommendations. Based upon a careful
reconsideration of the recommendation, and with full weight being given
to the views presented by the Director of Central Intelligence and two
of his Assistant Directors, the representatives of the Secretaries of
State and Defense hereby confirm their recommendation that
administrative support of covert and overt operations of CIA should be
separate. They thereby reaffirm the recommendation of the Dulles-Jackson-Correa Committee.

They consider particularly desirable separate administrative
organizations for the handling of such overt and covert functions as:
personnel administration including recruitment (except clerical type
personnel for headquarters) personnel security; fiscal, accounting and
budgetary functions, including the handling and control of confidential
funds; travel abroad; storage and warehousing for clandestine materials;
contract administration where the contracts involve clandestine matters;
reproducing and photo-copying; and other related administrative matters
which require close relationship and knowledge on the part of a minimum
number of administrating and operating officials to insure adequate
flexibility and security of operations.

They recommend, however, that certain administrative functions which can
be efficiently performed in a central administrative office without
danger of loss of flexibility or security to covert activities be kept
concentrated in such an office. Examples of such functions are: space
allocations; procurement of ordinary supplies (except special equipment
for clandestine use); legal services; transportation facilities in the
United States; and other closely related administrative functions which,
with full regard to special considerations of security and flexibility
of operations, may be economically and satisfactorily performed in a
central office.

The representatives of the Secretaries of State and Defense believe that
there now is sufficient overstaffing in the administrative services of
the Central Intelligence Agency to permit the separation of the
administrative support of overt and covert activities without any
substantial increase at present
in the allocation of personnel or funds for this purpose.

Joseph T. McNarney1

* Source: National
Archives and Records Administration, RG 273, Records of the National
Security Council, NSC 50. Top
Secret.

1 Printed from a
copy that indicates McNarney signed the original.

390. Memorandum From the Executive Secretary (Souers) to the National Security Council390. Memorandum From the Executive Secretary (Souers) to the National Security CouncilSource

Washington, July 25,
1949.

SUBJECT

The Central Intelligence Agency and National Organization for
Intelligence

REFERENCES

A. NSC Action No. 2311

B. NSC 502

Pursuant to the action of the National Security Council at its last
meeting (Reference A) the enclosed report by representatives of the
Secretaries of State and Defense as to the desirability of a separate
administration for the operations division proposed in paragraph 6-a-(1)
of NSC 50 is submitted herewith for
consideration by the Council.3

It is recommended that, if the Council accepts the enclosed report, the
Director of Central Intelligence be directed to carry out the provisions
of paragraph 6-a-(1) of NSC 50 with
respect to a separate administration within CIA for the operations
division substantially as indicated in the enclosure, and report on
progress toward their implementation together with the report called for
on the previously approved recommendations of paragraph 6 of NSC 50.

It is requested that the enclosure be handled with special security
precautions.

Sidney W. Souers4

* Source: Department of State, S/P-NSC Files: Lot 62 D 1, NSC Intelligence Directives. Top
Secret.

1 See footnote 2, Document
385.

2 Document 384.

3 Document 389.

4 Printed from a
copy that bears this typed signature.

391. Letter From the Secretary of State's Special Assistant for Research and Intelligence (Armstrong) to Director of Central Intelligence Hillenkoetter391. Letter From the Secretary of State's Special Assistant for
Research and Intelligence (Armstrong) to Director of Central Intelligence HillenkoetterSource

Washington, July 29,
1949.

DEAR ADMIRAL HILLENKOETTER: Our representative on the Joint Ad Hoc
Committee which prepared ORE 46-49, “The
Possibility of Direct Soviet Military Action During 1949,” has advised
me of the desirability of continuing operation of this committee in such
a way as to form a pool for interdepartmental consideration of Soviet
intentions for war. Probably all the intelligence organizations find
frequent need for means by which, at any time, they may produce
comprehensive, factual data as a basis of estimates on this subject.
Also, it seems to me, that a committee engaged in studying Soviet
intentions would be of great aid in handling most of the “crisis type”
requests that are likely to arise.

We have, of course, just discussed and agreed to the establishment of a
Jigsaw Committee to coordinate the intelligence approach to problems of
world communism. That Committee, however, although its work will
contribute in part to the analysis of Soviet intentions, has a
distinctive responsibility of its own which takes in many other matters
such as the development of Communist theory and Communist techniques,
and the growth of Communist activity of all sorts in local situations
throughout the world. I have in mind rather the need for continuing,
current analysis closely applied to indications of the likelihood of
Soviet military action, analysis which will integrate, for instance, OB
information from all three Services with political and economic
indications.

I would like to suggest therefore that you consider establishing under
CIA a permanent interdepartmental committee (which might be called the
Watch Committee) to pool information on Soviet intentions for war. I
attach a draft proposal which sets forth in detail a possible manner of
operation and which might, together with this letter, form an item for
discussion at the IAC.

Sincerely yours,

W. Park Armstrong, Jr.

Enclosure1

PROPOSED IAC AGREEMENT

SUBJECT

Permanent Committee on USSR Intentions

1. A permanent committee (hereinafter referred to as the Watch Committee)
is hereby established to coordinate intelligence information on the
short and long range warlike intentions of the USSR and to produce
periodic intelligence estimates on this subject as it affects national
security. The Watch Committee will work in accordance with the
established NSCID and DCI directives.

2. The Watch Committee shall act under the chairmanship of CIA and shall
comprise:

Chairman—CIA

Vice Chairman—State

Member—Army

Member—Navy

Member—Air Force

Member—CIA/OSO

Ad hoc members as needed may be determined by the regular members.

Secretariat—CIA

3. The Watch Committee will, in the first instance, establish methods of
procedure.

4. The Committee will meet at regular intervals, adjusting the frequency
of its meetings from time to time in relation to the need for
maintenance and revision of its work.

5. The Committee will be responsible for:

a. On a long range basis

(1) Bringing up to date in a comprehensive basic estimate existing papers
which relate to USSR intentions for war

(2) Developing basic EEI for such estimates

(3) Producing at appropriate intervals or upon request revisions of the
comprehensive estimate

b. On a short range basis

(1) Arranging periodic exchange amongst its members of items of
information pertinent to the EEI

(2) Producing from each such exchange an interim estimate which will
indicate the bearing of available current information on the most recent
basic comprehensive estimate.

* Source: Central Intelligence Agency
Records, Job 80-01731R, Box 43, Folder 7. Top Secret. A further
exchange of letters and memoranda is ibid.

1 Secret.

392. Letter From Secretary of State Acheson to Director of Central Intelligence Hillenkoetter392. Letter From Secretary of State Acheson to Director of Central Intelligence
HillenkoetterSource

Washington, August 1,
1949.

MY DEAR ADMIRAL HILLENKOETTER: Following conferences among consultants of
the National Military Establishment, the National Security Resources
Board and the Department of State, looking to the implementation of
NSC-43, I have proposed to the
Secretary of Defense that the planning and coordination work, and the
full-time staffs, provided for under NSC-4 and NSC-43 can be
combined.1

I have suggested that the combined staffs consist of representatives of
the Departments of State, Army, Navy, Air Force and the Central
Intelligence Agency, this having proved an effective composition under
NSC-4. In addition, I have requested
that a full-time representative of the Office of the Secretary of
Defense be detailed to the staff.

NSC-43 provides only for “liaison
representatives” of the Central Intelligence Agency and the National
Security Resources Board on the NSC-43
staff. Inasmuch as the Central Intelligence Agency representative on the
NSC-4 staff is, however, assigned on
a full-time basis, it would be appreciated if your Agency could continue
to provide full-time representation on the combined staff. Experience
will show whether further CIA personnel is required beyond the one
representative presently serving.

Sincerely yours,

Dean Acheson2

* Source: National Archives and Records
Administration, RG 59, Records of the Department of State, Decimal
File 1945-49, 101.61/8-149. Secret. Drafted by F.C. Oechsner and
W.T. Stone. An attached note indicates that a similar letter was
being sent to the Secretary of Defense but no copy has been found.
See the draft memorandum from Stone to Acheson, July 22, in the Supplement attached to an
August 11 letter from Acheson to Hillenkoetter. (National Archives
and Records Administration, RG 59, Records of the Department of
State, Decimal File 1945-49, 101.61/8-149)

1 NSC 4, December 9, 1947, entitled
“Coordination of Foreign Information Measures,” and NSC 43, March 9, 1949, entitled
“Planning for Wartime Conduct of Overt Psychological Warfare.”
(National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Records of the
Department of State, Records of the Executive Secretariat, NSC Files: Lot 63 D 351)

2 Printed from a copy that indicates
Acheson signed the
original.

393. Letter From the Secretary of State's Special Assistant for Research and Intelligence (Armstrong) to Director of Central Intelligence Hillenkoetter393. Letter From the Secretary of State's Special Assistant for
Research and Intelligence (Armstrong) to Director of Central Intelligence HillenkoetterSource

Washington, August 2,
1949.

DEAR ADMIRAL HILLENKOETTER: In accordance with the statement I made in
connection with consideration of NSC-50
at the last IAC meeting, July 22, I
enclose four papers on aspects on NSC-50
which the Department believes should be implemented at the earliest
feasible time. If you agree these papers could be placed on the IAC Agenda.

Sincerely yours,

W. Park Armstrong, Jr.1

Enclosure I

COORDINATION OF INTELLIGENCE ACTIVITIES

Problem: To Implement NSC 50 with Respect to they Coordination of Intelligence
Activities.

Discussion:

1. NSC 50 states that the responsibility
of CIA with respect to the coordination of intelligence activities has
not been fully discharged (para. 2a(1)). It also calls for ICAPS to be reconstituted as a staff
responsible only to the DCI, with the
task of developing plans for the coordination of intelligence
activities; to perform the present task of the Office of Collection and
Dissemination with respect to the coordination of collection
requirements and requests, and the dissemination of intelligence (para.
6a(5)).

2. ICAPS in the past has suffered from
the somewhat ambiguous nature of assignment of officers to it; that is,
whether they “represent” their
agency in ICAPS activities, or are
responsible only to the DCI. The Staff
of the National Security Council serves as an example for an ICAPS staff under the direction of the
DCI to study and plan for the
coordination of intelligence activities. Officers should be assigned
from an agency or service to the staff, not in a “representative”
capacity, but rather to bring the knowledge and interest of the several
agencies together in a joint effort.

3. In a similar fashion, the Standing Committee can serve as a staff
committee, with identical representation to IAC, acting in the same fashion as the Consultants do to
the NSC.

4. Coordination of the intelligence activities among the several agencies
and under the leadership of the CIA has not been fully effective,
particularly with respect to the coordination in the research effort,
owing in part to the fact that CIA has not made itself a center of
information on intelligence to which the other agencies can turn, has
been passive rather than aggressive in liaison, i.e., has relied upon
receiving liaison officers from the other agencies, and has not fully
accepted its proper role of passing on requests for research service to
the agency best equipped to handle it. CIA effort has gone too much to
miscellaneous research and reporting which, in the words of the
Dulles Committee, “by no
stretch of the imagination” could be considered national
intelligence.

Recommendation:

1. That ICAPS serve as a joint staff
under the direction of, and responsible to, the DCI, be composed of members contributed by the several
agencies on a fulltime basis, but not “representing” the agency, and be
headed by a chief who will also be the Executive Secretary of the IAC.

2. That matters of coordination be referred to ICAPS for study and recommendation by the DCI, or through the DCI by the IAC, but that
ICAPS itself may submit to the
DCI, or through the DCI to the IAC, recommendations which it considers appropriate for
consideration.

3. That the representation on the Standing Committee be the same as that
of the IAC, and that the Standing
Committee serve as a subordinate or staff committee to the IAC to consider on an interagency basis,
problems referred to it by the IAC.

4. That CIA fulfill its coordinating responsibility on research programs
primarily through the Estimates Division, whose primary function should
be such coordination, in accordance with the following principles:

a. CIA will constitute itself the center of information on all U.S.
foreign intelligence activities, including current research intelligence
projects;

b. CIA will have free access to the plans and programs of the several
intelligence agencies, subject to overall departmental regulation;

c. CIA will recognize that it should have active liaison responsibility
to other agencies as well as receiving liaison from those agencies;

d. CIA will effect coordination as much by positive action in stimulating
appropriate intelligence effort as by negative action in preventing
undesirable duplications;

e. CIA will recognize that requests for intelligence other than national
intelligence, as defined, shall be forwarded for action to the agencies
in accordance with established allocations and existing programs;

f. CIA will recognize that coordination also implies assistance to the
agencies in meeting their responsibilities, including in some cases the
temporary assignments of personnel to the agencies.

Enclosure II

PRODUCTION OF NATIONAL INTELLIGENCE

Problem: To Implement NSC 50 with Respect to the Production of National
Intelligence.

Discussion:

1. NSC 50 calls for a small Estimates
Division to draw upon and review the specialized intelligence production
of the departmental agencies in order to prepare coordinated national
intelligence estimates (para. 5a). It also calls upon the IAC to discuss and approve national
intelligence estimates with provision for dissenting opinions (para.
2a). Finally, it calls for special provisions to be made for prompt
coordinated national intelligence estimates in crisis situations (para.
4a(3)).

2. The NSC action, as well as the
Dulles Committee Report,
reaffirms in definite terms the basis principles of the NSCID's with respect to the production of
national intelligence. National intelligence is by definition
interdepartmental, and is distinguished by a substantive overlap between
more than one field of departmental interests as allocated. It does not
become national intelligence merely because it is of national interest,
or because it is in response to a request by an interdepartmental
body.

3. The NSCID's prescribe that national
intelligence be composed to the maximum extent possible of departmental
contributions of finished intelligence. This would require that CIA
estimates, to a greater extent then is now the case, be discussed and
planned at the earliest stage with appropriate collaborating
departments, and, subject to the review responsibility of CIA, in the
normal course be composed of texts contributed by the agencies. This would properly
result in the discontinuance of duplicative research and report writing
by CIA, with presumably economy of staff allocated to this function.

4. The effectiveness of participation by IAC in the production of national estimates will depend
heavily upon the selection of matters appropriate for consideration.
Presumably the authority of the IAC in
such participation can be delegated to subordinate groups. Nevertheless,
the IAC must stand ready to consult and
pass on any questions of substance on which there is not general
agreement, or on which any member requests consideration.

5. The special procedures required in crisis situations will need to be
worked out in some detail for subsequent consideration by the IAC. In any event, these procedures should
be based upon the same considerations of departmental responsibility and
consultation at all stages as apply to all national intelligence
estimates.

Recommendations:

1. That IAC agree with respect to the
production of national intelligence estimates:

a. That national intelligence applies only to intelligence which is
interdepartmental in substance;

b. That national intelligence should be developed with a maximum use of
departmental facilities and minimum duplication of departmental
intelligence activities;

c. That except in crisis situations no step be taken in the preparation
of national estimates before consultation with appropriate agencies.

2. That the IAC discuss and approve all
national intelligence estimates on which there is substantial
disagreement among the agencies or upon the request of a member.

3. That ICAPS review and make
recommendations for any revision of procedures for the production of
coordinated national estimates in crisis situations, such procedures to
be, as far as possible, in accordance with the principles outlined in
existing NSCID's, NSC 50, and Recommendation 1 above.

Enclosure III

RESEARCH AND REPORTS

Problem: To Implement NSC 50 with Respect to the Responsibility for Research and
Reports.

Discussion:

1. The NSC 50 states that in CIA there
has been a confusion between national intelligence and miscellaneous
research and reporting, and that while NSCID's on this subject are sound, they have not been
effectively carried out (para. 5a). It also states that out of the
present ORE there should be created (a)
a small Estimates Division which would draw upon and review the
specialized intelligence product of the interdepartmental agencies in
order to prepare coordinated national intelligence estimates, and (b) a
Research and Reports Division to accomplish research in and coordinate
production of intelligence in recognized fields of common interest.

Recommendation:

1. That, aside from national intelligence, CIA will produce intelligence
reports only in fields of common concern, as prescribed by the DCI on the advice of the IAC.

2. That, on a priority basis, ICAPS
prepare for consideration in IAC
recommendations on the delineations of fields of common concern.

Enclosure IV

POLITICAL SUMMARIES

Problem: To Implement NSC 50 with Respect to Political Summaries.

Discussion:

1. NSC 50 states that consideration
should be given to a proper allocation of responsibility for political
summaries (para. 4a (4)).

2. The preparation of political summaries, daily and weekly, pre-sents a
difficult problem involving the dissemination of information which is in
part intelligence and in part operational. It also involves the responsibilities of each agency
to distribute information which pertains to its responsibilities or
stems from its sources.

Recommendation:

1. That ICAPS study and prepare
recommendations for consideration by the IAC on the proper allocation of responsibilities for
political summaries, both daily and weekly.

* Source: Central Intelligence Agency
Records, Job 86-B00269R, Box 5. Secret. The enclosures were often
referred to as the “Four Papers” or the “Four Problems.” On August 5
Hillenkoetter sent them to the members of the IAC with a covering memorandum that
noted that Armstrong had
decided to drop a fifth problem designated as “Guidance to CIA.”
(Memorandum from Hillenkoetter August 5; ibid.) See the
Supplement.

1 Printed from a copy that indicates
Armstrong signed the
original.

394. Letter From Director of Central Intelligence Hillenkoetter to Secretary of State Acheson394. Letter From Director of Central Intelligence Hillenkoetter to
Secretary of State AchesonSource

Washington, August 19,
1949.

MY DEAR MR. SECRETARY: As you know, the National Security Council in
NSC 501 approved the
recommendations of the Secretary of Defense and yourself regarding
certain changes in the organization of the Central Intelligence Agency.
Among those changes was a directive to consolidate all “covert and
semi-covert field intelligence and related operations” in a single
branch to be called “The Operations Division.” To carry out this
directive, the attached organization plan with the attend-ant list of
functions for its components has been evolved.2

This proposed reorganization has received the full concurrence of all
interested parties in the Central Intelligence Agency (including the
Offices of Policy Coordination, Special Operations, and Operations).

In this proposed plan the functions of the various offices are preserved,
and their responsibilities are unchanged. However, to bring NSC 10/2 into consonance with the new
directive contained in NSC 50, the
former paper will necessarily have to be revised slightly, particularly,
in that part relating to the autonomous character of the Office of
Policy Coordination within the Central Intelligence Agency.

An advance copy of the attachments to this letter has been furnished to
Mr. George F. Kennan3 in order that he may have an opportunity to go
over it before you may desire to receive a briefing from him.

I should like respectfully to request your concurrence or your comments
on this proposed plan in order that, if agreeable to you, I may pre-sent
it to the entire National Security Council, through the Executive
Secretary, as a report on the progress which the Central Intelligence
Agency is making in carrying out the decisions in NSC 50.

With kindest regards, believe me.

Sincerely,

R.H. Hillenkoetter4
Rear Admiral, USN

* Source: Central Intelligence Agency
Records, Job 86-B00269R, Box 5. Top Secret.

1 Document 384.

2 Not attached to the source text. A copy is attached
to an August 16 memorandum from Hillenkoetter to Souers. (National
Archives and Records Administration, RG 273, Records of the National
Security Council, NSC 10/2)

3 Reference is to an August 16 memorandum
from Hillenkoetter to Kennan,
et al. (Central Intelligence Agency Records, Job 86-B00269R) See the
Supplement.

4 Printed from a
copy that bears this typed signature.

395. Memorandum From Shane MacCarthy to the Chief of the Intelligence Coordinating and Planning Staff, Central Intelligence Agency (Childs)395. Memorandum From Shane MacCarthy
to the Chief of the Intelligence Coordinating and Planning Staff,
Central Intelligence Agency (Childs)Source

Washington, August 24,
1949.

SUBJECT

Clarification of Points in Mr. Armstrong's Submittal

In accordance with your instruction, and in keeping with the statement of
Mr. Armstrong, I spent
considerable time today with Mr. Allan Evans, Director, Office of
Intelligence Research, Department of State, to seek further
clarification on parts of the four problems submitted by Mr. Armstrong to CIA under his memorandum
of 2 August 1949.1

I-1. That ICAPS serve as a joint staff
under the direction of, and responsible to, the DCI, be composed of members contributed by the several agencies on a fulltime basis,
but not “representing” the agency, and be headed by a chief who will
also be the Executive Secretary of the IAC.

Evans sees no conflict between ICAPS
acting as the Staff of the Director of Central Intelligence and
performing, as required, certain staff work for the IAC, of which the DCI is the Chairman. He did not visualize a permanent staff
in the sense of the National Security Council organization, and he was
not pressing for the choice of the title “Executive Secretary.” What
State does desire here is that adequate staff work be performed for the
Intelligence Advisory Committee.

I-3. That the representation on the Standing Committee be the same as
that of the IAC, and that the Standing
Committee serve as a subordinate or staff committee to the IAC to consider on an interagency basis,
problems referred to it by the IAC.

Evans contends that the representation on the Standing Committee should
be the same as the membership on the IAC. If any one agency, for example the Joint Chiefs, does not
desire representation on the Standing Committee, they may make this
decision themselves without disrupting the basic concept. ICAPS' relationship to the Standing
Committee should change to the extent that the members of ICAPS as a whole would no longer be
members of the Standing Committee; that the Chief of ICAPS, in chairing the Standing
Committee, should represent CIA; and that the other members of ICAPS should remain out of the Standing
Committee meetings, except as needed for specific purposes.

Further discussion of this whole problem about the relationship of ICAPS to the Standing Committee brought
certain modifications into the stability of Evans' thinking process. He
could see the benefit to be achieved by the other members of ICAPS in listening to and participating
in the discussions at the IAC meetings.
However, he felt that CIA usually had too many of their members coming
to meetings, and that their presence was having a bad effect upon agency
representation.

I-4. That CIA fulfill its coordinating responsibility on research
programs primarily through the Estimates Division, whose primary
function should be such coordination, in accordance with the following
principles:

When I told Evans that NSC 50 allowed us
to solve our problems in a manner which we determined most appropriate,
he still expressed the view that the “Estimates Division” is the only
way for CIA to conduct its coordinating responsibility on intelligence
research programs.

I-4a. CIA will constitute itself the center of information on all U.S.
foreign intelligence activities, including current research intelligence
projects;

The word “activities” was used in purposeful manner. They do not want CIA
to be considered the center of all foreign intelligence information. On the other hand, State does
feel that CIA should know what all intelligence agencies are doing,
which is not making of CIA a central reservoir on all foreign
intelligence information. This is the “central index” concept of having
in one spot a knowledge of all agency programs at all times. For
example, quite some time ago the Atomic Energy Commission wanted to know
what agency or agencies were doing research on electric power in Russia.
CIA did not know, and eventually it was found out that OIR was doing such a project.

I-4b. CIA will have free access to the plans and programs of the several
intelligence agencies, subject to overall departmental regulation;

The accessibility to “plans and programs” is modified by the words
“subject to overall departmental regulation.” It is true that this
paragraph is intended to liberalize the present viewpoint regarding
inspection of “intelligence matters” mentioned in NSCID No. 1. The words “subject to
overall departmental regulation” refer to the agency personnel rather
than to the people from CIA. The agency is to determine what their own
people may talk about and what they may not talk about. Accordingly, the
words “subject to overall departmental regulation” involve policy as
well as security.

I-4f. CIA will recognize that coordination also implies assistance to the
agencies in meeting their responsibilities, including in some cases the
temporary assignments of personnel to the agencies.

State did not mean to convey the concept that coordination always and
generally involves financial assistance to the agency being coordinated.
What State does infer is that the function of coordination does include
assistance of any type to avoid the establishing of functions on the
duplicated basis. As a specific example in support of this point of
view, Mr. Evans stated that on frequent occasions when assignments are
to be accomplished on an ad hoc basis, it may be ascertained that the
departmental organization is not adequately staffed or equipped to
accomplish the task. Under such circumstances, he contends that the
tendency is for us in CIA to conclude that the agency cannot perform the
task, and therefore we must set up a section or unit to do so. Such
“sections” or “units”, according to Mr. Evans, remain as permanent
adjuncts of the CIA organization. He reiterated that all such
duplications could be avoided if everything that needed to be done on an
ad hoc basis, recognizing that it fell within the allocated
responsibility of the agency, can be done if CIA will help the agency do
so.

II-1a. That IAC agree with respect to the
production of national intelligence estimates:

That national intelligence applies only to intelligence which is
interdepartmental in substance;

Evans does not feel that the present definitions of the NSCIDs need revising. In fact, he
emphasizes the view that this recommendation, together with sentence 2
of paragraph 2 of the discussion under “Production of National
Intelligence” is merely stating what the directives already
propound.

II-1b. That IAC agree with respect to the
production of national intelligence estimates:

That national intelligence should be developed with a maximum use of
departmental facilities and minimum duplication of departmental
intelligence activities;

Evans does not feel that DCI 3/1 needs
revising. He does indicate that we do not live up to it, and that we are
always inclined to put production items into the category of “urgent”
and “exceptional.” I asked him if he did not agree with the statement
that CIA may under certain circumstances produce political intelligence
and that under 3/1 the Department of State had admitted such. He became
a little bit peeved at this question and was somewhat evasive and
circuitous in his answer. In a supercilious manner he stated:—To deny
that CIA may on occasions do political estimates is too narrow a
viewpoint. When they do so, according to Evans, it is a matter of
“common interest,” which words he used interchangeably with “common
concern.” He added that of course in such cases the political estimates
would be prepared by an individual like Mr. Montague. In other words, he assigned this happening to
a person rather than to a segment of our organization.

II-2. That the IAC discuss and approve
all national intelligence estimates on which there is substantial
disagreement among the agencies or upon the request of a member.

This refers to the members of IAC and not
to the agencies. The words “substantial disagreement” mean that when
there is an estimate with dissent under present procedures that amounts
to a “substantial disagreement” and as such should be discussed. The
very fact that the dissent is published makes it, in Mr. Evans'
viewpoint, “substantial.” He did say that every effort should be made to
eradicate the possibility of publishing an estimate with dissent, and he
feels that under present procedures this is being done. He holds the
view that the publishing of an estimate with dissent is a rather
important decision, especially for the dissenting agency, and that the
collective discussion at this stage by the IAC members may lessen to a considerable degree the number
of dissents. Furthermore, he holds that this is the thinking process of
the Dulles report and NSC 50.

III-1. That, aside from national intelligence, CIA will produce
intelligence reports only in fields of common concern, as prescribed by
the DCI on the advice of the IAC.

In discussing this recommendation, Evans referred back to what he felt
was the meaning of “national intelligence” in the directives; namely
that it was distinguished from departmental intelligence “by a
substantive overlap between more than one field of departmental interest
as allocated.” We spent much time discussing the limiting word “only” in
line 2 of this recommendation. And again, I asked him the question as to
whether State had not already concurred in the viewpoint that we may
produce what is definitely a departmental intelligence under certain
circumstances. The affirmative reply from Mr. Evans on this question was
again very weak, in which he indicated that no one will deny the fact
that under certain unusual circumstances CIA “as well as any other
agency” may do certain things which are not normally looked upon as
within the prerogative of the agency. He elaborated on this viewpoint by
stating on rare occasions his office may get a request from the
Secretary for something which is almost solely military in content, and
that since his office has the necessary information, they work up the
answer without referring the request to G-2. At this juncture, I felt like saying that we should no
longer receive accusations from State about the fact that ORE was duplicating OIR. But I felt that silence was golden.

“Common concern” means of interest to two or more agencies, and as an
illustration of this he mentioned “transportation” and
“communications.”

IV-1. That ICAPS study and prepare
recommendations for consideration by the IAC on the proper allocation of responsibility for
political summaries, both daily and weekly.

Evans said that he did not feel very strong about the daily political
summary. In fact he didn't feel too strong about the whole
recommendation. However, he felt that the question involved pertained
more to the weekly summary than to the daily. I do not believe that
anything will be pressed by State on this recommendation.

Shane MacCarthy2

* Source: Central
Intelligence Agency Records, Job 86-B00269R, Box 5. Secret.

1 Document 393.

2 Printed from a
copy that bears this typed signature.

396. Memorandum From the Chief of the Intelligence Coordinating and Planning Staff, Central Intelligence Agency (Childs) to the Members of the IAC Standing Committee396. Memorandum From the Chief of the Intelligence Coordinating and
Planning Staff, Central Intelligence Agency (Childs) to the Members of
the IAC Standing CommitteeSource

Washington, August 25,
1949.

SUBJECT

State's Four Problems re NSC
50

REFERENCE

(a) Circular memorandum 5 August 19491 to IAC Members
“Implementation of NSC 50 (Dulles Report Recommendations)”
enclosing copy of a letter dated 2 August 19492 from Mr.
Armstrong, submitting
for IAC consideration Four Problems
raised by NSC 50.

(b) Decision at IAC meeting of
August 19th that the Standing Committee would give consideration to
Mr. Armstrong's Four
Problems

1. In giving consideration to Mr. Armstrong's four problems, CIA thought that a certain
amount of clarification was needed on the following recommendations:

I-1.I-4a.II-1b.III-1.

I-3.I-4b.II-2.III-2.

I-4.I-4f.II-3.IV-1.

2. In discussing these paragraphs with the State Department, it was
ascertained that:

“I-1. That ICAPS serve as a joint staff
under the direction of, and responsible to, the DCI, be composed of members contributed by the several
agencies on a fulltime basis, but not ‘representing’ the agency, and be
headed by a chief who will also be the Executive Secretary of the IAC.”

State desires that ICAPS be the staff
of the DCI and also of the IAC (the latter a part-time job).

“I-3. That the representation on the Standing Committee be the same as
that of the IAC, and that the Standing
Committee serve as a subordinate or staff committee to the IAC to consider on an interagency basis,
problems referred to it by the IAC.”

ICAPS as a group would no longer be a
member of the Standing Committee. Only the Chief of ICAPS, as Chairman of the Standing
Committee, would represent CIA. The Standing Committee Members would
continue to work for their IAC members,
but not on the ICAPS level in drafting
papers.

CIA Comments on the above two recommendations:

The DCI is opposed to making the working
committee and staff (Standing Committee and ICAPS) too formal. ICAPS
apparently is to become not only the staff of the DCI, but also the staff of the IAC and the Standing Committee is to become
a little IAC; i.e., an additional higher
layer advisory committee inserted to grant approval or disapproval to
the papers prepared by ICAPS in its
capacity as a staff of the real Advisory Committee. The DCI thinks this layer of “consultants” is
unnecessary for such working groups and they should not be aggrandized
and restricted by formal parliamentary procedures. He thinks discussions
in the ICAPS-Standing Committee group
among themselves and with specialists from the agencies, when necessary
or desirable, are healthy and should not be limited and restricted to
only certain members, especially when technical matters come up that are
more familiar to the working specialists then to the overall planners.
Furthermore, the DCI thinks it most
desirable that the IAC agencies
participate from the beginning in actually drawing up the proposals.

“I-4. That CIA fulfill its coordinating responsibility on research
programs primarily through the Estimates Division, whose primary
function should be such coordination, in accordance with the following
principles:”

State thinks there should be an “Estimates Division” and that one of its
prime functions should be coordinating intelligence research programs.
The establishment of such an “Estimates Division” in the Dulles Report is not obligatory in
NSC 50 and is not one of the
internal organization changes which is contemplated by the DCI at present.

“I-4a. CIA will constitute itself the center of information on all U.S.
foreign intelligence activities, including current research intelligence
projects;”

This does not mean that CIA is to be a central reservoir of foreign
intelligence or foreign intelligence information, but rather is to know
what all intelligence agencies are doing; i.e., a “central index” having
knowledge of all agency programs.

“I-4b. CIA will have free access to the plans and programs of the several
intelligence agencies, subject to overall departmental regulation;”

This paragraph is intended to liberalize NSCID No. 1, which allows access only to “intelligence
materials;” but, on the other hand, its last qualifying clause refers to
the policies as well as the security of the various departments.

“I-4f. CIA will recognize that coordination also implies assistance to
the agencies in meeting their responsibilities, including in some cases
the temporary assignment of personnel to the agencies.”

State still maintains that such assistance is a function of coordination
and cited as an example that, when it is not adequately staffed or
equipped to accomplish a task within its field of dominant interest, CIA
should provide assistance to State for this purpose rather than
performing the task in CIA. CIA maintains that such work in CIA would be
complementing, not duplicating, State's work and that financial and
personnel assistance to outside agencies from CIA cannot be considered
“coordination.” In the matters of extra funds and personnel, there no
longer is the “elasticity” in CIA that there once was!

“II-1a. That national intelligence applies only to intelligence which is
interdepartmental in substance;”

State visualizes no change in the existing definitions of national
intelligence.

“II-1b. That national intelligence should be developed with a maximum use
of departmental facilities and minimum duplication of departmental
intelligence activities.”

State thinks CIA is not living up to DCI
3/1 and that CIA is always inclined to put its production into the
category of “urgent” or “exceptional.”

“II-2. That the IAC discuss and approve
all national intelligence estimates on which there is substantial
disagreement among the agencies or upon the request of a member.”

This refers to the members of the IAC,
not to the IAC agencies; i.e., the
IAC members should discuss around a
table together any “substantial disagreements” which may lead to a
dissent, hoping that much collective discussion by the IAC members themselves before a paper is
finalized may lessen to a considerable degree the number of
dissents.

“III-1. That, aside from national intelligence, CIA will produce
intelligence reports only in fields of common concern, as prescribed by
the DCI on the advice of the IAC.”

OIR in State feels that ORE in CIA is
duplicating its work and wishes to confine CIA's activity only to
“national intelligence” and only to “fields of common concern.” State
thinks that “common concern” are items of interest to two or more
agencies and cited as an example “transportation” and “communications.”
The DCI, however, is often called upon
by the President, the NSC, the JCS and others on a high level for
intelligence estimates which they need. He feels that he must comply
with such requests as expeditiously as possible.

“IV-1. That ICAPS study and prepare
recommendations for consideration by the IAC on the proper allocation of responsibility for
political summaries, both daily and weekly.”

State no longer seemed to feel strongly about the daily and weekly
publications mentioned herein.

3. It is requested, therefore, that we have a Standing Committee Meeting
to consider Mr. Armstrong's Four
Problems on Tuesday afternoon, 30 August 1949, at 2:00 p.m. in the
Director's Conference Room on the Ground Floor of the Administration
Building, 2430 E Street, N.W. The discussion at this meeting could be
used to formulate a memorandum showing wherein the other IAC agencies agree or disagree with State's
recommendations. These data can subsequently be used as part of the
reply due the Executive Secretary of the NSC in answer to his circular memorandum of July 7th.

Prescott Childs3

* Source: Central Intelligence Agency
Records, Job 86-B00269R, Box 5. Secret.

1 See the source note, Document
393.

2 Document 393.

3 Printed from a copy that bears this
typed signature.

397. Memorandum From the Assistant Director for Special Operations (Schow) to the Chief of the Intelligence Coordinating and Planning Staff, Central Intelligence Agency (Childs)397. Memorandum From the Assistant Director for Special Operations
(Schow) to the Chief of the
Intelligence Coordinating and Planning Staff, Central Intelligence
Agency (Childs)Source

Washington, August 26,
1949.

SUBJECT

The NSC 50 Approval of the
Dulles Report

Reference is made to your memorandum dated 22 August 19491 concerning the
above subject. Pursuant to your request, there are set out below
appropriate comments on the last three items mentioned under Section 4
of the circular memorandum from the DCI
dated 12 July 1949.1

1. Coordination of Covert Intelligence Activities
in Occupied Areas.

With regard to this problem action has been taken recently directly with
the Intelligence Division GSUSA to effect a closer coordination of such activity which has
resulted in an appreciable improvement in the situation and a
substantial increase of coordination in both the Far Eastern and
European Areas. The ultimate solution to the problem presented depends,
however, in my opinion, upon appropriate agreement between, first, the
IAC agencies and secondly, the
National Security Council for an exact allocation and coordination of
all covert intelligence activities in the areas involved. This agreement
and the implementation thereof necessitate requesting certain basic
revisions in NSC Intelligence
Directives, particularly in NSCID-2
and NSCID-5. It is recommended that at
the proper time the IAC agencies propose
to the NSC a revision of these two
directives which will centralize the responsibility for the coordination
and procurement of all covert intelligence in the hands of the DCI both in occupied areas and in all other
areas outside of the United States and its possessions. NSCID-5 should, in addition, on
recommendation of the IAC Agencies be
amended by the National Security Council to more specifically limit the
exceptions (contained therein) to the allocated responsibility of the
DCI for the conduct of all Federal
espionage and counterespionage outside the United States and its
possessions. Specific recommendations in this connection to be approved
by the IAC and presented to the NSC for issuance as amended directives are
presently being considered and will be proposed at the appropriate time
by this office.

2. Coordination of the Handling of Defectors.

As your reference memorandum indicates, the proposed coordination of the
handling of defectors depends to a large extent on the issuance as soon
as possible of the proposed NSCID on
defectors which is being circulated to the IAC Standing Committee for consideration. It is noted that
this proposed NSCID has been under
consideration and in the proc-ess of preparation by the interested
agencies for almost a year, during which time various unfortunate
incidents involving the uncoordinated handling of defectors have clearly
demonstrated the absolute necessity for coordination and control in this
field. I feel I should point out in addition that even the issuance by
the NSC of the proposed NSCID on defectors as now written cannot
be expected to provide any immediate solution to the problem, inasmuch
as before such a solution can be reached it will be necessary for the
IAC agencies and the DCI to agree on and issue detailed
implementing instructions and procedures which, if the progress of the
proposed NSCID is any standard, may
take a number of additional months to complete. [5-1/2
lines of source text not declassified]

3. Increased Emphasis on the Counterespionage
Activities Abroad of CIA and Closer Liaison on Counterespionage Matters
with the FBI.

With regard to the above problem this office has placed increased stress
on the counterespionage function and on counterespionage activity abroad on a continuing basis.
Attention is directed to the proposed order codifying and centralizing
the counterespionage functions and responsibilities of the Office of
Special Operations which has been recommended to the DCI for his approval and which he is
presently considering. Plans and procedures which have been drawn up for
an increased emphasis on counterespionage activity are included in the
recommendation which has been submitted concerning the merger of the
covert offices and related functions of CIA. To an extent, of course,
the accomplishment of this increased emphasis cannot be undertaken until
there is some implementation of the proposed integration of the covert
offices and related functions. In connection with counterespionage
activity abroad, appropriate amendment of NSCID-5 which, as noted above will be recommended in due
course, will permit greater clarity and coordination in the
counterespionage field as well as a more effective fulfillment of the
CIA counterespionage mission.

In connection with the question of closer liaison on counterespionage
matters with the FBI, I feel I should
point out that this liaison and the cooperation attendant thereon have
increased effectively for a considerable period of time and particularly
in the past two years. Obviously the development of the closest possible
working relationship in this regard is not only necessary but highly
desirable. Recommendations for a more orderly centralized control and
effectuation of the liaison with the FBI
were recently made to the Executive but the complete implementation of
these recommendations is again dependent upon the integration of the
covert offices and related functions of CIA. Every effort is being made,
of course, not only pursuant to the recommendations of NSC 50, but particularly pursuant to the
long standing instructions of the DCI,
to develop the closest possible counterespionage liaison with the FBI, and I feel sure that the appropriate
officials of the FBI are in agreement
with me that this liaison relationship at the present time is close,
effective, and mutually advantageous.

Robert A. Schow

* Source: Central Intelligence Agency Records,
Job 86-B00269R, Box 5. Top Secret.

1 Not found.

398. Memorandum From the Deputy Special Assistant (Howe) to the Secretary of State's Special Assistant for Research and Intelligence (Armstrong)398. Memorandum From the Deputy Special Assistant (Howe) to the Secretary of State's Special
Assistant for Research and Intelligence (Armstrong)Source

Washington, September 8,
1949.

I understand that a very stiff fight is now going on between Schow and
Wisner as to who will take
over the direction of the reorganized, combined OSO-OPC office. Hilly is
pushing for Schow, but Mr. Webb
has entered the fray, quite firmly telling Hilly that Schow is
unacceptable and telling Wisner that he cannot resign as he was selected
by the Department and is considered the Department's choice—at least for
OPC. For the moment the problem
seems to be in abeyance, since Mr. Webb is tied up with the British talks.

The situation has the real makings of a jumble, because it is obviously
impossible to get a man big enough to be over Wisner and small enough to
be under Hilly. Furthermore, I do not believe we can hope for a solution
of the State Department insisting on Wisner, and Hilly resigning on the
issue.

My personal view is that it would probably be an excellent thing for
Wisner to take over the new job and if possible retain Schow in OSO and get, as he is capable of it, an
able man to replace him in OPC.

Again I am a little disturbed that the Department seems to be taking a
position on a CIA matter without informing us—let alone consulting.

FH

* Source:
National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Records of the
Department of State, Records of the Bureau of Intelligence and
Research: Lot 58 D 776, Office of Policy Coordination.
Confidential.

399. Memorandum From the Assistant Director for Scientific Intelligence (Machle) to Director of Central Intelligence Hillenkoetter399. Memorandum From the Assistant Director for Scientific
Intelligence (Machle) to Director of
Central Intelligence HillenkoetterSource

Washington, September 29,
1949.

SUBJECT

Inability of OSI to Accomplish Its Mission

1. Both the Dulles and Eberstadt
Committees expressed particular concern with respect to the inadequacies
of scientific and technical intelligence and stressed the likelihood of
their over-riding importance. As stated by the Eberstadt Committee:1

“Failure properly to appraise the extent of scientific development in
enemy countries may have more immediate and catastrophic consequences
than failure in any other field of intelligence.”

2. Little has been accomplished toward correcting these inadequacies.
They are high lighted by the almost total failure of conventional
intelligence in estimating Soviet development of an atomic bomb.
Important current inadequacies are summarized below and are discussed in
more detail in Enclosure I:2

a. Atomic Warfare (Tab I-A)

(1) The USSR completed an atomic bomb in half the estimated time
required.

(2) The rate of Soviet production of atomic bombs must be determined
accurately. On the basis of present knowledge this is impossible.
Therefore, estimates of potential bomb stockpiles have been attempted on
the basis of estimates of total uranium ore available to the USSR. The
probability of error in estimates of domestic USSR supply of uranium ore
is large because they are predicated almost entirely on geologic
reasoning. Similar reasoning has been proved to be in error by a factor
of five in the case of estimates of Satellite uranium mining
operations.

b. Biological Warfare (Tab I-B)

The only defense against BW is timely and accurate intelligence on:

(1) Specific agents to be employed.

(2) The means for dissemination.

(3) Location and capacity of research and production installations.

With respect to these considerations, nothing is known about the BW
agents under investigation in the USSR; only allusions as to means of
dissemination can be cited; and there is no positive information on
research and production installations.

c. Chemical Warfare (Tab I-C)

Almost no information is available on Soviet development of new CW
agents, particularly nerve gases; nor is reliable information available
with respect to CW preparations in general. Crude estimates are based
almost entirely upon German intelligence from World War II.

d. Electronics (Tab I-D)

Electronic systems, which include radar and communication equipment, are
the means of integrating operations of modern military organizations.
Our knowledge of Soviet developments in communications, navigation,
interception, fire control, and other electronic systems is extremely
limited or non-existent. Most estimates are based upon extrapolations of
knowledge of equipment obtained by the USSR through Lend-Lease or
capture from the Germans.

e. Aircraft (Tab I-E)

In general, knowledge of Soviet aircraft development is limited to
information available with respect to their exploitation of German
equipment. The one exception is the limited intelligence obtainable from
observation of new aircraft displayed at the May Day and Air Force
shows. In particular, information is lacking on night fighter aircraft,
rocket-propelled intercepters, long-range heavy bombers, supersonic
research aircraft, and jet and rocket engines.

f. Guided Missiles (Tab I-F)

Very limited information indicates that the Soviets are continuing the
German developments in guided missiles. However, there is no information
as to the extent of the effort or the progress being made.

g. Medical Intelligence

Medical Intelligence is vital in operations involving AM, BW, CW, RW and,
in fact, in any preparations for military operations. The Eber-stadt
Committee stated that “medical intelligence is virtually non-exist-ent.”
There has been no significant improvement since this statement was
made.

h. Basic Scientific Research

In addition to the specific inadequacies of intelligence outlined in the
preceding paragraphs, there is a vast area of ignorance of basic
scientific research in USSR and Satellite countries. Knowledge of
scientific progress is essential to foresee the development of new
weapons.

3. The inadequacies in present national scientific intelligence exist
because of conditions both inside and outside CIA.

Conditions Outside CIA

4. The conditions outside CIA which are preventing OSI from accomplishing
its mission are:

a. Refusal of the Departments to recognize CIA as the central
coordinating agency in the national intelligence structure. This refusal
is evidenced by active non-cooperation which is summarized and
documented in Enclosure II.

b. Lack of authority to effect coordination of intelligence activities
through emasculation of the authority of the National Security Act by
the NSCID's. This subject is covered
admirably in the memorandum from General Counsel to Executive, subject:
“Legal Responsibilities of the Central Intelligence Agency,” dated 27
September 1949.3

c. Domination of CIA by the departmental intelligence agencies through
the mechanism of the IAC.

5. These conditions can be corrected only if the Departments are forced
to recognize the intent of the National Security Act and the authority
granted CIA thereunder. This can be accomplished only through clear-cut
implementation of the National Security Act. Therefore, it is
recommended that the National Security Council be requested to:

a. Reinstate the authority granted the Director of Central Intelligence
in the directive approved by the National Intelligence Authority at its
9th meeting on 12 February 1947.4 This directive
provided that the Director of Central Intelligence “shall operate … as
an agent of the Secretaries of State, War and the Navy … so that his
decisions, orders and directives shall be considered as emanating from
them … .”

b. Readopt the definition of “strategic and national policy intelligence”
approved by the National Intelligence Authority at its 9th meeting, but
amended to include “scientific” intelligence. (See Tab D, Enclosure
III.)

c. Revise the NSCID's in conformity
with the foregoing which should include the elimination of IAC as the “Board of Directors” of CIA.

Attached hereto as Enclosure III is a suggested memorandum to the
National Security Council incorporating the above recommendations.

Conditions Inside CIA

6. The underlying condition within CIA which is preventing OSI from
accomplishing its mission is the failure of the collecting offices to
recognize that they exist
only to provide services for the producing offices and agencies. As a
result, collection, dissemination and library functions have become ends
unto themselves. This is evidenced by the statement of the AD/OSO that:

“[OSO]5 must weigh the demands of all
customers and determine priorities for all operations in the field.”
(See Tab N, Enclosure IV.)

7. Because of this situation, OSO has
failed completely to discharge its responsibility for covert collection
of scientific and technical intelligence. The effect of this failure on
specific fields of scientific intelligence is illustrated by references
to OSO in Tabs A, B, G and N of
Enclosure I. A compilation of specific cases and an analysis of
organizational and operational deficiencies of OSO are contained in Enclosure IV. These deficiencies may
be summarized as follows:

a. There is no effective planning of scientific and technical
intelligence operations in OSO nor any
mechanism for relating such planning to the needs for national
scientific intelligence.

b. The position of the scientific staff of OSO as a purely advisory group makes impossible effective
implementation of plans for scientific and technical intelligence
operations.

c. A fallacious concept of operational security dangerously limits the
dissemination of useful intelligence to OSI and prohibits technical
guidance of operations by informed and competent analysts.

8. In order to provide the positive covert support required by OSI from
OSO, it is recommended that:

a. OSO be directed to collect scientific
and technical information in conformity with the importance of that
information to the national security and to conduct its operations in
accordance with integrated priorities determined jointly by OSI and
ORN.

b. In order to provide day to day guidance by OSI in the collection of
scientific and technical information, controlled direct liaison be
established between OSI and the Foreign Branches of OSO.

c. The qualified staff members and the functions of TGS/OSO be transferred to OSI, in so far as
these functions relate to planning and coordinating technical and
scientific operations, processing requirements for technical and
scientific intelligence information, procuring technical advice for
OSO, and editing scientific and
technical intelligence for dissemination outside CIA.

d. OSO be directed to obtain approval by
AD/OSI, or his specifically designated representative, of the technical
and scientific objectives of any covert operation prior to its
initiation.

9. With respect to OO and OCD, it is recommended that the policies
and functions of these offices be reviewed in order that their
operations may reflect more adequately the guidance of the producing
offices and agencies.

Willard Machle6

* Source: Central Intelligence Agency
Records, Job 84-T00286R, Box 5, Folder 1. Top Secret.

1 Not printed. (Ibid.)

2 None of the
enclosures is printed.

3 Not found.

4 See Document 185. The language quoted was not
embodied in an NIA Directive as such
but was an “authority” or “delegation” approved by the NIA at the meeting and formally entered
in the minutes. The NIA rescinded
the authority at its 10th meeting on June 26, 1947; see Document 319.

5 Brackets in the source text.

6 Printed from a copy
that bears this typed signature.

400. Memorandum From Director of Central Intelligence Hillenkoetter to the Executive Secretary of the National Security Council (Souers)400. Memorandum From Director of Central Intelligence Hillenkoetter to the
Executive Secretary of the National Security Council (Souers)Source

Washington, October 7,
1949.

SUBJECT

Progress Report to NSC on NSC 50, Section 6 “Organization of
CIA”1

REFERENCE

(a) Memorandum of 8 July 1949 from Executive Secretary of the
NSC2

1. Paragraph 2 of the above mentioned reference3 and Section 6 of NSC 50 call for a report to the NSC in 90 days on progress toward
implementation of the recommendations on Organization in Section 6 of
NSC 50.

2. I am now able to report on these recommendations as follows:

(1) A plan for integrating OSO, OPC, and Contact Branch of OO under single overall direction in an
Operations Division has already been drawn up and submitted for review
to the Departments of Defense and State, prior to submission to the
NSC. Due to the changes entailed in
NSC10/2, the State Department has
requested some time to study this matter before implementation.

(2) With reference to the second factor in the organization about
creating a small Estimates Division and a Research and Reports Division
for recognized fields of common interest, it is believed that other
methods of organization will accomplish the same concept and objectives.
It is thought that good estimates can be obtained only when closely tied
in with research. Plans for some reorganization within ORE are now being drawn up with this view
in mind.

(3) When the plans for a Combined Operations Division (paragraph (1)
above) are approved, the Foreign Documents Branch will be relocated in
an appropriate place in the Agency.

(4) As recommended in the NSC 50 report,
the Foreign Broadcast Information Branch will not be included in the
proposed Operations Division.

(5) The Interdepartmental Coordinating and Planning Staff is a joint
staff responsible only to the Director of Central Intelligence devoted
to the interdepartmental coordination of intelligence activities. I plan
to strengthen it by giving it more internal CIA duties to better enable
it to plan and coordinate intelligence activities on the policy level.
The Office of Collection and Dissemination, however, will remain an
independent “housekeeping” office performing many centralized services
for the various sections of CIA with regard to collection and
dissemination. It is thought to be neither necessary nor desirable to
combine such operations with policy planning.

R.H. Hillenkoetter4
Rear Admiral, USN

* Source: Truman Library, Papers of Harry S. Truman,
President's Secretary's Files. Top Secret. Transmitted to the NSC under an October 10 memorandum from
Souers. See the Supplement.

1 Not found.

2 See Document
385.

3 Memo for the Director of Central Intelligence,
transmitting NSC Action No. 231.
[Footnote in the source text; see footnote 2,
Document 385.]

4 Printed from a
copy that indicates Hillenkoetter signed the original.

401. Letter From Secretary of Defense Johnson to Secretary of State Acheson401. Letter From Secretary of Defense Johnson to Secretary of State AchesonSource

Washington, October 7,
1949.

MY DEAR MR. SECRETARY: At our luncheon on September 23, 1949, we
discussed the location and various aspects of certain special activities
of the Central Intelligence Agency. I expressed to you my very great
concern at the present situation, and we both agreed that on an interim
basis we should make special and direct arrangements to provide policy
guidance for these activities.

I am familiar with your arrangements in the State Department whereby Mr.
Kennan serves as your adviser
on these activities, and in accordance with our understanding I am
designating Brigadier General John
Magruder, U.S. Army (Retired), as my special adviser on
these activities. He will be particularly concerned with the subject
contained in NSC 10/2, but in addition,
and for the purpose of providing the necessary integration of other
interrelated matters, he will concern himself on my behalf with NSC 4 and NSC 43 series. Your Department and mine under this
arrangement can then proceed to guide these activities in a direction
that we deem mutually desirable, and likewise to seek agreement
respecting an appropriate organizational setting for the activities
comprised in NSC 10/2.

The designation of General Magruder as my policy representative does not
alter the previous arrangements for the Joint Chiefs of Staff
representation in NSC 10/2 and NSC 43 matters.

I am also informing the three Secretaries of the military departments,
the Joint Chiefs of Staff and the Executive Secretary, National Security
Council, of my action.

Sincerely yours,

Louis Johnson

* Source: National Archives and Records
Administration, RG 59, Department of State, Decimal File 1945-49,
101.61/10-749. Top Secret. A handwritten notation on the source text
reads: “Reply drafted S: W.J. Sheppard 10/18/49.” No copy of a reply
has been found.

402. Memorandum From the Deputy to the Secretary of State's Special Assistant for Research and Intelligence (Howe) to the Special Assistant to the Secretary (Sheppard)402. Memorandum From the Deputy to the Secretary of State's Special
Assistant for Research and Intelligence (Howe) to the Special Assistant to the Secretary
(Sheppard)Source

Washington, October 17,
1949.

The agenda, as I understand it, for the meeting with Mr. Webb and Hilly tomorrow afternoon, is
concerned with the plans for cooperation with NAP countries. If this includes intelligence, as I
understand it does, as well as OPC work,
I think that both you and Mr. Webb should be aware that it is a new departure for
these meetings. They have in the past been confined to OPC work.

As I have also discussed with you, Park and I would welcome the
broadening of the scope of these meetings, so that they include the
overall guidance through discussions on OSO (intelligence) as well as OPC. We feel this for two basic reasons:

1. The organizational set up, both within CIA and within the Department,
and the personality situation within CIA, has led us, over the past few
months, to raising to Mr. Webb's
level and specifically at these meetings, the general solution to
CIA-State problems and the discussion of plans. This would have equally
beneficial results for intelligence as for OPC.

2. Probably more important is the fact that while the objectives of
intelligence and operations may be different and even conflicting, the
method and procedures are so much alike and so much in common that the
guidance and direction given to one should be with the full knowledge of
the other, at least at the top level. This is somewhat achieved in the
single person of Hilly. It is not, however, achieved in the Department
to date, except in the person of Mr. Webb. Thus, Messrs. Kennan and Joyce
are not able to be kept as fully informed on intelligence matters
pertaining to CIA as they must be to handle the operational liaison with
CIA and conversely we in R have not been
able to handle as efficiently as perhaps we might, the intelligence
matters, for lack of information on OPC.

I can think of examples, both substantive and procedural, which bear this
out. Our lack of knowledge of any efforts in Albania has, I think,
limited our usefulness, whereas we have been useful and will undoubtedly
be more so with respect to China as a result of these meetings.
Procedurally we are not able to deal in the full interest of the
Department with the OSO cover policies
when we are wholly unfamiliar with the OPC cover policy.

In sum then, I would want you to be aware that the meeting tomorrow
apparently will deal with intelligence for the first time, rather than
simply OPC operations, and that R welcomes this innovation.

If you agree with the above, I suggest that you and Mr. Webb give consideration to asking
Admiral Hillenkoetter to bring Colonel Schow, Director of OSO, to the meeting tomorrow, as well as
Mr. Wisner.

Fisher Howe1

P.S. I think an excellent example of where intelligence and operations
must be carried on with the full knowledge of each other, namely in our
policies of cooperation and collaboration with the British. It is my
understanding that the cooperative arrangements with the British have
been worked out almost entirely under the auspices of the Department,
whereas no attempt has been made to give the intelligence effort of CIA
guidance on this matter. S/P and R are apparently unfamiliar with the
policies of the Department with respect to these two phases of a very
similar problem.

F.H.

* Source: National Archives and Records
Administration, RG 59, Records of the Department of State, Records
of the Bureau of Intelligence and Research: Lot 58 D 776, Office of
Policy Coordination. Top Secret.

1 Printed from a copy that bears
this typed signature and typed initials below.

403. Memorandum From Director of Central Intelligence Hillenkoetter to the Intelligence Advisory Committee403. Memorandum From Director of Central Intelligence Hillenkoetter to the
Intelligence Advisory CommitteeSource

Washington, November 1,
1949.

SUBJECT

State Department's Four Problems

REFERENCE

Circular Memo to IAC, August 5,
19491

1. Subsequent to the IAC meeting which
decided that the Standing Committee should give consideration to the
Four Problems presented by Mr. Armstrong in connection
with the implementation of NSC 50
(Dulles Report
Recommendations), two meetings were held to discuss the recommendations
in the four papers2 which were
submitted.

2. All members of the Standing Committee, except the State Member, are in
agreement with the report. (Encl. A) The report preferred by the State
Member is also enclosed. (Encl. B)

3. If the IAC Members wish to have the
Coordination, Operations and Policy Staff (formerly ICAPS) prepare a report on the Four
Problems as presented by State, I shall be glad to have this done.

R.H. Hillenkoetter3

Rear Admiral, USN

Enclosure A4

Washington, September 23, 1949.

REPORT ON STATE'S FOUR PROBLEMS, FROM ALLSTANDING COMMITTEE MEMBERS
EXCEPT STATE'S

Problem I—Coordination of Intelligence
Activities

1. In general, all Standing Committee members are in agreement with Mr.
Armstrong's Recommendations
I-1, 2, and 3 pertaining to ICAPS and
the Standing Committee.

2. The Department of Defense members of the Standing Committee, however,
consider that the functions, responsibilities, and membership of ICAPS, and the Standing Committee should
be as follows:

ICAPS

a. Should be composed of full-time members contributed by the agencies
represented on the IAC.

b. Should be under the direction of and responsible to the Director of
Central Intelligence.

c. Should have, as one of its primary responsibilities, the
accomplishment of staff work in connection with the development and
presentation of policies and
procedures for the production and coordination of intelligence by the
various agencies represented on the IAC.
In matters of this sort the objective of ICAPS should be the production of an unbiased,
comprehensive presentation or report covering all aspects of a subject.
This it should be able to do because of the wide variety in training,
experience, and general background of its members.

d. Should function as a secretariat for the IAC and the Standing Committee of the IAC.

e. Should perform such other functions as the Director of Central
Intelligence may direct.

The Standing Committee of the IAC

a. Should be composed of at least one representative from each IAC agency.

b. Should review, on behalf of the IAC,
such matters as may be referred to it for action by the IAC or the IAC Secretariat (ICAPS).
Normally all staff work on such matters would be accomplished by ICAPS prior to submission of items to the
SC/IAC or the IAC.

c. Could then direct its action primarily toward the following
objectives:

(1) Presentation and discussion of revisions which SC/IAC members might consider desirable, from
the standpoint of the agencies they represent.

(2) Thorough indoctrination of all SC/IAC
members in all aspects of the matter under consideration including the
views of other SC/IAC members and hence
the probable recommendations they will make to their respective
Directors when the matter comes up for consideration by the IAC itself. (There should be no formal
voting by the SC/IAC and it should be
clearly understood that the views expressed by SC/IAC members will not necessarily be the
same on any particular subject as those presented by their Directors
when action is taken at the IAC
level.)

3. The Department of Defense members of the Standing Committee recommend
that the IAC approve the substance of
the above paragraphs and recommend to the DCI that it be published in appropriate form for the
information and guidance of all concerned.

4. Department of Defense members of the Standing Committee also recommend
that the remainder (I-4, II, III, and IV) of the Department of State
proposals be referred, as a first step, to ICAPS for appropriate staff action.

5. Nevertheless the remainder of Mr. Armstrong's four problems were discussed. The Standing
Committee agreed that the wording of Recommendation I-4 was confusing
and that it should be separated into two paragraphs to read: “4. That
CIA establish an Estimates Division in accordance with the
recommendations of the Dulles
Report,” and that there be a
new paragraph 5 reading: “5. That CIA fulfill its coordinating
responsibilities in respect to intelligence production in accordance
with the following principles:—.”

6. However, only State wishes to have established an Estimates Division
(new paragraph I-4), as the Department of Defense Agencies dissented and
proposed that the subject be referred to ICAPS for further study. The CIA representative also
dissented on the ground that the Director does not desire to have a new,
separate “Estimates Division.” AEC and
the FBI abstained. The Department of
Defense Agencies, in regard to the new paragraph I-5 mentioned above,
recommended that the principles (a) to (f) in Mr. Armstrong's recommendations be
referred to ICAPS for further study.
State and AEC approved of all of these
principles and FBI abstained. The CIA
position at the meeting, with regard to paragraph (e), was that the
obligations of this agency would not permit it to adjust its production
in accordance with the departments' “existing programs;” nor could CIA
agree that the assignment of personnel to IAC agencies from CIA, reference (f), was a part of its
coordinating responsibilities.

Problem II—Production of National
Intelligence

The Department of Defense Agencies and the AEC accepted in principle State's recommendations for
Problem II. The FBI abstained, and CIA
rejected the principles expressed in Recommendation 1 (a) and 1 (c).

Problem III—Research and Reports

It was agreed that Recommendation III-1 should have deleted the last
clause and be changed to read: “That, aside from National Intelligence,
CIA will produce intelligence reports only in fields of common concern,”
and that Recommendation III-2 should have added to it “for further
approval by the NSC.” With these changes
included, the State and Defense members agreed to the recommendations,
FBI abstaining. CIA maintained it
performs “services” of common concern (FBIB, etc.) but found
Recommendation 1, as written, too restrictive.

Problem IV—Political Summaries

The members of the Standing Committee agreed to this recommendation.
FBI abstained.

Recommendations by the Standing Committee

1. As the result of its considerations of Mr. Armstrong's four papers, the concensus
of opinion of the Standing Committee was:

a. That Recommendations 1, 2, and 3 of Paper I be accepted in principle
as elaborated by the Defense Department members.

b. That new Recommendations 4 and 5 (see paragraph 5 above) of Paper I
and all recommendations of Papers II, III, and IV be referred to ICAPS for appropriate action.

Enclosure B5

Washington, October 25, 1949.

REPORT ON STATE'S FOUR PROBLEMS FROM THESTATE MEMBER OF THE STANDING
COMMITTEE

It is our view that all four papers should be referred to COAPS for further study, inasmuch as the
points at issue have not been sufficiently clarified to permit IAC action. I would suggest that a report
to the IAC along the following lines be
substituted for the draft included in your memorandum.

1. The Standing Committee has met twice to consider the four papers
submitted with Mr. Armstrong's
letter of August 2, 1949. Although agreement was reached on a number of
the recommendations made in these papers, it is believed that the
divergent views on the remainder cannot be clarified without further
staff work.

2. The Standing Committee therefore recommends:

a. That the papers be referred to COAPS
for preparation of a staff study which will clearly indicate the areas
of agreement and isolate and define the issues and areas on which there
is disagreement, marshalling the arguments on each side;

b. That the study be completed in time for action at the November meeting
of the IAC.

* Source: Central Intelligence Agency
Records, Job 86-B00269R, Box 5. No classification marking. Addressed
to the Special Assistant for Research and Intelligence, Department
of State; the Director of Intelligence, Army General Staff; the
Director of Naval Intelligence; the Director of Air Force
Intelligence; the Director of Intelligence, Atomic Energy
Commission; the Deputy Director, Joint Intelligence Group, Joint
Staff; and the Director, Federal Bureau of Investigation.

1 See the source note, Document 393.

2 See the enclosures to
Document 393.

3 Printed from a copy that
indicates Hillenkoetter signed the original.

4 Secret.

5 Secret.

404. Memorandum From the Acting Executive Secretary (Lay) to the National Security Council404. Memorandum From the Acting Executive Secretary (Lay) to the National Security CouncilSource

Washington, December 14,
1949.

SUBJECT

The Central Intelligence Agency and National Organization for
Intelligence

REFERENCES

A. Memo for NSC from Executive
Secretary, same subject, dated October 10, 1949, with enclosed
Progress Report by the Director of Central Intelligence1

B. NSC 502

C. NSC Actions Nos. 237 and
2313

The enclosed memorandum by the Under Secretary of State with respect to
the reference Progress Report by the Director of Central Intelligence on
the implementation of paragraph 6 of NSC
50 is circulated herewith for the information of the National Security
Council.

In accord with the suggestion in the last paragraph of the enclosure the
Director of Central Intelligence is being requested to submit a further
report on the organization he plans to adopt in furtherance of paragraph
6 of NSC 50 when that has been
determined, including a review of other steps contemplated to achieve
the objectives outlined in paragraph 5 of NSC 50.

James S. Lay, Jr.

Enclosure4

Memorandum From the Under Secretary of State (Webb) to the Executive Secretary of the National
Security Council (Souers)

Washington, December 13, 1949.

SUBJECT

The Central Intelligence Agency and National Organization for
Intelligence, NSC 50 and Progress Report
on NSC 50, October 7, 1949

The receipt of the Progress Report of the CIA is acknowledged.5 Although it is
noted that no action has been requested by the Director of Central
Intelligence, the Department of State makes the following comment on the
report, specifically with reference to paragraph 2 (2).

In paragraph 6 of NSC 50, the Council
approved the recommendation of the Survey Group that out of the present
Office of Reports and Estimates of CIA “there should be created (a) a
small estimates division which would draw upon and review the
specialized intelligence product of the departmental agencies in order
to prepare coordinated national intelligence estimates and (b) a
research and reports division to accomplish central research in, and
coordinated production of, intelligence in recognized fields of common
interest.” The purpose of this organizational change was to facilitate
the accomplishment of the objectives set forth in paragraph 5 of NSC 50, dealing with the production of
national intelligence. The Council recognized, however, that there might
be other methods of organization which would accomplish the same
objectives.

The report indicates that the Director has elected to adopt an
alternative method of organization to accomplish the objectives outlined
in paragraph 5, but that the exact nature of this reorganization has not
been fully determined.

In view of the responsibility of the National Security Council for the
implementation of NSC 50, perhaps it
would be helpful to all concerned if the Director reported further on
the organization he plans to adopt in furtherance of paragraph 6 when
that has been determined. Such a report might extend to a review of
other steps contemplated to achieve the objectives outlined in paragraph
5.

James E. Webb6

* Source: Truman Library, Papers of Harry S.
Truman, President's Secretary's Files. Top Secret. A copy was sent
to Hillenkoetter.

1 See Document 400 and
the source note thereto.

2 Document 384.

3 Regarding NSC Action No. 231, see footnote 2, Document 385. NSC Action No. 237 is not printed.
(National Archives and Records Administration, RG 273, Records
of the National Security Council, Record of Actions, Box
55)

4 Top Secret.

5 Memo for NSC from
Executive Secretary, same subject, dated October 10, 1949. [Footnote
in the source text; see footnote 1 above.]

6 Printed from a copy that indicates
Webb signed the
original.

405. Central Intelligence Agency Memorandum405. Central Intelligence Agency MemorandumSource

Washington, December 21,
1949.

STATE'S FOUR PAPERS

(“COAPS” is substituted for “ICAPS”
throughout

this paper after 1 October 1949)

Background Statement

1. On 2 August 1949, Mr. W. Park Armstrong,
Jr., Special Assistant to the Secretary of State for
Research and Intelligence, transmitted to the Director of Central
Intelligence four papers1 containing
recommendations for implementation “at the earliest feasible time,”
which he wished to have considered by the Intelligence Advisory
Committee. The DCI submitted copies of
these papers to the IAC members by
circular memorandum dated 5 August 1949.2

2. A preliminary examination of the State proposals was made within CIA
prior to the Intelligence Advisory Committee meeting of 19 August 1949
at which it was decided “to pass (the four papers) on to the Standing
Committee to see what can be worked out and refer them back to the
IAC members.”

3. On 24 August 1949, the State Department member of ICAPS met with Mr. Allen Evans to clarify
certain aspects of the presentation made by the State Department.3

4. On 30 August 1949 the IAC Standing
Committee met to consider the State Department proposals. The goal of
this meeting, which was not realized, was to evaluate the State
recommendations and express Standing Committee endorsement or lack of
endorsement on each one. Much discussion of substantially differing
viewpoints dissipated progress at this meeting.

5. On 8 September 1949 the IAC Standing
Committee met again, to consider a draft of a report to the Intelligence
Advisory Committee on State Department's Problem I.—Coordination. At the
outset of this meeting the Department of Defense members submitted for
the first time a prepared paper expressing their views on the Department
of State proposals. Basically the Defense paper supported many of the
State recommendations and asked that the entire series of problems be
examined and suggested solutions be offered by ICAPS.

6. A report on these Four Problems was prepared as a result of these
discussions, and on 1 November 1949 the Director of Central Intelligence
sent to the IAC two reports4 —one of which was concurred in by all of the
Standing Committee except the State member, who recommended in the
second separate short report that the proposals of the Department of
State be referred to COAPS “for
preparation of a staff study which will:

a. “clearly indicate the areas of agreement and

b. “isolate and define the issues and areas on which there is
disagreement.”

7. A staff report by COAPS on the Four Problems of State met with the
endorsement of most of the IAC members
in response to the DCI memorandum of 1
November 1949.

Paper I

PROBLEM I—COORDINATION OF INTELLIGENCE ACTIVITIES

State Recommendation 1:

“That COAPS serve as a joint staff
under the direction of, and responsible to, the DCI, be composed of members contributed by the several
agencies on a fulltime basis, but not ‘representing’ the agency, and be
headed by a chief who will also be the Executive Secretary of the IAC.”

Discussion:

This recommendation describes the present situation as regards the Chief
of Coordination, Operations, and Policy Staff and the member from the
Department of State. The “joint staff” concept has not been clearly
established in the case of the members contributed by the military
departments. The words “Executive Secretary” should be changed, however,
to “Secretariat” to cover the staff work essential for promoting
efficiency at the IAC meetings and at
the same time to prevent conflict with the concept of single
responsibility in operations to the Director of Central
Intelligence.

Conclusion:

The functions of COAPS, as part of the
CIA organization, have been established and clearly enumerated by the
Director of Central Intelligence. These duties cover the viewpoints expressed by the
Department of State.

Recommendation:

That a memorandum from the DCI to the
IAC members indicate that COAPS, as his staff, will, among other
duties, accomplish the staff work on all problems being brought to the
attention of the Intelligence Advisory Committee.

State Recommendation 2:

“That matters of coordination be referred to COAPS for study and recommendation by the DCI, or through the DCI by the IAC, but that
COAPS itself may submit to the DCI, or
through the DCI to the IAC, recommendations which it considers
appropriate for consideration.”

Discussion:

This recommendation describes accurately a relationship whereby the
Coordination, Operations, and Policy Staff serves the DCI as a staff unit, recognizing that
problems may be referred to the unit for staff study and that COAPS may itself initiate action when
required.

Inherent in the wording of this recommendation, however, is the “Board of
Directors” philosophy—giving little or no recognition to the principle
of “forthright initiative and leadership” of the Director of Central
Intelligence in the coordination of intelligence activities. NSC 50 has confirmed that the IAC is to function as an advisory
committee.

Conclusions:

1. Although COAPS works as a staff unit
of the DCI, the Intelligence Advisory
Committee agencies must recognize, if progress is to be achieved,

a. that COAPS is the only permanently
established unit of organization available for staff analysis and
formulation of appropriate recommendations;

b. that the DCI is not looking to COAPS for only favorable answers on any
problems under examination and that the agencies should not require
similar partiality;

c. that COAPS, composed of individuals
contributed by the participating agencies, can and does achieve
objectivity in its evaluation of problems.

2. COAPS should assume more progressive
initiative in exploring areas of difficulty in the coordination process
and in preparing adequately items for Intelligence Advisory Committee
consideration.

Recommendations:

1. That a memorandum be sent by the DCI
to the IAC members notifying them that
COAPS will be available to help
appraise and recommend solutions to problems of intelligence
coordination.

2. That COAPS assume responsibility for
preparation of the items which are to be placed on the agenda of the
Intelligence Advisory Committee meetings and in so doing COAPS be guided by the principle that
with adequate prior staff study it is not necessary that all such items
be first referred to the Standing Committee before consideration by the
Intelligence Advisory Committee itself.

State Recommendation 3:

“That the representation on the Standing Committee be the same as that of
the IAC, and that the Standing Committee
serve as a subordinate or staff committee to the IAC to consider on an interagency basis, problems referred
to it by the IAC.”

Discussion:

From a practical standpoint the Intelligence Advisory Committee Standing
Committee cannot serve the Intelligence Advisory Committee as a “staff
committee” since it has no permanent continuous working status. The main
advantage of the existence of the Intelligence Advisory Committee
Standing Committee is the element of time-saving to CIA in securing
departmental viewpoints in round-table discussions on interdepartmental
problems. Thus, in producing staff studies for the Intelligence Advisory
Committee, COAPS is enabled to get
agency reaction on these studies before putting them in final form for
IAC action. Hence, the Standing
Committee is the proving ground for testing the Staff Study, but in this
process the Standing Committee should not be considered a barrier or
layer between the Director of Central Intelligence and the Intelligence
Advisory Committee. Accordingly, formality of procedure, demanding
official actions such as motions and votes are nonessential in Standing
Committee meetings. The adoption of parliamentary procedures in such
meetings would serve no purpose since the Standing Committee,
representatives of an advisory committee, can formulate no binding
decisions.

Since meetings of any committee are non-productive unless some prior
analysis is made of the problems to be discussed, the only items which
the IAC should refer to the IAC Standing Committee “to consider on an
interagency basis” are those upon which some staff work is already
performed to clearly define the issue involved. This may have been done
by the IAC agency introducing a
particular problem. In most instances, however, problems requiring
consideration “on an interagency basis,” being beyond the pale of
interest of any one department fall within the coordinating
responsibility of the Director of Central Intelligence, and, as such,
should be referred to him for adequate and proper consideration. In such
“consideration” he will, of course, test his tentative findings with the
Intelligence Advisory Committee before arriving at a decision.

The wording in the recommendation limits the kind of problems, that the
Standing Committee may consider, to those “referred to it by the IAC.” This restriction serves no useful
purpose.

Recommendation:

That the Recommendation of the Department of State be accepted if changed
to read as follows:

“That the representation on the Standing Committee be the same as that of
the Intelligence Advisory Committee, and that the Standing Committee
consider all problems referred to it on an interagency basis so as to
speed up the attainment of departmental views on interdepartmental
issues.”

State Recommendation 4:

“That CIA fulfill its coordinating responsibility on research programs
primarily through the Estimates Division, whose primary function should
be such coordination, in accordance with the following principles:”

Discussion:

The primary function of any “Estimates Division” is to prepare
intelligence estimates. Efficient work in this field will bring about a
certain degree of coordination as a by-product. However, whether or not
CIA establishes an organizational unit to be known as the “Estimates
Division” is an internal decision to be made by the Director of Central
Intelligence.

“Research,” as such, is an undertaking very essential in producing an
intelligence estimate and “research program” at the most is a segment of
the total production function. CIA's coordinating responsibility goes
far beyond the purview of just “research,” embracing also coordination
in many other fields; e.g., collection, dissemination.

How CIA carries on its coordinating responsibility is to be determined by
the Director of Central Intelligence, and hence these “principles” of
conduct are at the most suggestions for DCI to consider.

Conclusion:

Since the general subject being considered in State's first “Problem” is
“Coordination of Intelligence Activities,” the lead paragraph of
Recommendation 4 should be reworded to express more accurately CIA's
position.

Recommendations:

1. That it be recognized that the following principles are not
all-inclusive.

2. That State Recommendation 4 be reworded to read:

“That CIA fulfill its coordinating responsibility in accordance with the
following primary principles;”

First Principle

State Recommendation 4a:

“CIA will constitute itself the center of information on all U.S. foreign
intelligence activities, including current research intelligence
projects;”

Discussion:

The word “activities” places a false limitation on the scope of CIA
functions. Knowledge of “all U.S. foreign intelligence” is sufficiently
general to include information on activities.

As a central producer of national intelligence and as a coordinator of
all intelligence in the federal structure, CIA should be the recognized
repository of all information pertaining to intelligence undertakings
planned, in progress, and completed in the IAC agencies.

To achieve this objective the IAC
agencies themselves must take the initiative in maintaining strong
world-wide collection facilities and in guaranteeing the free flow of
raw information, finished departmental products, and other pertinent
data to the Central Intelligence Agency.

Conclusion:

To comply with the mission of CIA, this statement of principle should be
reworded so as to be more inclusive of CIA's total responsibility.

Recommendation:

That this statement of principle be accepted if reworded to read:

“CIA will constitute itself the center of information on all U.S. foreign
intelligence matters, including agency programs, projects, reports, and
activities of all types, and also on the nature and scope of the basic
supporting data.”

Second Principle

State Recommendation 4b:

“CIA will have free access to the plans and programs of the several
intelligence agencies, subject to overall departmental regulation;”

Discussion:

CIA's authority to comprehend fully the agency intelligence activities
and functions is circumscribed seriously by the present wording of NSCID 1, wherein it is specified that
CIA may see only “intelligence materials” and these with the express
permission of the department.

The last phase of the principle, “subject to overall departmental
regulation,” could hamper progress if it were applied too generally.
There is no objection to its usage if meant to cover only the security
regulations of each department and agency.

Conclusions:

1. The general acceptance of this principle by all IAC agencies would strengthen and
facilitate the responsibility of CIA in the field of interdepartmental
coordination.

2. The principle might well be clarified so that there will be no
misunderstanding regarding the kind of departmental regulations which
are meant to apply.

Recommendations:

1. That this principle be adopted by CIA for IAC application.

2. That the IAC members instruct their
organizations in adequate detail regarding full recognition of this
principle at all levels throughout each agency.

Third Principle

State Recommendation 4c:

“CIA will recognize that it should have active liaison responsibility to
other agencies as well as receiving liaison from those agencies;”

Discussion:

The goal expressed by this recommendation is practical and worthwhile,
and is a responsibility concomitant with the “free access” thoughts
expressed in the last proposed principle. The “free flow” idea should be
a two-way endeavor applicable to persons as well as materials and
information. This interagency liaison should exist at policy levels as
well as at working levels.

Conclusion:

The efficiency of present liaison functions between the IAC agencies and CIA is a subject worthy of
proper examination.

Recommendations:

1. That CIA examine the condition of present liaison activities between
CIA and the IAC agencies, and

2. Based upon the findings of such examination, issue the necessary
operating instructions.

Fourth Principle

State Recommendation 4d:

“CIA will effect coordination as much by positive action in stimulating
appropriate intelligence effort as by negative action in preventing
undesirable duplications;”

Discussion:

This principle ties in with the “forthright initiative and leadership”
concept of the Dulles Report and
NSC 50. Its adoption by CIA and its
unqualified recognition and acceptance by the IAC agencies would strengthen the administrative role of
the Director of Central Intelligence in effecting coordination.

Conclusions:

1. The “positive action” approach is undoubtedly the more acceptable
method for stronger coordination efforts.

2. To work properly, this principle must be accepted fully by the
Intelligence Advisory Committee agencies so as not to raise a question
of “interference” with departmental undertaking when the DCI takes action in overall planning to
stimulate “appropriate intelligence” efforts in the agencies.

Recommendation:

That this principle be adopted to guide CIA's actions in all fields of
coordination, after receiving agency guarantees of full cooperation.

Fifth Principle

State Recommendation 4e:

“CIA will recognize that requests for intelligence other than national
intelligence, as defined, shall be forwarded for action to the agencies
in accordance with established allocations and existing programs;”

Discussion:

Requests coming to CIA are for intelligence relating to the national
security, and, as such, are not earmarked “national,” “departmental,” or
any other category. Neither does the requestor specify that the desired
intelligence estimate must be prepared initially by any IAC department or agency. Accordingly, even
though the request on CIA may ask for an intelligence product which is
very largely political, this does not mean that CIA's responsibility to
the requestor is fully discharged by merely calling upon the Department
of State for the production of the estimate.

Usually a departmental intelligence estimate will not be allowed to go
beyond the limits of the department unless the findings agree with
policy. Hence all departmental intelligence products are framed in
departmental policy viewpoints, and, as such, lose their objectivity
when judged by intelligence standards.

Regardless of this deficiency, however, CIA utilizes departmental
intelligence products and seeks departmental concurrences in the task of
producing national intelligence estimates. The urgency of the request
will determine whether the work thereunder falls into the category of
“normal,” “urgent,” or “exceptional” as specified in DCI 3/1.

Conclusions:

1. “National Intelligence, as defined” being the basis for this
recommendation by the Department of State, we should give consideration
to improving the definition of National Intelligence.

2. The IAC agencies should realize:

a. That CIA was so constituted, and so placed in the Executive Structure
to enable it to prepare national intelligence estimates in a completely
objective manner, without necessity for reference to, or deference to,
established policy.

b. Because of this important factor, CIA, in producing national
intelligence estimates, has per se production responsibility even in the
fields of dominant interest which are allocated by directive to the
departments.

Recommendations:

1. That NSCID 3 be amended to include a
new definition of National Intelligence as indicated in this report.

2. That DCI 3/1 and DCI 3/2 then be scrutinized in the light of
an amended NSCID 3 for proper emphasis
and meaning.

Sixth Principle

State Recommendation 4f:

“CIA will recognize that coordination also implies assistance to the
agencies in meeting their responsibilities, including in some cases the
temporary assignments of personnel to the agencies.”

Discussion:

The suggested norm that “coordination also implies assistance” is an
unsound thought for general application. There may be, and have been
exceptional instances, when it was expedient to give the departments and
agencies some personnel or financial aid. The NIS program is an example of this type. However, it must be
recognized clearly that this help was not to be considered a precedent
for other undertakings, but was rather an exception to the normal
operating practices of CIA.

Conclusion:

This principle should be rejected as a substantially unsound
interpretation of the function of coordination.

Recommendations:

1. That CIA non-concur in this principle and,

2. Whenever an IAC agency is given
financial or other assistance by CIA it should be understood clearly
that a particular purpose is to be served by such act, and that CIA does
not prepare, and could not properly prepare, a budget to take care of
anything except “contingency” cases of this nature.

Paper II

Problem II—Production of National Intelligence

State Recommendation 1a:

“1. That IAC agree with respect to the
production of national intelligence estimates:

“a. That national intelligence applies only to intelligence which is
interdepartmental in substance;”

Discussion:

This recommendation expresses the State viewpoint on the fundamental
differences between State and CIA regarding the production of national
intelligence. CIA feels that national intelligence cannot be defined
exclusively in terms of being interdepartmental in substance, but that
the definition must embrace also the thought (based on the National
Security Act of 1947) that any intelligence (regardless of category)
“relating to the national security” is national intelligence, for which
the Director of Central Intelligence, as the sole objective producer of
intelligence in the federal government, not hemmed in by departmental
policy prejudices, must assume full production responsibility.

In examining the present definition of National Intelligence in NSCID 3 many are prone to overlook the
second and shorter definition of National Intelligence appearing in
paragraph 4 of NSCID 1, wherein it is
stated:

“The Director of Central Intelligence shall produce intelligence relating
to the national security, hereafter referred to as national
intelligence.”

Conclusions:

1. The viewpoint expressed in this recommendation is too narrow to cover
the essential components of National Intelligence, and

2. The Director of Central Intelligence should not concur in the concept
that this recommendation be placed before the IAC for agreement.

Recommendation:

1. That this State recommendation be rejected as inapplicable and
inappropriate as it fails to recognize the responsibilities imposed by
law.

State Recommendation 1b:

“1. That IAC agree with respect to the
production of national intelligence estimates:

“b. That national intelligence should be developed with a maximum use of
departmental facilities and minimum duplication of departmental
intelligence activities;”

Discussion:

This recommendation completely overlooks the fact that much of the
“duplication of departmental intelligence activities” exists between
departmental agencies themselves. Though “duplication,” as construed
generally, is a wasteful endeavor, the thought should never be used when
applied to intelligence production without being modified by the word
“undesirable.” Though each agency of the Intelligence Advisory
Committee, including the Central Intelligence Agency, has had allocated
to it by National Security Council Directive a field of dominant
interest, “it is recognized that the staff intelligence of each of the
departments must be broader in scope (underscoring supplied) than any
allocation of collection responsibility or recognition of dominant
interest might indicate.”

A second grave weakness in the recommendation is that the words “maximum
use of departmental facilities” convey the erroneous notion that each
department should prepare “its” section of a national intelligence
estimate, or that national intelligence is merely the combining or
stapling together of departmental intelligence products.

The principle that CIA should recognize the departmental facilities and
should look to them for assistance whenever possible is worthwhile as
long as this is done in a realistic manner.

Conclusions:

1. This recommendation should not be accepted as written until the IAC agencies understand and accept
uniformly the meaning of “National Intelligence.”

2. The IAC agencies should recognize that
National Intelligence is not merely the editing and joining of
departmental products, neither is it just the blending and merging of departmental
viewpoints but rather is an overall objective evaluation analysis which
transcends the competency, capacity, and policies of any department of
government.

3. CIA should never subscribe to any recommendation or principle which
overlooks the reality that “duplication” in the intelligence field, when
within reasonable bounds, is more a blessing than a curse because of the
adage that “Two minds are better than one.”

Recommendations:

1. That CIA not accept this recommendation until the basic problem of
definition of “National Intelligence” is solved.

2. That even then this recommendation be rewritten before accept-ance so
that:

a. “Duplication” be modified to read “undesirable duplication,” and

b. The “undesirable duplication” concept be understood to apply among the
IAC agencies themselves as well as
to the relationship between CIA and the agencies.

3. That the IAC agencies understand
clearly that any such recommendation as this lays a positive burden on
the agencies themselves to expedite an efficient and complete “free
flow” of departmental raw information and finished departmental
intelligence products to the Central Intelligence Agency.

State Recommendation 1c:

“1. That IAC agree with respect to the
production of national intelligence estimates:

“c. That except in crisis situations no step be taken in the preparation
of national estimates before consultation with appropriate
agencies.”

Discussion:

This recommendation misplaces the emphasis of the basic fact that the
Central Intelligence Agency is the sole unit of government charged with
the production of National Intelligence. In carrying out this function
CIA cannot seek direct or indirect prior permission or approval from any
of the IAC agencies. CIA assumes full
responsibility for the content and format of all national intelligence
estimates, and hence CIA has to determine the mode to follow in the
production of each such estimate.

However, CIA acknowledges the benefit to be achieved by tapping agency
facilities. DCI 3/1 establishes clearly
what shall be done in “normal,” “urgent” and “exceptional” circumstances
to seek agency participation in the production of national intelligence
estimates. Agency participation even in crisis situations is now in the
process of being formalized.

Conclusions:

1. To follow this recommendation would put fetters on the operations of
the Central Intelligence Agency, by subordinating the function of
producing National Intelligence to the policies and procedures of the
departmental activities.

2. In showing the proper spirit of cooperation with the Intelligence
Advisory Committee agencies, CIA has already gone further than the
exception called for in this recommendation by asking for departmental
comments even in “crisis situations.”

3. To meet its deadline for furnishing a national intelligence estimate
to the President, the Secretary of Defense, the Chairman of the Joint
Chiefs of Staff and others, the Central Intelligence Agency cannot be
dependent upon departmental promises of completion which are subject to
the determination of departmental policy officials.

Recommendations:

1. That this State recommendation be rejected as being at variance with
the mission and objectives of the Central Intelligence Agency.

2. That after “National Intelligence” has been understood, the IAC agencies recognize fully their position
in the development of the national intelligence products.

State Recommendation 2:

“That the IAC discuss and approve all
national intelligence estimates on which there is substantial
disagreement among the agencies or upon the request of a member.”

Discussion:

This recommendation has two major weaknesses:

a. The IAC is looked upon as a Board of
Directors to assume ultimate responsibility for the content of CIA's
products—i.e., National Intelligence estimates, and

b. The recommendation is contrary to the conclusions of the NSC with respect to the Dulles Report. NSC 50 stated that the Director and the IAC should not be bound by the concept of
collective responsibility because this would inevitably reduce
coordinated national intelligence to the lowest common denominator among
the agencies concerned.

Furthermore, there is no cogent reason why it should always be necessary
to discuss dissents at IAC Meetings. The
controlling factor for discussing national intelligence estimates at
IAC Meetings should be the
importance attached to the need for such discussion by any member of the
IAC, rather than the mere existence
of a difference of opinion as to the conclusions of the estimate.

We must recognize, however, that our present system on agency
concurrences does not achieve the same end as would be derived by simultaneous collective
discussion. Thus, some sympathetic consideration should be given to the
fact that collective discussion, rather than bringing out a weak “common
denominator” of thought, might, if adequately staffed, add to the
potency of the majority findings, might eliminate minority dissents
without weakening the major conclusions, or might evolve new and even
strengthened judgments on the premise under consideration.

Conclusions:

1. The recommended action is too broad and sweeping in calling for
Intelligence Advisory Committee discussion on “all national intelligence
estimates upon which there is substantial disagreement … .”

2. IAC discussion should not be
discouraged, but should be premised on the need as desired by any one
member rather than on the exist-ence of a substantial dissenting
opinion.

Recommendations:

1. That the State recommendation be reworded to read:

“That the IAC discuss estimates upon the
request of a member; provided that, in the opinion of the requesting
member, there is a substantive and important fault in the estimate to be
discussed.”

2. That the recommendation as reworded be accepted.

State Recommendation 3:

“That COAPS review and make
recommendations for any revision of procedures for the production of
coordinated national estimates in crisis situations, such procedures to
be, as far as possible, in accordance with the principles outlined in
existing NSCID's, NSC 50 and Recommendation 1 above.

Discussion:

COAPS studied the need for a formal
procedure to govern in crisis situations, and drafted and sent to the
IAC agencies a proposed DCI on this subject. The Army and some
other members wished to have the Army's phraseology as an amendment to
NSCID No. 1, so the agreed-upon
substance has been referred to the NSC
to determine the method of issuance.

Conclusion:

It is thought that the objective of the State recommendation has now been
reached.

Recommendation:

No further action is required until a reply is received from the NSC.

Paper III

Problem III—Research and Reports

State Recommendation 1:

“That, aside from national intelligence, CIA will produce intelligence
reports only in fields of common concern, as prescribed by the DCI on the advice of the IAC.”

Discussion:

This recommendation conflicts with the view contained in 4e of State
Paper I, which says that CIA will accomplish nothing beyond what is
known as “National Intelligence.” If “National Intelligence” is
redefined in adequate fashion this State recommendation would apparently
cause no restrictive limitation on the production responsibility of CIA.
However, appearances are sometimes deceptive and such would be the case
in this instance. The Director of Central Intelligence does not have
authority to prescribe fields of common concern, nor does the IAC. The National Security Act is most
specific in stating that CIA shall “perform, for the benefit of existing
intelligence agencies, such additional services of common concern as the
National Security Council determines can be
more efficiently accomplished centrally;” and furthermore that CIA shall
“perform such other functions and duties related to intelligence
affecting the national security as the National
Security Council may from time to time direct.” (Underscoring
supplied5 ) The recommendation also restates the “Board of
Directors'” philosophy that the Central Intelligence Agency shall
undertake what is prescribed by the Intelligence Advisory Committee.

Conclusions:

1. This State recommendation is too restrictive as the Director of
Central Intelligence must comply with requests from the President, the
National Security Council, and others.

2. This State recommendation is erroneous in content by ascribing a
responsibility to the DCI and the
Intelligence Advisory Committee which belongs, by law, to the National
Security Council.

Recommendation:

1. That the State recommendation be rejected.

State Recommendation 2:

“That, on a priority basis, COAPS
prepare for consideration in IAC
recommendations on the delineations of fields of common concern.”

Discussion:

The “fields of common concern” are those areas of production which do not
fall wholly into the allocated responsibility of any one department or
agency. Thus under NSCID 3 “Economic,
Scientific, and Technological Intelligence” are assigned to “Each agency
in accordance with its respective needs.”

Since the issuance of NSCID 3, a
permanent interdepartmental Scientific Intelligence Committee has been
established after long delays under DCI
3/3 “to plan, support and coordinate the production of scientific
intelligence as it affects the national security.” By this action the
scientific and technological “fields of common concern” have not only
been delineated, but have also been put under coordination control.

Conclusions:

1. Best coordination in fields of common concern is not achieved by mere
“delineation” of the fields.

2. Continuous problems of coordination exist in those fields.

3. The precedent of establishing the Scientific Intelligence Committee
should carry much weight in considering problems in the economic
intelligence field.

4. Because of vaster scope and more complexities in the economic field
there is even greater justification for establishing an Economic
Intelligence Committee.

Recommendations:

1. That the State recommendation be rejected as not affording a true
solution in the Economic Intelligence field.

2. That there be established by the Director of Central Intelligence a
permanent interdepartmental committee, under the chairmanship of a
representative of CIA, to plan, support and coordinate the production of
economic intelligence as it affects the national security and that such
committee be known as “The Economic Intelligence Committee.”

Paper IV

Problem IV—Political Summaries

State Recommendation 1:

“That COAPS study and prepare
recommendations for consideration by the IAC on the proper allocation of responsibility for
political summaries, both daily and weekly.”

Discussion:

As the intelligence facility of the National Security Council and the
President, the Central Intelligence Agency must continually and
systematically report all developments, political, economic, military,
and otherwise, which materially affect or have a bearing upon United
States national security and objectives abroad.

While CIA's Daily and Weekly Summaries are based to a considerable degree
upon Department of State materials, the major cause for this situation
derives from the fact that the Department of State makes its highest
level intelligence and operational materials, which have utility for
intelligence purposes, available to the Central Intelligence Agency
whereas the Departments of Army, Navy, and Air Force normally do not
provide operational details. It is hoped that this situation will be
improved. Moreover, in periods of relative peace, the bulk of
intelligence is of a political and economic, rather than military,
nature.

The Central Intelligence Agency's intelligence summaries are the only
ones designed primarily for the President and the National Security
Council. Each departmental intelligence agency is authorized to produce
such current publications as are required to meet its own departmental
needs.

Conclusion:

The CIA Daily Summary and Weekly Summary are not designed to be only
“political summaries.” They are issued as current intelligence under
Paragraph 1 of DCI 3/1.

Recommendation:

1. That the State recommendation be rejected.

* Source: Central Intelligence Agency Historical
Files, HS/HC-80. Secret.

1 Document 393.

2 See
the source note, Document 393.

3 See Document
395.

4 See Document 403 and
enclosures.

5 Printed here in
italics.

406. Draft Memorandum From the Secretary of State's Special Assistant for Research and Intelligence (Armstrong) to the Under Secretary of State (Webb)406. Draft Memorandum From the Secretary of State's Special Assistant
for Research and Intelligence (Armstrong) to the Under Secretary of State (Webb)Source

Washington, December 23,
1949.

SUBJECT

Production of National Intelligence

The enclosed staff study1 presents an analysis
of the nature of national intelligence and the major problems connected
with its production. It represents a considered statement of the major
unresolved questions which prompted your memorandum of December 13 to
Mr. Souers,2 suggesting that CIA
make a further progress report on the matters discussed in paragraphs 5
and 6 of NSC 50. In view of that
memorandum and of Mr. Lay's
memorandum of December 14 to the National Security Council,3 which reported that
the DCI is being asked to submit a
further report, I have felt it inappropriate to recommend further
positive action at this time.

My recommendations, therefore, as presented at p4 of the
attachment, request your approval of the study as an expression of the
Department's views on the issues discussed. I am quite sure that the
DCI's further progress report will
not show that there has been any real resolution of those issues and I
am prepared, if you approve this study, to pre-sent a similar thesis at
the appropriate time for possible NSC
action.

* Source: National Archives and Records
Administration, RG 59, Records of the Department of State, Records
of the Bureau of Intelligence and Research: Lot 58 D 776, National
Intelligence Staff Study. Secret.

1 The staff study
referred to is the enclosure to the transmittal note from Evans to
Trueheart, December 16. (Ibid.) See the Supplement. No evidence has
been found to indicate whether this memorandum and its intended
enclosure were sent to Webb
at the time. In any case, the study was put in final form in January
1950, although that final version was not sent to Webb until May; see Document 420.

2 See the enclosure to Document 404.

3 Document 404.

4 Omission in the source text.

407. Memorandum From Director of Central Intelligence Hillenkoetter to the Executive Secretary of the National Security Council (Souers)407. Memorandum From Director of Central Intelligence Hillenkoetter to the
Executive Secretary of the National Security Council (Souers)Source

Washington, December 27,
1949.

SUBJECT

Particular Intelligence Questions Requiring Coordination or
Attention

REFERENCE

(a) Section 4c(2) of NSC 50

(b) Memorandum to Director, 8 July 1949 from Executive Secretary,
NSC1

(c) Memorandum to Director, 14 December 1949 from Acting Executive
Secretary, NSC2

The following report is submitted in accordance with Section 4 of NSC 50 which lists particular intelligence
questions requiring coordination or attention, and requests the Director
of Central Intelligence to submit to the Council within six months a
report of progress in these matters.

1. Scientific Intelligence. On 1 January 1949 an
Office of Scientific Intelligence was established as one of the major
offices in the Central Intelligence Agency. This office is being well
staffed and is now devoting its time to matters of scientific
intelligence in conjunction with other offices of the Government
interested in this subject. DCI
Directive 3/3, based on NSCID 3, was
issued with IAC concurrence on 28
October 1949 establishing an interdepartmental Scientific Intelligence
Committee to plan, support, and coordinate production of scientific
intelligence as it affects the National Security.

2. Domestic Intelligence. The Federal Bureau of
Investigation is now a member of the Intelligence Advisory Committee so
that domestic intelligence and related matters will be coordinated with
foreign intelligence matters. The Office of Special Operations in the
Central Intelligence Agency is working closely with the Federal Bureau
of Investigation on matters where their respective interests are
related.

3. Crisis Situations. On 2 February 1949, at a
regular meeting of the Intelligence Advisory Committee, it was agreed to
expedite the handling of intelligence matters when there were crisis
situations. To confirm this agreement in writing, it is hoped that a
directive on this subject may be issued this month, after agreement has
been reached on the method of issuing it. This was referred to the NSC on 19 December 19493 after an
IAC meeting, at which agreement on
the method was not reached.

4. Political Summaries. As the intelligence
facility of the National Security Council and the President, the Central
Intelligence Agency must continually and systematically report all
developments, political, economic, military, and otherwise, which
materially affect or have a bearing upon United States national security
and objectives abroad. While CIA's Daily and Weekly Summaries are based
to a considerable degree upon Department of State materials, the major
cause for this situation derives from the fact that the Department of
State makes its highest level intelligence and operational materials,
which have utility for intelligence purposes, available to the Central
Intelligence Agency whereas the Departments of Army, Navy and Air Force
normally do not provide operational details. It is hoped that this
situation will be improved. Moreover, in periods of relative peace, the
bulk of intelligence is of a political and economic, rather than
military, nature. The Central Intelligence Agency's intelligence
summaries are the only ones designed primarily for the President and the
National Security Council. Each departmental intelligence agency is
authorized to produce such current publications as are required to meet
its own departmental needs.

5. Exploitation of Foreign Nationality Groups and
Individuals. This work is being undertaken as follows:

a. Foreign Radio Broadcasts Within the U.S.: A
recent survey shows that 131 radio stations in the U.S. broadcast to
Foreign Nationality Groups in 39 languages. Authorized transmitter power
is so low that only 5% of these stations, covering 10 languages, can be
monitored with present FBID facilities. The foreign intelligence
potential of these stations is considered of such little value that the
diversion of effort from foreign broadcasts is considered uneconomical
and unwarranted.

b. Foreign Language Publications Within the U.S.:
Whereas the foreign intelligence potential of the 733 publications was
considered negligible during the war years, a continuing survey shows an
increasing tendency to employ foreign correspondents which enhances
their intelligence potential. At present six publications of this type
receive regular screening.

c. Foreign Nationality Groups: These Groups are
being exploited in the large cities of the U.S. by CIA's 14 regional
field offices for foreign intelligence information and for assistance in
identifying aliens of high intelligence potential among the recently
arrived DP's and other immigrants. Close coordination with the FBI is in effect.

d. Individual Aliens: The exploitation of these
sources is performed under the provisions of NSCID No. 7 and carried out on behalf of all of the IAC agencies. After clearance with the
covert offices of CIA and FBI, the
regional field offices fulfill their joint intelligence information
requirements either by arrangement of interviews or by means of
responsive information reports.

6. Covert Intelligence in Occupied Areas. Action
has been taken with the Intelligence Division, GSUSA, to effect a closer
coordination of such activity, which has resulted in appreciable
improvement in the situation and a substantial increase of coordination
in both the Far Eastern and European areas.

7. Defectors. For over a year, this subject has
been under consideration by the interested agencies. After much
discussion and revision, a proposed NSCID was compiled on “Exploitation of Defectors and Other
Aliens Within the United States” and circulated in December to the
Intelligence Advisory Committee agencies for the usual approval before
submitting it to the National Security Council. A corollary proposal on
the “Exploitation of Soviet and Satellite Defectors Outside the United
States” was also submitted to the Intelligence Advisory Committee
agencies.4 It is hoped that both
proposals will soon be approved by the IAC so that they may be submitted to the NSC as proposed NSCIDs for early issuance.

Until these over-all policy directives are established and put in
operation, there is functioning a Pro Tem Interdepartmental Working
Committee to handle problems on the important cases of defectors which
arise and which have accumulated to date. It is hoped that before long
the over-all directives will be approved and issued, so that the pro tem
work of this nature may be discontinued and this work placed on a firmer
and more regular basis. The chief difficulty with regard to this problem
is the ultimate disposal of defectors and the costs entailed therein.
[4 lines of the source text not
declassified]

8. Counter-espionage Activities Abroad, and Closer
Liaison With the Federal Bureau of Investigation. Central
Intelligence Agency's Office of Special Operations has placed increased
stress on its counter-espionage functions and on counter-espionage
activity abroad on a continuing basis.

The Office of Special Operations' liaison and cooperation attendant
thereon with the Federal Bureau of Investigation have increased
effectively over a considerable period of time. Obviously, the closest
possible working relationship
is not only highly desirable but also necessary to developing the
closest possible counter-espionage liaison with the Federal Bureau of
Investigation. The Central Intelligence Agency feels that this liaison
relationship at the present time is close, effective, and mutually
advantageous.

9. With regard to Sections 5 and 6 of NSC
50, mentioned in the memorandum of 14 December 1949 from the Acting
Executive Secretary of NSC, transmitting
a copy of the memorandum dated 13 December from the Under Secretary of
State, the following organizational realignment of the Office of Reports
and Estimates in CIA was approved some weeks ago and is to a large
extent now in operation, relating to Section 6a(2) of NSC 50, in addition to the plan already
compiled in compliance with Section 6a(1):

a. An Estimates Production Board, under the chairmanship of the Assistant
Director for Reports and Estimates, has been established, composed
primarily of the Chiefs of the regional and functional divisions of the
Office of Reports and Estimates. Among other duties it is responsible
for recommending the scope and terms of reference of national
intelligence estimates; participation in production and final
substantive review of such estimates prior to transmittal to the IAC for coordination; and advising the
Assistant Director for Reports and Estimates on the adoption of proposed
intelligence production programs to ensure that adequate priorities are
given at all times to the production of high level estimates.

b. Each regional division of the Office of Reports and Estimates has been
realigned to provide (1) an Estimate Staff, and (2) three or more
regional, analytical, and research branches. They afford separate
facilities for high level estimates, and other reports and research
studies required for production of estimates but which are not available
from the departmental intelligence agencies. This realignment permits
the retention of centralized substantive and production controls under
each division chief and provides separate allocation of manpower for
each category of production.

(1) The Estimates Staff of each regional division produces national
intelligence estimates within its area in accordance with DCI 3/1 procedures and is of sufficient
size to ensure adequate production in this category.

(2) The analytical and research branches retain their present geographic
responsibilities and are continuing systematically to examine, identify
and analyze the significance of emergent trends within their areas of
responsibility in order to provide the regional Estimates Staff with
processed intelligence data. These data are for use in the production of
national intelligence estimates, as well as reports and estimates in
those fields of common concern which are appropriate to regional, as
distinguished from purely functional, treatment.

c. A Central Research Group has been established consisting initially of
the Map Division, the National Intelligence Survey Division (Basic
Intelligence Group, redesignated), and the General Division (formerly
the General Division, Plans and Policy Staff). At such time as it is
determined to conduct additional intelligence research in fields of
common concern, additional facilities for this purpose will be added to
the Central Research Group.

10. Further organizational realignment of the Office of Reports and
Estimates may be required if changes are made within the IAC agencies.

11. With specific reference to paragraph 5 of NSC 50, the Central Intelligence Agency has undertaken the
problem of intelligence production planning on a long-range and
interdepartmental basis. It is believed that such planning will afford
CIA and the IAC agencies a sound basis
upon which to reach agreement regarding what intelligence needs to be
produced and what departmental support can be provided to national
intelligence production.

R.H. Hillenkoetter5
Rear Admiral, USN

* Source: Department of State, S/S-NSC Files: Lot 63 D 351, NSC 50. Top Secret. Souers transmitted
Hillenkoetter's report to the members of the NSC under cover of a December 28 memorandum. (Ibid.)
See the Supplement.

1 Not found.

2 Document 404.

3 Memo
for NSC from Executive Secretary,
subject, “Crisis Situations,” dated December 22, 1949. [Footnote in
the source text. The memorandum has not been found.]

4 Subsequently submitted for
consideration by the National Security Council; memo for NSC from Executive Secretary, subject,
“Exploitation of Soviet and Satellite Defectors Outside the United
States,” dated December 20, 1949. [Footnote in the source text. The
memorandum has not been found.]

5 Printed from a
copy that indicates Hillenkoetter signed the original.

408. Memorandum From Brigadier General John Magruder to Secretary of Defense Johnson408. Memorandum From Brigadier General John Magruder to Secretary of
Defense JohnsonSource

Washington, December 22,
1949.

This study presents some background discussion and suggests several
alternative solutions for the organizational setting of Mr. Wisner's OPC.

I recommend alternative 6 on page 5. Generals Burns and McNarney
concur.

While I do not know State Department's final position, the alternative
recommended would furnish the basis of discussion which I think would
lead to a solution satisfactory to you and Mr. Webb.

I should be glad to explain any points which might be clarified.

John Magruder1

Enclosure

SUBJECT

Reorganization of Office of Policy Coordination (OPC)

The Problem

To establish an appropriate relationship between the agencies of CIA
responsible for clandestine collection of intelligence and conduct of
covert operations; and to fit them into the structure of CIA in a manner
to insure their coordinated control.

Assumptions

1. That suggested changes shall be possible without new legislation.

2. That responsibility for these operations be not susceptible to public
or direct attribution to the President or to individual cabinet
members.

3. That authoritative controls exist to insure that in peace or war
covert operations shall be restricted to projects which are clearly and
directly in furtherance of national policy.

4. That clear differentiation be made between:

a. Covert operations of a political, economic and psychological
character, which by their nature remain truly covert and which are
employed abroad to influence developments favorable to the United
States, and

b. Operations which, while initially covert, are by their nature designed
to create physical manifestations which cease to be covert, such as,
sabotage, support of underground and guerilla movements and
para-military activities.

Discussion

The principles governing the functions and general composition of CIA as
reflected in the National Security Act of 1947 had been the subject of long debate. It was not
casual that to one directorate was given such widely different
responsibilities as the production of national intelligence and the
collection of foreign intelligence by clandestine methods. When the need
for instituting covert operations in peacetime became apparent, again it
was not casual that they should have been assigned to CIA and placed
alongside their related activities, espionage and counter-espionage. To
avoid the creation of a floating agency operationally inappropriate to
any department and which was so directly dependent upon clandestine
intelligence, it was natural to incorporate covert operations in
CIA.

Thus, CIA became a basket of widely differing eggs. But eggs they are,
nevertheless, and a basket they must have. This copious basket called
Central Intelligence is uniquely an American concept. The arrangement
has historic validity which includes our wartime experiences, our
intimate observation of foreign practices in wartime and, last and most
important, our governmental structure which dictates its being as it is.
The more you try to change the composition of CIA the more obstinately
do conditions force you back to the original concept of the CIA
carry-all.

While I do not advocate it, the only major organizational change in our
national intelligence system which logically suggests itself is the
separation of the central organization for producing national estimates
and studies from the clandestine organizations for collecting
intelligence. The functions of these two agencies are not analogous.
However, their separation would create another splinter agency with the
obvious disadvantages involved and, furthermore, would deprive the
clandestine organizations of a valuable smoke screen. While functionally
CIA could thus rationally be divided, no good purposes would thereby be
served.

On the other hand, the complete separation of the several activities in
the clandestine field, such as are truly covert, presents numerous
disadvantages.2
Clandestine intelligence and covert operations are characterized by both
functional affinity and operational inter-dependence. They must be at
least under the same general direction if ineffectiveness and even
dangerous confusions are to be avoided. It is almost impossible to
operate individuals, groups or chains of underground agents in the same
area without their uncovering each other—unless they are very skillfully
controlled by a central direction.

While separate direction of strictly covert operations in the same area
is hazardous, it is also true that attempts to operate merged activities
of widely differing character may be self-defeating. If it is difficult
to see how intricate methods of espionage and subtle manipulations of
political subversion can
succeed except under single direction, it is highly improbable that the
merger of all types of subversive activities can be employed in a given
area, even by a single head, without the physical operations ceasing to
be truly covert and blowing wide open the subtle covert apparatus.

These considerations therefore suggest the importance of differentiating
between two broad types of covert activities: those which by their
nature are truly covert and must remain so if they are to succeed; and a
category of so-called covert activities whose development designedly
leads to physical manifestations which cease to be covert. This
differentiation leads to a possible solution which would permit the
merger under a single direction of those covert activities which are
clearly related and unquestionably interdependent while retaining under
separate direction the more physical or para-military types of
operations which rarely remain covert.

With respect to the controls and organizational set-up employed by the
British, the information obtained from different official levels is
contradictory. It can only be assumed that the British cabinet ministers
are employing different terminology from our own in defining integration
or separation of covert activities or else have reference to different
types of covert activities. [3-1/2 lines of source
text not declassified]

Whatever may be the explanation, it will be evident that the United
States Government cannot follow British practice in all details of
organization if for no other reason than the constitutional difference
in the two governments. [3 lines of source text not
declassified] The British constitution permits flexibility of
action in these fields by the British Cabinet Members not permitted by
existing law in the US. It was only after the creation of the National
Security Council that national central direction, other than the
President himself, became available as a permanent body to control such
activities. This agency seems to be entirely appropriate to control all
covert activities of inter-departmental or extra-departmental character
unless control of specific types be assigned to a particular department
with the concurrence of other interested departments.

Assuming that all existing Central Intelligence Agency responsibilities,
including covert operations, are of inter-departmental character, it
would seem inappropriate to separate OPC
or any of its functions from the general direction of CIA. There remains
the decision as to the method of fixing the relationship within CIA
between OPC and OSO, the latter of which now is engaged exclusively in the
clandestine collection of intelligence.

In view of the initial assumptions and the foregoing general
considerations, there are outlined below the several alternative
solutions which could be implemented by NSC directive.

Alternatives

1. Leave OPC in status quo ante
publication of NSC-50. This arrangement
is discarded as being unsatisfactory to all who operate under it, and to
all investigators who have studied the problem.

2. While combining under an assistant director of CIA, OPC, OSO,
Contact Branch and essential separate covert services, retain the
separation of OPC and OSO, with their existing functions, each
under a separate head. This arrangement provides for the separation of
OSO and OPO while permitting some
degree of coordination through an assistant director in charge of both.
With common control only at the top, it still leaves parallel but
non-integrated organizations whose personnel will inevitably be forced
into conflicting activities and unavoidable friction. It perpetuates
considerable duplication of personnel and auxiliary services. The truly
covert political operations of OPC will
be vulnerable to disclosure by the administration at home and abroad of
widely differing types of operations within the same organization. This
alternative is discarded.

3. Same as alternative 2, except that OPC
and OSO be integrated under one head but
not merged to the extent of preventing future possible separation.
Discarded for reasons given above and additionally because it introduces
another echelon of authority.

4. Same as alternative 3, except that OPC
and OSO be merged under one head.
Discarded as being the merger to which the Secretary of Defense objects
and as having the major disadvantages referred to in previous
alternatives.

5. If assumption 2 should be disregarded, all covert operations presently
assigned to OPC could be lifted from CIA
and assigned:

(a) To Department of State—all truly covert operations of political,
economic and psychological character.

(b) To Department of Defense—all the more physical types of operations,
including sabotage; training, support, and supply of underground
resistance; para-military activities.

This plan is discarded as being at variance with American practice of
assigning these unorthodox activities as a direct departmental
responsibility. Furthermore, the operations would gradually lose all
character of security, flexibility and unorthodoxy in the inescapable
straitjacket of departmental bureaucracy.

6. Combine under an assistant director of CIA the following activities:
OPC, OSO, Contact Branch, and essential separate covert
services. Transfer from OPC to OSO responsibility for all truly covert
political, economic and psychological operations. OPC, remaining under separate head, would
retain responsibility for the physical types of operations which only
initially are covert, such as: sabotage; the training, support and
supply of resistance movements; para-military activities. This plan avoids a merger of
organizations and thus reconciles the objections of the Secretary of
Defense. It separates the control over two non-homogeneous types of
activities now in OPC, but retains all
the essential functions in a logical organizational setting. Clandestine
intelligence collection and strictly covert political operations could
be conducted under most secure and coordinated conditions. If limited
covert operations of a physical character were required in peacetime,
they could be conducted under strictly security measures and
coordination of OSO. Under this
reorganization, OPC would continue the
planning and preparation for war of the types of operations of primary
interest to the Defense Department. The OPC could thus be transferred to the JCS in wartime, while having its
development take place in the atmosphere of unorthodoxy in CIA. In
wartime, the covert agencies of CIA and those transferred to military
control, having had common background of security and flexibility, could
cooperate with a high degree of understanding.

Recommendation—That the Secretary of Defense adopt the plan briefly
stated in alternative 6 and informally request the concurrence of the
Secretary of State. That if agreement be reached as to adoption of this
general plan, the Secretaries instruct their respective consultants, in
consultation with the Secretary, National Security Council, to draft an
implementing directive to the Director, CIA, for consideration of the
NSC.

John Magruder3

* Source: Central Intelligence Agency
Historical Files, HS/CSG-2434, Job 83-00764R, Box 3, Folder 8. Top
Secret. Magruder was a consultant on intelligence to the Secretary
of Defense.

1 Printed from a copy that indicates Magruder
signed the original.

2 The first 4 words of this
sentence are crossed out by hand on the source text.

3 Printed from a copy that indicates
Magruder signed the original.

409. Memorandum From the Deputy Special Assistant (Howe) to the Secretary of State's Special Assistant for Research and Intelligence (Armstrong)409. Memorandum From the Deputy Special Assistant (Howe) to the Secretary of State's Special
Assistant for Research and Intelligence (Armstrong)Source

Washington, January 5,
1950.

SUBJECT

Crisis Estimates

In conversation with General Magruder, he said that he took a very gloomy
view of the paper presently before the NSC on Crisis Estimates and he read from a draft of a briefing memo which he
proposed to send to Secretary Johnson.1 The gist of his comment was that the proposed
paragraph for NSCID 1 was wholly
inadequate to the important problem of crisis estimates and that among
other reasons because it diffused the responsibility. He did recommend
in the memo, however, that the Secretary agree to the paragraph only on
an interim basis, pending the establishment of a group within CIA which
could adequately produce national intelligence estimates.

I pointed out to General Magruder the following:

1. That crisis estimates could only be as sound as the whole of the
national intelligence estimates procedure; that until we had made the
fundamental corrections in national intelligence procedures, probably no
useful purpose would be served by trying to adjust crisis estimates.

2. That his recommendation might well offer a risk on which Hilly could
throw his hat; namely that CIA already has a facility for producing
national estimates, therefore everything is just fine.

3. That the reason that the paragraph is going into the NSC at all is because the Military wanted
the lever placed upon top officers to supply critical information to the
intelligence arms and to CIA.

4. That the Department had been indifferent on whether the matter was
taken up to the NSC and that we had
recommended the Under Secretary agree, believing that no useful purpose
would be served by trying to adjust crisis estimates until national
estimates had been corrected.

General Magruder seemed willing to revise his recommendation to state
simply that the Defense agreement was an interim one pending “an
adjustment of national intelligence procedures on which crisis estimates
must be based.” He did think, however, that the record should be kept
clear, that crisis estimates and national intelligence estimates as a
whole were still not satisfactory, so that an NSC agreement of crisis estimates would not imply that the
NSC was satisfied with the
procedures as a whole.

Fisher Howe2

P.S. Do you think that the fact that Johnson may raise some question on
this matter at the NSC meeting indicates
that we should prepare to brief the Secretary on it?

F.H.

* Source:
National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Records of the
Department of State, Records of the Bureau of Intelligence and
Research: Lot 58 D 776, State-CIA Relationship 1949-1956.
Secret.

1 Neither
found.

2 Printed from a copy that bears
this typed signature and initials.

410. Memorandum From the Secretary of State's Deputy Special Assistant for Research and Intelligence (Howe) to the Special Assistant to the Secretary (Sheppard)410. Memorandum From the Secretary of State's Deputy Special Assistant
for Research and Intelligence (Howe) to
the Special Assistant to the Secretary (Sheppard)Source

Washington, January 9,
1950.

SUBJECT

Status of Miscellaneous Projects

1. NSC 50
Progress Report

I call your attention to Admiral Souers' NSC memorandum of December 28,1 distributing CIA's further progress report on
implementation of NSC 50,2 which claims to
answer the State Department's request for further amplification of
organizational planning for national intelligence. I have discussed this
with General Magruder.

2. National Intelligence

There are three current papers on this subject in various stages of
completion. The documentation is, in fact, going to sizeable proportions
which, for such a technical subject, I think is unavoidable:

(a) Hillenkoetter's report on “State's Four Papers”3 (you will remember
that we put into the IAC four papers to
implement NSC 50); this memo dated
December 30, 1949, I will make available to you. It is tantamount to a
unilateral rejection by CIA of the State Department's recommendations
which were supposed to have gone to OCAPS for staff work, not for
rejection. However, they do indicate more thoroughly than heretofore the
basis (and illogic) of CIA's position on national intelligence.

(b) R Staff Paper:4 I enclose a stencilled draft of this
paper. We omitted recommendations, partly in order to discuss this
matter fully before finishing up and because positive action depended to
a large extent on CIA's response to the last NSC action asking for further amplification on this
subject. The staff paper, we believe, is excellent: it indicates quite
clearly the issues involved in national intelligence and the reasons we
feel so strongly that national intelligence should be established according to these lines. I
have informally left a copy of this with General Magruder. No other
distribution has been made.

(c) General Magruder's draft5 is not finished. He read parts of it to me
last week. If we straightened out the nomenclature, I think we would
find ourselves in almost complete agreement. Furthermore, his paper is
on the whole complementary to ours in that he proposes to lay down a
specific organization for CIA to fulfill its assignment on national
intelligence and to prescribe categorically what each organizational
unit is to do. This should be very helpful.

3. OPC-OSO Reorganization.

Almost nothing has been done further on this. I have, however, tried
another hand at drafting the nature of the problem and for whatever use,
I attach it hereto.6

4. CIA Budget.

I did not speak to Magruder about this and I therefore do not know the
NME views. This will need to be
pursued this week.

5. Tuesday Meetings.

Park handled the meeting last week and he has sent you a minute/6/ on
what transpired. I believe the memo also indicates the appropriate
subject for next week which arose out of the meeting.

Fisher Howe7

* Source: National
Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Records of the
Department of State, Records of the Bureau of Intelligence and
Research: Lot 58 D 776, National Intelligence Staff Study. Top
Secret.

1 Not printed. (Ibid., Records of the Executive Secretariat, NSC Files: Lot 63 D 351) See the
Supplement.

2 Document 407.

3 Document 405.

4 Dated January 3; see Tab A to Document 420.

5 Not found but
probably an earlier version of Tab B, Document
420.

6 Not found.

7 Printed from a copy
that bears this typed signature.

411. Memorandum for the Record411. Memorandum for the RecordSource

Washington, January 19,
1950.

SUBJECT

CIA Daily Staff Summary (Blue Book)

In the course of conversation on other matters, Bill Sheppard, Jim Lay,
and I discussed the CIA daily top secret Intelligence Summary.

Lay pointed out among other
things that the whole project stems from a considered decision by the
old NIA (Committee of the Secretary of
State and Service Departments, etc., in charge of Intelligence) whose
decision it was, following the desires of the President, that the CIA
produce such a summary, that the summary be both operational and
intelligence. The NIA also specifically
approved the distribution list.

Lay also pointed out that
regardless of our views of the merits of the Staff Summary, every
indication is that the President likes it and wants it. Furthermore,
there is no indication that the President is aware of or disparages the
fact that it is duplicative of State Department cables and information
summaries sent directly to him from the Department.

Lay also said incidentally that
Dennison is the staff officer in the White House who usually shows it to
the President without comment and that the CIA encloses the original
cable with the staff summary of the cable.

In answer to a question, Lay
discounted the possibility that there was any thought the Staff Summary
would serve as a “check” upon the flow of information to the President;
that by having another source of information, the President could be
assured that he received everything. It was pointed out that such a
view, if held, was fallacious in any event because the Department
controlled the information going to CIA. Lay felt that the CIA was not
in the least aware that they may be jeopardizing their flow of State
cables by producing a summary which (a) contained large amounts of
policy which was the responsibility of the State Department (b) failed
to include military intelligence (c) distributed throughout the
Government State Department information over which the Department itself
should have the control.

Lay saw no reason why
constructive suggestions and recommendations might not be made to
improve the Staff Summary, but such should be formulated within the
framework of the knowledge that the President favors the Staff
Summary.

Note: Lay was most cooperative
and friendly in discussing this project, and the information and views
which he gave should be treated confidentially. F. H.)

* Source:
National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Records of the
Department of State, Records of the Bureau of Intelligence and
Research: Lot 58 D 776, State-CIA Relationship 1949-1956.
Confidential. Drafted by Howe. Appended to the source text is a
handwritten “Note for file” by Sheppard dated January 27 which reads
as follows: “In conversation with Howe and Barnes it was decided:
(1) State now has sufficient control over the content of the daily
summary. (2) In view of the CIA situation & the President's
interest, (3) We should now do nothing to rock the boat.
W.S.S.”

412. Memorandum for the Record412. Memorandum for the RecordSource

Washington, January 31,
1950.

SUBJECT

OSO-OPC Relationship

In conversation with Magruder and for part of the time with Joyce and Krentz, considerable
discussion of the various facets of the problem was taken up. It was
finally decided that both Magruder and Howe would try a hand at a paper
which could be used as a modification of NSC 10/2, on the basis of which further discussions on the
precise details could go forward not only between NME with State, but also with Hilly and
Wisner.

The general principle on which the redraft of 10/2 should be based was
that there would be one Assistant Director for Operations. Under the
Assistant Director for Operations there would be three divisions:

1. The Contacts Branch.

2. A “rough stuff” branch which would plan sabotage, counter-sabotage,
guerrilla activity and logistics for such activity, but would not carry
out any operations itself. If operations of this nature were called for,
they would be done under the clandestine operations area offices.

3. Clandestine Operations Branch. This would combine the functions of
espionage, counter-espionage, and those positive operations in the
political, economic and psychological field, short of “rough stuff,” which require the agent
operation and covert techniques. This branch would in turn be subdivided
into area sections, each section having in its complement both
intelligence and operations people under a single area operations
head.

It was a matter of indifference whether staff arms for plans, services,
training and communications would be tied in at the Assistant Director
level, or under the Branch Head for Clandestine Operations.

The really difficult point in drafting comes in expressing the degree and
nature of control which the Department or the NME will have over the Operations Section. Magruder even
had some idea that there should be sealed in the hands of the Executive
Secretary, NSC, a secret protocol,
pointing out that there would be a degree of autonomy on the part of the
Assistant Director, Operations, which would permit him to be directly
responsive to foreign policy and military affairs. This problem too is
tied in very closely with the individuals who will be placed in
controlling positions in CIA, but Magruder says that he felt that
Johnson would accept a degree
of control by the Department and we both felt that it would be possible
to express this control in the revised NSC 10/2 which we would draft.

Fisher Howe1

* Source:
National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Records of the
Department of State, Records of the Bureau of Intelligence and
Research: Lot 58 D 776, State-CIA Relationship 1949-1956. Top
Secret. Drafted by Howe. The source text indicates that a copy was
sent to William J. Sheppard, one of the special assistants to the
Secretary.

1 Printed from a copy
that bears this typed signature.

413. Memorandum From the Acting Chairman of the National Security Resources Board (Steelman) to the Executive Secretary of the National Security Council (Souers)413. Memorandum From the Acting Chairman of the National Security
Resources Board (Steelman) to the
Executive Secretary of the National Security Council (Souers)Source

Washington, February 2,
1950.

SUBJECT

Appraisal of Foreign Economic Intelligence Requirements,
Facilities and Arrangements Related to the National Security

As resources mobilization planning progresses, it is increasingly evident
to the participating agencies that the full effectiveness of many segments of such planning
depends upon the ready availability of adequate, timely and correlated
foreign economic intelligence.

This has proved, for example, to be the case in such fields as peace-time
procurement and development for stockpiling; wartime procurement and
development; foreign manpower; war trade agreements; export and import
controls; economic assistance to potential allies and friendly neutrals,
and other foreign requirements; preclusive buying; proclaimed listing;
the control of foreign assets; economic capabilities and vulnerabilities
of potential allies, neutral and enemy nations.

From the experience of the agencies associated in mobilization planning
in recent months, it is now feasible to determine more clearly than
previously the foreign council intelligence requirements for further
planning. Many of the studies completed or under way also provide a
better means than previously available for testing the adequacy of
current intelligence efforts. In the light of these developments, more
effective evaluation of foreign economic intelligence for mobilization
planning can now be made.

Another field where foreign economic intelligence is vital is that of the
formulation of current policies and programs relating to the national
security. Members of the National Security Council will readily
appreciate the value of constantly seeking to improve the foreign
economic intelligence relating to proposals considered by the
council.

Intelligence activities with regard to mobilization planning and to
current security policies and programs are intricately interrelated and
at many points indistinguishable. Therefore, much can be said for
covering both fields in a single undertaking.

Accordingly, the time seems opportune to reappraise our foreign economic
intelligence requirements, facilities and arrangements as they relate to
the national security, including mobilization planning. Such an
appraisal would require central direction with appropriate interagency
collaboration.

It is, therefore, proposed that the National Security Council direct the
CIA, in collaboration with the Government agencies concerned:

1. To organize and conduct a study of:

a. foreign economic intelligence requirements relating to the national
security, including requirements for mobilization planning;

b. facilities and arrangements currently employed for meeting these
requirements;

c. the adequacy of such facilities and arrangements; and where
appropriate, means for their improvement.

2. Based on the findings of this study, to prepare for Council
consideration and action a comprehensive plan for satisfying the foreign
economic intelligence requirements of the national security and for a
coordinated interagency
effort to this end based on a definite allocation of responsibilities
among the agencies concerned.

The staff of the NSRB has much
information which would be of help in this undertaking, and will be
available to assist in liaison and consult-ant capacities.

John Steelman1

* Source: Truman Library, Papers of Harry S. Truman, President's
Secretary's Files. Confidential.

1 Printed from a copy
that indicates Steelman signed the original.

414. Memorandum From Director of Central Intelligence Hillenkoetter to the Director of Intelligence of the Army General Staff (Irwin)414. Memorandum From Director of Central Intelligence Hillenkoetter to the
Director of Intelligence of the Army General Staff (Irwin)Source

Washington, February 15,
1950.

SUBJECT

Proposed Watch Committee

REFERENCE

Memorandum of 20 January 1950,1 ID/CSUKA to DCI,
File CBGID-1 WW 319.26, information copies of which were sent to the
other members of the IAC by the
Army

1. As requested in the above reference, I am giving consideration to the
several questions raised therein about the production of national
intelligence on Soviet intentions with a view towards having further
clarifying discussions on them in the near future.

2. It seems to me that there are joined together in your proposal two
different functions which should be separate, as pointed out below.
There also appears to be a misconception of the duties of CIA and the
Intelligence Advisory Committee agencies in crisis situations. These
three points are listed below and discussed in the comments that
follow:

(1) The working level Check List network has been established to provide
timely warning, through the use of certain indicators, of impending
Soviet military action in the near future—as described in my detailed
circular memorandum of December 7th clarified by my letter to Mr.
Armstrong dated January
26th; after the members of the Intelligence Advisory Committee had
appointed their representatives requested in my circular memorandum of
September 26th.2

(2) Rounded intelligence estimates of the present Soviet position and
future courses of action, i.e., long range estimates for planning and
policy making, are produced in the day-to-day work by CIA's Office of
Reports and Estimates, coordinated with the other intelligence agencies
under NSCID 3 and DCI 3/1 and 3/2, and by the periodic ad hoc
interdepartmental committees under the chairmanship of Mr. Van Slyck in
CIA which have prepared two or three estimates during the past year or
so and are now working on another.

(3) “Furnishing Intelligence Advisory Committee with such crisis
intelligence as required by Intelligence Advisory Committee to discharge
its responsibility, as set forth in paragraph 6, NSCID 1.” The DCI prepares national intelligence not only on crisis
situations but on other matters, and not only for the members of the
Intelligence Advisory Committee but also for the President and the
NSC et al. This is his
responsibility by law. The responsibility of the members of the
Intelligence Advisory Committee is to get intelligence support from
their respective agencies and to give it and their advice to the
Director of Central Intelligence, not just vice versa. The only change
from past procedures in the new paragraph 6 of NSCID 1 is quicker action and on a higher level than is
customary.

Comments

3. In consideration of the problem of the production of intelligence on
Soviet intentions, I believe that a necessity exists to provide for
separate mechanisms (1) for the treatment of “indications of intentions”
and the short-range evaluations resulting from a consideration of these
indicators, and (2) for the longer-range composite “rounded intelligence
estimates” of the present Soviet position and probable future courses of
action, which require preparation against the broadest possible terms of
reference.

4. With regard to the “Check List,” I am inclined to agree that the
presently constituted “Check List Group” could be more formally
established by action of the members of the Intelligence Advisory
Committee if they wish, and that the name “Check List Group” could be
changed to “Watch Committee.”

5. It is my firm conviction, however, that this Committee should not be
diverted from the important task of focusing the attention of analysts,
in CIA and in the agencies of the Intelligence Advisory Committee
members, on certain indicators or actions contained in the Check List by
engaging in long-range strategic estimates of Soviet capabilities and
intentions.

6. There have been numerous difficulties attendant upon the establishment
of effective operations of the “Check List Group,” some of which will be
overcome by the formalization of this Group as a “Watch Committee” but
the remainder of which can be overcome only by fullest interdepartmental
cooperation and support. It is urgently requested, therefore, that, in
this interim period, every effort be made to overcome internal and
external obstacles to the effective fulfillment of the “Check List
Group” mission. It is important that there be regular Check List
meetings and that priority be given within each Department to
consideration of Check List operations. With reference to your comments
in the introduction to paragraph 2 of your Tab A, Tab A herewith shows
the recent activities of the Check List Group.

7. With regard to the rounded intelligence estimates, I should think that
most of the intelligence agencies presumably are devoting most of their
entire daily efforts to this large subject—“to analyze intelligence
information relating to short and long range Soviet intentions to go to
war and to produce periodic intelligence estimates on this subject as it
affects national security.” I should think an additional committee for
this purpose would be unnecessary and that the same results could be
accomplished by new instructions through the existing machinery of the
agencies concerned. However, if the other intelligence agencies think
that they can contribute best through another interdepartmental
committee, on Soviet intentions, this could be arranged. It would
produce the periodic long-range comprehensive estimates of Soviet
intentions and probable future courses of action against a regional and
global background, and would insure that existing estimates on this
subject would be continuously maintained in current status, be published
at appropriate intervals, and be responsive to changes in the situation
as revealed by the activities of the “Check list” or “Watch
Committee.”

8. The Army statements in paragraph 2b of its Tab A “Comments” appear to
mean that the Army's most capable analysts are not engaged in the
ordinary coordination procedures on the national intelligence estimates
produced under NSCID 3 and DCI 3/1, but would engage in activities of
a permanent committee producing well rounded estimates in lieu of the ad
hoc committees which have met two or three times in the past year or so.
The Army's other statements in that paragraph 2b appear to be
inconsistent with Section 1e of NSCID
No. 3.

9. Accordingly, I am preparing for circulation to the Intelligence
Advisory Committee agencies at an early date two draft interdepartmental
Operating Procedures proposing to formalize the “Watch Committee” and
the “Committee on Soviet Intentions” with their respective
responsibilities based on the different principles cited above. It is
thought best that these matters be discussed further on the working
level before they are referred to a meeting of the Intelligence Advisory
Committee.

R.H. Hillenkoetter

Rear Admiral, USN

Tab A3

CHRONOLOGY OF CIA ACTIVITIES ON
THE CHECK LIST
OPERATION

November 1948Proposal first circulated, for limited use.

19 August 1949State inquired at IAC meeting re a Watch Committee.

22 August to 9 September 1949Preparation of draft memorandum issued by DCI 26 September
1949.

12 September 1949Approval of draft memorandum by DCI.

15 September to 26 September 1949Interviews with top members of IAC intelligence staffs to
explain nature, operations, limitations of Check List.

26 September 1949DCI issues memorandum to IAG members.

30 September to 13 October 1949Check List Officers nominated by IAC agencies.

14 October to 1 November 1949Internal procedures set up in CIA and Check List needs
discussed with CIA Offices (OSO, OPC, OSI).

7 November 1949Request sent to all IAC Check List Officers for summaries of
available information bearing on Check List indicators falling
logically under their purview. This request had a deadline 18
November, shortly after which a meeting was to be held.

7 November to 15 November 1949Check List Officers nominated by CIA Offices.

19 November to 29 November 1949Reports received from Army and Navy; memo from State and
Air—in answer to memo of Nov. 7.

5 December 1949First Check List meeting; basic objectives and informal
allocations of primary responsibility discussed, among other
things; next meeting set for 11 January 1950.

7 December 1949Memo to participating agencies.

8 December to 13 December 1949Interviews with various Check List Officers to discuss
possibility of a “Christmas Flap”; all agreed little
likelihood.

13 December 1949Memorandum prepared as consensus of Check List opinion that
“no flap” was expected—held for use in case an apparent “flap”
began during the holidays.

14 December 1949 to 3 January 1950Holidays, one or more Check List Officers were gone during this period.

11 January 1950Meeting postponed due to non-receipt of scientific indicators
from OSI for inclusion in the Check List.

17 January 1950Meeting again postponed because revised Check List including
OSI's contributions not yet completed. At the time of both these
postponements all Check List Officers were contacted and some
saw a crisis brewing that would have required a meeting without
the new Check List.

26 January 1950Clarifying letter to Mr. Armstrong.

* Source: Central
Intelligence Agency Historical Files, HS/HC-208, Item 24. Top
Secret. Copies were sent to all IAC
members.

1 Not
found.

2 Not found.

3 Top Secret.

415. Memorandum From the Secretary of State's Special Assistant for Research and Intelligence (Armstrong) to the Under Secretary of State (Webb)415. Memorandum From the Secretary of State's Special Assistant for
Research and Intelligence (Armstrong) to the Under Secretary of State (Webb)Source

Washington, February 16,
1950.

SUBJECT

Status Report on Problems Relating to CIA

I believe it would be helpful if I gave you a brief status of report on
the various problems which we have under discussion with or about
CIA.

At the start I would like to point out that there are a number of areas
of CIA operation where the Department is quite satisfied and where no
substantial issues exist as between the Department and CIA. Notable in
this connection are the following:

Office of Scientific Intelligence;

Contacts Branch (exploitation of foreign intelligence from domestic
sources, U.S. business firms, etc.);

Foreign Voice Broadcast Monitoring.

These come generally under what are known as “services of common
concern,” i.e., activities which can best be performed centrally. CIA
performance appears to be adequate.

The areas in which difficulties are arising and the present status of the
problems are as follows:

1. OSO-OPC relationship (secret intelligence vs. secret
operations). You are aware that this problem is complicated by
an extremely difficult organizational question and by a delicate element
of personal relationships. General Magruder has drafted a
memorandum1 intended to “smoke
out” Secretary Johnson's attitude. On the basis of this memorandum
Secretary Johnson has concurred in
his discussing the question with the Department. The Department can
probably agree with General Magruder's memorandum in most sections, but
finds a number of points on which far more detailed clarification is
required—elements in which there may arise differences of view.
Discussions are continuing between the Department, NME, Hillenkoetter and Wisner, which we are hopeful will
result in a draft NSC directive for your
approval.2

2. National Intelligence Estimates. This
complicated and technical question has been before you only to a limited
extent in connection with NSC 50 (action
on the Dulles Report) and related
discussions with Hillenkoetter. It nevertheless is one of the most
serious issues between the Department and CIA and will almost surely
have to be taken up in the NSC in order
to give proper direction to CIA.

In essence the problem is this: The Department and the NME believe, as did the Dulles Committee, that CIA in its
research intelligence activity should utilize the resources of the
various departments and produce the best possible integrated national
intelligence estimates on the basis of departmental contributions. CIA,
on the other hand, has interpreted its directive to “produce national
intelligence estimates” to mean that it must do all of the research on
all subjects which might be called for by the President, the NSC, or the individual departments, and
regardless of the resources of the several departmental intelligence
arms. CIA, through various papers and activities has indicated that they
do not accept the NSC interpretation of
national intelligence to be that intelligence which transcends the
competence of any one department, but instead has taken national
intelligence to mean anything which they find appropriate to prepare.
Consequently CIA's research organization (ORE) has grown out of all proportion, it constitutes a
duplication of departmental, particularly State, research intelligence
activity, and—most important—few true national intelligence estimates
are forthcoming.

We have prepared a staff paper covering the various facets of the
difficulty. We are now combining our ideas with those of General Magruder.3
We propose very soon to raise the problem to you with the recommendation
that you devote sufficient time to brief yourself on its complex nature
and to advise us on what you consider the proper course of action from
that point on. It might be necessary to submit the question to the
Security Council for definitive resolution.

3. Program for Cooperation between Department and CIA
on “Cover” (STOSO Agreement). A proposed agreement for revision
of arrangements for administering CIA people under Foreign Service cover
has been under review by the Department for a number of months. The
proposal is in the hands of Mr. Rusk for consideration prior to
discussion with Mr. Peurifoy. A positive recommendation should come to
you shortly.

4. CIA Budget. Following NSC approval of the submission of the CIA budget, the
Department, in collaboration with the NME, has drafted a number of comments on the budget for the
NSC, which you have approved in
draft.4 This will now be
reviewed by Secretary Johnson as a
joint NME-State statement.

* Source: National Archives and Records
Administration, RG 59, Records of the Department of State, Records
of the Bureau of Intelligence and Research: Lot 58 D 776, State-CIA
Relationship 1949-1956. Top Secret. Drafted by Howe. The date is
handwritten on the source text.

1 Document 408.

2 Document 419.

3 See Document 420.

4 Document 417.

416. Letter From Director of Central Intelligence Hillenkoetter to Secretary of Defense Johnson416. Letter From Director of Central Intelligence Hillenkoetter to
Secretary of Defense JohnsonSource

Washington, February 17,
1950.

Dear Mr. Secretary: The Intelligence Advisory Committee at its meeting on
17 February 1950 has asked me to inform you of its view concerning the
importance of the Service Attache to the national intelligence
structure. It is the opinion of the Committee that our Service Attaches
are the backbone of the military intelligence collection effort. Their
presence is particularly valuable in the countries behind the Iron
Curtain where intelligence collection means are difficult to apply.

The military information obtained from the Service Attaches in the
Satellite countries, while not so complete as desired, is a major
contribution to the
accomplishment of the intelligence mission assigned by the National
Security Council to the agencies represented on the Intelligence
Advisory Committee.

Very sincerely yours,

R.H. Hillenkoetter1
Rear Admiral, USN

* Source: Central Intelligence Agency
Historical Files, HS/HC-208, Item 23. Secret. Copies were sent to
the members of the Intelligence Advisory Committee.

1 Printed from a
copy that indicates Hillenkoetter signed the original.

417. Memorandum for the Executive Secretary of the National Security Council (Lay)417. Memorandum for the Executive Secretary of the National Security
Council (Lay)Source

Washington, February 23,
1950.

JOINT STATEMENT OF DEPARTMENTS OF DEFENSE AND STATE ON CIA
BUDGET FOR FISCAL 1951

1. For the first time, members of the National Security Council have made
an examination of the CIA budget, and other than to note it in the
National Security Council meetings. For this reason it is appropriate to
comment upon the procedure and on the conditions under which the CIA
budget was reviewed, as well as on the budget itself. Both the
Department of State and of Defense wish to commend the Director of
Central Intelligence for his helpfulness and cooperation in making his
staff and records available to the representatives of the two
Departments in the budget presentation.

2. The practice of having the CIA budget reviewed in some detail is an
important step forward in fostering sound relationships between the Central Intelligence Agency
and the Departments of State and Defense. It is frequently overlooked
that by virtue of their membership on the National Security Council, the
Secretaries of State and Defense have a responsibility for the progress
and direction of the CIA program. By having an opportunity to comment on
the programs each year at the time it is submitted, the Secretaries of
State and Defense not only are able to exercise their responsibilities
for CIA in a more direct and effective manner, but will develop a
confidence that the CIA program is being conceived and executed in
harmony with its assigned missions and the requirements and policies of
those Departments primarily affected.

3. Since the budget review was conducted at a very late stage in the
annual program development, it did not accomplish as much as can be
expected in future years. This was recognized prior to undertaking the
review. Whatever experience could be gained this year, both in the
review process and in substantive comments, is a worthwhile addition. In
this connection it is important to note that the presentation of the
budget this year was directed primarily at the increase being requested,
without any analysis of previous budgetary allotments. Furthermore, it
is obvious that devoting only an hour or two to each office, with this
type of presentation, clearly has limitations.

4. In consideration of the interests of the National Security Council, it
would appear that much could be gained by some procedure which would
allow the Departments of State and Defense to participate in some degree
on a continuing basis as the programs develop throughout the year. It is
felt that the CIA would gain much strength and much support from the
mutual confidence to be derived from a more detailed understanding of
its direction.

General Comments

5. The funds appropriated for the activities of Central Intelligence are
not large in terms of the total budget of the United States Government,
nor in terms of the contribution which intelligence and operations can
make to national security and the success of the United States foreign
and military policy. Nevertheless, the CIA budget does represent a very
significant element of the total government appropriation to
intelligence activity; in fact, CIA appropriations are greater than the
aggregate of the other US foreign intelligence organizations.

6. The United States is relatively inexperienced in operating a national
intelligence system. Wise and vigorous action will be necessary if this
Government hopes to shorten appreciably the decades normally required
for the development of a sound national intelligence system. In a broad
review of this type, therefore, the primary question to be answered is
“What is the proper rate of growth?” In general, CIA should be supplied
with moderately increased funds over the next several years, limited primarily by the
effectiveness with which they can spend their funds.

7. There are two points which are relevant to the question of
effectiveness. First, and of more importance, is the question of
objectives. The objectives of CIA are found in the National Security Act
of 1947 and in the directives of the National Security Council. This
latter category includes the National Security Intelligence Directives
(NSCIDs), the report titled “The
Central Intelligence Agency and National Organization for Intelligence”
(Dulles Report), and NSC 50. Thus, during the current review,
the specific objectives outlined in these directives were considered to
help in arriving at least at a tentative answer to the question as to
whether the funds appropriated were being spent in such a manner as to
fulfill the objectives of the agency in the most direct manner. The
conclusion is inescapable that CIA still continues to have serious
shortcomings. NSC 50 remains largely
unimplemented. It is recognized that the Department of State and of
Defense have requested that paragraph 6a(1) not be implemented until it
can be given further study. This, of course, should not operate to delay
the implementation of the other directives of the National Security
Council in NSC 50. It is further
recognized that there remain serious defects in the integration of the
federal intelligence system which derive from unresolved differences
with departmental agencies.

8. A subsidiary question to the question of effectiveness is the
capability of the agency to spend the money in the period for which it
is requested. There are serious reservations on the part of the State
and Defense Departments about the capability of CIA to spend the
increase which has been requested for profitable projects, which are
clearly defined.

9. The capability of CIA to recruit and train in 19 months 514 competent
people, as indicated by comparison of their present and proposed
authorized strength, is open to question. Even if it is possible, the
implications of this pressure to recruit rapidly should be noted, for
the pressure to fill large numbers of vacancies lowers measurably the
standards of recruitment.

10. The more specific comments which follow apply to only three of the
offices of CIA. It is felt with respect to the remaining offices that no
comment was necessary and that, within the limits of judgment afforded
by the presentation and review, a generally satisfactory condition
appeared to exist.

Office of Policy Coordination

11. Of the total amount appropriated for this security for the current
fiscal year, only about 40% had been programmed by November 1. An
additional one-third had been earmarked for one project which came up
for consideration after
the beginning of the fiscal year. These figures would appear to indicate
that the firm demand for funds for this activity could be supplied
without difficulty within the funds appropriated—with the added
possibility that there might be unexpended funds at the end of this
fiscal year—and that the need for increased funds for fiscal 1951 is
wholly dependent on new projects undertaken. New projects are in turn
dependent on the possibilities for accommodation of this type of
activity to foreign policy as it evolves in fiscal 1951. An increase of
funds is requested for fiscal 1951 amounting roughly to 100%. Given the
present rate of development, it is doubtful that the need for new
projects will double over the next 18 months. The Departments of State
and Defense are entering no objection to the requested increase in
funds, but suggest that continuing review be given the progress and
developments of this Office during the next several months.

12. The comment above on the tendency of unfilled vacancies to have an
adverse pressure on the quality of personnel recruited seems to have
particular application to this Office. Most of the total increase of
persons requested by CIA as a whole is for this activity. Here
particularly it would appear doubtful that so many people with the
desired qualifications, plus normal turnover, could be recruited and
cleared in eighteen months.

Office of Special Operations

13. Generally, the Departments of State and Defense feel that this Office
has requested a justifiable increase and that the emphasis by geographic
area resulting from the increase is proper.

14. It is suggested that the Office inquire into the possibility of
effecting specific savings in the negotiation of properties abroad
through the application of the mutual defense concept of the North
Atlantic treaty.

15. It is further suggested that the Office increase its efforts to
provide for cover arrangements other than through official United States
Government establishments abroad. This must be for the foreseeable
future a paramount assignment of this Office.

Office of Reports and Estimates

16. In the light of the National Security Act of 1947, NSC Intelligence Directives, the Dulles Report, and NSC 50, serious question arises over the
existence of such a large staff in this Office.

17. Appropriate to this question is the discussion during the course of
the review, in which it was pointed out that the organization had grown
on an ad hoc basis since its establishment in the Central Intelligence
Group and that the organization was shaped by customer requests. It was
advanced that since CIA is the intelligence facility of the NSC, it is incumbent on ORE to furnish them
the type of estimate they need, irrespective of NSCID No. 1.
It was further stated that if the National Security Council Staff
requests an estimate, and sets a deadline, and the Agency having
responsibility for that particular type of intelligence is unable to
meet the deadline, then ORE must have
facilities on hand to do the work in lieu of the Agency normally
responsible. Among other things this argumentation overlooks the fact
that one of CIA's important responsibilities is the coordination of
intelligence.

18. It is apparent that there exists a fundamental divergence of view as
among the several agencies on the mission to be performed by ORE, on the relation of its work to that of
the other intelligence resources of the Government and therefore on the
size of staff required. There is an urgent need for clarification of
this function and responsibility, probably requiring revision or
amplification of existing NSCID's.
Under certain interpretations of the present directives the conclusion
is inescapable that ORE is overstaffed. It is suggested therefore, that
urgent consideration be given this problem.

* Source: National Archives and Records
Administration, RG 59, Records of the Department of State, Records
of the Bureau of Intelligence and Research: Lot 58 D 776, State-CIA
Relationship 1949-1956. Top Secret. The date is the drafting date of
a brief covering note from Armstrong to Deputy Under Secretary Rusk. This note,
which also bears the handwritten date of February 24, reads:
“General Burns approved this paper for the Department of Defense,
provided you ok'd it. For your information, Mr. Webb has already seen and approved
these comments in draft.” The covering note also indicates that the
memorandum was being cleared with Joyce and Humelsine. It is not clear whether this memorandum
was actually sent to Lay.

418. Letter From Director of Central Intelligence Hillenkoetter to the Director of Air Force Intelligence (Cabell)418. Letter From Director of Central Intelligence Hillenkoetter to the
Director of Air Force Intelligence (Cabell)Source

Washington, March 6,
1950.

DEAR GENERAL CABELL: The receipt is acknowledged of your circular
memorandum1 dated 27
February 1950 about changing U.S. policy regarding the treatment of
foreign Military, Naval, and Air Attaches assigned to the U.S. by their
governments.

I agree with you that this policy should be reviewed in the light of
world conditions at present and that the U.S. might well establish
strict reciprocity in granting privileges to foreign attaches whose
governments so rigidly restrict the activities of our own attaches.

I should say, however, that this matter is of primary concern to the
Departments of Defense and State, but this Agency, of course, has a
vital interest in the collection capabilities of our attache
organization. You will recall that I wrote the Secretary of Defense at
the request of the Intelligence Advisory Committee on 17 February 1950 to the effect
that our Service Attaches are the backbone of our military intelligence
collection effort. Foreign governments may well feel the same way about
their own attaches. As I see it, however, the change you suggest in our
diplomatic policy is not within the competence of this intelligence
Agency or of the Intelligence Advisory Committee.

Since our Service Intelligence Officers, in charge of the foreign
military, naval, and air attaches assigned here, presumably cannot give
highly selective treatment to the various nationalities on duty here,
they can make their recommendations for changes in policy to the
Secretary of Defense who in turn can take up the diplomatic phases of
this matter with the Secretary of State. They are the President's
Cabinet Officers chiefly concerned in this policy matter, whereas this
Agency's duties pertain to the coordination of national
intelligence.

However, if it might be considered helpful, this Agency, although having
only an indirect interest in the subject, is prepared to submit to the
Secretary of Defense and the Secretary of State a statement endorsing
the imposing of restrictions on Soviet and satellite attaches,
comparable to those placed on our own attaches abroad.

I am requesting my staff to discuss this matter further with your
staff.

Sincerely,

R. H. Hillenkoetter2
Rear Admiral, USN

* Source:
Central Intelligence Agency Historical Files, HS/HC-208, Item 14.
Secret. Sent to all members of the Intelligence Advisory
Committee.

1 Not found.

2 Printed from a copy that indicates
Hillenkoetter signed the original.

419. Memorandum From the Secretary of State's Special Assistant for Research and Intelligence (Armstrong) to the Under Secretary of State (Webb)419. Memorandum From the Secretary of State's Special Assistant for
Research and Intelligence (Armstrong) to the Under Secretary of State (Webb)Source

Washington, March 6,
1950.

SUBJECT

National Security Council Directive on Covert Operations

Problem:

To revise the organization for the conduct of covert operations.

Discussion:

1. NSC 10/21 created a new Office
of Policy Coordination (OPC) within CIA,
to plan and conduct covert operations under the direct policy guidance
of the Departments of State and Defense.

2. NSC 50,2 following the
recommendation of the Dulles
Committee Report, recommended that CIA combine in one office the Office
of Policy Coordination (OPC), the Office
of Special Operations (OSO), which is
responsible for espionage and counter-espionage, and the Contacts Branch
which is responsible for collection of foreign intelligence within the
United States.

3. The attached proposed NSC directive to
implement NSC 50 and, therefore, revise
NSC 10/2 has been worked out by the
Department with General Magruder of the NME, and has been approved by Secretary Johnson. The Executive Secretary, NSC, has been informally consulted.

4. The substance of the revision proposed by this directive is as
follows:

a. Distinction is made in covert operations between:

(i) Those which are subtle and truly covert and remain so, such as
political and economic warfare and propaganda; and

(ii) Those which are “rough” and tend eventually to become known, for
example, sabotage, guerrilla and para-military operations, etc.

b. CIA is directed to combine under one Assistant Director of CIA,
espionage and counter-espionage, all covert operations and the Contact
Branch, but in so doing, to place subtle covert operations in the same
organizational unit with
espionage and counter-espionage and apart from the unit which will plan
“rough” covert operations.

c. Furthermore, it is directed that the “rough” operations which are
approved in peacetime will be carried out by the unit responsible for
espionage and subtle operations, even though planned by the unit
responsible for planning “rough” operations.

5. The problem of appropriate organization within the State Department to
deal with the revised CIA organization will be the subject of a separate
paper.3

Recommendation:

That you approve the attached proposed NSC directive for submission to the NSC as a joint State-NME
proposal.

W. Park Armstrong, Jr.4

Attachment5

Memorandum for the Executive Secretary of the National Security Council
(Lay)

The Departments of State and Defense jointly submit the attached paper
for consideration by the National Security Council.

Attachment6

PROPOSED NSC 10/3

NATIONAL SECURITY COUNCIL DIRECTIVE ON COVERT
OPERATIONS

1. In NSC 10/2 the National Security
Council agreed:

a) “The National Security Council, taking cognizance of the vicious
covert activities of the USSR, its satellite countries and Communist groups to discredit and
defeat the aims and activities of the United States and other Western
powers, has determined that, in the interests of world peace and US
national security, the overt foreign activities of the US Government
must be supplemented by covert operations.”

b) “The Central Intelligence Agency is charged by the National Security
Council with conducting espionage and counter-espionage operations
abroad. It therefore seems desirable, for operational reasons, not to
create a new agency for covert operations, but in time of peace to place
the responsibility for them within the structure of the Central
Intelligence Agency and correlate them with espionage and
counter-espionage operations under the overall control of the Director
of Central Intelligence.”

2. In approving NSC 50, based on the
Dulles-Jackson-Correa Report, the NSC agreed that

“The operations of the Office of Special Operations, the Office of Policy
Coordination and the Contact Branch of the Office of Operations should
be integrated under single over-all direction in an operations division,
with its separate administration, within CIA.”

3. Therefore, under the authority of Section 102(d)(4) and (5) of the
National Security Act of 1947, as amended, the National Security Council
hereby directs, in accordance with NSCID 5, in lieu of NSC
10/2, and in light of paragraph 6a(1) of NSC 50, that:

A. As used in this directive, “covert operations” are understood to be
all activities which are conducted or sponsored by this Government
against hostile foreign states or groups or in support of friendly
foreign states or groups, but which are so planned and executed that any
U.S. Government responsibility for them is not evident to unauthorized
persons, and that if uncovered, the U.S. Government can plausibly
disclaim any responsibility for them. Specifically, such operations
shall include any covert activities related to: political manipulations;
propaganda; economic warfare; preventive direct action, including
sabotage, anti-sabotage, demolition and evacuation measures; subversion
against hostile states, including assistance to underground resistance
movements, guerrillas and refugee liberation groups, and support of
indigenous anti-communist elements in threatened countries of the free
world. Such operations shall not include armed conflict by recognized
military forces and cover and deception for military operations; nor
shall they include espionage and counter-espionage as provided for in
NSCID 5.

B. It will be recognized that there are two broad types of covert
operations, namely:

(i) Those activities which by their nature are truly covert and must
remain so if they are to succeed, e.g., political and economic warfare,
and propaganda operations, which types of activity have a close affinity
to espionage and counter-espionage; and

(ii) Those activities whose development designedly leads to physical
manifestations and therefore cease to be covert, which include all other
covert operations.

C. The following organizational changes will be affected within CIA:

(i) A new office of operations with specialized organic administrative
services shall be created within the Central Intelligence Agency to
embrace the functions now being performed by the Office of Special
Operations, the Office of Policy Coordination, and the Contact
Branch.

(ii) A highly qualified person, nominated by the Secretaries of State and
Defense, and acceptable to the Director of Central Intelligence, shall
be appointed as an Assistant Director, CIA, as head of the new office of
operations.

(iii) The Assistant Director for the new office of operations shall
report to the Director of Central Intelligence. For the purposes of
security and of flexibility of operations, and to the maximum degree
consistent with efficiency, the new office of operations shall operate
independently of other components of the Central Intelligence
Agency.

D. The new office of operations shall consist of three operating units
which shall perform the following functions:

(i) A unit which will perform the functions now carried out by the
Contact Branch as prescribed in NSCID-7.

(ii) A unit which will perform the functions now carried out by the
Office of Special Operations, namely: espionage and counter-espionage as
prescribed in NSCID-5. Additionally,
this unit shall plan and conduct covert political and economic warfare
and propaganda operations in peace and war. All covert operations
authorized in peacetime shall be conducted under the direction of this
unit.

(iii) A unit which shall plan and conduct all other covert operations
enumerated in Paragraph A above. However, such operations as may be
authorized to be undertaken in peacetime shall be conducted under the
direction of the unit specified in (ii) above.

E. Plans and preparations for the conduct of covert operations in time of
peace which require physical support or assistance of the military
services, and plans and preparations for the conduct of covert
operations in time of war or national emergency, or when the President
directs, shall be coordinated with the Joint Chiefs of Staff. Such
preparations and plans shall be drawn up with the assistance of a
representative of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, and plans for wartime
covert operations shall be accepted by the latter as being consistent
with and complementary to approval plans for wartime military
operations. The execution of covert operations in military theaters
shall be under the control of the Joint Chiefs of Staff.

F. The Director of Central Intelligence shall be responsible for ensuring
that:

(i) Through designated representatives of the Secretary of State and of
the Secretary of Defense, covert operations are planned and conducted in
a manner consistent with foreign and military policies and with overt
activities;

(ii) Through appropriate channels, agencies of the U.S. Government, both
at home and abroad (including diplomatic and military representatives in
each area), are informed of such operations as will affect them.

(iii) Covert operations pertaining to economic warfare will be conducted
under the guidance of the Departments and agencies responsible for the
planning of economic warfare.

* Source: Department of State, A/MS Files: Lot 54 D
291. Top Secret. Drafted by Fisher Howe. The date has been inserted
by hand. The subsequent history of this proposal is uncertain and it
is not clear that the proposed directive was in fact submitted to
the National Security Council.

1 Document 292.

2 Document 384.

3 Not found.

4 Printed from a copy that bears this typed
signature.

5 No classification marking.

6 Top Secret.

420. Memorandum From the Secretary of State's Special Assistant for Research and Intelligence (Armstrong) to the Under Secretary of State (Webb)420. Memorandum From the Secretary of State's Special Assistant for
Research and Intelligence (Armstrong) to the Under Secretary of State (Webb)Source

Washington, May 2,
1950.

SUBJECT

National Intelligence Estimates

As you are aware, it has long been apparent that existing mechanisms and
procedures for producing national intelligence estimates are inadequate.
Although this situation was pointed out with considerable clarity and
force by the Dulles-Jackson-Correa Committee report of January 1, 1949, later
endorsed generally by the National Security Council in NSC 50 of July 1, 1949, it has been equally
apparent that no effective steps will be taken to bring about
improvement unless specific instructions are issued by the NSC.

The problem is a difficult and complicated one and has been under
intensive study in R for more than six months. The results of our
initial investigation are embodied in a departmental staff study dated
January 3, 1950, attached as Tab A. I believe that you will find this
study useful as general background on the question, especially with
respect to the differences of view which have existed between CIA and
the other intelligence agencies, notably State.

While the departmental study was under way we began discussions with
General Magruder of the Department of Defense, who was independently
working on the problem, and with the service intelligence chiefs. These
discussions have led to a joint staff study and proposed NSC directive dated May 1, 1950, appended
as Tab B, on which there is now State-Defense agreement at the
intelligence level. We have discussed our ideas with the Intelligence
advisers and are now in process of putting them before Messrs. Kennan, Nitze, and Rusk. Mr. Lay has also been kept informed of the
various drafts, though he has not of course been asked to take a
position.

We sincerely believe that the mechanisms and procedures set forth in the
proposed directive will make possible the production of national
intelligence of the high quality which the President and the National
Security Council have the right to expect.

Before the study is put before the NSC,
however, it will be necessary, or at least desirable, to show it to the
Director of Central Intelligence, and obtain his views. There are a
number of ways in which this might be done, but the Defense
representatives agree with us that the approach definitely should not be
at the IAC level and in fact should
follow a general approval by you and Secretary Johnson or Under Secretary Early. If you
are in agreement with the proposal, you and Mr. Early could
appropriately lay it before Admiral Hillenkoetter on an informal
basis.

It is very probable that your support and personal assistance will be
necessary in any further steps that are taken. We stand ready at any
time to give you further briefing and to discuss the various procedures
we might use to put it into effect.

Tab A1

Department of State Staff Study on National
Intelligence

Washington, January 3, 1950.

Problem

What is the nature of national intelligence and how can its production be
improved?

Facts

1. Responsibility for the production of national intelligence rests with
the Central Intelligence Agency. This responsibility derives, in the
first instance, from the National Security Act of 1947 which provides
(Section 102 (d) (3)) that the CIA shall “correlate and evaluate
intelligence relating to the national security, and provide for the
appropriate dissemination of such intelligence within the Government
using where appropriate existing agencies and facilities”. The Act
further provides that “the departments and other agencies of the
Government shall continue to collect, evaluate, correlate and
disseminate departmental intelligence”.

2. Pursuant to the National Security Act, the National Security Council
issued a series of intelligence directives (NSCID's) for the guidance of CIA and the other intelligence
agencies. In these directives “intelligence relating to the national
security”—called “national intelligence”—is defined, and principles to
govern its production and dissemination are established. The definition
given is as follows:

“National intelligence is integrated departmental intelligence that
covers the broad aspects of national policy and national security, is of
concern to more than one Department or Agency, and transcends the
exclusive competence of a single Department or Agency or the Military
Establishment.” (NSCID-3)

a. The principle governing the production of national intelligence
is:

“In so far as practicable, [the CIA]2 shall not
duplicate the intelligence activities and research of the various
Departments and Agencies but shall make use of existing intelligence
facilities and shall utilize departmental intelligence for such
production purposes.” (NSCID-3)

b. The principle governing dissemination of national intelligence is:

“Intelligence so disseminated [i.e. to the President, the NSC, etc.] shall be officially concurred in
by the Intelligence Agencies or shall carry a statement of substantially
differing opinions.” (NSCID-3)

3. The National Security Council, with the assistance of the Dulles-Jackson-Correa
Committee, recently re-examined, and specifically reaffirmed as sound,
these provisions of the National Security Act of 1947 and the NSCID's relating to national intelligence
(NSC 50, section 1 c and 5 c). The
NSC concluded, however, that the
directives have not been effectively carried out, principally because
there has been within the CIA a confusion between responsibility for
producing national intelligence estimates and responsibility for miscellaneous research
and reporting (NSC 50; section 5 c).

4. In referring to the directives relating to the production of
departmental and national intelligence, the NSC agreed with the Dulles Committee that the CIA should interpret and
follow the NSC directives so as to
refrain as far as possible from competitive intelligence activities in
the production of research intelligence estimates (NSC 50; section 5 c).

5. The NSC also reaffirmed the principle
that the CIA should draw upon the specialized intelligence production of
the agencies in order to prepare coordinated national intelligence
estimates, and declared that a procedure should be adopted which would
permit the Director of Central Intelligence to take full advantage of
departmental opinion while retaining sole responsibility for the final
national intelligence product. (NSC 50;
section 5 c).

Discussion

An objective appraisal of the problem requires a fuller analysis of the
various factors which have contributed to its existence. Such an
analysis logically calls for consideration of possibly divergent views
as to the nature of national intelligence, as to the meaning of the
directives relating thereto, and to the utility of the directives in
practice. The discussion which follows, therefore, seeks: first to place
in focus the major unresolved issues in the broad field of national
intelligence production; second, to consider the concept of national
intelligence as it bears upon such issues; third, to interpret the
directives in terms of the theory of national intelligence; and fourth,
to test the theory against practical realities.

I. Focus of the Problem

A. General.

6. The confusion with respect to national intelligence, to which the
NSC referred, stemmed from differing
interpretations of the controlling directives and differing concepts of
national intelligence and of coordination (Dulles report, pp. 65, 69). Such differences still exist
and still seriously impede the national intelligence production effort.
Probably the differing interpretations and concepts of State and CIA
provide the most clear-cut expression of the issues involved.

B. CIA View.

7. CIA apparently believes that:

a. Inasmuch as the Director is, by law, solely responsible for producing
national intelligence estimates, collaborative preparation of such
estimates is not necessary. At the option of CIA, other agencies may be
asked to assist in the preparation of estimates, or the entire
production process, from research through drafting, may be carried out
by CIA. This production
responsibility, therefore, not only forces him to reject any thought of
collective responsibility with the IAC,
but also justifies him in minimizing procedures for joint or
collaborative preparation of drafts.

b. “Coordination” of national intelligence estimates can be adequately
accomplished by a procedure which gives the other IAC agencies the opportunity to express
concurrence or dissent to finished drafts presented to them by the CIA.
By this token, CIA may itself write reports on any topic, subject only
to the concurrence procedure.

c. The definition of “National Intelligence” cited in paragraph 2 above
should be interpreted as follows:

(1) departmental intelligence is integrated if the departments
participate to the extent of expressing concurrence or dissent in the
CIA product;

(2) intelligence covers “the broad aspects of national policy and
national security,” and becomes national intelligence if an important
aspect of national policy or security is concerned, whether or not it
falls wholly within the responsibility of some one department.

(3) intelligence “transcends the exclusive competence of a single
Department or Agency or the Military Establishment,” whether or not such
intelligence can be produced by a single departmental agency, if it has
been specifically requested by the President or an inter-departmental
agency, or initiated by the CIA.3

d. A large staff4 is needed to ensure that the DCI has the facilities to carry out his responsibility for
producing national intelligence, for without such a staff under his
immediate direction he cannot:

(1) meet emergency situations.

(2) protect himself from being dependent upon Departmental priorities in
the production of papers.

(3) analyze the mass of information necessary to detect possible
departmental bias and thus provide the independent “check” required of
him.

(4) accept the responsibility involved in expressing an independent
intelligence opinion sometimes at variance with the opinion of one or
more of the other IAC agencies.

e. Such a staff may independently prepare intelligence papers and conduct
intelligence research operations parallel to those of the other IAC agencies in all phases of
production.

C. State View.

8. State believes that the CIA views outlined in A above fail to meet the
intent of the NSC, have been largely
responsible for the continuing failure of the efforts to produce
adequate national intelligence, have produced an unwarranted duplication
of effort, and have tended to disrupt the entire intelligence production
effort. Specifically, State believes that in terms of current
definitions:

a. The DCI's responsibility for
“producing” national intelligence prohibits him from requesting the
IAC collectively to share
responsibility for the final, independent judgment required by law, but
imposes upon him an absolute obligation to seek the individual and
collective opinion of the departmental specialists in arriving at his
judgment. “Producing” does not mean that CIA does the entire work of
preparing reports from the basic raw information; rather it means that
CIA welds into a unified whole the oral or written contributions of the
Departments.

b. “Coordination” of national intelligence is effective only insofar as
it enlists a common, working collaboration of the responsible
intelligence experts throughout the agencies in presenting the most
authoritative reports possible. Responsibility for coordination,
therefore, cannot mean that CIA should assume responsibility for all
projects which happen to be referred to it. On the contrary,
coordination implies, inter alia, that CIA should serve as a clearing
house for referring to the appropriate IAC member any projects which fall within that member's
field of responsibility.

c. National intelligence

(1) is “integrated” only when departmental intelligence has explicitly
participated in its preparation at every stage;

(2) covers broad aspects of national policy and security only when it
involves topics of wide scope which require an objective balancing and
interrelating of factors over which no one agency exercises exclusive
jurisdiction.

(3) transcends the competence of the agencies only if it requires a
fusion of functional specialties of more than one agency.

d. The quality of the central staff rather than the size is the
determining factor in accomplishing the national intelligence mission;
departmental staffs can provide the elements of national intelligence;
acuteness rather than exhaustive research is required to check the
results.

e. Central duplication is wasteful and dangerous to the extent that
certain products of CIA are distributed outside regular channels and
thus add to the stream of intelligence uncoordinated views that are
sometimes divergent.

II. Concept of National Intelligence

A. General.

9. The conflicts in this situation divide themselves into problems of
definition and of execution; all of these in turn depend in part on the
concept of national intelligence. Upon the resolution of these problems
hangs in considerable measure the future shape of intelligence
production in the United States.

B. Background.

10. The wartime experiment with “joint” intelligence unquestionably
provided experience which helped to shape the theories under which the
Central Intelligence Agency was established. During the war, “joint”
intelligence was produced through a committee structure, with
departmental representatives drawing from their respective departments
the intelligence opinion required for joint intelligence problems. This
pyramidal concept proved sound except that its peak, a committee of
equals, tended to produce a watered-down product. The plan recommended
after the war for central intelligence retained the pyramid but replaced
the committee by a Director who was empowered to express an independent
view on national intelligence. It was provided that to the maximum
extent possible the Director's view should represent a fusion of expert
departmental opinion, but to avoid the watering down that would result
from forced agreement the device of dissent, or written statement of
serious disagreement with the Director's conclusion, at once freed the
Director from being bound by Departmental views and allowed policy
officials to know when such serious doubt existed.

C. Analysis of Concept.

11. This concept finds support in the Dulles report analysis (p. 70):

“In the original Central Intelligence Group it was conceived that there
would be a small organization of highly qualified individuals which
would limit itself strictly to national intelligence problems and base
its work primarily on the specialized reports and estimates produced by
the departments rather than employ a large research and analysis
organization of its own.”

and at pp. 68-69:

“The concept of national intelligence underlying the statute and the
directives is that of an authoritative interpretation and appraisal that
will serve as a firm guide to policy-makers and planners. A national
intelligence estimate should reflect the coordination of the best
intelligence opinion. It should be based on all available information
and be prepared with full knowledge of our own plans and in the light of
our policy requirements. The estimate should be compiled and assembled
centrally by an agency whose objectivity and disinterestedness are not
open to question. Its ultimate approval should rest upon the collective
responsibility of the highest officials in the various intelligence
agencies.”

III. Embodiment of the Concept in Definitions

A. Collaborative Preparation.

12. It seems clear from the foregoing that the assignment to the Director
of Central Intelligence of responsibility for the production of national
intelligence did not imply an obligation on his part to prepare estimate
entirely from his own resources. To be sure, the NSC rejected the Dulles report's extreme suggestion of collective
responsibility, but this by no means implied an opposite extreme.
Indeed, the NSC explicitly endorsed the
Dulles report when it
reaffirmed belief in collective construction of reports. (NSC 50, section 5 c supra), a belief more
sharply stated at p. 68 of the Dulles report:

“Although the Act and Intelligence Directives give the CIA the
independent right of producing national intelligence, Directive No. 1
stipulates that such intelligence shall be officially concurred in by
the intelligence agencies or shall carry statement of substantial
dissent. As a practical matter, such estimates can be written only with
the collaboration of experts in many fields of intelligence and with the
cooperation of several departments and agencies of government.”

13. It seems fair to assume that the several recognitions of
“departmental intelligence” which appear in the Act and in the
Intelligence Directives were included with the conscious purpose that
such intelligence should play a part in the national intelligence
scheme. The NSCID's further carefully
allocate responsibility for national intelligence to the CIA and for
designated fields of “dominant interest” to each departmental agency in
such a way that the department fields among them cover the major
functional division of intelligence;5 this can only mean that each department was to furnish
a part of the whole and to operate, for economy's sake if nothing more,
on a system of interreliance. CIA's responsibility for coordination, in
the sense of leadership in a common effort, was thus intimately related
to its responsibility for national intelligence production. The
Dulles report speaks of this
relationship at p. 65.

The CIA is—“given the responsibility of seeing to it that the United
States has adequate central machinery for the examination and
interpretation of intelligence so that the national security will not be
jeopardized by failure to coordinate the best intelligence opinion in
the country … This responsibility has not been adequately discharged and
remedial measures are necessary. There is confusion as to the proper
role of CIA in the preparation of intelligence reports and estimates.
This confusion has resulted
from incorrect interpretation and lack of proper implementation of the
statute and the directives. The reasons for this go to the heart of the
national intelligence problem …”—Dulles report, p. 65.

B. Distinction Between Departmental and National
Intelligence.

14. Unless the distinction between national and departmental intelligence
is vigorously maintained among the members of the intelligence team
there will obviously result a serious diminution in the effectiveness of
the entire structure, both in productivity and type of product. The
attached ORE Status Report of 1 December
1949 lists titles of recent or impending CIA “national intelligence”
reports. The following titles, among others, confirm the state of
confusion which exists:

Communism in Scandinavia

Political orientation of the West German State

The Succession of Power in the USSR

Postwar developments in Latin American civil aviation

Relation of Indonesia to the Economy of the Netherlands

UK activities in Iran

Great Britain and the German Problem

Soviet objectives in Latin America

The Suppression of Communism in Turkey Soviet role in the UN

15. It need hardly be argued, in terms of preceding concepts and
definitions, that such reports fail to fulfill the high mission assigned
the CIA in this field. It may, indeed, be pointed out that under any
reasonable interpretation of the allocations established in NSCID 3, most, if not all, of these
topics fall largely within the field which is recognized as the
responsibility of the State Department—well outside the field defined as
national intelligence. The Dulles-Jackson-Correa
interpretation of the pertinent directive seems sufficient (Dulles report, pp. 67, 68):

“The significant provision of Directive No. 3 for the CIA is the
definition of national intelligence, for which the Agency is given
exclusive responsibility … In effect the directive interprets the vague
provision of the National Security Act on “intelligence relative to the
national security” to cover a particular type of intelligence reasonably
distinct from departmental intelligence and conforming to admittedly
broad but generally comprehensible specification.”

National Intelligence “should deal with topics of wide scope relevant to
the determination of basic policy, such as the assessment of a country's
war potential, its preparedness for war, its strategic capabilities and
intentions, its vulnerability to various forms of direct attack or
indirect pressures. An intelligence estimate of such scope inevitably
‘transcends the exclusive competence of a single Department or Agency or
the Military Establishment.’ A major objective, then, in establishing
the CIA was to provide the administrative machinery for the coordination
of intelligence opinion, for its assembly and review, objectively and
impartially, and for its
expression in the form of estimates of national scope and
importance.”

IV. Practicability of the National Intelligence
Plan

A. Operational Practices.

16. If then the theory of the national intelligence production plan is
sound, is the plan practical in operation? The CIA evidently believes
not. As was noted above, the DCI's
interpretation of sole responsibility for national intelligence has led
to the establishment of a large staff to assist in preparing such
intelligence. The principle that maximum use should be made of
departmental facilities (NSCID 3) has
been forced aside through the fact of the staff's existence and the
operational practices which the CIA considers essential to its position.
The result, as put by the Dulles
Report (p. 54) is that “the Central Intelligence Agency itself has
become a competitive producer of intelligence on subjects of its own
choosing which can by no stretch of the imagination be called national
intelligence.” Whether there is need for the practices which led to this
result warrants detailed discussion, and can be clarified by answering a
small number of questions:

B. Problems in Execution.

17. Is Cooperative Preparation Incompatible with Sole Responsibility for
Production?

The responsibility for production of national intelligence was centered
in one official to guard against compromise or a possible failure to
unify in one place all available intelligence. It was not so centered to
relieve departmental experts from all but a review function. On the
contrary, it was designed to provide a common meeting ground where the
specialized departmental intelligence views could be considered in
relation to a broad, interdepartmental problem, could be synthesized in
the form of a single, authoritative estimate, and put forth under the
responsibility of the central authority. Such an estimate had to be
founded upon departmental intelligence provided especially for the
occasion to ensure that the central balancing of possibly divergent
views was a balancing of elements tailored to the same problem. This
concept of common effort had also its practical side: Maximum
utilization with minimum duplication of the intelligence production
resources of the Government.

18. Can the DCI Rely upon a System of
Cooperative Preparation for National Intelligence Purposes?

The DCI is empowered to secure from the
departments all available intelligence and to request special
intelligence studies (NSCID 3). He is
also empowered to secure from the Departments all intelligence
information which he requires. The tools therefore are at hand for him
to carry out his missions of coordination and production. The materials
available enable him to plan the national intelligence program, to spot
weaknesses in departmental intelligence programs, to be alert to crisis
situations, and to
initiate or respond to novel projects of high national importance. There
remain, even so, possible difficulties which must be examined
further:

a. Can the DCI receive prompt and
adequate service on a national intelligence request which conflicts in
an agency with other work in progress? To be sure, without a
considerable increase in departmental intelligence staffs, the DCI cannot expect to receive prompt and
adequate service on the variety of miscellaneous reports currently being
produced as “national intelligence.” However, with respect to problems
of such scope and importance as to warrant a national intelligence
estimate, it will generally be found that the relevant agencies already
have work in progress on the subject. It is then simply a matter of
adjusting a current agency project to the national intelligence problem
rather than of initiating a totally new project. The difficulty can in
part also be resolved through effective programming which would give
participants notice of forthcoming burdens and permit adjustments of
their schedules. Should these principles fail, the DCI's relationship with the IAC and NSC
ensures any necessary attention to a well considered project of national
intelligence. There remains, however, one possible obstacle: agency
limitations in personnel and equipment. To meet an emergency of this
sort the NSCIDs contemplate that the
DCI shall support the departments in
the interest of the over-all Governmental intelligence structure (NSCID 1) and either assist the agency in
securing from usual sources the necessary reinforcement or himself
supply the reinforcement to the agency.

b. Is collaborative composition incompatible with the speed required in
crisis situations? Collaborative composition does not necessarily imply
time-consuming composition. It implies rather a flexible means of
obtaining the fullest feasible application of pertinent viewpoints to a
given problem. Normally a national intelligence crisis estimate (cf.
Estimate of Russian intentions, March 1946) is a brief expression of
conclusions evolved from a maximum pooling of evidence and ideas with a
minimum of composition. Collaborative composition may thus on one
occasion involve a careful, laborious process of group drafting; on
another, individual drafting from agency submissions for group
consideration; on another, individual drafting on the basis of group
discussion. Topic and deadline in each case could determine the
method.

c. Can the DCI detect possible
departmental bias and thus provide the independent “check” required of
him? An abiding fear of any intelligence officer is the fear that
operational pressures may force intelligence to lend unjustified support
to a given policy or that personal feelings may develop prejudice. The
danger is inherent in any intelligence plan. Obviously if State, wedded
to a particular policy, presents facts distorted by faulty
preconceptions, the resulting intelligence report will be defective.
Unquestionably, such a danger is an important reason why the DCIhas final responsibility for
the national intelligence position. Detection of bias, however, is as
readily accomplished through collective as through central preparation.
The caliber of the CIA staff is largely determinative in either event,
but that staff, under a collective theory, has greater assist-ance from
other knowledgeable agencies, whose cross-views may bring out hidden
faults. In reality the problem of bias is a purely practical one; to
achieve the perfect solution, one would require a skyscraper of staffs
of equal size, each checking the findings of the one on the floor
beneath; in actual practice, on the relatively high level of
interpretation at which such bias becomes a problem, it is not extensive
files but intelligent and inquiring minds that constitute an effective
safeguard.

d. Could the DCI continue to exercise the
sometimes independent judgment required of his position? Independence of
judgment obviously does not deny a theory of collaborative preparation.
As was indicated earlier, the fixing of responsibility for national
intelligence in a single body was designed to overcome the dangers of
compromise inherent in a joint decision; collaborative preparation, on
the other hand, is the method of obtaining all relevant views in order
that the final judgment may be based upon the best available
intelligence in the various related fields. The more full the
examination of all factors which condition a single problem, the sounder
normally should be the conclusions derived therefrom. Reliance upon a
single staff as a means for arriving at independent conclusions, checked
only by review, would seem less wise than a hearing in the first
instance, of the best thoughts of the specialty staffs of the
departments.

e. Could a small high-level staff provide the DCI with the support he requires in fulfilling his
responsibility for producing national intelligence? Both the NSC and the Dulles Report agreed that a small staff would and should
be sufficient for this purpose. (NSC 50
section 6 c.) They added that central research should be confined to
recognized fields of common interest. In those two thoughts are clear
recognition that the duplicatory role of CIA is wasteful, that national
intelligence is a special type requiring expertise rather than numbers
to produce, and that intelligence research outside of the departments is
useful only in fields where departmental intelligence research is
totally lacking or is being carried out wastefully in more than one
department. If, as has been suggested above, the national intelligence
plan is free from serious practical as well as theoretical defects, it
is difficult to understand by what theories a large staff is justified.
It is doubtful that the US Government is prepared to support the ideal
mentioned earlier, a series of departmental and independ-ent groups each
duplicating the work of the other in order to test its accuracy. At some
point, there has to be acceptance of the principle of delegated
responsibility.

19. Do Departmental Personnel Ceilings Warrant CIA Retention of a
Parallel Intelligence Research Staff to Absorb Overflow Departmental
Work?

The national intelligence production plan, indicated above, envisages the
entire intelligence structure as a pyramid; the base, four strong
intelligence agencies to whom are delegated responsibilities
functionally related to the work of the departments they serve; the
apex, the central authority deriving its main strength from the base
and, through its national intelligence staff, seeking out and arranging
the essential union of departmental ideas which might otherwise never
unite. The apex is only as strong as the foundation. When it placed in
one central authority responsibility for the structure, the NSC remembered peace-time departmental
temptations. It imposed upon the DCI the
task of keeping intelligence strong. Retention of parallel intelligence
research in CIA not only would tend to destroy the symmetry of the
pyramid but in fact would ignore a prime CIA responsibility—to ensure as
sound as possible an investment of intelligence resources. Inability in
any Department fully to perform its intelligence mission should be of
concern to the DCI in terms of
strengthening the weak spots, or, under his coordinating responsibility,
in terms of recommendation to the NSC.
Parallel reporting absorbs additional Departmental effort in concurrence
or dissents and thus puts impossible strains on the weaker links.

Conclusions

I. The production of national intelligence remains at an ineffective
level largely because of a continuing misunderstanding on the part of
the DCI as to the legal connotations of
his responsibility for producing national intelligence. This
misunderstanding has caused the CIA to seek to establish a national
intelligence staff which can provide, from its own resources, all the
materials required for national intelligence purposes. As a result there
has occurred distortion in the meaning of national intelligence which,
in turn, has caused regrettable wastage, through duplication, of
intelligence resources. This, in turn, has brought on confusion as to
the concept of US intelligence production and has created
interdepartmental friction which could have serious consequences.

II. The clarity of the directives relating to national intelligence and
the recent NSC comments thereon suggest
that some part of the present CIA implementation of those directives may
stem from doubt as to the practicability of the plan which they outline.
In fact, however, the plan is sound, both in theory and in practice. Its
success depends upon a common realization of its team aspects and the
role which each member must play. The CIA must itself understand and
must itself establish within the IAC a
real feeling of the joint mission which national intelligence
represents. The DCI must likewise
appreciate more keenly his broad responsibility for strengthening the
entire intelligence structure.

III. The small staff recommended by the Dulles Staff, working in close collaboration with
present departmental facilities, can provide the DCI the support necessary to fulfill his national
intelligence production mission. Problems will remain, priorities and
the like, but none sufficiently serious that they cannot be solved
through the forthright leadership of the DCI.

Tab B6

Joint Department of State-Department of Defense Staff
Study

Washington, May 1, 1950.

PRODUCTION OF NATIONAL INTELLIGENCE

Problem

1. To provide for the more effective production of national intelligence
and to provide for continuous surveillance of current intelligence.

Facts Bearing on the Problem

2. Responsibility for the production of national intelligence rests with
the Central Intelligence Agency. This responsibility derives, in the
first instance, from the National Security Act of 1947 which provides
(Section 102(d)(3)) that the CIA shall “correlate and evaluate
intelligence relating to the national security, and provide for the
appropriate dissemination of such intelligence within the Government
using where appropriate existing agencies and facilities”.

3. Pursuant to the National Security Act, the National Security Council
issued a series of intelligence directives (NSCID's) for the guidance of CIA and the other intelligence
agencies. In these directives, “intelligence relating to the national
security”—called “national intelligence”—is defined, and principles to
govern its production and dissemination are established.

4. The National Security Council, with the assistance of the Dulles-Jackson-Correa
Committee, recently re-examined, and specifically reaffirmed as sound, those provisions of
the National Security Act of 1947 and the NSCID's relating to national intelligence (NSC 50, section 1c and 5c). The NSC concluded, however, that the directives
have not been effectively carried out, principally because there has
been within the CIA a confusion between responsibility for producing
national estimates and responsibility for miscellaneous research and
reporting (NSC 50, section 5c).

5. The NSC also reaffirmed the principle
that the CIA should draw upon the specialized intelligence production of
the agencies in order to prepare coordinated national intelligence
estimates, and declared that a procedure should be adopted which would
permit the Director of Central Intelligence to take full advantage of
departmental opinion while retaining sole responsibility for the final
national intelligence product. (NSC 50,
section 5c).

Discussion

6. Experience since the issuance of NSC
50 has indicated that the quality of national intelligence estimates has
not substantially improved and that unwarranted duplication of effort as
between the various agencies has continued. This condition results in
large measure from

a. Continuing disagreement between CIA, on the one hand, and the
departmental agencies, on the other, as to the meaning of national
intelligence;

b. Inadequacies of existing mechanisms and procedures for production of
national intelligence;

c. Continuing confusion within CIA between its responsibility for
producing national intelligence and its responsibility for miscellaneous
research and reporting.

7. The definition of national intelligence given in NSCID-3 needs further and more precise
interpretation. It has not proved adequate as a guide to operating
officials, and it has been subject to varying interpretations. To
resolve this ambiguity, the meaning of the term “national intelligence”
should be restated by the National Security Council, both in terms of
content and in terms of end use.

8. Revision of the definition, however, will not in itself insure the
production of authoritative national intelligence estimates reflecting
the coordination of the best intelligence opinion in the Government.
This can be accomplished only through the revision of existing
mechanisms and procedures, which are inadequate. They should be revised
to insure that national intelligence estimates reflect in every instance
an integration of the best intelligence opinion of the Government. Such
an integration can be fully achieved only through a cooperative process
of preparation in which departmental contributions, oral and written,
are synthesized and departmental intelligence opinion and advice, explicitly brought to
bear at all stages of production.

9. Continuing confusion within CIA between its responsibility for
national intelligence estimates and its responsibility for miscellaneous
research and reporting can only be cured by an organizational separation
of the staffs carrying out the two functions. A special group should be
created in CIA to handle its national intelligence functions and, in
addition, the surveillance and dissemination of current intelligence
required by executives responsible for the formulation and execution of
national policy. A separate office should be responsible for carrying
out such research and reporting functions of common concern as may be
prescribed by the NSC under the
provisions of Section 102(d)(4) of the National Security Act of
1947.

Conclusions

10. The National Security Council should define national intelligence in
terms of both content and end use so as to provide a clear guide for
operating officials.

11. Existing mechanisms and procedures for the production of national
intelligence estimates should be revised so as to insure that such
estimates represent in every instance an integration of the best
intelligence opinion in the Government.

12. The staff within CIA responsible for carrying out the Agency's
national intelligence functions should be organizationally separate from
the staff responsible for research and reporting activities of common
concern.

Recommendations

That the National Security Council

a. Approve and issue the attached directive implementing the conclusions
of this paper.

b. Direct that the strength of the National Intelligence Group, described
in paragraph 5 of the directive, shall not exceed 100 officer and/or
professional personnel, of whom not more than 20 may be detailed by
departmental agencies. One half of the necessary personnel
authorizations or spaces for officer and professional personnel shall be
charged against existing CIA allotments.

c. Note that after the accumulation of operating experience, the Director
of Central Intelligence, with the advice and assistance of the IAC, will recommend to the NSC such modifications in the strength and
composition of the National Intelligence Group as may be necessary.

d. Note that the Director of Central Intelligence, with the advice and
assistance of the IAC, will submit
revisions of existing NSCID's and DCID's required to bring
those directives into conformity with the attached directive.

Attachment7

NSC DIRECTIVE

Pursuant to the provisions of paragraphs (d) and (c) of Section 102 of
the National Security Act of 1947 and in furtherance of paragraphs 5 and
6.a(2) of NSC 50, the National Security
Council hereby authorizes and directs the following readjustment of the
functions and organization of the Intelligence Advisory Committee and of
the Central Intelligence Agency, in order specifically to insure more
effective production of national intelligence estimates and studies, and
to provide continuous surveillance of current intelligence:

General

1. National intelligence is that intelligence required in the formulation
of policy at the national (i.e. supra-departmental) level. As stated in
NSCID-3, such intelligence
inevitably “covers the broad aspects of national policy and national
security”, and normally it “transcends the exclusive competence of a
single department or agency or the military establishment”. Regardless
of its content, however, intelligence used in the formulation of
national policy must have an interdepartmental basis, i.e., it must
embody departmental intelligence resources and be subjected to adequate
safeguards against bias. Strictly political or strictly military
intelligence estimates, for example, should be considered as national
intelligence in those cases where such estimates are required in the
formulation of policy at the national level.

Because national intelligence serves as a basis for the formulation of
policy at the national level, it is essential that it represent in every
instance an integration of the best intelligence opinion of the
departments. Such an integration can be fully achieved only through a
cooperative process of preparation in which departmental contributions,
oral or written, are synthesized and departmental intelligence views are
explicitly brought to bear at all stages of production. Intelligence
which has not been so produced should not be disseminated as national
intelligence.

Intelligence Advisory Committee

2. Composition

In order to facilitate the effective functioning of the IAC, the Director of Central Intelligence,
the intelligence chiefs of the Departments of State, Army, Navy and Air
Force and the Federal Bureau of Investigation shall each designate a
qualified individual who shall be on full time duty at IAC headquarters and who will be
representative of his agency in matters covered by this directive not
requiring the action of the head of his agency. The Director of the
Joint Intelligence Group and the Director of Intelligence of the Atomic
Energy Commission may designate such representatives if they so desire.
The representative of the Director of Central Intelligence shall
concurrently be head of the National Intelligence Group (hereafter
described).

3. Mission

a. In addition to its existing functions, the mission of the IAC with respect to national intelligence
shall be

(1) To initiate timely national intelligence requirements to cover future
foreseeable needs for national estimates and studies of a continuing,
recurrent, or emergency nature, such requirements to be recommended to
the DCI for preparation by the National
Estimates Staff (hereafter described).

(2) To advise the DCI as to the
desirability and feasibility of national estimates and studies which he
may initiate.

(3) To review drafts of national estimates and studies prepared by the
National Estimates Staff and resubmit them for modification or clear
them expeditiously for consideration by the DCI by unanimous concurrence or with record of substantive
dissent by individual members. All issues under review on which dissent
is pending shall be considered by the assembled IAC.

(4) To maintain contact through the Chairman, IAC, with the NSC staff and
national planning agencies of the Government in order to be cognizant at
all times of contemplated high level negotiations, plans or projects
which should be soundly based on national intelligence estimates.

(5) To maintain close liaison with the Joint Intelligence Committee in
order to coordinate the projects for estimates in the two committees and
to insure the integration of appropriate parts of national estimates
with joint estimates.

b. In addition to the functions outlined above, it shall be the mission
of the IAC

(1) By keeping under continuing review all critical current intelligence,
to be prepared to draw nationally significant conclusions therefrom, if
an emergency threatens or prompt executive action is indicated. Such
conclusions shall be recommended without delay to the DCI for immediate transmission to key
executive officials.

(2) To recommend to the DCI the nature
and specifications of periodic current intelligence summaries and
reports, centrally prepared and appropriately edited, required by executive officials
responsible for national policy.

(3) To recommend to the DCI the
preparation of special intelligence products in recognized fields of
common interest.

(4) To be responsible for the conduct of all discussions with for- eign
intelligence agencies respecting the formulation of combined national
intelligence estimates and the preparation, in collaboration with
foreign intelligence agencies, of such combined estimates.

4. Location

The permanent headquarters for deliberations of the IAC shall be conveniently located with
respect to the National Intelligence Group (hereafter described) and its
facilities. The housing and facilities for both the IAC and the National Intelligence Group
shall be provided by the CIA.

National Intelligence Group (NIG)

5. Composition

The National Intelligence Group shall be established as an organic part
of CIA. It shall consist of a National Estimates Staff and Current
Intelligence Staff. A part of the professional and all clerical
personnel of the Group shall be provided by CIA. A proportion of the
professional personnel shall be provided by detail from departmental
agencies for duty with CIA; each individual so detailed shall be
acceptable to the DCI and responsible to
him. The DCI shall provide the necessary
personnel authorizations as well as reimbursement for civilian personnel
assigned. He shall also provide spaces for assigned military personnel
which will be additional to the personnel authorizations of their
respective service intelligence agencies.

National Estimates Staff (NES)

6. Mission

The National Estimates Staff shall:

a. Break down intelligence requisitions initiated by the IAC into component requisitions upon the
several departmental agencies and CIA for their appropriate
contributions of intelligence material, giving clear specifications as
to the nature and scope of material required and deadline dates for
completion.

b. By evaluation, analysis and synthesis of intelligence contributed in
appropriate form and content by the several departmental intelligence
agencies and offices of CIA, prepare drafts of national estimates and
studies.

c. Present draft estimates and studies for consideration of the members
of IAC prior to formal review by that
body. Representatives of the National Estimates Staff normally shall be
present when the drafts are
considered by the IAC and shall be
authorized to furnish orally additional reasoning or factual knowledge
in support of statements or conclusions incorporated in the drafts.

d. From critical information received from the Current Intelligence Staff
or any other source indicating the need for timely executive action on
any scale, prepare crisis estimates for prompt submission to the DCI and the IAC.

e. Periodically report to the DCI and the
IAC on the adequacy and completeness
of available information required in the preparation of national
estimates.

f. Collaborate with the Current Intelligence Staff in order to insure
that estimates and studies reflect the most recent, evaluated, current
information, and contra-wise, that the reasoning of current intelligence
publications is not inconsistent with well-confirmed long-range
intelligence.

Current Intelligence Staff (CIS)

7. Mission

The Current Intelligence Staff shall be organized and staffed to
effect

a. The prompt and systematic receipt, surveillance, and appropriate
situation room display of all radio, wire and otherwise
rapidly-dispatched current information received in all agencies and
departments of the Government which may be of significance in the
preparation of current intelligence required by executives responsible
for the formulation or implementation of national policy.

b. The conduct of a 24-hour watch on incoming information with provisions
for immediate alert of the DCI, NIG and the members of the IAC upon the indication of critical or
emergency situations which might require the preparation of crisis
estimates or timely executive action on any scale.

c. The identification and preparation of “hot” information obtained by
offices within CIA or from other sources for dissemination by the DCI if in his opinion it is of sufficient
importance and urgency to be furnished without delay to the President,
the members of the National Security Council and the IAC.

d. The preparation and dissemination, under the sole responsibility of
the DCI and with speed appropriate to
the apparent significance of the information, of periodic current
intelligence summaries patterned to the needs of the executives
responsible for the formulation of implementation of national policy. To
the extent practicable, the material in such summaries which is of
predominant interest to a member agency shall be coordinated with that
agency.

e. The operation of an intelligence situation room designed to serve the
needs of the above-mentioned executive officials and their principal
assistants, the IAC and the National
Estimates Staff.

Missions of Departmental Agencies and Central Intelligence
Agency

(with respect to national intelligence)

8. Departmental Agencies

The several departmental agencies of the IAC shall

a. Furnish upon requisition of the National Estimates Staff, within the
deadline dates prescribed, appropriate intelligence in form and content
as required by the NES to provide for the national intelligence projects
initiated by the IAC.

b. Be prepared to make oral presentations in the NES in support of their
respective intelligence contributions at their own request or when
requested by the NES.

c. Furnish to the CIS in the most expeditious manner possible all radio,
wire and rapidly-dispatched current information of possible significance
to the current intelligence mission of the CIA. In this category of
information should be included the intelligence content or implications
of operational messages.

d. In the event that intelligence studies in subjects of primary interest
are prepared departmentally which have the characteristics of national
intelligence and are intended for dissemination above departmental
level, they shall be subjected to the reviewing procedures of the NES
and the IAC in order to obtain the
imprimatur of “national intelligence”.

e. In the choice of personnel to be detailed for duty with the National
Intelligence Group, nominate individuals of highest professional
qualifications.

9. Central Intelligence Agency

a. All offices of CIA having intelligence resources shall contribute to
the requirements of the NES and the CIS in accordance with the same
principles as Federal agencies outside of CIA.

b. Intelligence offices of CIA, other than the National Intelligence
Group, shall be restricted to the production of intelligence prescribed
in paragraphs (4) and (5) of Section 102d of the National Security Act
of 1947.

c. Intelligence studies prepared under Paragraph 9.b., above, if of a
character to be employed as national intelligence, must have passed
through the reviewing procedures of the NES and the IAC before being designated “national
intelligence”.

10. Responsibility of Director, Central Intelligence Agency and Heads of
other Federal Intelligence Agencies

a. By virtue of the mission assigned in the National Security Act of 1947
to the DCI to produce intelligence
related to the national security (defined by the National Security
Council as “national intelligence”) employing as far as practicable the
resource of existing agencies, and his mission to coordinate
intelligence activities to this end, the DCI is primarily responsible for the implementation of this
Directive. His available means are the coordinated and integrated
resources of departmental intelligence agencies of the Government and of
CIA itself. The DCI is responsible for
mobilizing these resources in the production of national intelligence
and for the final approval and dissemination of national intelligence
estimates and studies.

b. The other members of the IAC are
responsible in no less degree than the DCI, however, in their obligation to support with their
full resources the mechanism set up in this Directive to accomplish
national intelligence objectives. They are individually responsible for
making available the talent and resources of their respective agencies
in all phases of the production of national intelligence.

c. “National intelligence” hereafter is limited to intelligence estimates
and studies which have passed through the NES and the reviewing
procedures of the IAC and have been
disseminated under the final responsibility of the DCI; provided, however, that such national
intelligence shall not be disseminated without a statement indicating
concurrence of the members of the Intelligence Advisory Committee or,
when there is a non-concurrence, a statement of substantially differing
opinion. In the event any IAC member
fails to act in the preparation of, or indicate his approval or dissent
with respect to, a national estimate or study, the DCI may proceed with its dissemination in
accordance with his responsibility.

Attachment8

BRIEFING FOR MR. WEBB ON NATIONAL INTELLIGENCE

(May 4, 1950)

Introductory

The “national intelligence problem” can be very simply defined: It is the
problem of finding a way of insuring that the President, the NSC and other officials concerned with national policy have the
benefit of the full intelligence resources of the Government. The
problem of national intelligence is thus by no means the total
intelligence problem; it does not, for example, directly involve the
multifarious problems of collection of information nor a number of other
knotty problems in the intelligence production field. But it is in a
very real sense the capstone of the intelligence business. No matter how
good our collection may be, unless we have a sound mechanism for
producing national intelligence, a mechanism that is not only adequate
but respected by the producers and users of intelligence alike, the
intelligence program of the Government has largely failed.

Now, tapping the full intelligence resources of the Government, and by
this I mean intelligence talent as well as intelligence information,
necessarily involves an interdepartmental process and interdepartmental
cooperation. And this is something relatively new in the intelligence
field.

History

Prior to World War II, the U.S. did not have any mechanism for the
interdepartmental evaluation of intelligence and the production of
interdepartmental estimates. (In some measure, the lack was responsible
for Pearl Harbor, and doubtless the Congress had this disaster very much
in mind at the time it passed legislation creating the CIA.)

Joint intelligence estimates had their beginning during the war in
connection with planning by the Joint Chiefs of Staff. Evidently such
interdepartmental planning had to be based on interdepartmental
intelligence estimates. Such estimates were put out by a Joint
Intelligence Committee composed of the intelligence chiefs of the three
services and representatives from State, OSS, and OWI. This body
functioned satisfactorily and its estimates undoubtedly had an important
influence on the planning and conduct of the war. It still exists today,
minus the civilian element, as an adjunct of the Joint Chiefs.

The JIC arrangement had one major flaw,
or potential flaw: As a committee of equals, it tended to produce
watered-down estimates which were the lowest common denominator of the
views of the members. This difficulty was avoided in the National
Security Act of 1947 and in subsequent NSC directives which created the Central Intelligence
Agency with a Director empowered to express an independent view.

To assist the Director in discharging this responsibility, it was
originally expected that the CIA would have a small organization of
highly qualified individuals which would limit itself strictly to
national intelligence problems and base its work primarily on the
specialized reports and estimates produced by the departments rather
than employ a large research and analysis organization of its own.
(Parenthetically, I may say that this is the concept which we still think is the correct one and
which we seek to establish now.)

In practice, however, CIA followed the opposite course: It developed over
the course of time a very large research organization of its own which
not only sought to produce national estimates from the ground up but
also—through sheer weight of numbers and zeal to write—began to produce
reports on all manner of subjects which, as the Dulles Committee put it, could by no
stretch of the imagination be called national intelligence. Gradually
the process of producing a national intelligence estimate came to be
something like this. CIA conceives a topic on which it decides to
produce a “national estimate”, or the topic may be given to it by higher
authority. CIA then proceeds, normally from its own resources, to
produce a draft estimate, which is then circulated to the other agencies
for concurrence, comment or dissent. This process does not insure, in
fact in our view it discourages, full participation by the other
agencies in the estimate. The recipient of a CIA national intelligence
estimate, concurred in by State, Army, Navy, and Air, can only be sure
that what he has before him is not violently opposed by the other
agencies. He can be reasonably sure that it does not represent the best
intelligence estimate of which the Government's intelligence system is
capable. Finally, he can be positive that the system which produced it
is the most wasteful that could be devised, since it involves, in
theory, the duplication in CIA of the research and analysis facilities
of each of the other agencies.

To correct this situation we are proposing the following:

1. To cut the national intelligence function clearly out of the CIA
Office of Reports and Estimates and to establish a separate staff within
CIA to take care of it. The ORE would
henceforth be limited to those research and reporting functions of
common concern which can best be performed centrally.

2. To limit this staff, to be called the National Intelligence Group, to
a maximum of 100 professional personnel. This we believe is a generous
staff but not so large that it would be tempted to produce national
estimates from its own resources.

3. To require the NIG to break down
requests for estimates forwarded to it, into requisitions for
intelligence on the appropriate departments. Such departmental
contributions, oral and written, to be synthesized by the NIG into draft estimates.

4. To give to the IAC added
responsibilities in the production of national intelligence, notably

a. The formulation and recommendation to the DCI of the subjects on which national intelligence
estimates are needed.

b. The detailed review of the draft estimates prepared by the NIG prior to recommending them to the
DCI for dissemination.

* Source: National Archives and Records
Administration, RG 59, Records of the Department of State, Records
of the Bureau of Intelligence and Research: Lot 58 D 776, National
Intelligence Problem. Secret. Drafted by W.C. Trueheart.

1 Secret.

2 These
and following brackets are in the source text.

3 It might
here be pointed out that unquestionably many of these and other
requests relate to a popular but erroneous impression that CIA
possesses information not held by the other IAC agencies and can therefore produce unique reports.
In fact, all CIA information is distributed to the appropriate
IAC agencies. The latter have
more information on their own fields than does the CIA. [Footnote in
the source text.]

4 According to the Dulles report, this staff numbered
some 600 persons as of 1 January 1949. [Footnote in the source
text.]

5 Political, Cultural, Sociological Intelligence—State; Military
Intelligence—Army; Naval Intelligence—Navy; Air Intelligence—Air;
Economic, Scientific and Technological Intelligence—Each agency in
accordance with its respective needs. [Footnote in the source
text.]

6 Secret. Darling reports that General
Magruder was the main drafter of this study (The Central
Intelligence Agency, p. 393). This view is supported by Howe's
comments in Document 410, which apparently
refer to an earlier draft. It was also known as the Webb Study.

7 Secret.

8 Secret. This was not an enclosure to
Armstrong's memorandum
to Webb, which is dated 2
days earlier, but was attached to the source text. It may have been
the text or set of notes for a follow-on oral briefing.

421. Memorandum From Director of Central Intelligence Hillenkoetter to the Assistant Chief of Staff for Military Intelligence, War Department General Staff (Bissell)421. Memorandum From Director of Central Intelligence Hillenkoetter to the
Assistant Chief of Staff for Military Intelligence, War Department
General Staff (BissellSource )

Washington, May 8,
1950.

SUBJECT

Free Flow of Operational Information to CIA

REFERENCE

(a) Circular Memorandum to Standing Committee dated 24 April
19501

1. For a considerable time this Agency has felt concern over the fact
that it does not have access to a great deal of information of essential
value for intelligence purposes, which is contained in communications of
the Military Departments. On the other hand, the Department of State
bends every effort to supply to this Agency all pertinent material. The
bulk of the material in question consists of operational cables which
are not normally sent to the intelligence agencies of the Military
Departments for action, but only for information.

2. With the purpose of exploring this problem and perhaps obtaining some
ideas as to its solution, a meeting was held at CIA on 4 May 1950.
Representatives of the Military Departments and of CIA attended. A State
Department representative was present as an observer.

3. It was the consensus of opinion among the representatives of the
Military Departments that, if CIA would furnish each of the intelligence
agencies concerned with a statement of requirements, their efforts to
supply CIA with the needed material would be facilitated. Your
endorsement of this approach is requested.

R.H. Hillenkoetter2
Rear Admiral, USN

* Source: Central Intelligence Agency
Historical Files, HS/HC-210, Item 16. Confidential. Also sent to the
Director of Naval Intelligence and the Director of Intelligence,
U.S. Air Force. A copy was sent to the Special Assistant for
Research and Intelligence, Department of State.

1 Not found.

2 Printed from a
copy that indicates Hillenkoetter signed the original.

National Security Council Intelligence Directives, 1947-1950National Security Council Intelligence Directives, 1947-1950: Document List

Document 422: National Security Council Intelligence Directive No. 4

Washington, December 12, 1947.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Records of the Department of State, Records of the Executive Secretariat, NSC Files: Lot 66 D 148, Dulles-Jackson-Correa Report, Annex 10. Confidential.

Document 423: National Security Council Intelligence Directive No. 5

Washington, December 12, 1947.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Records of the Department of State, Records of the Executive Secretariat, NSC Files: Lot 66 D 95, NSCIDs. Top Secret.

Document 424: National Security Council Intelligence Directive No. 6

Washington, December 12, 1947.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Records of the Department of State, Records of the Executive Secretariat, NSC Files: Lot 66 D 148, Dulles-Jackson-Correa Report, Annex 12. Secret.

Document 425: National Security Council Intelligence Directive No. 2

Washington, January 13, 1948.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Records of the Department of State, Records of the Executive Secretariat, NSC Files: Lot 66 D 148, Dulles-Jackson-Correa Report, Annex 8. Confidential.

Document 426: National Security Council Intelligence Directive No. 3

Washington, January 13, 1948.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Records of the Department of State, Records of the Executive Secretariat, NSC Files: Lot 66 D 148, Dulles-Jackson-Correa Report, Annex 9. Secret.

Document 427: National Security Council Intelligence Directive No. 7

Washington, February12, 1948.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Records of the Department of State, Records of the Executive Secretariat, NSC Files: Lot 66 D 95, Box 1799, NSCIDs. Secret. Also reproduced in CIA Cold War Records: The CIA under Harry Truman, pp. 177-179.

Document 428: National Security Council Intelligence Directive No. 8

Washington, May 25, 1948.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Records of the Department of State, Records of the Executive Secretariat, NSC Files: Lot 66 D 148, Dulles-Jackson-Correa Report, Annex 14. Secret.

Document 429: National Security Council Intelligence Directive No. 10

Washington, January 18, 1949.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Records of the Department of State, Records of the Executive Secretariat, NSC Files: Lot 66 D 195, NSCIDs. Secret.

Document 430: National Security Council Intelligence Directive No. 11

Washington, January 6, 1950.

Source: Truman Library, Papers of Harry S. Truman, President's Secretary's Files, Subject File, Current Policies of the Government of the United States of America Relating to the National Security. Top Secret.

Document 431: National Security Council Intelligence Directive No. 12

Washington, January 6, 1950.

Source: Truman Library, Papers of Harry S. Truman, President's Secretary's Files, Subject File, Current Policies of the Government of the United States of America Relating to the National Security. Top Secret.

Document 432: National Security Council Intelligence Directive No. 1

Washington, January 19, 1950.

Source: Truman Library, Papers of Harry S. Truman, President's Secretary's Files, Subject File. Secret. This revision of NSCID 1 was approved by NSC Action No. 275 on January 19 (National Archives and Records Administration, RG 273, Records of the National Security Council, Record of Actions, Box 55), which added paragraph 6 (on intelligence in crisis situations) to the existing NSCID 1, which had been approved by the NSC on July 7, 1949; see Document 385. In all other respects, the 1949 and 1950 versions are identical except for a renumbering of paragraphs. The July 1949 text of NSCID 1 superseded the original NSCID 1, approved by the NSC on December 12, 1947; see Document 335. The December 12, 1947, text is reproduced in CIA Cold War Records: The CIA under Harry Truman, pp. 169-171. The 1949 revision, which resulted from NSC approval of the NSC 50 (McNarney Report) recommendations on implementation of the Dulles Survey proposals, introduced three changes in the 1947 text. It formally designated the Director of Central Intelligence as Chairman of the Intelligence Advisory Committee and made the FBI a member of the IAC (both provisions in paragraph 1). In the last sentence of paragraph 5, the 1949 version altered the formulation on dissents in national intelligence. (In the December 1947 text, this sentence read: “Intelligence so disseminated shall be officially concurred in by the Intelligence Agencies or shall carry an agreed statement of substantial dissent.”)

Document 433: National Security Council Intelligence Directive No. 13

Washington, January 19, 1950.

[Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Records of the Department of State, Records of the Executive Secretariat, NSC Files: Lot 66 D 95, Box 1799—NSCIDs. Top Secret. 3 pages of source text not declassified.]

Document 434: National Security Council Intelligence Directive No. 14

Washington, March 3, 1950.

[Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Records of the Department of State, Records of the Executive Secretariat, NSC Files: Lot 66 D 95, Box 1799—NSCIDs. Top Secret. 4 pages of source text not declassified.]

Document 435: National Security Council Intelligence Directive No. 9

Washington, March 10, 1950.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 59, Records of the Department of State, Records of the Executive Secretariat, NSC Files: Lot 66 D 195, NSCIDs. Confidential. This is the second version of this NSCID. The first was dated July 1, 1948. (Ibid.) See the Supplement. The only substantive difference between the two texts is the addition of the Federal Bureau of Investigation to the list of agencies enumerated in paragraph 2.

422. National Security Council Intelligence Directive No. 4422. National Security Council Intelligence Directive No. 4Source

Washington, December 12,
1947.

NATIONAL INTELLIGENCE OBJECTIVES

Pursuant to the provisions of Section 102(d)(5) of the National Security
Act of 1947 and for the purpose of providing intelligence support for
the preparation of studies required by the National Security Council in
the fulfillment of its duties, it is directed that:

1. The Director of Central Intelligence, in collaboration with the other
agencies concerned, shall prepare a comprehensive outline of national
intelligence objectives applicable to foreign countries and areas to
serve as a guide for the coordinated collection and production of
National Intelligence.

2. The Director of Central Intelligence, in collaboration with the other
agencies concerned, and under the guidance of the NSC Staff1 shall select from time to time
and on a current basis sections and items of such outline which have a
priority interest. These selections will be issued by the Director of
Central Intelligence to supply the desired priority guidance for the
production of National Intelligence by the Central Intelligence Agency
and for the contributions to such production by other agencies
concerned.

* Source: National Archives and Records
Administration, RG 59, Records of the Department of State, Records
of the Executive Secretariat, NSC
Files: Lot 66 D 148, Dulles-Jackson-Correa Report, Annex 10. Confidential.

1 For
this purpose, the NSC Staff shall
consist of the Executive Secretary and the Departmental
representatives designated by Council members to advise and assist
the Executive Secretary. Any cases of disagreement within this group
will be referred to the National Security Council for decision.
[Footnote in the source text.]

423. National Security Council Intelligence Directive No. 5423. National Security Council Intelligence Directive No. 5Source

Washington, December 12,
1947.

ESPIONAGE AND COUNTERESPIONAGE OPERATIONS

Pursuant to the provisions of Section 102(d) of the National Security Act
of 1947, the National Security Council hereby authorizes and directs
that:

1. The Director of Central Intelligence shall conduct all organized
Federal espionage operations outside the United States and its
possessions for the collection of foreign intelligence information
required to meet the needs of all Departments and Agencies concerned, in
connection with the national security, except for certain agreed
activities by other Departments and Agencies.

2. The Director of Central Intelligence shall conduct all organized
Federal counter-espionage operations outside the United States and its
possessions and in occupied areas, provided that this authority shall
not be construed to preclude the counter-intelligence activities of any
army, navy or air command or installation and certain agreed activities
by Departments and Agencies necessary for the security of such
organizations.

3. The Director of Central Intelligence shall be responsible for
coordinating covert and overt intelligence collection activities.

4. When casual agents are employed or otherwise utilized by an IAC Department or Agency in other than an
overt capacity, the Director of Central Intelligence shall coordinate
their activities with the organized covert activities.

5. The Director of Central Intelligence shall disseminate such
intelligence information to the various Departments and Agencies which
have an authorized interest therein.

6. All other National Security Council Intelligence Directives or
implementing supplements shall be construed to apply solely to overt
intelligence activities unless otherwise specified.

* Source: National Archives and Records
Administration, RG 59, Records of the Department of State, Records
of the Executive Secretariat, NSC
Files: Lot 66 D 95, NSCIDs. Top
Secret.

424. National Security Council Intelligence Directive No. 6424. National Security Council Intelligence Directive No. 6Source

Washington, December 12,
1947.

FOREIGN WIRELESS AND RADIO MONITORING

Pursuant to the provisions of Section 102 of the National Security Act of
1947, and for the purposes enunciated in paragraphs (d) and (e) thereof,
the National Security Council hereby authorizes and directs that:

1. The Director of Central Intelligence shall conduct all Federal
monitoring of foreign propaganda and press broadcasts required for the
collection of intelligence information to meet the needs of all
Departments and Agencies in connection with the National Security.

2. The Director of Central Intelligence shall disseminate such
intelligence information to the various Departments and Agencies which
have an authorized interest therein.

* Source: National Archives and Records
Administration, RG 59, Records of the Department of State, Records
of the Executive Secretariat, NSC
Files: Lot 66 D 148, Dulles-Jackson-Correa Report, Annex 12. Secret.

425. National Security Council Intelligence Directive No. 2425. National Security Council Intelligence Directive No. 2Source

Washington, January 13,
1948.

COORDINATION OF COLLECTION ACTIVITIES ABROAD

The following over-all policies and objectives are established by the
National Security Council for the interdepartmental coordination of
foreign intelligence collection activities, so that measures may be
taken promptly to effect sound and efficient utilization of the various
departmental collecting and reporting facilities abroad:

1. There shall be an allocation within certain broad categories of agency
responsibility for collection abroad, as follows:

PoliticalDepartment of State

CulturalDepartment of State

SociologicalDepartment of State

MilitaryDepartment of the Army

NavalDepartment of the Navy

AirDepartment of the Air Force

Economic
Scientific
TechnologicalEach agency in accordance with its respective needs

2. All available intelligence information, no matter by whom collected,
shall, wherever possible, be transmitted immediately to the field
representative of the agency most concerned. However, the collector may
also send copies to or otherwise inform his own agency.

3. The senior US representative in each foreign area where the United
States maintains a foreign post shall, within the spirit of the
principles enunciated herein, be responsible for the coordination of all
normal collection activities in his area.

4. The collecting and reporting facilities of each of the agencies shall
be utilized so as to avoid unproductive duplication and uncoordinated
overlap and to insure within budgetary limitations that full flow of
intelligence information which is the major need of all departments and
agencies for the accomplishment of their respective missions.

5. Full utilization shall be made of the individual initiative and
favorable contacts of agency representatives.

6. No interpretation of these established over-all policies and
objectives shall negate the basic principle that all departmental
representatives abroad are individually responsible for the collection
and for the appropriate transmission to their departments of all
intelligence information pertinent to their departmental missions.

7. There shall be free and unrestricted interdepartmental exchange of
intelligence information to meet the recognized secondary needs of each
department and agency for intelligence usually obtained or prepared by
other departments or agencies.

* Source: National Archives and Records
Administration, RG 59, Records of the Department of State, Records
of the Executive Secretariat, NSC
Files: Lot 66 D 148, Dulles-Jackson-Correa Report, Annex 8. Confidential.

426. National Security Council Intelligence Directive No. 3426. National Security Council Intelligence Directive No. 3Source

Washington, January 13,
1948.

COORDINATION OF INTELLIGENCE PRODUCTION

Pursuant to the provisions of Section 102 of the National Security Act of
1947, and for the purposes enunciated in paragraphs (d) and (e) thereof,
the National Security Council hereby authorizes and directs that the
following over-all policies and objectives are established for the
coordination of the production of intelligence:

1. In order that all facilities of the Government may be utilized to
their capacity and the responsibilities of each agency may be clearly
defined in accordance with its mission, dominant interest, and
capabilities, the whole field of intelligence production is divided into
the following categories, and responsibilities are allocated as
indicated:

a. Basic Intelligence

(1) Basic intelligence is that factual intelligence which results from
the collation of encyclopedic information of a more or less permanent or
static nature and general interest which, as a result of evaluation and
interpretation, is determined to be the best available.

(2) An outline of all basic intelligence required by the Government shall
be prepared by the CIA in collaboration with the appropriate agencies.
This outline shall be broken down into chapters, sections, and
sub-sections which shall be allocated as production and maintenance
responsibilities to CIA and those agencies of the Government which are
best qualified by reason of their intelligence requirements, production
capabilities, and dominant interest to assume the production and
maintenance responsibility.

(3) When completed, this outline and tentative allocations of production
and maintenance responsibilities shall be submitted for NSC approval and issued as an
implementation of this Directive. It is expected that as the result of
constant consultation with the agencies by the Director of Central
Intelligence, both the outline and the allocations will be revised from
time to time to insure the production of the basic intelligence required
by the agencies and the fullest possible use of current agency
capabilities. Changes in the outline or allocations shall be effected by
agreement between the Director of Central Intelligence and the agencies
concerned.

(4) This basic intelligence shall be compiled and continuously maintained
in National Intelligence Surveys to cover foreign countries, areas, or
broad special subjects as appropriate. The National Intelligence Surveys
will be disseminated in such form as shall be determined by the Director
of Central Intelligence and the agencies concerned.

(5) The Director of Central Intelligence shall be responsible for
coordinating production and maintenance and for accomplishing the
editing, publication, and dissemination of these National Intelligence
Surveys and shall make such requests on the agencies as are necessary
for their proper development and maintenance.

(6) Departments or agencies to be called on for contributions to this
undertaking may include agencies other than those represented
permanently in the IAC.

b. Current Intelligence

(1) Current intelligence is that spot information or intelligence of all
types and forms of immediate interest and value to operating or policy
staffs, which is used by them usually without the delays incident to
complete evaluation or interpretation.

(2) The CIA and the several agencies shall produce and disseminate such
current intelligence as may be necessary to meet their own internal
requirements or external responsibilities.

(3) Interagency dissemination of current intelligence shall be based on
interagency agreement including NSC
Intelligence Directive No. 1 and the principle of informing all who need
to know.

c. Staff Intelligence

(1) Staff intelligence is that intelligence prepared by any department or
agency through the correlation and interpretation of all intelligence
materials available to it in order to meet its specific requirements and
responsibilities.

(2) Each intelligence agency has the ultimate responsibility for the
preparation of such staff intelligence as its own department shall
require. It is recognized that the staff intelligence of each of the
departments must be broader in scope than any allocation of collection
responsibility or recognition of dominant interest might indicate. In
fact, the full foreign intelligence picture is of interest in varying
degrees at different times to each of the departments.

(3) Any intelligence agency, either through the Director of Central
Intelligence or directly, may call upon other appropriate agencies for
intelligence which does not fall within its own field of dominant
interest. Such requests shall be made upon the agencies in accordance
with their production capabilities and dominant interest.

(4) As a part of the coordination program, the Director of Central
Intelligence will seek the assistance of the IAC intelligence agencies in minimizing the necessity for any agency to develop
intelligence in fields outside its dominant interests.

(5) The CIA and the agencies shall, for purposes of coordination,
exchange information on projects and plans for the production of staff
intelligence.

(6) It shall be normal practice that staff intelligence of one agency is
available to the other intelligence agencies permanently represented on
the IAC.

d. Departmental Intelligence

(1) Departmental intelligence is that intelligence including basic,
current, and staff intelligence needed by a Department or independent
Agency of the Federal Government, and the subordinate units thereof, to
execute its mission and to discharge its lawful responsibilities.

e. National Intelligence

(1) National intelligence is integrated departmental intelligence that
covers the broad aspects of national policy and national security, is of
concern to more than one Department or Agency, and transcends the
exclusive competence of a single Department or Agency or the Military
Establishment.

(2) The Director of Central Intelligence shall produce and disseminate
national intelligence.

(3) The Director of Central Intelligence shall plan and develop the
production of national intelligence in coordination with the IAC Agencies in order that he may obtain
from them within the limits of their capabilities the departmental
intelligence which will assist him in the production of national
intelligence.

(4) The Director of Central Intelligence shall, by agreement with the
pertinent Agency or Agencies, request and receive such special
estimates, reports, and periodic briefs or summaries prepared by the
individual Departments or Agencies in their fields of dominant interest
or in accordance with their production capabilities as may be necessary
in the production of intelligence reports or estimates undertaken
mutually.

2. The research facilities required by any agency to process its own
current and staff intelligence shall be adequate to satisfy its
individual needs after taking full cognizance of the facilities of the
other agencies. Each agency shall endeavor to maintain adequate research
facilities, not only to accomplish the intelligence production tasks
allocated to it directly under the foregoing provisions but also to
provide such additional intelligence reports or estimates within its
field of dominant interest as may be necessary to satisfy the
requirements of the other agencies under such allocations.

3. For the purposes of intelligence production, the following division of
interests, subject to refinement through a continuous program of coordination by the Director
of Central Intelligence, shall serve as a general delineation of
dominant interests:

Political, Cultural, Sociological IntelligenceDepartment of State

Military IntelligenceDepartment of the Army

Naval IntelligenceDepartment of the Navy

Air IntelligenceDepartment of the Air Force

Economic, Scientific, and Technological IntelligenceEach agency in accordance with its respective needs

* Source: National Archives and Records
Administration, RG 59, Records of the Department of State, Records
of the Executive Secretariat, NSC
Files: Lot 66 D 148, Dulles-Jackson-Correa Report, Annex 9. Secret.

427. National Security Council Intelligence Directive No. 7427. National Security Council Intelligence Directive No. 7Source

Washington, February12,
1948.

DOMESTIC EXPLOITATION

Pursuant to the provisions of Section 102 of the National Security Act of
1947, and for the purpose enunciated in paragraphs (d) and (e) thereof,
the National Security Council hereby authorizes and directs that:

1. The Central Intelligence Agency shall be responsible for the
exploitation, on a highly selective basis, within the United States of
business concerns, other non-governmental organizations and individuals
as sources of foreign intelligence information.

2. To implement this undertaking, the Central Intelligence Agency
shall:

a. Determine the foreign intelligence potential of sources so that the
best available may be selected expeditiously for exploitation upon the
receipt of collection requests from the intelligence agencies. For this
purpose, CIA will maintain a central index of non-governmental sources
in the United States.

b. Establish uniform procedures and standards for security clearance of
all contacts in this field, and arrange such clearances.

c. Establish uniform procedures to insure that the interests of
organizations and individuals contacted will not be jeopardized.

d. Collect through the establishment of field offices within the United
States, foreign intelligence information required in the interests of
the national security or by the individual intelligence agencies.

e. Arrange for direct contact between intelligence agency representatives
and non-governmental sources within the United States whenever
conditions require such action or upon the request of a member agency to
secure technical or other foreign intelligence information.

f. Obtain the agreement of responsible policymaking officials of American
organizations having a foreign intelligence potential before
establishing and maintaining contacts within that organization.

g. Inform the intelligence agencies of the prospective departure from or
return to the United States of selected American citizens having a high
foreign intelligence potential, so that the agencies may furnish
requirements or provide specialists for briefing or interrogation.

h. Disseminate to the appropriate agencies all foreign intelligence
information obtained through this program. Reports produced by the
agencies shall be identified as such, unless the originating agency
stipulates to the contrary.

3. Further to implement this undertaking, the intelligence agencies
shall:

a. Assign to duty in the Central Intelligence Agency field offices, if
they so desire and within their capabilities, representatives to serve
their interests under the direction of the CIA managers. Member agencies
may, at their discretion, establish active working liaison between their
Regional Offices and CIA Field Offices.

b. Send directly to the Central Intelligence Agency for collection all
their requests for foreign intelligence information to be obtained from
non-governmental sources within the United States.

c. Transmit to the Central Intelligence Agency for appropriate
dissemination full information and reports resulting from approved
direct contacts by agency representatives with non-governmental sources,
identifying such sources by CIA code number.

d. Obtain, to the maximum extent possible, from their departments and
agencies the foreign intelligence information which the departments and
agencies have received as a by-product of the normal relationship with
business concerns and other non-governmental organizations and
individuals in the United States in connection with non-intelligence
activities, and transmit to the maximum extent possible, the information
to the Central Intelligence Agency for editing for source security and
for appropriate dissemination.

e. Obtain, in so far as is practicable and within existing security
regulations, from their departments and agencies information concerning
business concerns and other non-governmental organizations and
individuals in the United States having foreign intelligence potential,
which the department or agency possesses or subsequently acquires, and
make the information available to the Central Intelligence Agency.

f. Nominate representatives to serve on a committee, under the
chairmanship of the Central Intelligence Agency, to meet periodically to
consider mutual problems and interests in connection with this
program.

4. Further to implement this undertaking, the National Security Resources
Board and the components of the Military Establishment, other than the
components represented on the IAC, shall
furnish directly to the CIA, to the maximum extent possible, all foreign
intelligence information which is received as a by-product of their
normal relationship with business concerns and other non-governmental
organizations and individuals in the United States, in connection with
non-intelligence activities.

5. Nothing in this program shall be interpreted to affect the established
relationship of the Departments and Agencies with business concerns,
other non-governmental organizations, and individuals in the United
States for purposes other than the procurement of foreign intelligence
information. Nor shall it affect the normal interchange of documents
between libraries of the departments and other libraries, or the
development of research projects with individuals or non-governmental
institutions.

* Source: National Archives and Records
Administration, RG 59, Records of the Department of State, Records
of the Executive Secretariat, NSC
Files: Lot 66 D 95, Box 1799, NSCIDs. Secret. Also reproduced in CIA
Cold War Records: The CIA under Harry Truman, pp. 177-179.

428. National Security Council Intelligence Directive No. 8428. National Security Council Intelligence Directive No. 8Source

Washington, May 25,
1948.

BIOGRAPHICAL DATA ON FOREIGN SCIENTIFIC AND TECHNOLOGICAL
PERSONALITIES

Pursuant to the provisions of Section 102 of the National Security Act of
1947 and for the purpose enunciated in paragraph d(4) thereof, the primary responsibility
for the maintenance of Biographical Data on Foreign Scientific and
Technological Personalities is assigned to the Central Intelligence
Agency.

1. To implement this undertaking, the following procedures are
established:

a. Departmental intelligence agencies shall continue to collect, analyze,
and abstract biographical data on foreign scientific and technological
personalities in accordance with their needs.

b. Departmental intelligence agencies shall forward to the Central
Intelligence Agency, in the manner most satisfactory to the Department
concerned, all biographical data originating within their respective
Departments, or complete documentary references thereto, on foreign
scientific and technological personalities.

c. The Central Intelligence Agency shall codify and index all such data
received, including such data as may be received from all sources, and
shall incorporate the actual material received in its files.

d. All biographical data on foreign scientific and technological
personalities maintained by the Central Intelligence Agency shall be
readily available to the participating Departments and Agencies.

* Source: National Archives and Records
Administration, RG 59, Records of the Department of State, Records
of the Executive Secretariat, NSC
Files: Lot 66 D 148, Dulles-Jackson-Correa Report, Annex 14. Secret.

429. National Security Council Intelligence Directive No. 10429. National Security Council Intelligence Directive No. 10Source

Washington, January 18,
1949.

COLLECTION OF FOREIGN SCIENTIFIC AND TECHNOLOGICAL DATA

1. Since previous directives made no specific provision for supplying
“scientific” and “technological” information other than that required by
each IAC agency for its own use, it is,
accordingly, determined that, in furtherance of the cooperative policies
and procedures enunciated in NSCID No.
2 and any supplements thereto, and pursuant to the provisions of Section
102(d) of the National Security Act of 1947 and for the purpose of providing the U.S.
Government and its agencies with the scientific and technological
information required from foreign areas in the interests of national
security:

a. The Department of State shall have primary responsibility for the
collection abroad for all government agencies of information in the
basic sciences. The Department of State will also collect information in
such additional scientific and technical fields as is necessary to meet
the requirements of government agencies other than the National Military
Establishment and, when requested, requirements of the National Military
Establishment. The Departments of Army, Navy, and Air Force will collect
scientific and technological information including basic research when
necessary to meet the requirements of the National Military
Establishment, utilizing whenever practicable the facilities of the
Department of State for collection in the basic sciences. Close
collaboration and consultation will be maintained between all scientific
representatives at U.S. missions abroad so that all scientific
requirements can be satisfied with minimum duplication and maximum
utilization of personnel. The scientific representatives of the
Department of State shall be available to serve as scientific
consultants to the military representatives.

b. The Director of Central Intelligence, in collaboration with pertinent
agencies, shall determine those countries which have informational
potential in fields of basic and applied sciences, as related to the
national security.

c. For the purpose of inducing exchanges with foreign countries, the
National Military Establishment shall provide the Department of State
with available unclassified information pertaining to the basic
sciences.

d. In order to provide for the collection of the data which is the
responsibility of the Department of State, the Department of State shall
take appropriate measures to obtain the necessary funds from the
Congress or from the agencies served, other than the National Military
Establishment, and will appoint, as practicable, specially qualified
scientific and technical personnel to selected United States Missions
for this collection responsibility.

e. In order to provide for the collection of the data which is the
responsibility of the National Military Establishment, the Departments
of the Army, the Navy and the Air Force shall take appropriate measures
to obtain the necessary funds from the Congress and will assign as
practicable, specially qualified scientific and technical personnel to
the staffs of their respective attaches at such United States Missions
as may be required for this collection responsibility.

f. The Department of State shall call upon agencies of the government
which require scientific or technological information for advice and assistance as may be
necessary in connection with the requirements of this directive.

* Source: National Archives and Records
Administration, RG 59, Records of the Department of State, Records
of the Executive Secretariat, NSC
Files: Lot 66 D 195, NSCIDs.
Secret.

430. National Security Council Intelligence Directive No. 11430. National Security Council Intelligence Directive No. 11Source

Washington, January 6,
1950.

SECURITY OF INFORMATION ON INTELLIGENCE SOURCES AND METHODS

Pursuant to the provisions of Sections 101 (b)(2) and 102 (d)(3) of the
National Security Act of 1947, as amended, providing that the National
Security Council shall consider policy on matters of common interest to
the departments and agencies of the Government concerned with national
security and shall make recommendations to the President in connection
therewith, and that the Director of Central Intelligence shall be
responsible for protecting intelligence sources and methods from
unauthorized disclosure, the National Security Council hereby authorizes
and directs that:

1. The departments and agencies of the Government engaged in intelligence
activities shall take steps to prevent unauthorized disclosure of
information on United States intelligence sources and methods. Each
agency will determine its own channel for authorization to release any
such information. The delimiting phrase “intelligence sources and
methods” includes information ostensibly overt which requires security
protection because of its specific means of procurement or specific
place of procurement, revelation of which would endanger intelligence
sources and methods, but the phrase does not include intelligence as
such, the dissemination of which is already covered by appropriate
departmental and agency security regulations.

2. The Director of Central Intelligence shall coordinate policies
concerning the protection of intelligence sources and methods, within
the limits established by Section 102 of the National Security Act of
1947, except where provision has already been made by the National
Security Council.

3. In protecting intelligence sources and methods, the Director of
Central Intelligence and the other intelligence directors shall be
guided by the principle that covert or sensitive information, either
unevaluated or as an intelligence product, shall go only to those whose
official duties require such knowledge.

4. In order to protect intelligence sources and methods further, any
reference to the Central Intelligence Agency should emphasize its duties
as the coordinator of intelligence, rather than its secret intelligence
activities. No reference will be made to this agency whatsoever unless
it is unavoidable, of course.

* Source: Truman Library, Papers of Harry S.
Truman, President's Secretary's Files, Subject File, Current
Policies of the Government of the United States of America Relating
to the National Security. Top Secret.

431. National Security Council Intelligence Directive No. 12431. National Security Council Intelligence Directive No. 12Source

Washington, January 6,
1950.

AVOIDANCE OF PUBLICITY CONCERNING THE INTELLIGENCE

AGENCIES OF THE U.S. GOVERNMENT

Pursuant to the provisions of Sections 101 and 102 of the National
Security Act of 1947, as amended, and in accordance with Section 7 of
NSC 50,1 the National Security
Council hereby authorizes and directs that the following policy be
established, since any publicity, factual or fictional, concerning
intelligence is potentially detrimental to the effectiveness of an
intelligence activity and to the national security:

1. All departments and agencies represented by membership on the
Intelligence Advisory Committee shall take steps to prevent the
unauthorized disclosure for written or oral publication of any
information concerning intelligence or intelligence activities. The head
of each department or agency will determine his channel for granting
such authorization as may be necessary.

2. The sense of the above directive shall be communicated to all other
executive departments and agencies as an expression of policy of the
National Security Council.2

3. In cases where the disclosure of classified information is sought from
the Director of Central Intelligence, and he has doubt as to whether he
should comply, the question will be referred to the National Security
Council.

* Source: Truman Library, Papers of Harry S.
Truman, President's Secretary's Files, Subject File, Current
Policies of the Government of the United States of America Relating
to the National Security. Top Secret.

1 Not reproduced herein. [Footnote in the source text; Document 384.]

2 See communication
which follows. [Footnote in the source text. Attached to NSCID No. 12 (and apparently approved
at the same time) was a memorandum dated January 6 signed by Souers
and addressed “To the Heads of Executive Departments and
Establishments,” conveying the substance of the directive. Not
printed.]

432. National Security Council Intelligence Directive No. 1432. National Security Council Intelligence Directive No. 1Source

Washington, January 19,
1950.

DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES

Pursuant to the provisions of Section 102 of the National Security Act of
1947, and for the purposes enunciated in paragraphs (d) and (e) thereof,
the National Security Council hereby authorizes and directs that:

1. To maintain the relationship essential to coordination between the
Central Intelligence Agency and the intelligence organizations, an Intelligence Advisory
Committee consisting of the Director of Central Intelligence, who shall
be Chairman thereof, the Director, Federal Bureau of Investigation, and
the respective intelligence chiefs from the Departments of State, Army,
Navy, and Air Force, and from the Joint Staff (JCS), and the Atomic Energy Commission, or their
representatives, shall be established to advise the Director of Central
Intelligence. The Director of Central Intelligence will invite the
chief, or his representative, of any other intelligence Agency having
functions related to the national security to sit with the Intelligence
Advisory Committee whenever matters within the purview of his Agency are
to be discussed.

2. To the extent authorized by Section 102 (e) of the National Security
Act of 1947, the Director of Central Intelligence, or representatives
designated by him, by arrangement with the head of the department or
agency concerned, shall make such surveys and inspections of
departmental intelligence material of the various Federal Departments
and Agencies relating to the national security as he may deem necessary
in connection with his duty to advise the NSC and to make recommendations for the coordination of
intelligence activities.

3. Coordination of intelligence activities should be designed primarily
to strengthen the over-all governmental intelligence structure. Primary
departmental requirements shall be recognized and shall receive the
cooperation and support of the Central Intelligence Agency.

a. The Director of Central Intelligence shall, in making recommendations
or giving advice to the National Security Council pertaining to the
intelligence activities of the various Departments and Agencies,
transmit therewith a statement indicating the concurrence of
non-concurrence of the members of the Intelligence Advisory Committee;
provided that, when unanimity is not obtained among the Department heads
of the National Military Establishment, the Director of Central
Intelligence shall refer the problem to the Secretary of Defense before
presenting it to the National Security Council.

b. Recommendations of the Director of Central Intelligence shall, when
approved by the National Security Council, issue as Council Directives
to the Director of Central Intelligence. The respective intelligence
chiefs shall be responsible for insuring that such orders or directives,
when applicable, are implemented within their intelligence
organizations.

c. The Director of Central Intelligence shall act for the National
Security Council to insure full and proper implementation of Council
directives by issuing such supplementary DCI directives as may be required. Such implementing
directives in which the Intelligence Advisory Committee concurs
unanimously shall be issued by the Director of Central Intelligence, and
shall be implemented within the Departments and Agencies as provided in
paragraph b. Where disagreement arises between the Director of Central Intelligence and one or
more members of the Intelligence Advisory Committee over such
directives, the proposed directive, together with statements of
non-concurrence, shall be forwarded to the NSC for decision as provided in paragraph a.

4. The Director of Central Intelligence shall produce intelligence
relating to the national security, hereafter referred to as national
intelligence. In so far as practicable, he shall not duplicate the
intelligence activities and research of the various Departments and
Agencies but shall make use of existing intelligence facilities and
shall utilize departmental intelligence for such production purposes.
For definitions see NSCID No. 3.

5. The Director of Central Intelligence shall disseminate National
Intelligence to the President, to members of the National Security
Council, to the Intelligence Chiefs of the IAC Agencies, and to such Governmental Departments and
Agencies as the National Security Council from time to time may
designate. Intelligence so disseminated shall be officially concurred in
by the Intelligence Agencies or shall carry a statement of substantially
differing opinions.

6. Whenever any member of the Intelligence Advisory Committee obtains
information that indicates an impending crisis situation, such as the
outbreak of hostilities involving the United States, or a condition
which affects the security of the United States to such an extent that
immediate action or decision on the part of the President or the
National Security Council seems to be required, he shall immediately
furnish the information to the other members of the Intelligence
Advisory Committee as well as to other officials or agencies as may be
indicated by the circumstances. The Director of Central Intelligence
shall immediately convene the Intelligence Advisory Committee. After
receiving the views of the Intelligence Advisory Committee members, the
Director of Central Intelligence shall promptly prepare and disseminate
the national intelligence estimate in accordance with paragraphs 4 and 5
above.

7. When Security Regulations of the originating Agency permit, the
Director of Central Intelligence shall disseminate to the Federal Bureau
of Investigation and other Departments or Agencies intelligence or
intelligence information which he may possess when he deems such
dissemination appropriate to their functions relating to the national
security.

8. The Director of Central Intelligence shall perform for the benefit of
the existing intelligence Agencies such services of common concern to
these Agencies as the National Security Council determines can be more
efficiently accomplished centrally.

9. The intelligence organizations in each of the Departments and Agencies
shall maintain with the Central Intelligence Agency and with each other,
as appropriate to their respective responsibilities, a continuing interchange of intelligence
information and intelligence available to them.

10. The intelligence files in each intelligence organization, including
the CIA, shall be made available under security regulations of the
Department or Agency concerned to the others for consultation.

11. The intelligence organizations within the limits of their
capabilities shall provide, or procure, such intelligence as may be
requested by the Director of Central Intelligence or by one of the other
Departments or Agencies.

12. The Director of Central Intelligence shall make arrangements with the
respective Departments and Agencies to assign to the Central
Intelligence Agency such experienced and qualified officers and members
as may be of advantage for advisory, operational, or other purposes, in
addition to such personnel as the Director of Central Intelligence may
directly employ. In each case, such departmental personnel will be
subject to the necessary personnel procedures of each Department.

* Source: Truman Library, Papers of Harry S. Truman,
President's Secretary's Files, Subject File. Secret. This revision
of NSCID 1 was approved by NSC Action No. 275 on January 19
(National Archives and Records Administration, RG 273, Records of
the National Security Council, Record of Actions, Box 55), which
added paragraph 6 (on intelligence in crisis situations) to the
existing NSCID 1, which had been
approved by the NSC on July 7, 1949;
see Document 385. In all other respects,
the 1949 and 1950 versions are identical except for a renumbering of
paragraphs. The July 1949 text of NSCID 1 superseded the original NSCID 1, approved by the NSC on December 12, 1947; see Document 335. The December 12, 1947, text
is reproduced in CIA Cold War Records: The CIA
under Harry Truman,
pp. 169-171. The 1949 revision, which resulted from NSC approval of the NSC 50 (McNarney Report)
recommendations on implementation of the Dulles Survey proposals, introduced three changes in
the 1947 text. It formally designated the Director of Central
Intelligence as Chairman of the Intelligence Advisory Committee and
made the FBI a member of the IAC (both provisions in paragraph 1).
In the last sentence of paragraph 5, the 1949 version altered the
formulation on dissents in national intelligence. (In the December
1947 text, this sentence read: “Intelligence so disseminated shall
be officially concurred in by the Intelligence Agencies or shall
carry an agreed statement of substantial dissent.”)

433. National Security Council Intelligence Directive No. 13433. National Security Council Intelligence Directive No. 13Source

Washington, January 19,
1950.

* [Source: National Archives and Records
Administration, RG 59, Records of the Department of State, Records
of the Executive Secretariat, NSC
Files: Lot 66 D 95, Box 1799—NSCIDs. Top Secret. 3 pages of source text not
declassified.]

434. National Security Council Intelligence Directive No. 14434. National Security Council Intelligence Directive No. 14Source

Washington, March 3,
1950.

* [Source: National Archives and Records
Administration, RG 59, Records of the Department of State, Records
of the Executive Secretariat, NSC
Files: Lot 66 D 95, Box 1799—NSCIDs.
Top Secret. 4 pages of source text not declassified.]

435. National Security Council Intelligence Directive No. 9435. National Security Council Intelligence Directive No. 9Source

Washington, March 10,
1950.

COMMUNICATIONS INTELLIGENCE

Pursuant to the provisions of Section 101 and Section 102 of the National
Security Act of 1947, as amended, the National Security Council hereby
authorizes and directs that:

1. There is hereby established under the National Security Council the
United States Communications Intelligence Board (hereinafter referred to
as the “Board”) to effect the authoritative coordination of
Communications Intelligence activities of the Government and to advise
the Director of Central Intelligence in those matters in the field of
Communications Intelligence for which he is responsible.

2. The Board will be composed of not to exceed two members from each of
the following departments or agencies: The Departments of State, the
Army, the Navy, and the Air Force, and the Central Intelligence Agency,
and the Federal Bureau of Investigation. Only those departments or
agencies designated by the President are authorized to engage in
Communications Intelligence activities.

3. The Board members will be vested with authority to represent their
respective departments or agencies in the field of Communications
Intelligence and each member department or agency will be represented at
each meeting by at least one member, or alternate, with the necessary
powers to act.

4. Decisions of the Board will be based on the principle of unanimity,
which shall be a prerequisite for matters within the purview of the
Board, except that the Chairman shall be elected by majority vote. When
decision cannot be reached, the Board will promptly refer the matter for
resolution to the National Security Council; provided that, when
unanimity is not obtained among the military department heads of the
Department of Defense, the Board shall present the problem to the
Secretary of Defense before presenting it to the National Security
Council.

5. Decisions and policies promulgated by the Board within the scope of
its jurisdiction shall be applicable to all departments and agencies
represented on or subordinate to the National Security Council and any others designated by the
President, and shall be implemented by those departments and agencies of
which action is required.

6. The special nature of Communications Intelligence activities requires
that they be treated in all respects as being outside the framework of
other or general intelligence activities. Orders, directives, policies,
or recommendations of any authority of the Executive Branch relating to
the collection, production, security, handling, dissemination, or
utilization of intelligence, and/or classified material, shall not be
applicable to Communications Intelligence activities, unless
specifically so stated and issued by competent departmental or agency
authority represented on the Board.

7. The Board shall act for the National Security Council to insure proper
and full implementation of Council directives by issuing such
supplementary directives as may be required. Such implementing
directives in which the Board concurs unanimously shall be issued to and
implemented by the member departments and agencies. When disagreement
arises in the Board upon such directive, the proposed directive,
together with statement of non-concurrence, shall be forwarded to the
National Security Council for decision as provided in paragraph 4.

8. Other National Security Council Intelligence Directives to the
Director of Central Intelligence and related implementing directives
issued by the Director of Central Intelligence shall be construed as
non-applicable to Communications Intelligence activities under the
authority of paragraph 6 above, unless the National Security Council has
made its directive specifically applicable to Communications
Intelligence.

9. The Board will perform such functions as may be required to accomplish
its objective set forth in paragraph 1 above, and in the exercise of
responsibilities and authority delegated to it by the National Security
Council in this directive.

10. The Board shall leave the internal administration and operation of
Communications Intelligence activities to the member departments or
agencies.

11. All currently effective decisions, policies, and operating
arrangements of the Board and its predecessors, the Army-Navy
Communications Intelligence Board, and the State-Army-Navy
Communications Intelligence Board, as previously constituted, which are
not in conflict with this directive, will remain in full force and
effect unless changed by subsequent decisions of the Board.

12. Definitions. For purposes of this directive the following definitions
apply:

a. “Foreign communications” include all telecommunications and related
materials (except Foreign Press and Propaganda Broadcasts) of the
government and/or their nationals or of any military, air, or naval
force, faction, party, department, agency, or bureau of a foreign
country, or of any person or
persons acting or purporting to act therefor; they shall include all
other telecommunications and related material of, to, and from a foreign
country which may contain information of military, political, scientific
or economic value.

b. “Communications Intelligence” is intelligence produced by the study of
foreign communications. Intelligence based in whole or in part on
Communications Intelligence sources shall be considered Communications
Intelligence as pertains to the authority and responsibility of the
United States Communications Intelligence Board.

c. “Communications Intelligence Activities” comprise all processes
involved in the collection, for intelligence purposes, of foreign
communications, the production of information from such communications,
the dissemination of that information, and the control of the protection
of that information and the security of its sources.

* Source: National Archives and Records
Administration, RG 59, Records of the Department of State, Records
of the Executive Secretariat, NSC
Files: Lot 66 D 195, NSCIDs.
Confidential. This is the second version of this NSCID. The first was dated July 1,
1948. (Ibid.) See the Supplement. The only substantive difference
between the two texts is the addition of the Federal Bureau of
Investigation to the list of agencies enumerated in paragraph
2.

IndexIndex

Note: The original index has been suppressed in this ebook; for more information, see “About the Electronic Edition”
