Foreign Relations of the United States, 1949, The Near East, South Asia, and Africa, Volume VI (U.S. Department of State, Office of the Historian, 1977)
Public domain. Sourced from the U.S. Department of State, Office of the Historian: Foreign Relations of the United States (https://history.state.gov/historicaldocuments/frus1949v06).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

================================================================================

The Near East, South Asia, and Africa (Foreign Relations of the United States, 1949, Volume VI)

Title pageForeign Relations of the United States, 1949

Volume VI

The Near East, South Asia, and Africa

United States Government Printing Office
Washington

U.S. Department of State
Office of the Historian
Bureau of Public Affairs

This ebook was generated on May 28, 2018.
Please visit the Office of the Historian ebooks web page to access updates.

About the Electronic Edition About the Electronic Edition

The Office of the Historian at the U.S. Department of State has embarked on a program to release an ebook edition of the Foreign Relations of the United States (FRUS) series, which was established in 1861. Far lighter and more portable than printed editions of FRUS, the ebook edition offers the full content of each volume and makes use of the full-text search and other reading features of most ebook devices and applications, including bookmarking and note-taking. Unlike the web-based edition of FRUS, the ebook edition, once downloaded, can be accessed even without internet connectivity.

In creating the FRUS ebook edition, we endeavored to maintain fidelity with the original printed edition. One challenge in this respect is representing original page numbers from printed editions in ebooks. For readers who need to cite material in this ebook, we recommend citing document numbers instead of page numbers, since document numbers are persistent, media-neutral identifiers. In older FRUS volumes (before the subseries covering the Johnson administration), where cross references use page numbers rather than document numbers, we append to each page number a bracketed list of the document numbers that correspond to it.

The Office of the Historian has worked to ensure that this ebook is error-free and works on a broad range of devices. Please email history_ebooks@state.gov with any feedback.

To learn about updates to this ebook, other ebooks, and the ebook initiative in general, visit our ebooks homepage, and follow us on Twitter at @HistoryAtState and Tumblr at HistoryAtState.

Office of the Historian
Bureau of Public Affairs
U.S. Department of State
May 2018

The Near East, South Asia, and Africa (Foreign Relations of the United States, 1949, Volume VI)Contents

Preface

List of Abbreviations and Symbols

The Near EastMultilateral Relations:Consideration of basic United States security interests in the Near East and South Asia (Documents 1-7)

Talks at Washington between the United States and the United Kingdom on political and economic subjects concerning the Near East (Documents 8-13)

Participation by the United States in the development of the petroleum resources of the Near East (Documents 14-70)

Conference at Istanbul, Turkey, of American chiefs of mission in the Near East, November 26–29, 1949 (Documents 71-75)

Attitude of the United States toward the proposed political union of Syria and Iraq (Documents 76-80)

Egypt:Interest of the United States in the revision of the Anglo-Egyptian treaty of August 26, 1936, and the future status of the Sudan; the issue of Egyptian participation in staff talks by United States and United Kingdom military officials concerning the defense of the Near East (Documents 81-104)

GreeceThe United States and the conclusion of the Greek civil war; the Greek question at the United Nations (Documents 105-261)

IranConcern of the United States with the hostile attitude of the Soviet Union toward Iran; political support of Iran by the United States; the question of United States military and economic aid to Iran (Documents 262-340)

IsraelInterest of the United States in the Arab-Israeli controversy over the future status of Palestine; armistice agreements between Israel and its Arab neighbors; unsuccessful attempts to attain a final peace settlement in the area (Documents 341-1095)

KuwaitProposal of the United States to establish a consulate at Kuwait (Documents 1096-1098)

Saudi ArabiaInterest of the United States in questions of economic and military assistance to Saudi Arabia; renewal of United States tenancy at the Dhahran airfield; elevation of the United States legation at Jidda to the status of an embassy (Documents 1099-1131)

SyriaAttitude of the United States toward recognition of governments in Syria following a succession of coups d’etat (Documents 1132-1138)

TurkeyPrincipal problems and policies in United States relations with Turkey (Documents 1139-1164)

South Asia:Multilateral Relations:Efforts to resolve the dispute between India and Pakistan over Kashmir; visit of Indian Prime Minister Nehru to the United States (Documents 1165-1231)

Afghanistan:Discussion with Afghanistan concerning Afghan requests for financial and military assistance (Documents 1232-1234)

Africa:Multilateral Relations:Conference at Tangier, Morocco, of American consular officials in North Africa, June 6–10, 1949 (Documents 1235-1236)

Ethiopia:Agreement between the United States and Ethiopia respecting a mutual aid settlement (Documents 1237-1237)

Union of South Africa:Discussion between the United States and the Union of South Africa concerning the adverse effect on United States shipping of import controls imposed by the Union of South Africa; matters related to the Union’s requests for United States financial and military assistance (Documents 1238-1242)

Index

Preface Preface

The late S. Everett Gleason supervised the initial planning and compilation of this volume. His successors as editor of Foreign Relations, Fredrick Aandahl (from 1972) and William Z. Slany (from 1975), directed the process of declassification and review and made the final editorial decisions.

Herbert A. Fine prepared the greater portion of the volume, including the sections on multilateral relations in the Near East and on Egypt, Iran, Israel, Kuwait, and Syria. Other members of the Historical Office also prepared sections: Mr. Slany (Greece, Turkey, and the Union of South Africa); Lee H. Burke (Saudi Arabia); and Mr. Aandahl, David H. Stauffer, and Frederic A. Greenhut (South Asia). Paul Claussen provided subsequent research, and Mr. Stauffer coordinated declassification and clearance. Margaret G. Martin and Ruth M. Worthing supplied editorial assistance. The technical editing of the volume was done by the Publishing and Reproduction Division (Willard M. McLaughlin, Chief), and Francis C. Prescott prepared the index.

Historians of the Department of Defense, including those of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, gave useful assistance which the editors acknowledge with appreciation. They also wish to recognize the cooperation of the National Security Council, the Department of Defense, and the Central Intelligence Agency, all of which facilitated declassification of papers for release in this publication.

David F. Trask
The Historian, Historical Office
Bureau of Public Affairs

Principles for the Compilation and Editing of “Foreign Relations”

The principles which guide the compilation and editing of Foreign Relations are stated in Department of State Regulation 2 FAM 1350 of June 15, 1961, a revision of the order approved on March 26, 1925, by Mr. Frank B. Kellogg, then Secretary of State. The text of the regulation, as further amended, is printed below:

t1350 Documentary Record of American Diplomacy

1351 Scope of Documentation

The publication Foreign Relations of the United States constitutes the official record of the foreign policy of the United States. These volumes include, subject to necessary security considerations, all documents needed to give a comprehensive record of the major foreign policy decisions within the range of the Department of State’s responsibilities, together with appropriate materials concerning the facts which contributed to the formulation of policies. When further material is needed to supplement the documentation in the Department’s files for a proper understanding of the relevant policies of the United States, such papers should be obtained from other Government agencies.

1352 Editorial Preparation

The basic documentary diplomatic record to be printed in Foreign Relations of the United States is edited by the Historical Office, Bureau of Public Affairs of the Department of State. The editing of the record is guided by the principles of historical objectivity. There may be no alteration of the text, no deletions without indicating where in the text the deletion is made, and no omission of facts which were of major importance in reaching a decision. Nothing may be omitted for the purpose of concealing or glossing over what might be regarded by some as a defect of policy. However, certain omissions of documents are permissible for the following reasons: a. To avoid publication of matters which would tend to impede current diplomatic negotiations or other business.

b. To condense the record and avoid repetition of needless details.

c. To preserve the confidence reposed in the Department by individuals and by foreign governments.

d. To avoid giving needless offense to other nationalities or individuals.

e. To eliminate personal opinions presented in despatches and not acted upon by the Department. To this consideration there is one qualification—in connection with major decisions it is desirable, where possible, to show the alternatives presented to the Department before the decision was made.

1353 Clearance

To obtain appropriate clearances of material to be published in Foreign Relations of the United States, the Historical Office: a. Refers to the appropriate policy offices of the Department and of other agencies of the Government such papers as appear to require policy clearance.

b. Refers to the appropriate foreign governments requests for permission to print as part of the diplomatic correspondence of the United States those previously unpublished documents which were originated by the foreign governments.

List of Abbreviations and Symbols List of Abbreviations and Symbols

Editor’s Note.—This list does not include standard abbreviations in common usage; unusual abbreviations of rare occurrence which are clarified at appropriate points; and those abbreviations and contractions which, although uncommon, are understandable from the context.

A-, airgram

Actel, series indicator for telegrams from Secretary of State Acheson while away from Washington

ActSec, Acting Secretary of State

AEC, Atomic Energy Commission

agam (agram), airgram

agit-prop, agitation and propaganda section of a Communist party

AIOC, Anglo-Iranian Oil Company

AL, Arab League

AL, Arab Legion (Transjordan)

AMAG, American Mission for Aid to Greece; also Amag, series indicator for telegrams from the Mission

Amb, Ambassador

Amcits, American citizens

AmEmb, American Embassy

AMINCO, American Independent Oil Company

ANE, Office of African and Near Eastern Affairs, Department of State

AP, Associated Press

ARAMCO, Arabian-American Oil Company

ArMish, American Military Mission with the Iranian Army

ASYG, Assistant Secretary-General of the United Nations

BalCom, United Nations Special Committee on the Balkans (see also UNSCOB); also Balcom, series indicator for telegrams to the United States Representative on that Committee

BBC, British Broadcasting Corporation

BC, Division of British Commonwealth Affairs, Department of State

BMEO, British Middle East Office

BMM, British Military Mission

BNA, Office of British Commonwealth and Northern European Affairs, Department of State

CC, Conciliation Commission (for Palestine)

CFM, Council of Foreign Ministers

CFP, designation for memoranda on combined forces planning

CFTC, Confédération Française des Travailleurs Chrétiens (French Confederation of Christian Workers)

CGT, Confédération Générale du Travail (General Confederation of Labor in France)

CIA, Central Intelligence Agency

CIGS, Chief of the Imperial General Staff (British)

C-in-C, Commander in Chief

CINCME, Commander in Chief, Middle East

CINCMED, Commander in Chief, British Naval Forces in the Mediterranean

CINCNELM, Commander in Chief, United States Naval Forces, Eastern Atlantic and Mediterranean

CIO, Congress of Industrial Organizations

cirtel, circular telegram

Combal, series indicator for telegrams from the United States Representative on the United Nations Special Committee on the Balkans

Cominform, Communist Information Bureau

Comkas, series indicator for telegrams from the United States Representative on the United Nations Commission for India and Pakistan

ConGen, Consulate General

Congram, Consulate airgram

Contel, Consulate telegram

COS, Chief(s) of Staff (British)

CP, Communist Party

CP, Division of Commercial Policy (after October 3, 1949, Commercial Policy Staff), Department of State

CPG, Communist Party of Greece

CPY, Communist Party of Yugoslavia

CRO, Commonwealth Relations Office (British)

CSGID, Ground Intelligence Division, General Staff, Office of the Chief of Staff, United States Army

DAB, Dhahran Airbase

DAF, Dhahran Airfield

DEF, Department of Defense

Delga, series indicator for telegrams from the United States Delegation at the United Nations General Assembly

Depair, Department of State airgram

Depcirgram, Department of State circular airgram

Depcirin, Department of State circular instruction

Depcirtel, Department of State circular telegram

Depinfotel, Department of State information telegram

Depintel, Department of State circular information telegram

Depreftel, Department of State reference telegram

Deptel, Department of State telegram

DG, Director General

DP, displaced person

DRN, Division of Research for Near East and Africa, Department of State

EAM, Ethnikon Apeleftherotikon Metopon (National Liberation Front), a resistance group controlled by the Communist Party of Greece

ECA, Economic Cooperation Administration

ED, Division of Investment and Economic Development (after October 3, 1949, Investment and Economic Development Staff), Department of State

EFFINDI, Economic and Financial Development Institute of the Near East

Embdes, Embassy dispatch

Embreftel, Embassy reference telegram

Embtel, Embassy telegram

ERP, European Recovery Program

ESM, United Nations Economic Survey Mission

EUR, Office (after October 3, 1949, Bureau) of European Affairs, Department of State

Exim (Ex-Im Bank), Export-Import Bank of Washington

FAO, Food and Agriculture Organization

FBI, Federal Bureau of Investigation, Department of Justice

FBO, Division of Foreign Buildings Operations, Department of State

FN, Division of Financial Affairs, Department of State

FO, Foreign Office

FonMin, Foreign Minister

FonOff, Foreign Office

For Sec, Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs (British)

FY, fiscal year

FYI, for your information

G, Deputy Under Secretary of State

GA, General Assembly of the United Nations

GAA, General Armistice Agreement

GADel, United States Delegation at the United Nations General Assembly; also Gadel, series indicator for telegrams to the United States Delegation

Gama, series indicator for telegrams to the American Mission for Aid to Greece

GA Res, United Nations General Assembly Resolution

GATT, General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade

GCA, ground control approach

GENMISH, United States Military Mission with the Iranian Gendarmerie

GGS, Greek General Staff

GNA, Greek National Army

GOI, Government of India

GOP, Government of Pakistan

GTI, Division (after October 3, 1949, Office) of Greek, Turkish and Iranian Affairs, Department of State

HICOM, High Commission(er) for Germany

HMG, His Majesty’s Government

HSO, Highest Staff Officer

IBI, Imperial Bank of Iran

IBRD, International Bank for Reconstruction and Development

ICAO, International Civil Aviation Organization

ICJ, International Court of Justice

ICRC, International Committee of the Red Cross

ICS, Israeli Chief of Staff

ILO, International Labor Organization

IMF, International Monetary Fund

IMRO, Internal Macedonian Revolutionary Organization

infotel, information telegram

intel, circular information telegram

IPC, Iraq Petroleum Company

IRO, International Refugee Organization

ITO, International Trade Organization

IZL, Irgun Zvai Leumi

J and K, Jammu and Kashmir

JCS, Joint Chiefs of Staff

Jlem, Jerusalem

JUSMAPG, Joint United States Military Advisory and Planning Group

JUSSGSA, Joint United States Survey Group to Saudi Arabia

Kascom, series indicator for telegrams to the United States Representative on the United Nations Commission for India and Pakistan

KKE, Kommounistikon Komma Ellados (Communist Party of Greece)

KOC, Kuwait Oil Company

L, Office of the Legal Adviser, Department of State

L/P, Office of the Assistant Legal Adviser for Political Affairs, Department of State

Legtel, Legation telegram

MA, Military Adviser (of the United Nations Commission for India and Pakistan)

MA, Military Attaché

MAC, Mixed Armistice Commission

MAP, Military Assistance Program

Martel, series indicator for telegrams from Secretary of State Marshall while away from Washington

MD, Munitions Division, Department of State

ME, Middle East

Mid, series indicator for telegrams from the Military Attaché in Greece

MilAd, Military Adviser (of the United Nations Commission for India and Pakistan)

MinFonAff, Ministry for Foreign Affairs

Mistel, Mission telegram

MP, Military Police

MR, map reference, involving a grid overprinted on maps to show location

MRP, Mouvement Républicain Populaire (French political party)

NAC, National Advisory Council on International Monetary and Financial Problems

NAC, North Atlantic Council

NAP, North Atlantic Pact

NATO, North Atlantic Treaty Organization

NDC, National Defense Corps (Greek)

NE, Division of Near Eastern Affairs, Department of State; or Near East

NEA, Office of Near Eastern and African Affairs (after October 3, 1949, Bureau of Near Eastern, South Asian, and African Affairs), Department of State

NEDA, Near East Development Agency

NEDI, Near East Development Institute

NERWA, Near East Relief and Works Agency

NESDA, Near East Settlement and Development Authority

niact, night action, communications indicator requiring attention by the recipient at any hour of the day or night

NME, National Military Establishment

NOF, Narodnoosloboditelniot front (Macedonian National Liberation Front)

NSC, National Security Council

OCI, Overseas Consultants, Inc.

OEEC, Organization for European Economic Cooperation

OFLC, Office of the Foreign Liquidation Commissioner, Department of State

OIR/GE, Special Adviser on Geography, Office of Intelligence Research, Department of State

PA, Plebiscite Administrator

Palun, series indicator for telegrams from the United States Delegation on the Conciliation Commission for Palestine

PCC, Palestine Conciliation Commission (United Nations); also series indicator for telegrams from the United States Delegation on the Conciliation Commission for Palestine

PED, Petroleum Division (after October 3, 1949, Petroleum Policy Staff), Department of State

PG, Persian Gulf

PGI, Provisional Government of Israel

PL, Public Law

PlebAd, Plebiscite Administrator

PM, Prime Minister

POL, petroleum, oil, and lubricants

PolComm, Political Committee

POW, Prisoner of War

PPS, designation for documents by the Policy Planning Staff, Department of State

PriMin, Prime Minister

PWOC, Pacific Western Oil Company

RAF, Royal Air Force (British)

reDeptel, regarding Department of State telegram

reEmbair, regarding Embassy airgram

reEmbtel, regarding Embassy telegram

refagram, reference airgram

refDeptel, reference Department of State telegram

refLegtel, reference Legation telegram

reftel, reference telegram

reMistel, regarding Mission telegram

Repto, series indicator for telegrams from the Special Representative in Europe for the Economic Cooperation Administration

reurad, regarding your radio message

RFC, Reconstruction Finance Corporation

RHAF, Royal Hellenic Air Force

RWRA, Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (United Nations)

S, Office of the Secretary of State

S/, designation for documents issued by the Security Council

S/CFA, Coordinator for Military Assistance Programs, in the Office of the Secretary of State

S/P, Policy Planning Staff, Department of State

S/S, Executive Secretariat, Department of State

SAG, Saudi Arabian Government

SANACC, State–Army–Navy–Air Force Coordinating Committee

SC, Security Council of the United Nations

SE, Division of Southern (after March 14, 1949, Southeast) European Affairs, Department of State

SOA, Division (after October 3, 1949, Office) of South Asian Affairs, Department of State

SYG, Secretary-General

TA, trade agreement

Tapline, Trans-Arabian Pipeline Company

TC, Truce Commission (in Palestine)

TC, Trusteeship Council of the United Nations

Telac, series indicator for telegrams to Secretary of State Acheson while away from Washington

TJ, Transjordan

Telmar, series indicator for telegrams to Secretary of State Marshall while away from Washington

Torep, series indicator for telegrams to the Special Representative in Europe for the Economic Cooperation Administration

TVA, Tennessee Valley Authority

U, Under Secretary of State

U/FW, Special Assistant to the Under Secretary of State for Fisheries and Wildlife

UGTT, Union Générale des Travailleurs Tunisiens, a large Moslem Federation

UKG, United Kingdom Government

UNA, Office (after October 3, 1949, Bureau) of United Nations Affairs, Department of State

UNCIP, United Nations Commission for India and Pakistan

UND, Division (after October 3, 1949, Office) of Dependent Area Affairs, Department of State

UNE, Division (after October 3, 1949, Office) of United) Nations Economic and Social Affairs, Department of State

UNESCO, United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization

UNGA, United Nations General Assembly

UNICEF, United Nations International Children’s Emergency Fund

UNP, Division of United Nations Political Affairs (after October 3, 1949, Office of United Nations Political and Security Affairs), Department of State

Unpal, series indicator for telegrams to the United States Delegation on the Conciliation Commission for Palestine

UNPCC, United Nations Palestine Conciliation Commission

UNRep, United Nations Representative

UNRPR, United Nations Relief for Palestine Refugees

UNRRA, United Nations Relief and Rehabilitation Administration

UNSCOB, United Nations Special Committee on the Balkans

UNSCOP, United Nations Special Committee on Palestine

UnSecy, Under Secretary of State

urdesp, your dispatch

urinfo, your information

urtel, your telegram

USAF, United States Air Force

USDA, United States Department of Agriculture

USDel, United States Delegation

USG, United States Government

USGADel, United States Delegation at the United Nations General Assembly

USIE, United States Information and Educational Exchange Program

USIS, United States Information Service

USMC, United States Marine Corps

USUN, United States Mission at the United Nations

USUNDel, United States Delegation at the United Nations

V-J day, the day of Japanses capitulation (September 2, 1945)

VOA, Voice of America

WAA, War Assets Administration

Weeka, weekly, inter-agency, summary analysis from United States diplomatic missions

WFTU, World Federation of Trade Unions

WHO, World Health Organization

The Near EastThe Near East

Contents

Consideration of basic United States security interests in the Near East and South Asia (Documents 1-7)

Talks at Washington between the United States and the United Kingdom on political and economic subjects concerning the Near East (Documents 8-13)

Participation by the United States in the development of the petroleum resources of the Near East (Documents 14-70)

Conference at Istanbul, Turkey, of American chiefs of mission in the Near East, November 26–29, 1949 (Documents 71-75)

Attitude of the United States toward the proposed political union of Syria and Iraq (Documents 76-80)

Interest of the United States in the revision of the Anglo-Egyptian treaty of August 26, 1936, and the future status of the Sudan; the issue of Egyptian participation in staff talks by United States and United Kingdom military officials concerning the defense of the Near East (Documents 81-104)

The United States and the conclusion of the Greek civil war; the Greek question at the United Nations (Documents 105-261)

Concern of the United States with the hostile attitude of the Soviet Union toward Iran; political support of Iran by the United States; the question of United States military and economic aid to Iran (Documents 262-340)

Interest of the United States in the Arab-Israeli controversy over the future status of Palestine; armistice agreements between Israel and its Arab neighbors; unsuccessful attempts to attain a final peace settlement in the area (Documents 341-1095)

Proposal of the United States to establish a consulate at Kuwait (Documents 1096-1098)

Interest of the United States in questions of economic and military assistance to Saudi Arabia; renewal of United States tenancy at the Dhahran airfield; elevation of the United States legation at Jidda to the status of an embassy (Documents 1099-1131)

Attitude of the United States toward recognition of governments in Syria following a succession of coups d’etat (Documents 1132-1138)

Principal problems and policies in United States relations with Turkey (Documents 1139-1164)

Multilateral Relations:Multilateral Relations:

Contents

Consideration of basic United States security interests in the Near East and South AsiaConsideration of basic United States security interests in the Near East and South Asia1

1 For documentation on overall aspects of United States national security policy, see vol. i, pp. 249 ff.

[1] Memorandum by the Chief of the Division of Greek, Turkish, and Iranian Affairs (Jernegan) to the Assistant Chief of the Division of South Asian Affairs (Thurston)

[Washington,] October 11, 1948.

840.20/10–1148

[2] Editorial Note

[3] Report by the SANACC Subcommittee for the Near and Middle East

[Washington,] 19 April 1949.

Lot 52 M 45 is a comprehensive collection of documents, minutes, agenda, memoranda, and related correspondence of the State-War-Navy Coordinating Committee (SWNCC) and the State-Army-Navy-Air Force Coordinating Committee (SANACC) for the years 1944–1949.

[4] Memorandum by Mr. Gordon P. Merriam of the Policy Planning Staff

[Washington,] June 13, 1949.

PPS Files, Lot 64 D 563, Record Copies

[5] Memorandum by the Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern and African Affairs (McGhee) to the Coordinator for Foreign Military Assistance Programs (Berkner)

[Washington,] August 16, 1949.

890.24/8–1649

[6] The Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern and African Affairs (McGhee) to the Assistant Secretary of State for Congressional Relations (Gross)

[Washington,] September 21, 1949.

840.20/8–1649

[7] Editorial Note

Memorandum by the Chief of the Division of Greek, Turkish, and Iranian Affairs (Jernegan) to the Assistant Chief of the Division of South Asian Affairs (Thurston) 840.20/10–1148

[Document 1]

Memorandum by the Chief of the Division of Greek, Turkish, and Iranian Affairs (Jernegan) to the Assistant Chief of the Division of South Asian Affairs (Thurston)2

secret [Washington,] October 11, 1948.

Last week Ray Hare3 suggested to me that it would be well for us to formulate our thoughts with regard to the assistance we are furnishing or may furnish to Greece, Turkey, Iran and Afghanistan.4 He pointed out that there is a tendency on the part of each of these four countries to compare itself with the others and to argue that because each is exposed to Soviet attack, it should receive substantial assistance from the United States of the same type and magnitude as that being provided one or more of the others. In particular, the Iranians insist that their country is at least as important as Turkey, strategically and politically, and should be aided on the same scale and in the same way, while the Afghans point to assistance allegedly being furnished Iran and argue that they should be treated on an equal basis because they, too, are a link in the chain of defense.

The attached rough draft is my attempt to compare the three GTI countries and to explain why all three are not receiving the same sort of aid and support from the United States. I think it would be useful for SOA to add a similar appreciation of the position of Afghanistan, after which we could sit down together and go over the whole thing to see whether it hangs together and would be of assistance in discussion with the countries concerned or in formulating future policies.

[Annex]

secret [Washington, undated.]

Subject: Analysis and Comparison of United States Policies with Regard to Aid to Greece, Turkey, Iran and Afghanistan

Fundamentally, American policy with respect to all four countries is the same. It is to support their independence and integrity, which is presently threatened by the Soviet Union and its satellites, and to further their economic and social development. However, the situation of each country differs in some respects from that of each of the others, and for this reason the implementation of our fundamental policy is different in each case. The following is an attempt to analyze the reasons for extending aid to each country and for the differences in the aid furnished to each.

Greece: During the period from 1944 to February 1947, Greece was kept alive only by the very large UNRRA supplies and the direct logistic support of the Greek forces by the British Government. On February 24, 1947 the British Government informed the United States that it could no longer continue to support the Greek forces.5 At about the same time the end of UNRRA operations came in sight. Without some substitute for these two supports, the Greek state would have collapsed completely, and unquestionably would have fallen under Communist control. The only possible source from which assistance on the required scale could have come was the United States.

The Department recognized this situation and further realized that to allow Greece to fall behind the Iron Curtain would be a political disaster of the first magnitude. The decision to furnish aid was taken as an emergency measure for purely political reasons.

Because of the dire economic straits into which Greece has fallen and because of the magnitude and persistence of the Communist-led guerrilla movement, it will be necessary to continue large-scale aid to Greece for a considerable period of time. This will be done on the economic side through the European Recovery Program, in which Greece is a participant by virtue of being a European state. Had it not been possible to include Greece in the ERP, it would have been necessary to continue the original special economic aid program, since Greece simply could not borrow or otherwise obtain the necessary funds from any other source. Special military aid to Greece (outside ERP) is being continued because the military threat to the economy of Greece and to the existence of a democratic government in Greece has not been removed. However, there are no plans for making Greece into a military bastion against Soviet aggression. It is our understanding that American military authorities do not consider it possible to strengthen Greece sufficiently to resist full-scale attack, no matter how much assistance might be provided. Consequently, direct military aid to Greece on any substantial scale will probably be terminated as soon as large-scale guerrilla activity is ended.

Turkey: The British decision to end aid to Greece was accompanied by a decision that the British Government could extend no assistance to Turkey. This did not have the same significance as in the case of Greece, because there had been little British aid extended to Turkey since the end of the war and the British plans for future assistance to Turkey were comparatively modest. The Turkish state could have maintained itself without special foreign aid. However, during the period preceding February, 1947 Turkey had been under severe Russian pressure6 and its government and people were justly afraid of becoming the object of even stronger pressures. They were therefore maintaining a large and costly but inefficient army which the nation could not afford if it were to progress economically and socially.

The American program of aid to Turkey was designed to fulfill three purposes: (1) To reassure the Turkish Government and people of the concrete determination of the United States to support Turkey against the Soviet Union and to prevent any feeling on the part of the Turks that they were being abandoned, such as might have been produced by the knowledge that British aid was not to be forthcoming and that there would be no substitute for it from another source.

(2) To improve the combat efficiency of the Turkish armed forces in order to deter the Soviet Union or its satellites from aggression against Turkey. At the same time, the strengthening of the Turkish forces was designed to increase the confidence of the Turkish people in their ability to defend themselves and so to increase their determination to resist the pressures short of war being brought against them by the USSR and its satellites.

(3) To release badly needed man power from the armed forces by increasing the mobility and fire power of those forces, thus enabling a smaller number of men to provide an equal or superior defense.

The objectives indicated have been achieved to a greater or less degree in each case. It is improbable that large-scale military aid to Turkey will be continued for very much longer. However, to avoid losing the benefits already gained and adversely affecting the morale of the Turkish people, it will probably be necessary and desirable to continue to provide military assistance on a small scale and to continue the military missions in Turkey for an indefinite period.

No program of direct economic aid to Turkey has been undertaken, because the Turkish economy has been in reasonably good shape and is in no danger of collapse. However, the need for economic development is plain, both to improve the standard of living of the people and to increase Turkey’s powers of resistance in the event of war. Any reduction in the present low standard of living of the Turkish people might create internal political stresses which would weaken the hitherto firm structure of the government and open the way to Communist penetration of the sort which has proven so dangerous in Greece. Turkey has been included in the ERP and will receive modest credits from that source. It can probably also obtain credits from the International Bank, as it has in the past from the Export-Import Bank, and the United States will support its requests for credits in all cases where the projects involved seem economically sound. It is not considered that the economic needs of Turkey are sufficiently serious to warrant outright grants for economic purposes.

Iran: American aid to Iran to date has consisted entirely of relatively small credits for the purchase of surplus military equipment, surplus merchant vessels, and similar items, plus technical advice furnished by military missions and civilian advisers. The Iranian Government has never requested aid of any other type, although the Shah and certain other individuals in the Government and outside it have expressed a desire to obtain military assistance of the same type as that being furnished to Turkey. The Iranian Ambassador has recently indicated that the Iranian Government may make a direct request in the near future for special assistance on the Turkish model.

The Iranian economy is extremely backward and needs improvement in virtually every direction. However, it is not in a state of crisis, being probably about as stable as at any period in recent years. There is, therefore, no need for urgent economic assistance of the type being provided to Greece. Furthermore, the Iranian trade situation and the financial resources of the Iranian Government are such that the country should be able to borrow from the International Bank and the Export-Import Bank as much capital as it could effectively utilize for economic development during the next few years. We are encouraging the Iranian Government to approach those sources and have assured it of our support for any properly justified requests it may make for credits.

At the present time, Iran is probably even more seriously menaced by the USSR than is Turkey. It has shown commendable firmness in the face of this menace. The Iranians who advocate direct military assistance to Iran by the United States point to these political facts in support of their argument. Superficially, an excellent case could be made for building up the Iranian armed forces through a program of American military assistance. There is no doubt that if Iran were to fall under Soviet control, the consequences would be nearly as serious as those which would be produced by the fall of Turkey. The whole of the Middle East and India would be exposed to Soviet attack while the greatest oil reserves in the world would either be in Soviet hands or very gravely exposed.

Nevertheless, there are reasons for refraining from any attempt to build up large-scale military forces in Iran. These reasons include: (1) The poverty of the country, which would make it economically impossible for the Government to support an army resembling that of Turkey, even if the external costs of equipment were borne entirely by the United States.

(2) The unstable character of the political situation in Iran. Even though most Iranian political leaders are favorable to the western powers and opposed to the policies of the Soviet Union, the determination of the Government to resist the USSR in a crisis could not be taken for granted.

(3) The relative remoteness of Iran from the United States would make it very difficult to support the Iranian Army in time of war. This being the case it would probably be a waste of our resources to make a heavy investment of them in time of peace and in an armed force which would have to be abandoned to its fate in time of war.

(4) It is understood that the greater part of our military resources will have to be concentrated on the strengthening of the western European countries, whose fall would be an even more serious blow to our security than the fall of Iran. It is more than doubtful that any large quantity of military supplies could be spared for Iran during the next two or three years.

(5) The relatively backward state of technical knowledge in the Iranian armed forces means that an enormous expenditure of time and effort, including the services of a large number of American military personnel, would have to be expended to train the Iranian forces in the use of modern weapons and equipment such as jet planes and radar.

(6) There is some reason to fear that a greatly strengthened army would be used by the Shah or ambitious military leaders as a means of imposing a dictatorship on the country. This fear is strong in some Iranian circles and contributes to the unfortunate political instability.

Consequently, it is our present belief that the best measures to assist Iran are to provide only sufficient military aid to insure the maintenance of internal security together with encouragement and assistance in sound projects of economic development which will improve the condition of the people and consequently the stability of the government. Our objective is a limited one: to make Iran sufficiently strong to prevent its collapse through Soviet penetration or pressures short of war. We do not believe that Iran could be made sufficiently strong to protect itself against open attack nor that the benefit to be realized from any delay which the Iranian forces might impose on a Soviet march through Iran would compensate for the diversion of American resources from other needs.

Afghanistan: 7 To date the United States has extended no direct aid to Afghanistan, on either a loan or a grant basis.* The Afghan Government, long desirous of receiving financial assistance from the United States, is only now preparing its request for a loan of something like forty-one million dollars from the Export-Import Bank for construction and development work.

A preliminary request for limited military assistance has recently been made. Action on this request must await the receipt of additional specific information concerning Afghanistan’s present military resources and future needs. Afghanistan’s military requirements were formerly supplied by the UK and the Government of India. Since partition, the Indian Government, while ostensibly honoring the prepartition arrangement, has furnished only a fraction of the normal annual quota of military supplies to Afghanistan.

The Afghan economy is undeveloped, almost totally lacking in industrial plant, with no railroads whatsoever and only rough roadways connecting the major cities and towns. The country is very mountainous and largely arid; development opportunities, while they indeed exist, are limited to improvement of transport and communications facilities, agricultural development (including irrigation), mineral exploitation and relatively small industrial plants.

Any extensive program of economic and military assistance to Afghanistan at this time is considered inadvisable for the following reasons: (1) Owing to limitations in man power and productive potential in the event of war, it is only on the basis of regional cooperation between Afghanistan, Iran, Pakistan and India that Afghanistan would be able to offer more than a token resistance to invasion from the North. The prospects for cooperation among these four countries at the present time are not promising.

(2) The undeveloped condition of the country and the lack of general education would make the equipping and training of a truly effective army, even a small one, for defense against external aggression expensive and difficult beyond the utility it would have as a delaying force, and beyond the Afghan Government’s ability to maintain it.

(3) The need for allocating our not unlimited resources to the first line of defense, i.e., Western Europe.

(4) Unlike Iran, Afghanistan is not now being subjected to overt political pressure from the USSR. The Soviet position seems to spring from a not unjustified confidence that Afghanistan could be occupied by Soviet troops within two weeks, and the preliminary “softening up” would be an unnecessary expense and provocation.

(5) The present government has maintained its stability for seventeen years. Although the country is faced with problems of inflation and great poverty, the economy is not in a critical condition and there is not yet a grave internal threat to the stability of the government.

For these reasons it is considered that assistance beyond a small loan for development purposes and assistance in buying military equipment to assure the Government’s ability to maintain internal order is not advisable at this time. Limited financial assistance through the Export-Import or World Bank would have the Department’s support.

In connection with assistance to Afghanistan in buying military equipment in the United States, the training of Afghan personnel to operate any equipment so acquired could most advantageously be given by the American firms supplying it. The Department should recommend that provisions for training be made a part of the purchase agreement.

A U.S. military mission to Afghanistan is considered inadvisable. The presence of such a mission would proclaim Afghanistan’s alliance with the West and its latent antagonism to the USSR to a degree which might well provoke overt action by the latter, and which would jeopardize present correct relations between the two countries.

To attempt to train Afghan personnel in U.S. service training schools is considered impracticable owing to the considerable lag between the Afghan’s general knowledge of motorized equipment and that of the average American trainee.

Afghan officials repeatedly stress the thought that stability and national morale require some recognizable indication that Afghanistan is not isolated from United States interest in the area; they point out that with changed conditions on their eastern and southern borders the government is less than ever able to cope with internal disorders on two or more fronts. They assert that they have definite proof that their integrity and independence are threatened.

The evidence and the views of Afghan leaders indicate that arms supply sufficient for the assurance of internal order would go far to meet a definite hazard to security and to offset the persistent feeling among Afghans that United States strategic interest stops at their frontiers. Deterioration in economic conditions which might enhance the opportunities for Soviet penetration may be cheeked by relatively modest financial assistance.

2 Addressed also to Richard S. Leach of the Division of South Asian Affairs. The text as typed included various passages that were subsequently crossed out. These and other drafting changes are not indicated here.

3 Raymond A. Hare, Director of the Office of Near Eastern and African Affairs.

4 For further documentation on the question of aid to Greece, Turkey, Iran, and Afghanistan, see pp. 227 [Pg. 227 is part of Doc. 105] ff., 1638 [Pg. 1638 includes portions of Doc. 1139 and Doc. 1140] ff., 471 [Pg. 471 is part of Doc. 262] ff., and 1777 [Pg. 1777 is part of Doc. 1232] ff., respectively.

5 For the text of the British aide-mémoire of February 21, 1947, handed to the Secretary of State on February 24, see Foreign Relations, 1947, vol. v, p. 32.

6 For documentation on the demands of the Soviet Union for the revision of the Turkish Straits régime and on other matters affecting Turkish-Soviet relations, see Foreign Relations, 1946, vol. vii, pp. 801 ff.

7 The pages on Afghanistan, numbered separately, were presumably added by the Division of South Asian Affairs, as recommended by Mr. Jernegan in the covering memorandum.

* In two eases prior to July, 1947, small grants-in-aid were given to American teachers in Afghanistan. [Footnote in the source text.]

Editorial Note [Document 2]

Editorial Note

In the final months of the negotiations between the United States and various Western European countries that culminated in the signing of the North Atlantic Treaty on April 4, the question arose of United States support for the security of Greece, Turkey, and Iran. As early as January 25, the Department of State had informed the Iranian Ambassador that it recognized that the United States must avoid giving a false impression that, by the commitment to Western Europe, it was abandoning Iran (see telegram 86, February 1, to Tehran, volume IV, page 62).

Consideration was given to issuing a formal United States declaration supporting the security of the three Near Eastern countries. On April 2, however, the Department informed the American embassies concerned that it had decided not to issue a formal declaration but to rely instead on previous and future public statements by President Truman, Secretary Acheson, and Foreign Secretary Bevin to reassure Greece, Turkey, and Iran of continued American and British interest in their security (see circular telegram of April 2, ibid., page 270).

Several additional documents bearing on the proposed declaration are printed in volume IV, between pages 62 and 270. Related documentation is also found in Department of State files under 840.20.

Report by the SANACC Subcommittee for the Near and Middle East SWNCC Files: Lot 52 M 451

[Document 3]

Report by the SANACC Subcommittee for the Near and Middle East 2

top secret [Washington,] 19 April 1949.

SANACC 360/14

Appraisal of U.S. National Interests in South Asia

the problem

1. To re-examine U.S. national and strategic interests in the countries of South Asia (Afghanistan, Pakistan, India,3 Burma, Nepal and Ceylon), and to determine the measures which should be undertaken in the implementation of established U.S. foreign policy for cooperating with these countries.

facts bearing on the problem

2. See Appendix “A”.

discussion

3. See Appendix “B”.

memorandum from joint chiefs of staff

4. See Appendix “C”.

conclusions

(The Joint Chiefs of Staff have expressed general agreement with the following conclusions which have military implications, i.e. 5.a, c and d (2). Paragraph 6. adopts essentially the JCS statement of our basic strategic objectives in South Asia. See Appendix “C”.)

5. The political, economic and strategic importance of the emerging South Asian countries to the U.S. is such that our national interests require: a. The orientation of South Asia toward the U.S. and other Western democracies, and away from the USSR. To this end we should endeavor, through diplomatic channels and through the media of our cultural and informational programs, to convince the South Asian governments and peoples that our international objectives are compatible with their national interests and worthy of their support. We should also, whenever possible and consistent with our global policies, endeavor to cooperate with the South Asian governments in the achievement of their legitimate international objectives.

b. Economic development in South Asia of a type which would not only help to provide foundations for more stable and democratic governments, friendly to the U.S., but also assist these countries to contribute to economic recovery in the Far East and throughout the world. To this end we should ascertain, as specifically as possible, and as contemplated in point four of the President’s inaugural address, the economic needs of South Asian countries and the extent to which our economic, technical and financial assistance to them can or should be broadened, with particular reference to increased food production, improved transportation facilities and additional exports of goods required for U.S. strategic stockpiling or to meet requirements for commodities in world short supply.

c. The maintenance of internal security within the countries of South Asia and their freedom from Communist domination. To this end we should re-examine our capabilities of providing military matériel to South Asia in the light of over-all requirements for U.S. military assistance. At the minimum we should endeavor to meet the legitimate requirements of spare parts and replacements for military equipment of U.S. origin already possessed by South Asian countries. See JCS comments contained in pars. 2 and 3, Appendix “C”.

d. Collaboration with the British in South Asia. To this end after determining our capabilities to extend economic and military assistance to the South Asian countries, we should discuss with the British (1) The economic position of South Asia, and the desirability and practicability of co-ordinated U.S. and U.K. economic policies with respect to the area, it being understood that no delimitation of spheres of influence or division of markets is contemplated.

(2) The military requirements of the South Asian countries for the maintenance of internal security, the extent to which the British can meet such of these requirements as must be provided from outside the area, and the implications for U.K. strategic interests in South Asia of possible U.S. military assistance to the countries of the area.

e. Cooperation among the nations of South Asia for constructive purposes. To this end U.S. assistance which may be extended to the South Asian countries should be utilized as far as practicable as an instrument to effect cooperation within the region, and we should endeavor to guide any regional or Asian movement which may develop in the direction of constructive participation in UN activities.

6. The basic strategic objectives of the U.S., with respect to the South Asian countries are: a. To prevent Soviet encroachment or domination;

b. To prevent the USSR from obtaining military support or assistance from these nations either directly or through the use of their facilities. (The problem of Soviet access to strategic resources in the area requires further study on a global basis);

c. To develop, without commitment to military action on our part, a cooperative attitude in these countries which would facilitate obtaining the use of areas or facilities which might be required by the Western democracies … for military operations against the USSR in the event of war; and

d. With reference to Pakistan, to favor commercial arrangements which would in emergency, facilitate development for operational use of base facilities in the Karachi–Lahore area.

recommendations

7. It is recommended that SANACC approve the foregoing conclusions and transmit them to the National Security Council for consideration.

8. It is further recommended that the conclusions of this study be considered in conjunction with similar appraisals of U.S. national interests in other areas related to South Asia, particularly Southeast Asia.4

Appendix “A”

Facts Bearing on the Problem

1. Until very recently the military and other requirements of the South Asian countries were either the direct or indirect responsibility of the British Government. Direct British control of most of these countries assured the British Commonwealth of Nations of access to the military potentials of the area, and the British-controlled Indian Army provided for its defense. Soviet influence was negligible in all the countries of South Asia, and U.S. national and strategic interests in the area were in some measure safeguarded by our close relations with the British.

2. With the transfer of British power to independent regimes in India, Pakistan, Burma and Ceylon during the past year, direct British control of, and responsibility for the South Asian countries was eliminated. However, through the continued membership of India, Pakistan and Ceylon in the Commonwealth, through specific defense provisions in the Anglo-Burmese treaty of October 1947 and through manifold economic and cultural contacts, the British continue to play an important role in South Asia. Since the reduction in British control and the consequent weakening of the safeguards upon which the U.S. formerly relied, Soviet influence has increased in these countries and the USSR is offering some of them opportunities of purchasing light industrial equipment and arms from Czechoslovakia.

3. Although the South Asian countries would like to maintain strict neutrality as between the U.S. and the USSR, the hard fact of Soviet inability to give them substantial material aid has caused them to look to the U.S. for economic and military cooperation. They have made numerous informal requests for our assistance, and although their wants are huge, their informal approaches, with some exceptions, have been realistic. We have at present an unusual opportunity to maintain and strengthen the immediate outlay of U.S. resources. We must recognize that, should we not provide at least the minimum assistance deemed essential by the countries of the area, South Asia might give effect to its predilection for strict neutrality visa-à-vis the U.S. and the USSR or, at worst, it might fall into the Soviet orbit. In either event we should find it difficult to prevent the countries of the area from developing political and economic principles incompatible with our own, and should war come, we might find ourselves denied access to the raw materials, manpower, limited industrial capacity and possible bases of South Asia.

4. We have accordingly recognized that the orientation of the governments and peoples of South Asia toward the U.S. and away from the USSR is an essential element of our political and economic objectives with respect to the area, and we have formulated, in general terms, a policy of economic and political cooperation with the South Asian countries.

5. (Deleted in view of paragraphs 4, 5 and 6 of Appendix “C”, Memorandum from the Joint Chiefs of Staff. See also paragraph 6 under Conclusions and section headed “10. Joint Chiefs of Staff Summary of Strategic Considerations” in Appendix “B”, Discussion.)

6. Recent developments in China, which point to the probability that the greater part or even the whole of China may fall under the domination of the Chinese Communists, increase our interest in and possible future dependence on South Asia, particularly India and Pakistan. If we are to lose access to Chinese territory, it is the more important for us to prevent the extension of Soviet influence in South Asia and to retain this area as a Western salient on the Asian continent.

7. India’s convocation of an Asian conference on Indonesia held in New Delhi in January 19495 may prove to be a significant step in the oft-rumored formation of an Asian bloc. Although such a bloc would provide a medium for the expression of opinions of a type subject to exploitation by Moscow and apt to exacerbate existing differences between the Orient and the Occident, attempts on our part to prevent its formation would probably be ineffective and would certainly intensify anti-U.S. sentiment in Asia. Our efforts would be more fruitful if directed toward impressing upon India, now in the leading position, and the other Asian nations the importance of acting within the framework of the UN and of avoiding immoderate emphasis on alleged racial issues.

Appendix “B”

Discussion

1. effects of the british withdrawal

The deep-rooted political uncertainties which effected the British withdrawal of power from the South Asian countries have led to an over-all situation of near-chaos in many parts of the area. Burma is presently embroiled in civil strife. India and Pakistan have just passed through unparalleled communal disorders and are still engaged in undeclared warfare in Kashmir. Pakistan has inherited responsibility for the defense of the strategic North West (Afghan and Iranian) Frontier, but is without the military means of providing an adequate defense. Afghanistan, whose position has always rested on the balance of Russian and British power, has been left isolated on the Soviet frontier without the counterbalance of British power behind it; while at the same time Afghan leaders have raised issues regarding the status of the North West Frontier tribes which have adversely affected relations with Pakistan.

In the process of this political upheaval the economies of these countries have been seriously set back, recovery is handicapped by the resulting trade dislocations, and the need for outside assistance in many fields has become strikingly apparent.

Concurrently with this political and economic deterioration the nationalist movements in the South Asian countries have grown strong enough to make it clear that the British will probably never again attempt to impose their will by force. In a negative sense, therefore, these nationalist movements must be considered the military equals of British power within this area, since they can deny access to their territory and resources. Whether the present membership of Pakistan and, more particularly, India, in the Commonwealth will continue remains to be seen; but in any event this new balance of power is leading to new political and economic patterns and possibly to tacit military alliances outside the Commonwealth. Old values are being changed and new ones sought. New friendships are being formed. The new political leaders are seeking assistance and support, and it is largely on the basis of the responses which they receive that friendship is being measured, and that new alliances will come into being. Some of the leaders of the South Asian countries have assumed, unrealistically, that their power to force the British to negotiate with them was proof they could stand alone as independent states and discharge all their national and international obligations. The past year has shown, however, that they must of necessity either turn for assistance to the Western powers, of which they now accept the U.S. as leader, or that eventually they might be drawn into the Soviet orbit. Even if they were to create the regional bloc for which there is some popular demand in South Asia, and attempt to adhere to a neutral course between the U.S. and the USSR, such a regional organization would probably in time be drawn into the orbit of either the Western or the Soviet power groups. As in other areas of the world, therefore, whether we will or not, we are here becoming engaged in a competition with the USSR for the favor and resources of South Asia. The leaders of the South Asian countries are presently looking in both directions. It is in the light of these developments, and of the very considerable economic and military importance of South Asia, that U.S. national and strategic interests in, and policy towards these countries should be critically re-examined. The concentration of power in the hands of inexperienced leaders in these countries demands of us the greatest wisdom and forbearance in dealing with them. The great danger to us is in not taking and implementing positions that will enable us to achieve our objectives and will assure us of their friendship and support.

2. soviet interests in south asia

In telegram No. 3304 of December 1, 1947 the Embassy in Moscow, in discussing a lengthy lead article in the important Soviet publication “World Economics and World Politics”, highlighted the possibilities with respect to Soviet interests in India and South Asia as follows:

“This authoritative restatement of Communist doctrine may well portend a shift in major Kremlin efforts towards the East. It seems to reflect loss of confidence in imminence of an economic crisis in USA and in possibilities of further Soviet gain in Europe in the face of Marshall Plan developments and growing European antagonism to Soviet aggressive tactics. If Europe can indeed be held firm and if we become deeply committed on the continent in the process, we may then see the Kremlin turn to direct development and exploitation of what Stalin termed the ‘great reserves of the revolution in the colonies and dependent countries’.”6

More recent developments indicate that the Kremlin is at least preparing the way for greater Communist activity in South Asia. Within the past year the USSR has established an Embassy in New Delhi which is reported to have become a focal point of contact with subversive Communist elements in India. The Soviets have entered into agreements to establish diplomatic missions in Pakistan and Burma, and continue to maintain an active Embassy in Afghanistan. Soviet provocateurs have been intermittently active in northern Afghanistan, and agents of the Soviet Embassy in Kabul reportedly have been in contact with the Afghan tribes of the North West Frontier.

In recent years Soviet trade with South Asian countries has been confined to imports of such products as jute and jute manufactures, shellac, graphite, wool, tea and peanuts. Two trade agreements have been concluded between the USSR and Afghanistan since the war, and India and Pakistan have entered into commodity barter arrangements with the Soviets. The USSR has attempted, thus far without success, to make an agreement with Ceylon for the bulk purchase of that country’s rubber production. A Czechoslovakian technical commission has visited India, Pakistan and Afghanistan to arrange for the setting up of Czechoslovak industries; a number of Czech nationals have recently been employed in Afghanistan and Pakistan; and there are indications that the South Asian countries have been encouraged to think that arms, ammunition and the machinery for their manufacture might be available from Czechoslovakia. Yugoslavia, Hungary, Poland and Rumania are other satellite countries which have shown an interest in developing diplomatic and trade relations with South Asia.

In various organizations of the United Nations, Soviet representatives have attempted, often with a degree of success, to create an alignment between the USSR and the South Asian countries on various UN questions pertaining to racial discrimination, imperialism, trusteeship, etc.

Through its instruments, the various Communist Parties in the South Asian countries, the USSR has concentrated its efforts in South Asia on a campaign of virulent anti-Western propaganda aimed particularly against the U.S. and Great Britain. This propaganda is widely circulated in South Asia and appears in various expressions of public opinion, ranging from the extreme left to considerably right of center. All possible means have been utilized to build up popular support among workers, peasants, and communal refugees to achieve Communist objectives and discredit political leaders not amenable to Soviet aims. In India, industrial strikes and unrest, coupled with increasingly hostile attacks on the Nehru Government, have been manifestations of Communist activity; while in Burma the Communists are engaged in open insurrection against the Government of Burma.

The Soviets have advantages over us in this developing struggle for South Asia. The political foment and economic distress obtaining in most of the South Asian countries, combined with their weak military defenses, make this area particularly susceptible to Communist penetration. Soviet authorities are keenly aware of the issues involved and of the anti-foreign and anti-imperialist temper of the people which predisposes them to suspect the motives and objectives of the Western powers. Since there was no direct Soviet contact with any of these countries, except Afghanistan, prior to the withdrawal of the British, no disillusion or suspicion of Communist doctrine has matured among the people. To most of these people, therefore, Communist propaganda still glitters untarnished and attractive.

We also have advantages over the Soviets. Among the more enlightened of these peoples our traditional sympathy for dependent countries has left a legacy of trust and good will, though the positions we have until very recently taken with respect to national movements in Indochina and Indonesia have weakened the effectiveness of this legacy. Among the educated classes, particularly in India, many of the younger leaders were educated in the U.S. and have retained an affection for this country. The U.S. is at present the outstanding or only source of the capital goods, technical know-how and financial support which these countries desire for their economic development. In the military sphere the principal armies of South Asia are now equipped largely with British and U.S. material, thus having effected military standardization with the Western democracies; and so long as they remain dependent upon us for their continuing requirements it is unlikely that they would or could turn against us. Due to their traditional religious-social order, which is the antithesis of Communism, many of the peoples of South Asia are naturally resistant to the Communist doctrine. This influence is being revealed in India where some of the provincial governments have declared the Communist Party illegal and arrested Party leaders.

3. importance of south asia to u.s. national interest

While it is beyond the scope of this paper comprehensively to estimate the economic and military potentials of the South Asian countries, we believe that their magnitude is such that the loss to the U.S. of access to the raw materials and present and possible productive capacity, manpower and military bases of this area, or Communist control of the area and its vast population, would gravely affect the security of the U.S. Such an eventuality would prevent the development in these countries of political and economic principles compatible with our own and would thus adversely affect our future trade and investment relationships with these countries. Moreover, any substantial decrease in South Asian exports to Europe might also have an adverse effect on the European Recovery Program. The following facts appear to support this generalization.

a. Strategic importance

The geographical position of South Asia is such that, if the economic and military potentials of the area were more fully developed, it could dominate the region of the Indian Ocean arid exert a strong influence also on the Middle East, Central Asia and the Far East. The Indian subcontinent, with its several good ports in India and Pakistan, is readily accessible to us by sea. The sea lanes leading to these ports are through waters which are presumed to be fairly safe to us from attack by Soviet air or naval forces. The best rail, motor and air transport system in Asia leads from these ports and serves the zone of the interior. The defensive position of the interior, against ground movement of Soviet forces from Central Asia, is favored by mountain ranges which form one of the most formidable natural barriers on earth. The strategic passes through these mountains, most of which occur in Afghanistan, are presently controlled by an armed population which alone is capable of Creating some delay against Soviet military penetration. During the recent war the air bases of eastern India and Burma proved of importance in carrying the war to the enemy in the Far East; and so long as the defense of the Afghan frontier remains secure to us the air bases at Karachi, Lahore, Rawalpindi and Peshawar might prove equally important in conducting air operations against the industrial areas of the Soviet Heartland, or in defending Middle East oil.

[Here follow subparagraphs b and c, dealing with “Military (Manpower) Potential” and “Economic Potential”, respectively.]

4. present economic and financial requirements of south asia

The hope of economic progress in the countries of South Asia is generally related to their ability to maintain, or in the case of Burma restore, law and order, and to mobilize their own resources, and to their further needs for capital goods, technical skills and dollars. These needs cannot yet be described in detail in terms of the volume of imports or of the outside financing required. The hopes and plans of these countries appear greatly to exceed the realities of early accomplishment. More investigation and evaluation would be necessary before the economic desires prevalent in South Asia could be formulated in terms of individual need and projects arranged in accordance with practically conceived plans. Some assistance in this task may be provided by various working parties of the Economic Commission for Asia and the Far East, of which the U.S. is a member. Until this and related work is completed, there are inadequate bases for appraising the magnitude of the economic and financial requirements of the area in realistic terms. Furthermore, such an appraisal must include consideration of the practical bases on which economic cooperation can be carried forward, as the fear of foreign economic “domination” is widespread in this area, where U.S. private capital has found few favorable conditions for entry.

In the case of India, in addition to the primary need for capital goods, the most serious problem impinging directly upon economic relations with the U.S. is the deficit which the Indian economy is experiencing in its transactions with the dollar area. Although historically India has exported more to the U.S. than it has imported from the U.S., the post-war demand for consumer and capital goods has reversed the pre-war trade pattern to the point where India suffered an adverse balance of payments with the U.S. in 1947 amounting to approximately $200,000,000. India has attempted to meet this problem by restricting imports, by drawing on the central dollar reserves of the sterling area, and by drawing against its International Monetary Fund quota of $400,000,000. Of these practices a severely restricted import policy is counter to our concept of expanding multilateral trade, and substantial drawings on the central dollar reserves of the sterling area are opposed to our desire to maintain the financial stability of the U.K.

In Pakistan, as in India, dollar requirements are met out of earnings plus drafts on the sterling dollar pool. In its trade with the U.S., Pakistan is presently earning a small dollar surplus; but this is due to import restrictions on all non-essential goods, and this surplus would soon turn into a serious deficit should Pakistan purchase more of the capital goods so badly needed for essential development. As in the case of India, the practice of restricting imports and substantial drawing on the sterling dollar pool is contrary to our concept of expanding multilateral trade and maintaining the financial stability of the U.K. Pakistan’s requirements differ from India’s in that Pakistan is primarily agrarian and its basic industry has yet to be established. Pakistan’s need for capital goods, therefore, is proportionately greater. This, plus its military requirements, and the urgent desire to place their new country on a firm over-all financial footing was the basis of the Pakistan Government’s informal request in late 1947 for a U.S. Government loan7 of some 2,000,000,000 [200,000,000?]. Pakistan’s economic position, being unbalanced as between industry and agriculture, also more clearly emphasizes the need for interregional cooperation and especially for Indo-Pakistan economic cooperation.

In Afghanistan, also, there is the problem of financing the essential imports of consumer goods and military stores while proceeding with development plans. Afghan consumer goods are normally imported largely from India and Pakistan, where they are now being procured and balances settled through the sale of dollars because poor transport and marketing facilities have recently impeded the sale of Afghan products and the accumulation of adequate rupee exchange. Present development plans call for an increase of agricultural output, establishment of light industries, development of natural resources and improvement of communications and transport; several projects have already been undertaken by an American firm which requires dollar payments. Nearly 95% of Afghanistan’s dollar earnings is derived from the sale of Karakul furs in the U.S., and this fluctuates with the fur market. In 1946 they received from this source $34,000,000; in 1947 less than $2,000,000; and in the first half of 1948 about $29,000,000. Their main economic requirements, therefore, are for better inter-regional economic cooperation to provide the rupee exchange necessary to obtain consumer goods in India and Pakistan with local currencies, and for some U.S. financial assistance to insure completion of their development projects. It is mainly for this latter purpose that the Afghan Government has approached us to determine the prospects of a U.S. loan.

Since Burma has become so embroiled in civil strife, the trend in that country has been more toward economic disintegration and requests for military supplies than for the means of economic rehabilitation and development. Pending the outcome of this conflict, therefore, an appraisal of Burma’s economic and financial requirements, and of our interest in furnishing them, cannot well be made. As a member of the sterling area Burma now obtains most of its dollars from the central reserves of the U.K. Since Burma is normally the largest world exporter of rice, and may again become an important world source of tungsten, tin, lead and zinc—all of which are now in short supply—Burma might obtain additional dollars if the U.S. were to purchase these materials.

Nepal has announced its intention to develop local industries and agriculture, and is negotiating with American firms for an economic survey of the country as the first step toward such development. Nepal’s principal economic requirement is for the dollar exchange needed to carry out this program. Currently, Nepal is dependent on India for such limited dollar exchange as it obtains; and Nepal now wishes to enter into an arrangement whereby all foreign exchange arising out of the export of Nepalese products through India would accrue to Nepal.

Ceylon’s present dollar position is comparatively good, and this country has requested several types of U.S. technical assistance.

In accordance with our general policies of promoting an expanded multilateral world trade, of recognizing the world-wide need for accelerated economic development and of upholding the principles of international cooperation, this Government desires, within the limits of its resources, to assist the countries of South Asia to raise their standards of living and to increase their productive capacities. This desire is consonant with one of the principal elements of our objectives in this area: to maintain the orientation of these countries towards the U.S. and Western democracies and away from the USSR. It is likewise consistent with our interest in obtaining, within the next few years, maximum supplies of strategic materials from South Asia, and it reflects the belief that capital exports to these countries can in some measure prove to be a stabilizing influence on the level of U.S. production and employment by increasing or retaining foreign markets for U.S. goods.

As yet we have not included the South Asian countries in that limited group to whose needs we are giving specially favorable consideration, because the development needs of all areas now carry a lower priority for short supplies than do reconstruction and rehabilitation needs. Until now we have held that private investment should be the principal means of U.S. financial assistance to these countries for the further development of their economy. We have held that, when private capital is not available, we should lend support to their applications for loans from the International Bank or the Export-Import Bank for individual development projects, but that our interests in South Asia, in view of our broader commitments in other theaters, do not warrant special treatment with respect to the supply of capital goods or direct U.S. Government credits which require Congressional approval. We are endeavoring, however, to assist the South Asian countries by making available, from public and private sources, technical assistance for the improvement and rehabilitation of their economies.

It is present U.S. policy to permit the export of goods subject to official quotas (none of which represents an obligation on suppliers) in the largest possible quantities consistent with the effective functioning of our domestic economy. The Secretary General of the Economic Commission for Asia and the Far East has been informed of this policy, in answer to the recent appeal by a majority of the Commission to make available to Asian countries “an adequate share” of our production of capital goods and basic materials. Furthermore, an increased world production of essential commodities (including capital goods) is expected to result from the rehabilitation and recovery of Europe and certain Far Eastern countries, to which the U.S. is now contributing an unprecedented volume of financial assistance, and such an increase will materially help to establish the basis in South Asia for economic progress. This progress, in turn, may result in improved conditions that will provide foundations for stable democratic governments, friendly to the U.S.

Meanwhile, as U.S. resources are limited, it is urgent that we reappraise the existing financial and other means at our disposal and explore the possibilities of utilizing additional methods of economic assistance to the area, in order to determine the extent and character of the aid which is consonant with our own interests.

In formulating and carrying out any such assistance, we should avoid adopting procedures or imposing conditions which would afford our critics in and outside the area a basis for charging us with attempts at “economic domination”. We should utilize to the fullest possible extent the facilities of the U.S. Information Service to explain to the people of South Asia the nature of our programs and objectives.

5. present military requirements of south asia

Out of a total population of more than 440,000,000 the total strength of the ground forces of all the South Asian countries has recently stood only at about 602,000 regular troops, plus various irregular security forces. By countries these forces are distributed approximately as follows: Population Ground Forces

Afghanistan 11,000,000 72,000

Pakistan 75,000,000 137,000

India 317,690,000 * 310,000

Burma 15,000,000 † 34, 000

Nepal 5,600,000 45,000

Ceylon 6,500,000 4,000

Due to the political unrest which now pervades the area and to the presence of militant forces within the area (Afghan tribal forces, Indian States forces, Gurkha warrior castes, etc.), which are not yet fully welded to the merging national authorities, these military forces of the South Asian countries are barely sufficient to meet existing demands for the maintenance of internal security. It should be realized that a collapse of law and order throughout the area, similar to that already evident in large parts of Burma, would seriously affect our national interests. Exports of strategic materials might be drastically reduced or stopped altogether. Trade in general would be curtailed, and foreign investments in South Asia would be jeopardized. Progressive economic and political development in the area would cease, and the stage would be set for the seizure of power by extremist elements of the left or right. The impact would be felt not only on our own economy and strategic considerations, but also in the countries of the Commonwealth and Western Europe. Law and order need not collapse if the South Asian governments, which enjoy solid bases of popular support, have the military means to put down local disturbances and contain existing subversive elements and tribal groups. We should weigh carefully the possible consequences of withholding from these governments the minimum essential supplies of foreign military matériel required for the maintenance of internal security.

We should consider also the position of the South Asian countries vis-à-vis powerful aggressors from outside the area. It is evident that these countries, singly or jointly, could not in the foreseeable future effectively resist a full-scale invasion by the USSR. However, in view of the natural strategic advantages of the area, the military strength of Afghanistan, Pakistan and India might be built up to a point which would enable them to contain a small-scale attack designed to seize certain key points such as the port of Karachi and the airfields of northern Pakistan. This would have the negative virtue of requiring the USSR to make a major effort to achieve its objectives. In the light of the existing commitments of the U.S. and the U.K., and the strained relations among Afghanistan, Pakistan and India, it would be unrealistic to propose the necessary strengthening of the armed forces of the three South Asian countries at present. The possibilities should, however, be noted.

The considerations set forth in the two preceding paragraphs notwithstanding, the present trend, owing to the lack of replacement equipment, spare parts, etc., is toward a decrease of either the efficiency or the strength of the military establishments of the South Asian governments. None of the countries in the area is yet able fully to supply its own armies with equipment of its own manufacture. All are presently equipped with matériel formerly obtained from British and U.S. sources. To maintain their present strength, as their stores become exhausted, they are now turning to the U.S. as a primary source of supply. To the extent that the South Asian countries seek spare parts for and replacements of matériel of U.S. origin, their requests merit careful consideration in the light of SANACC 360/5, approved July 26, 1948,8 which points out the importance of recognizing the continuing spare part and replacement needs of countries which have obtained U.S. matériel. Should the cost of such spare parts and replacements be so great as to constitute a serious diversion from the recipient country’s funds for economic development it might be necessary, as also contemplated in SANACC 360/5, to give consideration to extending U.S. financial assistance to the countries so affected.

6. requests of south asian countries for u.s. military matériel and assistance

Requests thus far received from the countries of South Asia for U.S. Military matériel and assistance, and the action taken thereon, are as follows:

a. Afghanistan

For all practical purposes Afghanistan is almost totally dependent on foreign sources for its military requirements. Up to now the Afghan Army has obtained from the U.S. only surplus hospital and non-combatant equipment, through the purchase for cash of U.S. surplus property in India in 1945. In June of 1946 the Afghans approached the U.S. for other military supplies. A further approach was made in 1947, … In April 1948 they informally requested a U.S. loan of $100,000,000 to finance a 12-year economic development program and to provide for their military requirements, and although this figure has since been reduced, the request is still pending. As to their military requirements alone, they informed our Embassy in Kabul on July 29, 1948 that for internal security they were presently in need of approximately 24 to 36 light tanks, 120 4.2 inch mortars, 40 AT–6 type aircraft, and matériel to equip one motorized division of 4,000 to 6,000 men. Since none of these Afghan requirements has yet been presented to us as formal requests, no positive action has been taken on these approaches.

b. India

At present India is able to produce large quantities of small arms and ammunition, uniforms and leather equipment, but is largely dependent on foreign sources for planes, tanks, ships, heavy ordnance, etc. Of these latter categories the Indian Army is partly equipped with U.S. lend-lease and surplus property material. During 1948 the Indian Military Attaché, Col. Kaul, approached the Departments of State and Army to obtain medium bombers and other military equipment for the Indian armed forces. He wished to order 12 B–25 Mitchell bombers for delivery in May 1948 and 31 additional B–25’s for subsequent delivery. He also informally indicated the interest of the Government of India in long-term military collaboration between India and the U.S.

At the time of Col. Kaul’s approach the Department of State was in the final stage of reaching its determination, subsequently approved by the President, that in view of the threat of war between India and Pakistan over Kashmir it was not consonant with the foreign policy of the U.S., while this issue was under review by the UN, to authorize the sale or transfer of combat matériel, which would increase existing military strength, to either India or Pakistan9 pending a clarification of the situation. At the same time the Department of State was advised by the Department of the Air Force that no medium bombers of the type desired by India were then available as surplus to the needs of the U.S. military establishment. It was accordingly decided to discourage Col. Kaul from making further requests of this nature.

On April 2 the Deputy Foreign Minister of India, Sir Girja Bajpai, called at the Department of State10 and stated that, with the full knowledge and authority of Prime Minister Nehru, he would like to propose the sending of an Indian military mission to the U.S. at an early date to explore the possibilities of obtaining military equipment in this country. In making this request he gave assurances that the principles for which the U.S. and India both stand are identical and that India would under no circumstances align itself with the Soviet Union in a war between that country and the U.S. Sir Girja was informed that the proposal would be considered; but he was reminded that, not only because of the present U.S. arms policy with respect to, India and Pakistan but also because of our own present arms requirements, it might not be feasible to do very much for India.11

Recently members of the Indian Embassy, including the Indian Military Attaché, have informally approached the State Department to express a desire for a greater exchange of military information between the two countries. This problem has been partly met by: (1) having India classified upwards to the category of countries receiving “restricted” U.S. military information; (2) making a deliberate effort to furnish the Indian Military Attaché here with relatively harmless but somewhat impressive military information; and (3) urging the U.S. Army to continue Indian officer students in U.S. Army Service Schools.

On June 7, 1948, Mr. Chopra, First Secretary, Embassy of India, requested informally the probable reaction of the U.S. Government to a formal request from India to import arms and ammunition from the U.S. to be used exclusively in the Indian military training program.12 He stated that the Government of India would be prepared to give formal assurance that the arms and ammunition imported would in fact be used for training and would under no circumstances be employed in Kashmir. The items requested included: 75 mm. how 209,000 rounds

75 mm. gun 100,000 ”

75 mm. gun, smoke 46,000 ”

37 mm. HE 150,000 ”

37 mm. Cannister 32,000 ”

30 cal. Browning (mixed belts) 12,000,000 ”

Grenade, rifle, practice 17,000 ”

The Department of the Army has determined that these quantities are completely reasonable and that they represent on a per capita basis approximately 75% of the amounts normally required by U.S. troops for training purposes. In reply to this request representatives of the Indian Embassy were informed on July 29 that the supply of this ammunition from U.S. sources could not be approved because it would be in violation of the U.S. policy not to supply war matériel to either India or Pakistan until the situation in Kashmir had clarified.

On July 30, 1948 the Indian representatives inquired whether the U.S. included spare parts for out-dated Stuart tanks among those items which were excluded for export from the U.S. to India. They were informed in November 1948 that the export of spare parts for equipment of U.S. origin was not precluded.13 The Indians have stated that while the Government of India understands the U.S. position with regard to such temporary situations as the Kashmir problem, it was also faced with long-range as well as short-range military planning, and the time was coming when India, in order to evolve its long-range planning, would have to know “where it stood” with the U.S. Government in the over-all evaluation of what international contribution might be made by India in the event of further deterioration in international relations in general.

c. Pakistan

The new Government of Pakistan, which came into being with no munitions industry and only a modicum of equipment from Indian stores, approached the Department of State in October–November 1947 with the request for U.S. financial aid over the next 5-year period to include, inter alia, the following defense items:

Army—$170,000,000. To provide for a regular army of 100,000 to consist of one armored division, five infantry divisions partly motorized, and a small cavalry establishment; and to provide for replacement and remodeling of existing arms and equipment, supplies and ammunition, equipment for ordnance factories, raw materials and payment of personnel.

Air Force—$75,000,000. To provide for twelve fighter squadrons (150 planes), four fighter reconnaissance squadrons (70 planes), three bomber squadrons (50 planes), four transport squadrons (50 planes), four training wings (200 planes), together with necessary replacements, ground facilities, and payment of personnel.

Navy—$60,000,000. To provide for four light cruisers, sixteen destroyers, four corvettes, twelve coast guard gunboats, three submarines, 120,000 tons miscellaneous facilities with necessary ammunition, base equipment, etc.

It was obvious from this approach that Pakistan was thinking in terms of the U.S. as a primary source of military strength, and that this would involve virtual U.S. military responsibility for the new dominion. Since no legal authority existed for granting U.S. financial aid to Pakistan for this purpose, and since the time was not considered opportune for seeking such authority, our reply to this Pakistan request was negative. Furthermore, it was not yet clear what role the British were to fulfill in the military affairs of the new dominions, nor what U.S. military policy toward South Asia would eventually be. Of the other requests received at that time for financial aid, however, a WAA credit of $10,000,000 was granted Pakistan for medicine and other material for refugee relief.

Since that time we have received requests from the Pakistan Embassy for 30—AT–6 training planes, spare parts for AT–6 planes already possessed by the Pakistan Air Force, and for information regarding sources in this country where the Government of Pakistan might obtain maintenance spares for Stuart tanks, Sherman tanks, and tracked carriers which are now possessed by the Pakistan Army. After considerable deliberation, it was finally determined that, provided suitable guarantees were given, the sale of training planes and parts of the type requested was not incompatible with the informal embargo mentioned above in connection with India, and accordingly the Department of State has approved export licenses for these items. The Pakistan Embassy was informed in November 1948 that the exports of spare parts for equipment of U.S. origin was not precluded.

In May 1948 the British Government requested that the U.S. approve the transfer, from British lend-lease stores to the Government of Pakistan, of 5,198,000 rounds of .30 caliber and 1,091,000 rounds of .50 caliber ammunition. This request was refused because it was considered that such a transfer would violate the informal arms embargo mentioned above.

d. Burma

Burma has no munitions industry, and the Burmese Government recently found itself lacking adequate supplies of automatic weapons, small arms, ammunition, communications equipment and aircraft for its campaign against insurgent Communists. In his telegram No. 130 of April 3, 1948,14 Ambassador Huddle informed the Department of State that the Burmese Foreign Minister had requested U.S. assistance to the extent of providing six fighter bombers, 400 field wireless sets, 1,000 Thompson sub-machine guns or Sten guns and 30 armored cars. The Ambassador suggested that the Foreign Minister try to obtain these supplies through the British Defense Mission before calling upon the U.S. for aid. The Foreign Minister followed this advice and was successful in obtaining some of this equipment, at which time, also, we consented to the British request to retransfer to Burma 12,000 rounds of .50 caliber Lend-Lease ammunition. Since then, however, our Military Attaché in Burma reports that on August 18, 1948, our Embassy in Rangoon was again informally approached by the Burmese with the request that the U.S. supply the Government of Burma immediately 10,000 carbines, 1,000 light machine guns, 1,000 Bren guns or equivalent, 1,000 light machine guns, and 300 heavy machine guns. The British were also being asked at that time to supply additional arms and equipment. On September 4, 1948, in an official note to our Embassy in Rangoon,15 the Government of Burma requested to buy from the U.S. 5,000 carbines with 2,250,000 rounds of ammunition and 150 jeeps, stating that of their long list of essential needs these items were available only from the U.S. and that most of the other items were being supplied by the British. The British Ambassador supported this request. Our Embassy at Rangoon, on September 20, 1948, informed the Government of Burma that although we approve its efforts to quell the insurrection, we cannot supply the desired military equipment owing to the heavy requirements of the U.S. Army and previous commitments elsewhere. The Embassy mentioned that the desired equipment or suitable substitutes might be available by purchase from U.S. commercial sources, but pointed out that the issuance of export licenses would depend upon world conditions prevailing at the time the equipment might be ready for shipment.

e. Nepal and Ceylon

There have been no requests by either Nepal or Ceylon for military assistance from the U.S.

7. desirability of consultation with the british

The U.K. does not at present possess sufficient economic or military resources to supply South Asian countries with either substantial amounts of the capital goods and technical skills needed for their economic rehabilitation and development, or all the military equipment needed for the maintenance of their internal security. Despite this situation and a concomitant drastic reduction of British responsibilities in the area, British commercial and financial interests still constitute the leading foreign element in most of the economies of South Asia, and British advisers on military matters occupy important, though temporary, posts in former British possessions. Accordingly, it appears that an effective and economical U.S. policy should take into account the position of the British and that some form of consultation with them, on political, economic and military matters, should precede our own decisions. We have had informal indications from the British that they are interested in such discussions.

Consultation on economic matters appears premature until we have completed a re-appraisal of our ability to contribute to the economic and financial needs of the area; it should, of course, not leave the impression that we wish to de-limit spheres of influence or to divide markets with the British. Meanwhile, we should continue to keep abreast of developments affecting the area with respect to balance of payments problems, sterling balance releases, the effects of European recovery on South Asian trade, prospective treaty relations with the British, and British ability to furnish technical advice to these countries.

In the military sphere, we should wish to explore with the British the extent to which they can continue to assume responsibility for meeting the military requirements of the South Asian area. Bearing in mind our commitments elsewhere, it would appear to be in our interest for the British to bear as great a share of this burden as they possibly can. Moreover, we should wish to make certain that matériel supplied by the U.S. and the U.K. would be complementary and related both to the specific justifiable needs of the area for internal security and to the broader requirements of global strategy.

8. necessity for regional approach by u.s.

We may defeat our own purpose if by extending assistance to any one country in this area we alienate the friendship of one or more of the other South Asian powers. Certain of these countries, particularly India and Pakistan, do not yet enjoy good relations with one another. If U.S. assistance is made available to one the others will increase their pressure for comparable aid. In considering any program of assistance to the area, therefore, a regional approach is necessary, keeping in mind, of course, that internal conditions an individual countries must always be taken into account.

On the other hand, India is the natural political and economic center of South Asia and aid given to the peripheral countries would have to be adapted to conditions in India.

9. desirability of regional cooperation

Even if U.S. aid is extended to the South Asian countries on a regional basis there remains the possibility, due to continuing internal and inter-regional conflicts, that the combined power potential of South Asia may never develop in the foreseeable future if the individual countries are left to their own devices. U.S. assistance to these countries may not contribute to our own national interest unless it contributes to the improvement of their internal stability and better relations with each other. Due to the momentum of movements which are already set in motion in South Asia, a period of internal and interregional conflict is perhaps inevitable. Whether this will eventually lead to greater regional cooperation or greater chaos remains to be seen. The possibility of its leading to greater chaos must now be accepted as a calculated risk. To minimize this risk and thereby promote our own objectives, any plan for U.S. assistance should be used as far as practicable as an instrument to effect cooperation within the region.

10. joint chiefs of staff summary of strategic considerations

Attention is invited to the Joint Chiefs of Staff summary of strategic considerations with respect to South Asia, as set forth in paragraph 5 of Appendix “C”. In this connection, it is observed that the effective use of the Karachi–Lahore area in Pakistan might well depend upon access to facilities in India as well as Pakistan.

Appendix “C”

[Washington,] 24 March 1949.

Memorandum From the Joint Chiefs of Staff 16

Subject: Appraisal of United States national interests in South Asia

1. As requested in your memorandum dated 8 February 1949, the Joint Chiefs of Staff have reviewed the report forwarded therewith entitled “Appraisal of United States National Interests in South Asia” (Afghanistan, Pakistan, India, Burma, Nepal, and Ceylon), and submit the following comments from the military point of view:

With reference to those conclusions in the basic paper having military implications (briefed below for convenience), the Joint Chiefs of Staff are in general agreement that the following would be in our national interests: a. Orientation of South Asia toward the United States and other Western democracies and away from the USSR;

b. An endeavor by the United States to meet the legitimate requirements for spare parts and replacements for military equipment of United States origin already possessed by South Asian countries to assist those countries in the maintenance of internal security and freedom from Communist domination; and

c. United States collaboration and consultation with the British to determine the military requirements for internal security, the extent to which the British can meet such requirements, and the implications to British strategic interests in South Asia if United States military assistance were provided to the countries of that area.

2. In agreeing that the furnishing of military equipment for maintenance and replacement of items of United States origin now in the hands of the South Asian countries would be in the United States interest, the Joint Chiefs of Staff would point out that such equipment, if provided, should preferably be made available on a reimbursable basis and, further, that such aid must be considered in connection with over-all requirements for United States military assistance.

3. Current United States policy with respect to Western Union and the proposed North Atlantic Pact17 can be expected to result in heavy demands on the United States for military strengthening of the Western European countries. These, together with current commitments designed to counter active Soviet encroachment in other areas, will have high priority and will probably tax United States capabilities to the utmost. Any provision of military aid to countries of South Asia would, therefore, of necessity be extremely limited. Policies and priorities for the implementation of foreign military assistance programs are in process of formulation by the Foreign Assistance Correlation Committee (FACC) which, when approved, will govern.

4. Paragraph 5 of Appendix “A” of the basic study states, “Our basic strategic objectives with respect to South Asia have, however, not been clearly defined, and we have yet to make basic policy decisions on the desirability and practicability of military cooperation with the countries of the area.”

5. The Joint Chiefs of Staff, therefore, submit the following brief summary of strategic considerations and a statement of basic military strategic objectives applicable to the countries of South Asia:

From the military point of view, the countries of South Asia excepting Pakistan have, under present and prospective conditions, little value to the United States. Their remoteness from the United States, their difficult terrain, and the lack of communications and other essential facilities required by modern combat forces would pose a difficult logistical problem if military operations of consequence by either Western or indigenous forces were to be supported in the South Asia area, particularly in the light of probable heavy commitments elsewhere. The South Asian countries contiguous to the USSR, however, do offer the possibility of ideological and intelligence penetration of the USSR because the peoples of Soviet Central Asia have national and personal affinities with the peoples of the South Asian countries and those of the Near and Middle East rather than with those of the USSR.

The Karachi–Lahore area in Pakistan may, under certain conditions, become of strategic importance. In spite of tremendous logistic difficulties, this area might be required as a base for air operations against central USSR and as a staging area for forces engaged in the defense or recapture of Middle East oil areas.

While the countries of South Asia, excepting Pakistan, are of negligible positive strategic importance to us, encroachments by the USSR would endanger our national policy of Communist containment. Furthermore, domination of the area by the USSR would deny to us and make available to the USSR certain sources of raw materials and would threaten sea routes which are now relatively safe. On the other hand, the inaccessibility of the area from the north and the fact that more remunerative objectives exist in Europe, the Middle East, and the Far East, make it unlikely that, in the event of war, the USSR would expend any substantial military effort in South Asia, particularly if these countries had the means to maintain their internal security and stability.

6. In the light of the above considerations, our basic strategic objectives relative to South Asian countries are as follows: a. Prevent Soviet encroachment or domination;

b. Prevent the USSR from obtaining military support or assistance from these nations either directly or through the use of their facilities;

c. Develop, without commitment to military action on our part, a cooperative attitude in these countries which would facilitate obtaining the use of areas or facilities which might be required by the Western democracies … for military operations against the USSR in the event of war; and

d. With reference to Pakistan, endeavor to make commercial arrangements which would, in emergency, facilitate development for operational use of base facilities in the Karachi–Lahore area.

1 Lot 52 M 45 is a comprehensive collection of documents, minutes, agenda, memoranda, and related correspondence of the State-War-Navy Coordinating Committee (SWNCC) and the State-Army-Navy-Air Force Coordinating Committee (SANACC) for the years 1944–1949.

2 Prepared in collaboration with the SANACC Subcommittee for Rearmament.

3 For documentation on United States interest in efforts to resolve the dispute between Pakistan and India over Kashmir, see pp. 1686 [Pg. 1686 is part of Doc. 1165] ff.

4 By informal action of May 31 SANACC approved the conclusions of SANACC 360/14 with certain amendments that are incorporated in the text printed here. The record of actions by the National Security Council, dated June 16, states that the paper, together with amendments proposed by the Secretary of Defense, was referred to the NSC staff for use in the preparation of a study on United States policy toward Asia (S/S NSC (Miscellaneous) Files, Lot 66 D695, Record of Actions). In a memorandum of June 17, the Executive Secretary of the National Security Council (Souers) circulated to the Council the amendments proposed by the Secretary of Defense; neither printed (S/S NSC Files, Lot 63 D 351, NSC 48 file).

Lot 66 D 95 is a collection of administrative and miscellaneous National Security Council documentation for the years 1947–1963, as maintained by the Executive Secretariat of the Department of State. Lot 63 D 351 is a serial master file of the National Security Council documents and correspondence and related Department of State memoranda for the years 1947–1961, also maintained by the Executive Secretariat.

The NSC staff study in the form of a draft report on “United States Policy toward Asia,” dated December 23, 1949, was circulated in the Council as NSC 48/1. The report included several sections on South Asia, particularly paragraphs numbered 19 through 22. The text of NSC 48/1 is printed in Department of Defense, United States–Vietnam Relations, 1945–1967 (Washington, Government Printing Office, 1971) Book 8, p. 226.

After discussing NSC 48/1, the Council sent to President Truman a report numbered 48/2 and dated December 30, consisting solely of the conclusions of NSC 48/1, as amended and approved by the Council. The President approved the report the same day. For text of the report, see vol. vii, Part 2, p. 1215.

5 Some documentation on this subject is included in vol. vii, Part 1, pp. 119 ff.

6 The full text of telegram 3304 is printed in Foreign Relations, 1947, vol. iv, p. 624.

7 For documentation on this subject, see Foreign Relations, 1947, vol. iii, pp. 172–174 ff.

* Does not include princely state forces numbering some 110,000, and Territorials (National Guard) numbering approximately 120,000. [Footnote in the source text.]

† Does not include police levies, numbering some 18,000, raised by the Burma Government from its Socialist adherents. [Footnote in the source text.]

8 For text, see Foreign Relations, 1948, vol. i, Part 2, p. 597.

9 See Secretary Marshall’s memorandum of March 11, 1948, to President Truman, Foreign Relations, 1948, vol. v, Part 1, p. 496.

10 For the memoranda of conversations, see ibid., pp. 501 and 506.

11 For the discontinuation of the embargo on the shipment of American arms to India and Pakistan and the limitation placed on future shipments of arms to these countries, see telegram 264, March 31, to New Delhi, p. 1696 [Pg. 1696 includes portions of Doc. 1174 and Doc. 1175].

12 Memorandum of conversation, not printed; hut see footnote 1, Foreign Relations, 1948, vol. v, Part 1, p. 513.

13 For the Department of State’s decision on this matter, see Mr. Satterthwaite’s memorandum of November 10, 1948, to Mr. Lovett, Foreign Relations, 1948, vol. v, Part 1, p. 519.

14 Not printed.

15 Not printed.

16 The addressee of this memorandum is not indicated in the source text; presumably it was the State–Army–Navy–Air Force Coordinating Committee.

17 For documentation on the participation by the United States in the North Atlantic Treaty Organization and in efforts for European integration, see vol. iv, pp. 1 ff.

Memorandum by Mr. Gordon P. Merriam of the Policy Planning Staff PPS Files, Lot 64 D 563, Record Copies

[Document 4]

Memorandum by Mr. Gordon P. Merriam of the Policy Planning Staff

top secret [Washington,] June 13, 1949.

The Problem

1. To determine whether the North Atlantic Treaty should be extended to include Middle Eastern countries, and the possibility of creating one or more additional Article 51 treaties embracing the Middle East.

Analysis

2. The countries considered for the purposes of this discussion are Greece, Turkey, Syria, Lebanon, Israel, Jordan, Egypt, the Sudan, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Saudi Arabia, Iraq, Iran, Afghanistan, Pakistan and India.

3. The basic security considerations are summarized in the Annex attached.

4. It is clear from the material quoted in the Annex that the Eastern Mediterranean and Middle East areas are regarded as of importance to the security of the United States to the extent that any potentially hostile power should be denied any foothold in these areas. Moreover, the U.S. should, as a matter of policy, assist in maintaining the territorial integrity of Italy, Greece, Turkey, and Iran and be prepared to make full use of its political, economic, and if necessary, military power for this purpose. The loss of Turkey would critically affect U.S. security interests in the Eastern Mediterranean and Middle East areas. Our security requirements and interests in these areas are similar to those of our potential allies and closely interwoven with those of Great Britain.

5. The foregoing paragraph must be considered in the light of the fact that the primary security interests of the United States outside the western hemisphere lie in the North Atlantic area. This fact is reflected by the North Atlantic Treaty. Nevertheless, the political and territorial integrity of the Middle East area as a whole, and particularly of certain countries in that area, are of such importance to U.S. security as to justify strenuous efforts in the political field, and such efforts in the economic and military fields as overall circumstances, and the situation affecting each country, justify and permit and as are non-provocative in character.

6. It has been decided that, for the present, it would be unwise either because of the limitations of our resources, or because of the provocation which would be caused to the U.S.S.R., or both: a. To send U.S. Forces to Greece, even as token forces;

b. To construct medium bomber and fighter fields in Turkey with a view to use by U.S. Forces;

c. To stock existing Turkish airfields with aviation gasoline to be held for use by U.S. Forces.

7. On the other hand, it is considered desirable to construct a suitable airfield in the Suez area which could be used by U.S. bombers.

8. The U.S. has had operating and access rights to Dhahran Airfield in Saudi Arabia.1 The agreement providing for these rights has expired, but it is being extended on a month-to-month basis during negotiations for its extension. Because of the arms embargo and the inability of the U.S. thus far to provide a quid pro quo by making available arms and equipment desired by Saudi Arabia, a long-term extension of U.S. rights at Dhahran is unobtainable at this time, and an endeavor is being made to secure a one-year extension pending further developments.

9. The U.S. has no rights, but experiences no difficulties, in the use of air and naval facilities in Greece.

10. The U.S. has access to the British-controlled Mellaha airfield near Tripoli, to the air facilities on Cyprus and in the Sudan, would presumably be able to use British-controlled facilities in Cyrenaica and Jordan in the event of hostilities and will probably have no difficulty in continuing to maintain and operate the communications center at Asmara in Eritrea. However, long-term ability of the U.S. to use military facilities in Tripolitania, Cyrenaica and Eritrea depend upon the ultimate disposition of these territories.

11. Existing political circumstances make it impossible at this time for the U.S. to obtain military rights or to make military use of Egypt, Israel, Syria, Lebanon or Iraq. However, Syria and Jordan do not object to the U.S. Air Force overflying their respective territories for the purpose of servicing Dhahran. In the event of serious trouble with the U.S.S.R. it is not entirely certain that the U.S. could, on the basis of the consent of the countries concerned, make military use of Egypt, Israel, Syria, Lebanon or Iraq. Egypt and Iraq, however, could probably be used by the U.S. through the British, provided the latter succeed in maintaining their military rights in these countries.

12. All of the countries of the Middle East area above-mentioned have indicated at one time or another a desire to enter into a military alliance or other military arrangements with the U.S. or with both the U.S. and the U.K. The political and military realities of the U.S. situation prevent the negotiation of such arrangements. Moreover, with the exception of Saudi Arabia, none of the Arab governments could enter into an alliance with the U.S. at this time due to the deterioration of relations resulting from the Palestine question.2

13. Although the United States has exerted in the past, and will exert in the future, strenuous efforts to counter Soviet Russian expansionist ambitions in the areas by diplomatic means both within and without the United Nations, and by such economic and military aid as is justified by the circumstances and by U.S. capabilities, it is clear that so long as the policies of the U.S.S.R. remain essentially unaltered, the security situation of the area will remain precarious unless further steps can be taken to safeguard it. So long as a precarious security situation exists, or is felt to exist by the countries in the area, economic and social progress will be slow and uncertain and they will be promising subjects for revolution and for communist domination from within.

14. Further steps could take one or more of the following forms: a. Continuing along present lines, i.e. by unilateral diplomatic, economic and military support as determined by us on the basis of ad hoc need and availabilities, but refraining from any mutual commitment except as provided by the U.N. Charter, with such assistance and cooperation as other like-minded nations, particularly the U.K., can and will provide.

b. Extension of the North Atlantic Treaty to include certain selected countries in the area.

c. Creation of a regional pact, pure and simple.

d. Creation of a regional pact linked to the stronger members of the North Atlantic Treaty system.

e. Creation of a regional pact having some kind of association, or possibility of association, with the North Atlantic Treaty.

f. Creation of a new U.N. procedure.

15. Continuing along present lines has the advantage of simplicity. The U.S. can select those countries in the Middle East it wishes to aid, and can control the nature and amount of aid it supplies to them. It has the disadvantage that our security measures and planning for the area cannot be intelligently or logically worked out on an ad hoc, country by country basis, but should be considered on an area basis. More specifically, adequate provisions for military use of a forward area such as Turkey cannot be made unless we are sure of facilities in depth to the south. This is particularly true in view of the fact that the establishment of adequate military facilities in the forward areas, prior to the actual outbreak of hostilities, would be provocative. South of Greece, Turkey and Iran we now depend upon sparse and tenuously-held British facilities. The acquisition or construction of adequate facilities to the south in countries under Arab sovereignty will be extremely difficult if not impossible so long as the U.S. maintains a policy of favoritism in regard to Israel, because of the unfriendliness and spirit of non-cooperation which that policy engenders in the Arab countries.

In sum, the circumstances require an area approach, the prerequisite of which is relations with all of the countries of the area which are characterized by friendship, trust and cooperation. This relationship formerly existed with the Arab countries but has suffered severe though not irreparable damage. Until the damage has been repaired, our task of supporting the integrity of the three northern countries of Greece, Turkey and Iran will be that of holding up an arch which lacks foundations. Furthermore, the relations between the various countries of the area must be on a sound basis. The Palestine question has caused the contrary effect.

16. a. Extension of the North Atlantic Treaty to include selected countries in the area, a development ardently desired by Greece and Turkey, is an idea which is worth careful consideration. As an immediate possibility, however, it is necessary to reject it for two reasons: (1) By the inclusion of Norway and Italy, it is possible that the Treaty already takes in too much territory, existing circumstances considered; (2) The inclusion of Greece would throw the question of aid to Greek guerrillas into the NAP framework and risk magnifying the question into a crude and primary power issue. No NAP country can now afford to contribute actual power to this issue except the U.S. which is already doing so. Therefore, inclusion of Greece in the NAP would saddle the group with a problem with which it is not, as a group, capable of dealing at this time. It would be unrealistic to include Turkey if Greece were not included.

b. Looking ahead, however, it is possible that the NAP group will take a strategic view of the Middle East essentially in accord with that now taken by the U.S. and U.K., and feel sufficiently strong in relation to the U.S.S.R. to implement that view by bringing selected countries into the NAP system. The countries selected might be limited to Greece and Turkey and in any case would almost certainly include them, and conceivably Iran. The forthcoming membership of Greece and Turkey in the Council of Western Europe may point in this direction.

c. It would be unwise to include any Middle Eastern country in NAP unless Germany, or Western Germany, is friendly to the West. The NAP countries could not be under an obligation to rescue Greece or Turkey with an unfriendly Germany on their flank. It follows that any extension of the NAP system to the Middle East requires as a precondition, that Germany not be or become a major security risk.

17. a. Two regional pacts already exist in the area. One is the Saadabad Pact (July 8, 1937) between Afghanistan, Iran, Iraq and Turkey. This Pact provides for non-interference, non-aggression, and consultation regarding all international conflicts affecting the members’ common interests. The other is the Pact of the League of Arab States3 (March 22, 1945) between Egypt, Iraq, Jordan, Lebanon, Saudi Arabia, Syria and Yemen. It provides methods for settling disputes between the members and for their cooperation in political, economic and social matters. The weakness of the key provisions of both Pacts reflects the weakness of the members, singly or in combination. It follows that no important results for the security of the Middle East from external aggression can be expected to flow from the existence of these Pacts.

b. The creation of a regional pact, pure and simple, similar to the NAP, of the Middle Eastern countries offers no solution, not only because of the discord among them which has been created by the Palestine question, but also because of deep-rooted suspicions which antedate that question and have been intensified by it. Moreover, and this is a fundamental difficulty, the area lacks a power center on the basis of which a pact could be built.

18. a. The creation of a regional pact in the Middle Eastern area linked to the stronger members of the NAP—the U.S. and the U.K. in present circumstances—would place too heavy a commitment on those two countries, which must be entirely free to be the judges of what, if any, resources they can devote to the security of the area, and to select the recipient countries.

b. Turkey and Greece would both dislike such an arrangement, believing that it would result in a diminution, through dilution, of the aid now being received from the U.S. They also fear that this arrangement would inject them into the Palestine imbroglio, and that their policy in this matter might well be in opposition to that of the U.S., which would be a highly embarrassing and worrisome situation. However, they might be willing to run these risks in return for a U.S. commitment.

c. The Arab countries, while having a pervading fear of the U.S.S.R., have a closer and more immediate problem in Israel. They feel, in fact, that, they require protection from threats from three sources: the U.S.S.R., Israel, and each other. Moreover, protection by the U.S. and the U.K. applied with respect to Israel, and to the Arab countries in their relations with one another, would, in operation, probably run afoul of a basic difference in outlook, if not in policy, between the United States and the United Kingdom. The U.S. has supported and favored Israel, and endeavored at the same time to remain, on friendly terms with the Arab states. The U.K., on the contrary, places Arab relations ahead of relations with Israel, and has temporally departed from this policy only when necessary in the interest of Anglo-American relations.

d. Israel seeks to follow a middle course in the West-East situation. While it desires assurances against Arab aggression, it would not at the present time accept them if it involved an anti-Soviet orientation.

e. It is evident, therefore, that a regional pact linked to the U.S. and the U.K. would run into strong cross-currents and there is serious risk that it would end in becoming unmanageable.

19. Creation of a regional pact having some kind of relationship or possibility of association with the NAP, like the extension of the NAP to selected Middle Eastern countries, is not immediately practicable due to the lack of harmony and singleness of purpose in the Middle East described in paragraph 28 [18?] above. At a suitable stage in the future, however, when Western Europe is stronger and Germany or Western Germany is dependable and cooperative, and if the Middle East can be sufficiently pulled together, this formula offers interesting possibilities, which are: a. The two regional groups could be associated, or association made possible, in a way which would result in a far less rigid structure than would the case if the ME countries, or any substantial number of them, were included in the NAP.

b. The association would not occur before the Middle East pact came into existence, which would place the onus and necessity upon the Middle Eastern countries to get on with the job of settling their own differences.

c. There being no power center in the Middle East, the pact of itself would be non-provocative as far as the capabilities of the members were concerned. It could, however, contain phraseology visualizing and permitting, but hot requiring, assistance from like-minded nations or groups of nations to ward off attack and danger thereof. This would also be non-provocative, since action would be taken only, in case of provocation from the other side of the curtain.

d. The association would permit full discretion on the part of the NAP group and members thereof, as to assistance to be furnished the Middle Eastern group.

e. The NAP and Middle Eastern groups could be separate and distinct, or, depending on circumstances, certain countries such as Greece and Turkey and perhaps Iran could be members of both groups.

f. It would be easier for some Middle East countries to invite outside assistance through a regional group than individually, though individual requests would not necessarily be excluded. Furthermore, the requests of individual countries would probably be moderated as the result of group consideration. There would also be advantage in group-to-group requests, i.e. by the Middle East group to the NAP group, or vice versa, thereby taking the onus off both the requesting and responding countries. Here again, if the NAP as a group did not see fit to respond favorably, it would be open to an NAP member to do so if it considered its interests vitally affected.

g. The membership of a Middle East regional pact presents difficulties. Inclusion of India would probably make the group too large and unwieldy. On the other hand it would be unrealistic to include Afghanistan and Pakistan without India since the usefulness for security purposes of Afghanistan and Pakistan depends very largely on the facilities in depth to be found in India. Since Iran has obvious connections with Afghanistan, Pakistan and India, two regional groups—Middle Eastern and South Asian—might be formed, Iran being included in both.

h. Even if it should not prove possible to form one or more pact groups in the Middle East-South Asia areas, the effort would have valuable by-products in the following ways: (1) It would tend to bring about a composition of the differences between the nations of the areas and so enable them to gain strength, particularly in the economic and social fields, to combat the internal communist threat.

(2) It would tend to unify the main lines of policy of the Western Powers which have important interests in the areas and avoid the danger of their working at cross-purposes.

20. There remains the possibility that existing machinery of the United Nations, not subject to veto, might be harnessed, consistent with the Charter, to contribute to general international security including the security of the Middle East. The suggestion is that the General Assembly might now, in advance of the outbreak of any major armed conflict (perhaps at the Assembly’s Fourth General Session in 1949), adopt a resolution which (1) declares the concern of the United Nations for observance of the law of the Charter, (2) recalls to the member states that the fundamental substantive obligations undertaken in the Charter do not lapse upon the inability or failure of the United Nations machinery to operate with full effectiveness, (3) reminds the members of their duty to support and defend the purposes and principles of the United Nations, (4) resolves that it is the sense and intention of the Assembly that, in the event of any member communicating to the Secretary General an assertion that an armed attack has occurred, a special session of the Assembly under Article 20 of the Charter will at once be called upon agreement of a majority of the members of the United Nations,* and (5) resolves that if the Security Council, concurrently meeting in continuous session, does not promptly take action to maintain or restore international peace and security, the General Assembly will make appropriate findings.†

The purpose of such action by the Assembly would be to make clear in advance that there can and will be a judgment of the international community on the facts of any situation in which armed attack is alleged and the Security Council fails to take adequate measures. Such a judgment would give guidance to the individual members of the United Nations as to whether armed attack has really occurred and who is the aggressor. The effect of such a judgment would be to marshal the moral and political strength of the United Nations in defense of the victim and in support of the law of the Charter. Pursuant to such a judgment, members of the United Nations would take appropriate action to restore international peace and security, perhaps having already consulted to coordinate their activities. In the event of armed attack which called into operation the provisions of the North Atlantic Treaty, or of a Middle East pact, or both, the deliberations of the General Assembly would be concurrent not only with those of the Security Council but also with those of the council established by Article 9 of the North Atlantic Treaty, or with procedure under a Middle East pact. This concurrence would have the advantage of affording to the Atlantic and Middle East Treaty states an accurate reading of general international opinion, and of indicating what action taken pursuant to the Treaties would command maximum support among the United Nations.

This proposal is believed entirely consistent with the Charter. Of necessity, the actions of the General Assembly would be general in character, and a good deal of freedom would be left to the member nations. The proposal appears practicable at the present time. It could make a significant political contribution to security as a deterrent, particularly in regions outside the Western Hemisphere and the Forth Atlantic area.

[Annex]

Summary of Basic Security Considerations

1. The National Security Council has concurred in the following (NSC 5/2)4 :

“… The security of the Eastern Mediterranean and of the Middle East is vital to the security of the United States.

“… The security of the whole Eastern Mediterranean and of the Middle East would be jeopardized if the Soviet Union should succeed in its efforts to obtain control of any one of the following countries: Italy, Greece, Turkey, or Iran. In view of the foregoing, it should be the policy of the United States, in accordance with the principles and in the spirit of the Charter of the United Nations, to support the security of the Eastern Mediterranean and the Middle East. As a corollary of this policy the United States should assist in maintaining the territorial integrity and political independence of Italy, Greece, Turkey, and Iran. In carrying out this policy the United States should be prepared to make full use of its political, economic, and if necessary, military power in such manner as may be found most effective.… It would be unrealistic for the United States to undertake to carry out such a policy unless the British maintain their strong strategic political and economic position in the Middle East and Eastern Mediterranean, and unless they and ourselves follow parallel policies in that area.

“One of the greatest dangers to world peace may be the failure of the Soviet Union to understand the extent to which the U.S. is prepared to go in order to maintain the security of the Eastern Mediterranean and the Middle East. It should, therefore, be the policy of this Government to make evident in a firm but non-provocative manner the extent of the determination of the United States to assist in preserving in the interest of world peace the security of the area.5

“Footnote:

“Approved by the President on November 24, 1947. Adopted by the NSC by memorandum approval as of November 21, 1947. NSC Action No. 13. The Secretary of the Army approved subject to a, a similar British commitment, particularly as to military features, being simultaneously made, and b, the policies outlined being first discussed and if possible cleared, with the Chairman of the Armed Services Committees of the House and Senate and with the Chairmen of the Foreign Relations Committee and the Foreign Affairs Committee. This is a U.S. position, no implementation for which was directed pending parallel action by the British Government.”

2. a. The Joint Chiefs of Staff, in a memorandum dated November 24, 1948 (NSC 42/1) stated: “From the military point of view, the Joint Chiefs of Staff are of the opinion that, as long as the U.S.S.R. pursues its expansionist policies, the security of the Eastern Mediterranean and the Middle East is of critical importance to the future security of the United States.”6

b. The Joint Chiefs of Staff, in reaffirming the view expressed in the preceding paragraph, added (NSC 47):7 “The stability of the Middle East, including assurance that the peoples of this area will not turn to the U.S.S.R. and against the United States, is a vital element in United States security.”

3. The National Security Council has concurred in the following (NSC 42/1):

“… the United States has greater long-range strategic interests in the military establishments of Turkey than in those of Greece. Nevertheless, highly adverse psychological and political results would occur at this time if the communist [political] warfare being conducted against Greece should be permitted to succeed. Should Turkey come under Communist domination, U.S. security interests in the Middle East and Eastern Mediterranean areas would be critically affected.”

4. The Joint Chiefs of Staff, in a memorandum dated August [5], 1948 (NSC 19/38 ) containing an appraisal of U.S. security interests in the entire Middle East area, set forth the following strategic requirements:

“a. Denial to any potentially hostile power of any foothold in this area.

“b. Maintenance of friendly relationships which can be promoted by social and economic assistance, together with such military assistance as may be practicable, to insure collaboration by the indigenous peoples in the common defense of the area.

“c. Development of the oil resources in this area by the United States and such other countries as have and can be expected to have a friendly attitude toward the United States.

“d. Assurance of the right of military forces of the United States to enter militarily essential areas upon a threat of war.

“e. Assurance of the right to develop and maintain those facilities which are required to implement d above.

“The above requirements take into consideration our overall requirements within the framework of our global strategy. Moreover, these requirements have not been determined from the standpoint of United States security interests alone but also include consideration of the security interests of our potential allies, particularly Great Britain. The Joint Chiefs of Staff would emphasize that the interests of the United States and Great Britain in this entire area are so interrelated that they must be considered as a whole.”

5. The Joint Chiefs of Staff, in a memorandum dated March 24, 1949,9 stated the following with respect to Pakistan:

“From the military point of view, the countries of South Asia excepting Pakistan have, under present and prospective conditions, little value to the United States.

“The Karachi–Lahore area in Pakistan may, under certain conditions, become of strategic importance. In spite of tremendous logistic difficulties, this area might be required as a base for air operations against central U.S.S.R. and as a staging area for forces engaged in the defense or recapture of Middle East oil areas.”

6. The National Security Council has concurred in the following (March 22–23, 194910 ):

“… the Joint Chiefs of Staff offer the following definition of United States long-range strategic interests in the military establishments of Greece and Turkey: ‘a. Greece: A Greek military establishment capable of maintaining internal security in order to avoid the communist domination of Greece.

‘b. Turkey: A Turkish military establishment of sufficient size and effectiveness to insure Turkey’s continued resistance to Soviet pressure; the development of combat effectiveness to the extent that any overt Soviet aggression can be delayed long enough to permit the commitment of U.S. and allied forces in Turkey in order to deny certain portions of Turkey to the U.S.S.R.”

The most recent expression of the Joint Chiefs of Staff on the subject of U.S. strategic interests in specific countries of the Eastern Mediterranean and Middle East areas (apart from their memorandum on Pakistan above-cited) is contained in its memorandum of March 14, 1949,11 from which the following is quoted:

“Turkey

“The preservation of Turkey’s independence and the maintenance of her status as a buffer against expansion of the Soviet Union into the Mediterranean and Middle East is of critical importance to the security of the United States. Soviet domination of Turkey would not only jeopardize United States interests in the Near and Middle East, but would also make the communications facilities and military base sites throughout that area and in the Mediterranean basin more vulnerable to Soviet attack.

“It is considered that the program as agreed to by the Joint Chiefs of Staff and set forth in the memorandum forwarded to the Secretary of Defense, dated 20 December 1948,12 adequately carries out the U.S. policy towards military assistance to Turkey which calls for ‘… military assistance to Turkey which will contribute towards modernization of the Turkish armed forces without undue strain on Turkish resources, release of manpower for productive work, and increase Turkish confidence in her ability to resist Soviet pressure.’

“Greece

“If the U.S.S.R. should gain control of Greece either directly, through the satellites, or through a Greek puppet government, it would complete Soviet domination of the Balkans and pose an active threat to both the Aegean and the Eastern Mediterranean, thereby outflanking the Dardanelles and the Suez Canal. In addition, failure to prevent Soviet control of Greece would weaken U.S. prestige and offer encouragement to further Soviet political and military aggression in the Near East and in Western Europe. The United States, therefore, has a vital security interest in seeing that Greece remains a free and independent country. Although Greek military forces could not withstand a direct, open attack by the U.S.S.R. or its satellites, Greece’s position depends upon the ability of the Greek government, with United States aid, to eliminate the guerrilla forces.

“The Joint Chiefs of Staff, in a study on future United States support to the armed forces of Greece, dated 7 October 1948,12 noted in the conclusion of that paper that, ‘Although there would be considerable military advantage to the United States if Greece could be supported militarily to such an extent that she could resist all forms of communist aggression, it would be impracticable, in view of the strategic realities and of other and more important commitments made by the United States, to extend military aid to Greece beyond that required to eliminate guerrilla activity …’ and that thereafter, ‘military aid will be reduced to that sufficient only to maintain Greece’s internal security.’

“Iran

“The geographical position of Iran make her of strategic importance in the event of a war with the U.S.S.R., and because of this position, it is desirable that the United States maintain friendly relations, with a view towards strengthening and further stabilizing the Iranian government as a means of combatting communist encroachment.

“Therefore, the long range security objective of the United States should be to supply the Iranian army with sufficient equipment and support as would reasonably insure maintenance of internal security, a stabilized government, and the prevention of interference from outside forces, other than direct invasion.

“Saudi Arabia

“From the military point of view, it is considered that: (1) Saudi Arabia is highly important to the future security of the United States.

(2) Present estimates indicate that the regaining of Middle East oil is not vital‡ but will be highly desirable. Regaining these resources by the end of the second year of war will provide insurance against the adverse effect of presently unforeseeable factors. This applies only to a war commencing in the immediate future (not later than 1949)§ .

(3) It is of utmost importance that Middle East oil be denied the U.S.S.R. during the period prior to the outbreak of war.

(4) Even though it is estimated that the U.S.S.R. now has the capability of occupying Saudi Arabia, it is not necessarily a correct assumption from the long-range viewpoint that Soviet capabilities with respect to occupation of Saudi Arabia, particularly with improvement in the military posture of the United States, will remain unchanged.

“In light of the above opinions and in furtherance of our present national policy, it would be a significant contribution to our national security for the United States to make such commitments as may be practicable in order to retain our present position in Saudi Arabia and maintain our friendly relations there.…

7. The Joint Chiefs of Staff have concluded (NSC 4713 ) that U.S. security interests with respect to the new State of Israel are:

“(1) That Israel should be oriented towards the Western Democracies and away from the U.S.S.R.;

“(2) That Communist infiltration should be blocked and domination of Israel by the U.S.S.R. should be prevented;

“(3) That the differences between the new Israeli state and the neighboring Arab States should be reconciled at least to the extent that Israel and the Arab states would act in concert to oppose Soviet aggression; and

“(4) That from the United States military point of view it would be advantageous if British relations with Israel were such that a common approach could be taken by the United States and the United Kingdom in achieving mutual objectives with respect to Israel.”

8. The Secretary of State stated on March 23, 1949:14

“During the drafting of the North Atlantic Pact, we were aware of the possibility that our formal expression of serious interest in the security of countries in the North Atlantic area might be misinterpreted as implying a lessening of our interest in the security of countries in other areas, particularly the Near and Middle East.

“In my radio discussion of the North Atlantic Pact last Friday night,15 I tried to make clear our continuing interest in the security of areas outside the North Atlantic community, particularly in Greece, Turkey and Iran. I will repeat the portion of my speech bearing upon this subject: ‘In the compact world of today, the security of the United States cannot be defined in terms of boundaries and frontiers. A serious threat to international peace and security anywhere in the world is of direct concern to this country. Therefore, it is our policy to help free peoples to maintain their integrity and independence, not only in Western Europe or the Americas, but wherever the aid we are able to provide can be effective. Our actions in supporting the integrity and independence of Greece, Turkey and Iran are expressions of that determination. Our interest in the security of these countries has been made clear, and we shall continue to pursue that policy.’

“I think that should speak for itself.”

9. The President stated on April 4, 1949:16

“Yet the [Atlantic] Pact will be a positive, not a negative, influence for peace, and its influence will be felt not only in the area it specifically covers but throughout the world. Its conclusion does not mean a narrowing of the interests of its members. Under my authority and instructions, the Secretary of State has recently made it abundantly clear that the adherence of the United States to this Pact does not signify a lessening of American concern for the security and welfare of other areas, such as the Near East. The step we are taking today should serve to reassure peace-loving peoples everywhere and pave the way for the world-wide stability and peaceful development which we all seek.”

10. The National Security Council has concurred in the following (NSC 20/4):17

“We should endeavor to achieve our general objectives by methods short of war through the pursuit of the following aims:

‘d. To create situations which will compel the Soviet Government to recognize the practical undesirability of acting on the basis of its present concepts and the necessity of behaving in accordance with precepts of international conduct, as set forth in the purposes and principles of the U.N. Charter.’

“Attainment of these aims requires that the United States:

‘d. Strengthen the orientation toward the United States of the non-Soviet nations; and help such of those nations as are able and willing to make an important contribution to U.S. security, to increase their economic and political stability and their military capacity.’”

11. Senate Resolution 239, approved on June 11, 1948, reads in part as follows:

“… this Government, by constitutional process, should particularly pursue the following objectives within the United Nations Charter:

“Progressive development of regional and other collective arrangements for individual and collective self-defense in accordance with the purposes, principles, and provisions of the Charter.

“Association of the United States, by Constitutional process, with such regional and other collective arrangements as are based on continuous and effective self-help and mutual aid, and as affect its national security.

“Contributing to the maintenance of peace by making clear its determination to exercise the right of individual or collective self-defense under article 51 should any armed attack occur affecting its national security.”

1 For documentation on this subject, see pp. 1573 [Pg. 1573 is part of Doc. 1099] ff.

2 For documentation on this subject, see pp. 594 [Pg. 594 is part of Doc. 341] ff.

3 For documentation on the establishment of the Arab League, see Foreign Relations, 1945, vol. viii, pp. 25 ff.

* The General Assembly’s Rules of Procedure would require amendment to shorten the interval between the call for a special session and the first actual meeting of such a session. [Footnote in the source text.]

† The action of the General Assembly, particularly any recommendations which it might decide to make, would come after the Security Council had completed its futile consideration of the case and voted to remove it from the agenda. See Article 12 of the Charter. But the Assembly could discuss during the Council’s deliberations. [Footnote in the source text.]

4  Foreign Relations, 1948, vol. iv, pp. 46–47.

5 For the full text of “The American Paper”, from which these extracts were taken, see ibid., 1947, vol. v, p. 575. The American Paper was prepared in the Department of State in connection with “The Pentagon Talks of 1947” between the United States and the United Kingdom concerning the Middle East and the Eastern Mediterranean. The talks took place in October 1947.

6 The full text of the memorandum by the Joint Chiefs of Staff, from which this extract is taken, is printed as SANACC 358/8 in Foreign Relations, 1948, vol iv, p. 191. For NSC 42/1, a report of March 22, 1949, by the National Security Council to President Truman, see p. 269 [Pg. 269 is part of Doc. 133].

7 Dated May 16, p. 1009 [Pg. 1009 is part of Doc. 659].

8  Foreign Relations, 1948, vol. iii, p. 933.

9 See Appendix C to SANACC 360/14, p. 29 [Pg. 29 is part of Doc. 3].

10 This reference is to NSC 42/1, March 22, p. 269 [Pg. 269 is part of Doc. 133].

11 Not printed; it dealt with the preparation of a foreign military assistance program for fiscal year 1950. It noted that $100,000,000 of military assistance for Turkey and $200,000,000 for Greece had been approved by the Joint Chiefs of Staff on December 20, 1948; that Iran was receiving military equipment valued at $54,000,000 through a dollar loan to purchase surplus military property; and that the shipment of military equipment to Saudi Arabia was precluded by United States adherence to the Security Council Resolution of May 1948.

12 Not printed.

12 Not printed.

‡ Subject to confirmation by responsible government agencies. [Footnote in the source text.]

§ Preliminary studies indicate that in a more remote war, Middle East oil increases in importance and in ten years may be needed from D–Day on. [Footnote in the source text.]

13 Dated May 16, p. 1009 [Pg. 1009 is part of Doc. 659].

14 At his press conference.

15 For the text of Secretary Acheson’s radio address on March 18, see Department of State Bulletin, March 27, 1949, p. 384.

16 The full text of President Truman’s address is printed ibid., April 17, 1949, p. 481.

17 Dated November 23, 1948, Foreign Relations, 1948, vol. i, Part 2, p. 662.

Memorandum by the Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern and African Affairs (McGhee) to the Coordinator for Foreign Military Assistance Programs (Berkner) 890.24/8–1649

[Document 5]

Memorandum by the Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern and African Affairs (McGhee) to the Coordinator for Foreign Military Assistance Programs (Berkner)1

secret [Washington,] August 16, 1949.

Subject: Military Assistance for NEA countries

The revision of MAP legislation eliminating the provision which authorized the extension of military procurement assistance on a reimbursable basis to other than Title I, II and III countries2 and those countries with which we have collective defense and regional arrangements, comes as a serious blow to our relations with certain NEA countries, particularly India, Pakistan, Afghanistan and Saudi Arabia.

With reference to the SOA countries, all recent policy studies have clearly recognized the importance of giving favorable consideration to requests for military assistance as a means of achieving our national political objectives with respect to these countries. SANACC 360/143 states explicitly that the political, economic and strategic importance of the emerging SOA countries to the US national interests require the maintenance of internal security within these countries and their freedom from Communist domination, and that at the minimum we should endeavor to meet the legitimate requirements of spare parts and replacements for military equipment of US origin which they already possess.

As you know, both India and Pakistan have attempted to meet their security requirements by utilizing matériel of US origin which was acquired under Lend-Lease or from US surplus property disposals. Much of their armor and many other items were so acquired. Therefore they are necessarily dependent upon the US for maintenance spare parts and replacements for this equipment. Since the informal embargo on the export of military matériel to India and Pakistan was removed last March, both countries have sent high level military missions to the US to seek an assured source of future military supplies in this country. In seeking these supplies they have made clear their desire to associate themselves closely with us in matters pertaining to long-range military planning. The advantages to us of such an association are obvious. In response to their approaches we have told them that we were sympathetic to their needs and desired to be helpful.

For over two years—since the withdrawal of the British from India—the Afghan Government has been seeking from us the means of internal defense. The Afghan Government has even suggested that in return for military aid it might abandon its traditional neutrality and openly pronounce Afghanistan’s association with the Western powers.…

In view of these and other considerations, our failure to extend some form of procurement assistance or token aid at this time would very seriously jeopardize our efforts over the past two years to orient these countries to the West and away from Communism.

In the case of Saudi Arabia, the Joint Chiefs of Staff have expressed an interest in the maintenance and expansion of U.S. facilities at the Dhahran air base. For the last two years King Ibn Saud has been asking for military equipment in sizeable quantities and has assured us that such equipment would be used only for internal security and for protection against aggression. While our rights to use the Dhahran air base have been temporarily extended for one year, there is no doubt that the King will only consider any long-term extension in return for military assistance. A survey party of U.S. military officers is proceeding to Dhahran for the purpose of estimating our requirements in connection with a long-term extension of the Dhahran air base agreement and to make a survey of Saudi Arabian defense needs. When this party makes its recommendations we will be faced with the problem of what military assistance can be extended in return for long-term rights, and unless there is legislative authority, we may find ourselves unable to secure an extension of our rights at this important base.

In these circumstances I strongly urge that every effort be made to amend the present legislation for the purpose of authorizing the extension of reimbursable aid to India, Pakistan, Afghanistan and Saudi Arabia. I wish to strongly emphasize the deterioration in our relations with these countries as well as the possible loss of strategic objectives that may result should we not be in a position to provide military procurement assistance for supplying reasonable quantities of military equipment to these countries.

1 In his position as Coordinator, Lloyd V. Berkner served as Special Assistant to the Secretary of State.

2 This reference is to various Titles of the legislation that became known as the Mutual Defense Assistance Act of 1949 on its enactment on October 6, 1949. As enacted, Title i covered the North Atlantic Treaty countries; Title ii, Greece and Turkey; and Title iii, Iran, the Republic of Korea, the Philippines, and China.

3 Dated April 19, p. 8 [Pg. 8 includes portions of Doc. 1, Doc. 2, and Doc. 3].

The Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern and African Affairs (McGhee) to the Assistant Secretary of State for Congressional Relations (Gross) 840.20/8–1649

[Document 6]

The Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern and African Affairs (McGhee) to the Assistant Secretary of State for Congressional Relations (Gross)

secret [Washington,] September 21, 1949.

Subject: Military Assistance for NEA Countries

In recent discussions with Dr. Berkner, S/CFA, this office has been informed that legislation could be submitted to the next session of Congress for the purpose of obtaining authority to extend military assistance on a reimbursable basis to certain NEA countries. Presumably, the request for such authority would be proposed in legislation supplementary to the Foreign Military Assistance Act of 1949.

As you may recall, the MAP legislation, as originally introduced by the Administration, contained a provision which would have made it possible for the President to provide aid on a cash-reimbursable basis to any country associated with us in a collective or regional defense arrangement, or to any other nation whose increased security was in the national interest of the United States. The latter part of this provision was omitted from the legislation by the Congressional Committees and the omission was approved by the Secretary and the Secretary of Defense since it was considered that insistence on its inclusion might jeopardize the entire bill.

At the request of S/CFA, this office is currently preparing definitive statements as to the need for military assistance by certain NEA countries to be used as a basis for preliminary work with the Congress to assure that supplementary legislation, when requested, will not again be the subject of misunderstanding.

As indicated in the attached memorandum of August 16 to Dr. Berkner, it is extremely important that supplementary legislation be obtained in 1950 both as regards our foreign relations with certain of the NEA countries and as to certain US strategic objectives we are seeking in these countries.

In connection with action which NEA is urgently planning, it would be appreciated if you will advise this office whether the Secretary’s agreement to eliminate the above mentioned provision from MAP legislation currently being considered in the Congress has any bearing on the Department’s plans to seek supplementary legislation in 1950.1

1 Mr. Gross replied to Mr. McGhee in a memorandum of October 3, in which he stated: “It does not seem to me that the decision of the Administration to restrict the reimbursable aid provision in the Military Assistance Bill this year precludes the Department from proposing an amendment to the Military Assistance Legislation when it is submitted next year for a new authorization. “Before the Department goes back next year for a further authorization for the Military Assistance Program careful consideration must be given as to whether any additional countries should be added to the Program and, if so, on what basis. Any such determination would heed to be based upon a careful analysis of specific proposed programs of the type which NEA is presumably preparing.” (840.20/8–1649)

A marginal notation by Carl Marcy, the Assistant Legislative Counsel, states that Mr. Gross’ memorandum was “Not sent formally but copy given Robertson as setting forth our views.” David A. Robertson was Politico-Military Adviser in the Bureau of Near Eastern, South Asian, and African Affairs.

Editorial Note [Document 7]

Editorial Note

The Staff of the National Security Council, on December 23, prepared a draft report entitled “The Position of the United States with Respect to Asia”. The report, numbered NSC 48/1, was prepared with the advice and assistance of representatives of the Secretaries of State and Defense and of other high officials of the United States Government. Parts of the paper dealt with the political, economic, and security interests of the United States in South Asia. The text of the report is printed in Department of Defense, United States–Vietnam Relations, 1945–1967 (Washington, Government Printing Office, 1971), Book 8, page 226.

The National Security Council discussed the draft report and, on December 30, sent to President Truman a report identified as NSC 48/2, bearing the same title as the draft report and consisting solely of the conclusions of NSC 48/1, as amended and approved by the Council. The text of NSC 48/2 is printed in volume VII, Part 2, page 1215.

Talks at Washington between the United States and the United Kingdom on political and economic subjects concerning the Near EastTalks at Washington between the United States and the United Kingdom on political and economic subjects concerning the Near East1

1 Previous broad conversations of this character, known as the “Pentagon Talks of 1947”, are documented in Foreign Relations, 1947, vol. v, pp. 485 ff.

[8] Memorandum of Conversation, by the Secretary of State

[Washington,] April 4, 1949.

890.00/4–449

[9] The Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern, South Asian, and African Affairs (McGhee) to the British Superintending Under Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs (Wright), at London

Washington, October 24, 1949.

711.90/10–2449

[10] Memorandum by the Politico-Military Adviser in the Bureau of Near Eastern, South Asian, and African Affairs (Robertson)

[Washington,] November 14, 1949.

711.9011/11–1449

[11] Memorandum of Conversation, by the Deputy Director of the Office of African and Near Eastern Affairs (Moose)

[Washington,] November 18, 1949.

PPS Files, Lot 64/D/563, Libya

[12] Memorandum by the Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern, South Asian, and African Affairs (Hare) to the Deputy Under Secretary of State (Rusk)

[Washington,] December 19, 1949.

611.41/1–2550

[13] The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom

Washington, January 5, 1950—9 p. m.

790.00/1–550: Telegram

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Secretary of State 890.00/4–449

[Document 8]

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Secretary of State 2

top secret [Washington,] April 4, 1949.

Subject: Talk with Mr. Bevin3 about the Middle East and Southeast Asia, April 2, 3:00 p. m.

Participants: Secretary of State

Mr. Bevin

The British Ambassador

Dr. Jessup,4 State

Mr. Barclay, British Embassy5

Mr. Beam, State

Mr. Bevin outlined his concept of present world geographical-political factors. Since 1945 he had been thinking along the following lines. It was to be expected that Soviet Russia would succeed in expanding in the agricultural areas of the world. The Western world must hold the “outer crust” extending from Scandinavia to Turkey and including the Middle East. At Potsdam6 he had opposed Four-Powered Ruhr control since this was an industrial resource which must be preempted for the West. The presence of U.S. troops in Europe was an additional reassurance. So far we have done well in Europe. Some day Western Europe will overcome the obstacles of Nationalism and will develop a multilateral system. This was the concept the British Cabinet approved in 1945 by taking the “terrific decision” to get the UK into Europe.

Mr. Bevin said we should now look ahead to the primary producing countries. He had nothing against the Jews but he was trying to hold the Arabs in line, since he was convinced that the 100 million Moslems were one of the biggest potential forces in the world. The UK was the best window toward this area. Mr. Bevin did not favor the elaboration of joint military pacts for this sphere, but thought the US and UK should adopt a common line for the development of the great potential resources needed for our defense, particularly oil. Moreover, he foresaw an industrial recession may eventually occur and it was advisable now to plan for the creation of new capital goods.

Mr. Bevin said that once the Palestine question is out of the way, he hoped to concentrate on two or three great potential developments in the Middle East, which he proceeded to enumerate. There were the Lake Victoria and Lake Tana water schemes and furthermore a project for the growing of jute in southern Egypt. The Euphrates, scheme offered the possibility of establishing, under good living conditions, a five or six million population who could withstand Soviet pressure. Afghanistan, and particularly Persia, also offered many possibilities and it was desirable to finish the oil pipeline south of Aqbar. The Arab refugees from Palestine were a problem, however, which was being studied. Some 40,000 could be resettled on the slopes of the Jordan and he was putting pressure on the Syrian government for the settlement of between 200,000 and 300,000 in northern Syria. He hoped the rest could be absorbed in Transjordan.

As regards Arabia and this general area, Mr. Bevin favored an economic drive by the Western countries which would not be military in character, nor even primarily political. Development was important for the capital goods market and also for the production of food. On the whole, the Moslems were sensible people and he hoped that we can hold these 100 million for the West. He would like a US/UK working party set up for the coordination of plans.

With respect to India, Mr. Bevin mentioned that the Prime Minister had written the President. Coordination was necessary here also, since haphazard planning could lead to needless irritations.

With respect to Southeast Asia, Mr. Bevin mentioned the Dutch seemed to be coming into line but we must tell the Republicans they must play, too. He was upset by a proposal made in New York that the Republican government and Army return to Jogjakarta. The government had no civil service and chaos might result if the situation is not rightly handled. It is time for us to tell the other side, namely the Republicans, what we want.

According to Mr. Bevin, 60 percent of the people in Southeast Asia are Moslems and Russia has an opening here. The UK could exercise influence through Pakistan but hoped for U.S. help. The UK was moving slowly in Malaya but was broadening the basis of self government. With general reference to Indonesia, Burma, and Malaya, he would like to see a sort of Southeast Asian conference arrangement in which the US, UK, Australia, and New Zealand could cooperate for economic and political purposes, as distinct from a military understanding or pact for this area which should not be considered now. I interposed we might like to set up a kind of “Caribbean Commission” for Southeast Asia.

Mr. Bevin said that China seemed to be lost to us. He had furnished the U.S. with a documentary survey and would like to exchange opinions with us. As regards Hong Kong, he said the UK intended to stand firm, making it, if necessary, a sort of “Berlin of the East”, which could be used to influence the Chinese situation whatever might eventuate. The UK would assert its rights and he doubted if they would be challenged. (In reply to Mr. Bevin’s question, I said that the thought of another Berlin, if this involved another airlift, filled me with considerable distaste.)

Summing up, Mr. Bevin said the next big step was to proceed vigorously with economic, as distinct from military, development of the Middle East. India should be helped to reduce famine. Southeast Asia should be cleaned up in a kind of “conference arrangement”. He wished to be informed about U.S. policy in Japan and he would like to examine the Chinese situation with us so that there might be joint understanding.

In reply, I told Mr. Bevin that the President was greatly interested in the development of the Middle East which he regarded as the other side of the medal of Western European recovery.

As the President sees the problem, if no new markets are developed after the termination of ERP in 1952, friction will occur and an unbalance will take place in the bargaining position of the West with the East. The Eastern countries would be in a strong position to exploit barter arrangements by their rigid production controls, but if there are other places than Europe to which the Western European countries can look, they will be in a better position vis-à-vis the East. The President was extremely interested in the Euphrates scheme. He wished, however, to concentrate oil development problems and not diffuse our energies.

I said we wished to proceed on an international front and would like to find some instrumentality, such as the International Bank or other agency, through which we could act. Because of budgetary deficits, we did not see our way clear to using U.S. Government financing for the development of Point IV of the President’s Program, and we thought the International Bank is the appropriate and competent organization for this purpose. Mr. Bevin said he will examine the list of international agencies which might be of help, but he pointed out that some of the schemes may not be sufficiently definite to be handled in this way at this time.

I said we were doubtful about India and that so far our thinking had only been along vague lines. Mr. Bevin suggested we send experts to get in touch with planning groups who have been working on India and Africa under Sir Stafford Cripps.7

With respect to Indonesia, I recognized the situation could go to pieces. The Dutch had stupidly delayed many obvious decisions. I had urged the earliest dispatch of Van Roijen8 to that area and had assured the Dutch that Cochran9 will work with him. The main thing is to get the Dutch and the Republicans talking together.

I said we had given a great deal of thought to China. The Nationalists seem to be washed up and the Communists able to go where they wished. The Chinese are tired and disillusioned. Help to the Nationalists can have a contrary effect, since the Chinese might take the view it is only prolonging a war which must end. We had abandoned the idea of supporting the regime and were only extending to June 2 a further 58 million dollars under the China Aid Act. We thought the Moscow-trained Communists will be diluted, and that Chinese inertia and the corruption of the civil service will overcome them. After all the Chinese Communists must deal with the West to a certain extent, since Russia has no resources to offer. It had been difficult in this country publicly to withdraw support from the Nationalists, but the extreme supporters of Chiang Kai-shek in Congress were gaining a better appreciation of realities. The U.S. henceforth will pursue a more realistic policy respecting China.

As regards Japan, I said the Far Eastern Commission had become useless, since it had, become a forum for Soviet complaints. However, we will let it go its way. Since the U.S. is spending about 900 million dollars a year in Japan, MacArthur10 has been told to take more vigorous steps toward recovery. While reparations in themselves are not much of a drain, they are a confusing factor in the Japanese economy and we shall let them fall into oblivion. There was small chance of a treaty being concluded, and as far as I knew, no work was being done along these lines at present.

As regards the parts of the world we have discussed, Mr. Bevin said we seem to agree we should try to clean things up, leaving Japan out of account for the time being and also China, which appeared to be lost. While we had suffered a terrible blow in China, he was not too pessimistic and thought we could get along without it. Many of the Chinese would still be on our side, and after all, Great Britain had got along by letting the U.S. go its own way in earlier times.

At the end of our talk, which lasted an hour, Mr. Bevin left with me a Top Secret memorandum on Southeast Asia.11

2 Drafted by Jacob D. Beam, Acting Special Assistant in the Office of German and Austrian Affairs.

3 Ernest Bevin, British Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs.

4 Philip C. Jessup, Ambassador at Large.

5 Roderick E. Barclay was Private Secretary to Mr. Bevin; he was not attached to the British Embassy.

6 For documentation on the Potsdam Conference of 1945, see Foreign Relations, The Conference of Berlin (The Potsdam Conference), 1945, volumes i and ii .

7 British Chancellor of the Exchequer.

8 J. H. Van Roijen, Netherlands Representative at the United Nations.

9 J. Merle Cochran, United States Representative on the United Nations Good Offices Committee in Indonesia.

10 General of the Army Douglas MacArthur, Supreme Commander, Allied Powers, Japan.

11 Dated April 2; for text, see vol. vii, Part 2, p. 1135.

The Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern, South Asian, and African Affairs (McGhee) to the British Superintending Under Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs (Wright), at London 711.90/10–2449

[Document 9]

The Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern, South Asian, and African Affairs (McGhee) to the British Superintending Under Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs (Wright), at London 1

secret Washington, October 24, 1949.

My Dear Michael: I often recall the helpful discussions which we had in London on my return from the Near East this past spring. Since taking over my new functions2 I have also heard frequent reference to the important part you have played in the development of the present effective collaboration between the Foreign Office and the Department in Near Eastern matters, particularly in the important conversations during the fall of 1947. A great deal has happened since your visit here in 1947 and, in fact, there have been a number of new developments since our meeting in London, which laid the foundation for the Economic Survey Mission.3 Since Mr. Bevin did not bring a Near Eastern expert with him during his recent visit,3 there was not much opportunity for detailed discussions on this area.

In these circumstances, the thought occurred to us that it would be helpful to both of our governments if we could meet with you again to discuss matters of common interest in the Near Eastern area, particularly in the political and economic fields. Roger Makins4 agreed to take the matter up with you on his return, and I was pleased to hear today from your Embassy that the idea appealed to you and that you would be able to come. I have had in mind for the meeting something of a rather informal character, more or less along the lines of our conversations with Mr. Dening5 when he was recently here with Mr. Bevin. I have no precise agenda in mind, but we would obviously find it of interest to discuss the activities of the Economic Survey Mission, whose preliminary report will be available at that time, and the longer range development proposals which we understand you have been preparing, as well as such political questions as the Syrian-Iraqi union movement,6 and the status of the Arab League. We will, of course, be glad to receive any suggestions which you may have as to suitable topics for discussion. Unless you feel strongly, we would prefer not to deal with military or strategic problems as such, except insofar as they may bear on other topics. We will also be glad to discuss with you if you like any other common problems within your area of responsibility, such as the Italian Colonies question, however, we would like to focus our discussions on the Arab world and Israel.

Your suggestion of November 15 as the date of your visit is fine. I will be back by that time from meeting with our Chiefs of Mission to the Arab States and Israel now scheduled for around November 10.7 We had previously considered having this meeting later, in which case your visit would have come first, however I believe the other sequence will probably be preferable. Mid-November will also be an opportune time to discuss any UN problems which might be awaiting action in the General Assembly. There is some slight competition at this time from the Shah of Iran, who will be in Washington between the 16th and 19th, however, he will not take much of our time and you will be wanting to see other people in your Embassy, the Department, and the government who will not be involved with the Shah. We will be glad to have you stay as long as you like. Our Near Eastern talks should, however, not occupy us more than four to five days.

I would appreciate having your comments on the foregoing. I look forward to seeing you here, and feel sure that a frank and informal discussion between us will be helpful to us both.8

With kindest personal regards,

Sincerely yours,

George C. McGhee

1 Enclosed in Mr. McGhee’s letter of October 24 to the Second Secretary of Embassy in the United Kingdom (Palmer) for transmittal to Mr. Wright.

2 Mr. McGhee became Assistant Secretary of State on October 3.

3 For documentation on this subject, see pp. 594 [Pg. 594 is part of Doc. 341] ff.

3 For documentation on this subject, see pp. 594 [Pg. 594 is part of Doc. 341] ff.

4 Sir Roger M. Makins, Deputy Under-Secretary of State in the British Foreign Office.

5 Maberly E. Dening, Assistant Under-Secretary of State in the British Foreign Office.

6 For documentation on this subject, see pp. 180 [Pg. 180 is part of Doc. 76] ff.

7 The Conference was actually held from November 26 to 29; for relevant documentation, see pp. 165 [Pg. 165 is part of Doc. 71] ff.

8 The genesis of the McGhee–Wright conversations may be traced back to discussions at Paris between Secretary Acheson and Ernest Bevin, British Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs. Mr. Acheson, on June 1, informed the Department that Mr. Bevin had inquired of him “whether we think it would be useful for Wright to go to Washington … with view to further discussion Near Eastern questions.” (Actel 30) The Department responded the same day, advising the Secretary that a visit by Mr. Wright “would be helpful.” (Telac 38) The two telegrams are printed on pp. 1081 [Pg. 1081 is part of Doc. 715] and 1082 [Pg. 1082 includes portions of Doc. 716 and Doc. 717]. Later in June and until the talks got under way in November, the Department exchanged letters and telegrams with the Embassy in the United Kingdom on the timing of the talks, the agenda and the like. These papers are filed under 711.41 and 711.90.

Additional information on the origins of the talks is included in Mr. McGhee’s memorandum of October 7, p. 165 [Pg. 165 is part of Doc. 71].

Memorandum by the Politico-Military Adviser in the Bureau of Near Eastern, South Asian, and African Affairs (Robertson) 711.9011/11–1449

[Document 10]

Memorandum by the Politico-Military Adviser in the Bureau of Near Eastern, South Asian, and African Affairs (Robertson)1

top secret [Washington,] November 14, 1949.

U.S. Strategic Position in the Eastern Mediterranean and Middle East

Since the adoption of the United Nations Charter in 1945 it has been a basic objective of foreign policy to maintain world peace in accordance with the Charter’s principles. The development of any situation which might lead to widespread armed conflict would accordingly be a matter of concern to this government. An area in which such situations exist is the Eastern Mediterranean and Middle East. For the purposes of this discussion this area is comprised of Greece, Turkey, Iran, the Arab states, Israel and Libya. The security of the Eastern Mediterranean and Middle East is of critical importance to the security of the United States. The security of this area would be jeopardized if any potentially hostile power gained a foothold therein. It should be U.S. policy in accordance with the principles and in the spirit of the United Nations Charter to support the security of the Eastern Mediterranean and Middle East. As a corollary of this policy the U.S. should assist in maintaining the political independence and territorial integrity of Greece, Turkey and Iran. In implementing this policy the U.S. should be prepared to make full use of its political, economic and, if necessary, military power in such manner as may be found most effective. Political and economic means should be exhausted, including recourse to the United Nations, before resorting to force. Any resort to force should be in consonance with the Charter of the United Nations and in cooperation with like-minded members of the United Nations in so far as possible.

In the case of Greece we have defined the strategic interests of the United States as favoring a Greek military establishment capable of maintaining internal security in order to avoid communistic domination of that country. To this end military equipment and training have been provided over the past few years with the result that the Greek National Armies have successfully destroyed the major elements of the communist supported guerrilla forces in Greece. We have expressed our interest in continuing our support of Greece in the face of any renewed communistic efforts to dominate or overthrow the duly constituted government.

The United States has greater long-range strategic interests in the military establishments of Turkey than in those of Greece. Turkey is strategically more important since it dominates major air, land and sea routes from the U.S.S.R. to the Cairo-Suez area and to the Middle East oil fields. U.S. policy on military aid to Turkey should be based on the necessity of supporting and strengthening Turkish efforts to oppose communistic pressure and on possible utilization of Turkey for U.S. strategic purposes in the event of conflict with the U.S.S.R.

The long-range security objectives of the U.S. in Iran should be to supply the Iranian Army with sufficient equipment and support as would reasonably ensure maintenance of internal security, a stabilized government, and prevention of interference from outside forces, other than direct invasion. If Iran fell under communistic influence its independence would cease, and its strategic oil supply could no longer be counted on and security of the Middle East as a whole would be jeopardized.

Our policy toward Israel and the Arab states will be an important factor in determining whether they can be stimulated to constructive action in their own behalf to provide the basis for a stable and progressive political structure and a balanced and viable economy. If either Israel or the Arab states fail to take such action, the security of the Eastern Mediterranean and the Middle East and U.S. national interests therein will be jeopardized. If Israeli policy develops along expansionist and aggressive lines, the security of the area and the United States national interests therein will be endangered. In view of the strong passions which have been aroused, it will be many years before relations between; Israel and neighboring countries can become sufficiently stable as to be proof against sudden and violent eruption. Accordingly our policy toward Israel and the Arab states should be based on the fundamental propositions that (a) The political and economic stability and security of the Eastern Mediterranean and the Middle East are of critical importance to the security of the United States (b) It is in the U.S. national interest to have the respect and good will of all the peoples of the area, Jews and Arabs alike, and their orientation away from the Soviet Union (c) The differences between the new Israeli state and the neighboring Arab states should be reconciled at least to the extent that Israel and Arab states would act in concert to oppose Soviet aggression (d) The foregoing can best be achieved by asserting leadership in the solution of the economic, social and political problems of the area, and on an impartial basis (e) There should be close United States-United Kingdom collaboration wherever possible to achieve the basic objectives. In light of the Security Council Resolution of August 11, 1949 removing the embargo on export of war material to these countries and in order to promote internal security as a basis for general security in the area, we should permit the export of reasonable amounts of military material to Israel and the Arab states limited to such arms as are within the scope of legitimate security requirements.

In a study concerning the Persian Gulf it has been pointed out that in the event of hostilities the oil resources and facilities must be denied to the enemy. Accordingly plans must be developed for the neutralization of the facilities. It is emphasized that these plans are to be implemented only as a last resort and after it is determined that there is no reasonable probability of keeping any particular field out of the possession of the enemy. It is concluded in this study that (a) Plans for neutralization of Middle Eastern oil facilities are in no way to be construed as lessening the importance of holding the Middle Eastern oil areas if such action be feasible and in accordance with accepted strategic concepts, and (b) In view of the essential nature of Middle Eastern oil to the United States, neutralization plans for the Middle Eastern oil fields shall be implemented only as a last resort. (Comment: As a precautionary measure it might be ad visible that Ambassador Childs2 be requested not to enlarge on any discussion of this subject on the occasion of your presentation.)

An appraisal of U.S. security interests in the entire area of the Middle East and Eastern Mediterranean indicates the following strategic requirements. We should deny any foothold in this area to any potentially hostile power. We should maintain friendly relationships with the countries concerned promoting such relationships by social and economic assistance, together with such military assistance as may be practicable, to ensure collaboration by the indigenous peoples in the common defense of the area. The oil resources of the area should be developed by the U.S. and such other countries as have and can be expected to have a friendly attitude toward the U.S. We should take such proper steps as would assure the right for U.S. military forces to enter militarily essential areas upon a threat of war.

In accordance with these strategic requirements we should be in a position to secure air base facilities in the Dhahran area sufficient for the operational use of all types of modern military aircraft and for a U.S. military mission so expanded that it, in conjunction with Saudi nationals, could defend U.S. military installations in the Dhahran area. The U.S. Air Force has in the course of nearly four years become increasingly dependent on this base for its Near Eastern operations and for the maintenance of transport and communications between the occupational forces in Europe and the Far East. Our world-wide strategic position would be greatly improved, if in the event of war the means could be developed to defend successfully and to conduct sustained air operations from the Dhahran airport. A similar observation might be made regarding the U.S. Air Force facility at Tripoli, Libya. It is highly important that we be able to work out satisfactory arrangements for continuing our rights to use this important airbase when a solution in the UN has been attained as regards disposition of the Italian Colonies.

We have already undertaken and should continue to coordinate the handling of our common strategic interests in the area with the British as it would be unrealistic for the United States to undertake to carry out its policies unless the British maintained their strong strategic, political and economic position in the Middle East and Eastern Mediterranean and they and we follow parallel policies in that area. The desirability for a common approach to problems and collaboration wherever possible has been clearly demonstrated by the useful results of our cooperation to date particularly since the outbreak of World War II.

1 Prepared, presumably, for the use of Mr. McGhee in connection with his talks with Mr. Wright.

2 J. Rives Childs, Ambassador to Saudi Arabia.

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Deputy Director of the Office of African and Near Eastern Affairs (Moose) PPS Files, Lot 64/D/563, Libya

1 [Document 11]

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Deputy Director of the Office of African and Near Eastern Affairs (Moose)

top secret [Washington,] November 18, 1949.

Subject: United States Military Requirements in Tripolitania

Participants: British Foreign Office: Mr. Michael Wright

ANE—Mr. Moose

ANE—Mr. Kopper2

London Embassy—Mr. Palmer

Mr. Wright, adverting to his conversation of November 15, 1949,3 with Assistant Secretary McGhee, inquired whether or not the Department had been able to obtain confirmation of the continuing desire of the United States Government to secure air base rights in Tripolitania.

Mr. Moose replied that an oral inquiry had been addressed to the competent officer in the Department of Defense, and that the reply had been in the affirmative. When Mr. Moose had asked for an indication of the extent of the rights desired, he had been informed that the rights contemplated by the Defense Department consisted of rights to an “airbase and supporting facilities”. Included in that phrase are 1) the right to develop, operate and maintain the present base; 2) the right to develop, operate and maintain the present oil pipeline (or other pipelines) from the port of Tripoli to Wheelus Field; 3) the right to develop, operate and maintain fuel and ammunition storage at Wheelus Field as well as in dispersed localities; 4) the right to develop, operate and maintain necessary communication facilities, including the present radio station; 5) unrestricted access to and between the facilities enumerated, including the use of the Port of Tripoli or other ports; and 6) the right to station such personnel in Tripolitania as may be needed for the operation and protection of the facilities. The rights described above, said Mr. Moose, are indicative of United States needs, but are not necessarily comprehensive.

Mr. Wright observed that he would like to have some kind of written record of the foregoing points, so the British provisional administration in Tripolitania could keep them in mind as an objective. Mr. Moose replied that he did not imagine there would be any objection, though he was not sure how this information should be transmitted.

Mr. Wright asked how firm the United States military authorities are in their desire for air base rights. He added that it would be embarrassing if the British were to make arrangements for such rights to be granted to the United States, only to find that they were no longer desired. Mr. Moose replied that the officer in the Department of Defense to whom he had talked had indicated that the Department was firm in its desire for the base rights. The officer had indicated no wavering in the official desire for the rights, although observing that further planning and budgetary conditions would of course govern the use which might be made of such rights.

1 Lot 64 D 563 is the master file of documents, drafts, records of meetings, memoranda, and related correspondence of the Policy Planning Staff of the Department of State for the years 1947–1953.

2 Samuel K. C. Kopper, Assistant Chief of the Division of African Affairs.

3 See Annex 6, p. 71 [Pg. 71 is part of Doc. 12].

Memorandum by the Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern, South Asian, and African Affairs (Hare) to the Deputy Under Secretary of State (Rusk) 611.41/1–2550

[Document 12]

Memorandum by the Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern, South Asian, and African Affairs (Hare) to the Deputy Under Secretary of State (Rusk)

secret [Washington,] December 19, 1949.

I am attaching for your information informal summaries of the discussions which were conducted with Mr. Michael Wright of the British Foreign Office (Tab A1 ). Mr. McGhee and Mr. Wright held the talks between November 14 and 17 and I continued them on November 22. There is also attached for reference the full record of the meetings (Tab B) as agreed with the British.2

As was brought out by Mr. McGhee is his introductory remarks at the first meeting with Mr. Wright, it is clearly understood by both parties that the conclusions reached did not constitute binding agreements but that the talks were designed to afford an opportunity for finding areas of agreement subject to further examination and to the obtaining of higher approval as required.

A summary of the conversations with Mr. Wright on the former Italian Colonies (included here as part of Tab B) was sent to you separately under cover of my memorandum of November 29, 1949.3

Copies of this record have been furnished S/P and EUR, both of which were represented during the talks.

[Annex 1]

Statement by the United States and the United Kingdom Groups

secret [Washington,] November 14, 1949.

Introductory Discussions

In his introductory remarks, Mr. George McGhee said that such intimate discussions had now become a normal aspect of Anglo-American relations. It was clearly understood by both parties that the conclusions from the talks constituted no binding agreements on the parties concerned and that the purpose of the exchanges of view was to find areas of agreement. In the case of the United States Group the opinions expressed and conclusions reached were tentative until the conclusion of the conference of American representatives in the Near East which was opening in Istanbul on November 26th. (Following the conclusion of this meeting it would be necessary to spell out the discussions and obtain higher approval for more precise definition of policies.)

Mr. Wright confirmed Mr. McGhee’s view of the status of the talks and pointed out that conclusions reached on the British side would also be for approval by higher authority. He hoped that the talks would lead to agreement on the same set of principles for tackling problems in the Middle East.

Mr. McGhee said he had considered carefully Anglo-American relations in the Near East and had come to the conclusion that the objectives of the two countries in the area were identical, although there might be a difference of method in seeking to attain them. Both countries attached high importance to the area from a security point of view. American interests were parallel and not competitive and both countries shared a common desire for the stability of the area and its orientation towards the West. The difference in methods might arise from the fact that the influence and material interests of the United Kingdom and the United States were not the same in each country. Points of asymmetry, therefore, were only superimposed on an area of broad agreement. He emphasized that the United States Government had no desire to compete with or to hinder the United Kingdom in carrying out its policy in the Middle East. The United States policy was, however, governed by the limitations imposed by the nature of the United States Government, its policy of non-interference, and the difficulty of securing ad hoc treatment.

Mr. Wright agreed in general with the above analysis. He said that in the United Kingdom view the Middle East was a key to the struggle with the Soviet Union. If Western influence was removed from the Middle East, either voluntarily or by force, Communism would certainly fill the vacuum left. The Middle East under Communist control would bring alarming results. It would affect the whole United Kingdom relationship with Asia. It would prejudice the future of Europe and would pave the way for Communist domination in Africa. The triumph of Soviet ideology in the Middle East and Africa would secure a tremendous strategic prize for the U.S.S.R., the possession of which would in other circumstances cost her a great expenditure of blood and treasure. With this prize, the U.S.S.R. might be emboldened to take further aggressive action. The loss of the Middle East to Communism would have a devastating economic effect on the United Kingdom. Post-war recovery would be prejudiced and, deprived of Middle East oil and to a lesser extent, cotton, the United Kingdom economy would be irretrieveably damaged. It was to our common advantage that the United States Government should increasingly concern itself with the Middle East. The United Kingdom Government had no desire to persuade the United States Government in this matter. It was entirely a decision for the United States Government but he wished to make it clear that the presence of the United States in the Middle East was considered by the United Kingdom to be to the common advantage.

Mr. McGhee replied that the importance of the Middle East to the United States Government was determined to a considerable extent by its importance to the United Kingdom Government. The Americans had no comparable position in Africa and Asia to protect and, in the matter of oil, was not so dependent as the United Kingdom on Middle East supplies. Nevertheless, American oil interests were large and the area was important from the point of view of strategic position and air communications. For the United States to take an increased interest in the Middle East was the assumption of a new responsibility. In these discussions the pervading problem from the American side was how far to go in accepting new responsibilities and in taking a more positive role in the area. It was not sufficient just to ward off Communism in the Middle East, it was essential to assist the peoples of the Middle East to improve their living standards and social and political institutions and to acquire self respect and their proper place among the nations of the world. The United States Government had found it advantageous to back nationalism against communism. But nationalism was not necessarily friendly to British and American interests. We should aim at putting the Middle East countries on their own feet and persuading them voluntarily to turn toward the West. The United States was in the process of deciding how far it should and could go in a positive approach to the area to achieve the foregoing objectives.

Mr. Wright agreed that support of nationalism could be used effectively against the spread of communism. But nationalism and communism could not be fought together. It should be our objective to convert the nationalism of the Middle East countries into a friendly force. France, Belgium and Holland did not yet wholly share this view. The preoccupation of the youthful countries of the Middle East with political problems made it very difficult for economic progress to be made. It was, however, the view of the United Kingdom that the effect of the Palestine problem was fading and the moment for more constructive action by the United Kingdom and the United States was approaching.

The conclusions drawn from the above discussion are as follows:— (a) The general objectives of the United States and United Kingdom Governments in the Middle East are basically the same.

(b) The maintenance and extension of a friendly attitude on the part of the Middle Eastern countries to the United Kingdom and United States influence is a vital factor in the security of the Western Powers. The denial of the area to Communist influence, in peace no less than in war, is essential.

(c) The United States has no desire to compete with or hinder the United Kingdom Government in its activities in the Middle East area but on the contrary both have a desire to reinforce the general position of the other.

(d) Should the United States Government choose to assume a greater responsibility in the area, such a decision would be welcomed by the United Kingdom as being to the common advantage.

(e) It must be our common aim to align the forces of nationalism in the Middle East against communism and to guide them into channels friendly to the Western Powers.

(f) With the bitterness of the Palestine problem receding the moment for United States and United Kingdom to take more constructive action to achieve common objectives is at hand. The United States Government is at present considering how far it can go in making a more positive approach to the area.4

[Annex 2]

Statement by the United States and the United Kingdom Groups

secret [Washington,] November 14, 1949.

Discussion on a Palestine Settlement 5

Mr. Fraser Wilkins of the State Department drew attention to four points outstanding in the Palestine settlement arising directly from the Resolution of December 11, 1948. These points were: (1) What was to be the future of the Palestine Conciliation Commission?

(2) Could the scope of present discussions be extended to lead towards a solution of the boundary question?

(3) What was to be the future of the Jerusalem area?

(4) What was to be the decision on the right of the refugee to return—repatriation and settlement?

Mr. McGhee said that it was the United States policy to keep the solution of the Palestine question in a United Nations framework and not to intervene on a national basis. The United States Government had decided that it was neither desirable nor possible for the United States itself to propose any overall solution. It was not considered that the United States had sufficient influence on the countries concerned to persuade them to accept such a solution, and the result would only be to create bad relations and impair the position of the United States in assisting the United Nations or the states concerned in arriving at an agreement.

It, therefore, supported the continuation of the work of the United Nations through the Palestine Conciliation Commission. In Mr. McGhee’s view there was no quick solution and the Conciliation Commission had a long pull before it. Its affairs appeared at the moment to be in a critical state as a result of the Israelis’ refusal to utilize it for indirect talks, and the Arabs’ unwillingness to talk direct to the Jews. The United States delegate to the P.C.C. would, however, urge the Commission to seek a solution in every way possible, including encouragement of direct talks. If acceptable to both parties, the Commission would mediate between the disputants.

Mr. McGhee wished to keep the Commission entirely divorced from the relief and development program. In his view coordination between the two could be achieved outside the area by the governments represented in them. In the United States view, the Commission should continue with its existing terms of reference as it appeared desirable not to risk raising the question of modified terms of reference in the General Assembly and thus precipitate general discussion of the Palestine problem.

Mr. Wright of the Foreign Office generally shared these views and was anxious to avoid a debate in the Assembly, and he considered it inadvisable to tamper with the present terms of reference of the Commission.

Mr. McGhee pointed out that the Jerusalem settlement and the report of the Economic Survey Mission must necessarily be fully debated. If the United States is to take a positive role in the economic development of the Near East, it is necessary that this development be associated with the solution of the Palestine problem. No other policy or legislative basis for United States participation in the development of the Middle East exists at present, except for the Point Four program, which is limited to technical assistance. The United States desired the United Nations to continue to assume responsibility and to provide the machinery through which the parties could solve the Palestine problem themselves. The United States wished to avoid further general statements which might serve to postpone the parties coming to grips with the problem, rather than assist them.

Mr. Wright drew a distinction between private and public advice on a settlement and cited cases in which the U.K. Government considered that informal action could facilitate settlement.

Mr. McGhee agreed, but emphasized that the parties must themselves come to grips with the problem.

On the question of Jerusalem Mr. McGhee said the United States supported the P.C.C.’s proposal. The United States would not wish to take the initiative to amend the proposal in the General Assembly, but would be prepared to consider the amendments of others on their merits and if they appear to contribute to obtaining agreement. The plan was in their view a good compromise proposal. It was the general view of the meeting that it might be desirable to get a Sub-Committee appointed after the discussion of Jerusalem in the ad hoc Political Committee. This Sub-Committee could, under the supervision of the P.C.C. try to work out a plan based on the amendments presented. It was agreed to consider the Jerusalem problem further on the arrival of Mr. Sheringham from the Foreign Office.

Mr. Wright then raised the question of the incorporation of Arab Palestine in Jordan. The Foreign Office considered the present state of uncertainty was bound to introduce an unnecessary element of instability into the area. The incorporation of Arab Palestine into Jordan, besides removing a cause of instability, would be a material factor in solving the refugee problem. The Arab League appeared to be reconciled to the step and it seemed unlikely that the Israelis would object.

Mr. McGhee replied that when the Secretary of State, Mr. Bevin, had raised this question with Mr. Acheson, the U.S. considered that the moment was not ripe for incorporation. It was pointed out at that time that this might lead to similar declaration by Israel with respect to her occupied territory, and might be resisted by the other Arab states. New factors had now been introduced. Israel had asserted title to the territory already occupied by them and had stated there would be no cession of it.

The United States Government accepted the principle of incorporation of Arab Palestine in Jordan and was concerned only with the question of timing.

Mr. Wright suggested that some time after the General Assembly Jordan should, by proclamation, incorporate the area. The U.K. would raise no objection and he hoped that the United States would follow suit. The Anglo-Jordanian Treaty would automatically be extended to the enlarged area. He agreed with Mr. Hare that the move would in practice mean the liquidation of the greater part of the outstanding territorial settlement and would be a marked step forward.

Mr. McGhee agreed to discuss the point with the United States representatives at the coming meeting at Istanbul and reaffirmed the United States Government’s agreement to the step in principle. He said that the U.S. would consider the matter further after the General Assembly.6

[Annex 3]

Statement by the United States and the United Kingdom Groups

secret [Washington,] November 14, 1949.

Points Arising from the Discussion on Long Range Development in the Middle East

1. The U.K. considers that positive action is now essential in the area on two lines.

(a) Actual works measures.

(b) Drive for the improvement of social conditions.

As far as (a) was concerned it is considered that the survey period is now over and that a number of schemes are now ripe for execution. A priority list of projects has accordingly been drawn up in consultation with Departments in London and is now communicated to U.S. Government for their consideration, and in hope that they would support its proposals.

2. The U.K. feels that the cost of long range development in the Middle East is of manageable proportions and will yield substantial results.

3. The U.K. had no feeling of reserve or antagonism towards the United States taking a more prominent role.

4. In the view of the U.S. Government and the U.K. the Arabs must take the major responsibility for carrying out development work. For this reason and in view of national susceptibilities it would be profitable to work through Development Boards set up in the Middle East countries themselves. Any regional development organization arising out of the ESM report could assist those Boards in technical matters and coordinate outside assistance forthcoming as a result of the ESM report.

5. From the U.S. point of view the Point Four and any long range development programme must be coordinated with the Clapp report.7 It is important that the Clapp report lay the basis for longer range development programs. The Foreign Office proposals (see 1. above) might be communicated to Clapp on a personal basis.

6. U.K. and U.S. Government agreed that the area should not be parcelled out into “spheres of influence”. It was also agreed that it would be desirable to approach long range development plans on a country to country basis.

7. In general private capital was not attracted by the type of project envisaged for the Middle East countries. The U.S. Government emphasized that Point Four program did not involve direct financial assistance and that other countries must be prepared to contribute to development programs.8

[Annex 4]

Statement by the United States and the United Kingdom Groups

secret [Washington,] November 14 and 15, 1949.

Points Arising From a Discussion of the Report of the Economic Survey Mission

1. The proposal of the Economic Survey Mission to set up a new agency for the administration of relief and relief works projects was exhaustively discussed. In approaching this problem the Foreign Office said that they had seven criteria: (a) That the transition from relief to relief works be made as soon as possible.

(b) That any new agency set up should not be administered or controlled by the secretariat of the United Nations.

(c) That the new agency should not include Slav or other undesirable membership; and should, if possible, be composed of British, American, French and Turkish representatives, i.e. the same membership as the Economic Survey Mission.

(d) That the local governments should be associated as closely as possible in responsibility for the execution of the program.

(e) That the new agency should not, at this state [stage], be made responsible for all development in the Middle East Area as a whole.

(f) That the proposed arrangement should not involve any government directly in the responsibility of handling relief funds raised under U.N. auspices.

(g) That the U.K.’s contribution could be in non-convertible sterling only.

2. The United States Government agreed with the above criteria and emphasized their anxiety to avoid national responsibility for the distribution of funds derived from international sources. From their point of view, it is essential that the Clapp Report lays the basis for long-term development program as the situation arising from the war in Palestine was the only basis on which funds for development in the Near East could be requested from Congress at this time.

3. In considering national contributions the U.S. representatives saw no reason why the U.K. £1 million interest-free loan to Jordan should not be considered (for “matching purposes”) as part of the U.K. subscription, the extent of which would have to be considered further in London. The U.S. Government indicated that it was not its policy to consider extending loans to countries not fully credit-worthy.

4. As a result of the discussions, agreement was reached on the attached draft resolutions and the supporting State Department memorandum subject to drafting amendments. (Also attached is a revised draft of the resolution.)9

[Annex 5]

Statement by the United States and the United Kingdom Groups

secret [Washington,] November 15, 1949.

Discussion on Arab Unity

Mr. Wright said that in the British view one of the reasons for Arab bitterness against Western countries was the territorial settlement after World War I. This settlement, in the Arab view, created artificial territorial divisions which have been continuously resented. There existed amongst the Arabs a deep-seated desire for some sort of union and this desire was a potent factor in their political thinking. It had so far found expression only in the Arab League, whose record was on the whole unsuccessful. The policy of the Arab League had been one of extreme nationalism orientated against the western powers. This policy had to a large extent now been discredited. He felt that if every move towards closer union between Arab countries was blocked by Western Countries the Arabs would fall back again on the extremism which had characterised the first stage of Arab League development. There was in the Middle East countries a strong desire for some change and in Arab minds social, economic, and political reform or change were linked. However illogical it might appear to the U.K. and the U.S., any attempt to block political change in the Middle East was automatically interpreted as an attempt to block economic and social change. The U.K. attitude towards any movement for closer union in the Middle East, was based on the foregoing analysis. The U.K. was opposed to change by force but had decided that it could not oppose change brought about in a peaceful and constitutional manner. The U.K. could not share the French desire for retaining the status quo at all costs.

Mr. McGhee replied that the U.S. Government was in general agreement with this analysis. There could be no doubt that the instability of the area was increased by the existence of several small states which were not viable either politically or economically. He believed a more stable situation would exist if the states could get together in some way. The U.S. Government did not seek to maintain the status quo but in the case of the proposed Iraq-Syrian Union10 had not considered that the moment was ripe nor the auspices correct. It had therefore counselled caution and careful consideration. He thought that the attitudes of the U.S. Government and the U.K. were close on this point.

Mr. Wright said that the proposed union in its extreme and immediate form would undoubtedly cause serious difficulties with neighbouring Arab states. The U.K. had felt, however, that it could not come out against it. It was possible that the idea would in fact now come to nothing. He noted with interest that the states had been considering steps short of complete union.

It was agreed that much of the instability in the area arose from a feeling of insecurity in the countries concerned. There was a general discussion on how far this insecurity could be removed from which the following points emerged:— 1. The Egyptian proposal for a general Arab collective security pact was in too elementary a stage for judgment to be passed upon it. The U.K.-U.S. attitude should for the time being be non-committal.

2. A Middle East pact on the Atlantic model was excluded by the present policy of the U.S. Government and, in any case, such a pact did not by itself meet U.K. strategic requirements. Bilateral treaties between the U.K. and Arab countries were necessary and their stabilising effect was recognised.

3. As a result of the existing Palestine situation it was necessary for U.S. Government to seek to maintain a balance of its favours between Arab states and Israel.

4. U.S. Military Assistance Programme could not be extended to Near East countries other than to Greece, Iran and Turkey with the possible later exception of S[audi] A[rabia].

5. The approval of the U.S. and its influence on the side of the maintenance of existing U.K. Arab treaties would be of great assistance to the U.K. Government and would increase the stability of the area.

6. The United States would examine its attitude toward the extension of U.K. treaty obligations to additional Arab countries, although such an extension did not at first glance seem attractive to Foreign Office representatives. The maintenance of the U.S. air base at Dhahran was a stabilising influence.

7. A revision of Arab League activities leading to more concern with economic development should be encouraged.

8. Both U.S. and U.K. Governments are opposed to political change by force but would not obstruct change brought about in a peaceful and constitutional manner.11

[Annex 6]

Statement by the United States and the United Kingdom Groups

secret [Washington,] November 15, 1949.

Discussion on the Former Italian Colonies 12

1. Mr. Moose opened the discussion by saying that he had heard a suggestion to the effect that the United Kingdom Delegation to the United Nations was considering moving, in a plenary session, an amendment to the First Committee’s Resolution on the Former Italian Colonies in so far as it affected the Commissioner and the Advisory Council. He understood that the United Kingdom Delegation was thinking of trying to get the resolution amended in a plenary session to provide for the earliest possible turn-over to the Italians of the administration of Italian Somaliland. While the United States was in full sympathy with the British aims in these respects, they saw some danger in re-opening these issues in a plenary session. Although the Resolution had been carried in the Committee by 49 votes in favor to one against, with eight abstentions, it would be a pity to endanger its passage through the plenary.

2. Mr. Wright began his remarks by saying that only the administering power could appreciate the difficulties of trying to run a territory satisfactorily from the point of view of its inhabitants, to safeguard long-term British interests, and to keep in step with the U.N. If the United Kingdom had at times seemed hard to please, it should be remembered that they alone had all these difficulties to contend with.

italian somaliland

3. Mr. Wright said that the United Kingdom had never been really happy that an Italian return to Somaliland was the right policy from the point of view of the future of the territory but the United Kingdom had agreed to support an Italian return as the lesser of several evils. The major danger attaching to it was that the Italians might run into serious trouble when they got back to the territory. Whether they did or not would depend largely on their behavior when they returned and on the kind of officials they took with them. The United Kingdom was anxious not to see any trouble develop, particularly before British troops had withdrawn. From the British point of view, therefore, the sooner the Italians took over, the better it would be. Details of the hand-over had already been planned under the title “Operation Caesar”, as suggested by the Italians. It was expected that the hand-over would take two months from the commencement of the operation. The British authorities would do everything possible to help the Italians before and during the hand-over but they would leave no one behind after the hand-over period. The United Kingdom would like the hand-over to take place in February or March at the latest, so that it could be completed before the monsoon season. The United Kingdom would therefore be very grateful for the assistance of the United States Government in getting a trusteeship agreement for Italian Somaliland approved as soon as possible. In response to an American question, Mr. Wright indicated that the paragraph in the Committee resolution for the transfer of administration to the Italians was satisfactory.

4. Mr. McGhee asked whether Mr. Wright thought the United Nations Council would work satisfactorily. Mr. Wright replied that, in his opinion, it would be extremely difficult to make the United Nations scheme work satisfactorily. The United Kingdom would never have agreed to administer a territory under such terms, but as the Italians had agreed to it, it would be their problem. It was asked on the United States side whether the Italians had a draft trusteeship agreement ready since it was felt that this would save a good deal of time. Mr. Wright said that he was not certain whether a draft agreement had yet been worked out by the Italians.

eritrea

5. Mr. Moose mentioned that the Commission to be sent by the United Nations to investigate the situation in Eritrea was composed, as at present, of representatives of Pakistan, Norway, Burma, Guatemala and South Africa. Mr. Wright said that there seemed nothing to be done but to wait and see how the Commission did its work. If the Commission was objective, it would probably have to recommend something more or less similar to the U.S.–U.N. proposals. Mr. Wright mentioned that he had heard a rumour that the United States Delegation was considering re-introducing its proposal for the federation of Eritrea with Ethiopia. The United Kingdom would at this stage prefer to let the present proposal for a Commission go through. Mr. McGhee said that since the United Kingdom would have to bear the burden of another year’s administration of Eritrea under the proposal for a Commission, it was for the United Kingdom to say whether they preferred to bear that burden rather than try to get a solution involving personal union under the Emperor. Mr. McGhee agreed to find out what the United States Delegation had in mind.

libya

6. Mr. McGhee asked what the United Kingdom intended to do regarding the possibility of amending the First Committee’s Resolution. Mr. Wright replied that the United Kingdom Delegation had at present merely reserved the right to raise the matter in a plenary session. Meanwhile the matter had been referred to London. He felt personally that the United Kingdom Delegation was unlikely to move any further amendments.

7. Mr. McGhee asked what objections the United Kingdom had to the Committee’s proposal for a U.N. Commissioner and a Council. Mr. Wright replied that the only workable principle was that one authority alone should be responsible for the administration of a territory. He understood that the United Nations had now decided to omit the word “advisory” which had previously been used to qualify the Council. Mr. McGhee pointed out that the Resolution provided that the Council would “aid and advise” the Commissioner. But he agreed that some of the functions laid down for the Council dealt with matters such as the setting up of a constitution which closely affected the administration of the territory.

8. The problem of where the Council would sit was also discussed. Mr. Wright said that this point had not been made clear in the resolution; but if the Council were to sit in the territory itself, immense difficulties would arise. A Council of ten people sitting, for example, in so small a place as Tripoli would be quite out of balance, even if the Council were harmonious. But in fact the Council was unlikely to be harmonious, since so many different national interests and aims would be in play. Mr. Moose recalled that the U.S. favored having the headquarters of the Council outside of the territory. He added that Geneva had a good deal to commend it for the seat of the Council. If the Council resided in the territory itself, they would have constant appeals from the local inhabitants to intervene in the administration. Mr. Wright said that the British authorities had been told both by Tripolitanian notables and by the Emir of Cyrenaica that they did not want a United Nations commission. With regard to the Commissioner, it was agreed that the personality would be of great importance. Dr. Bunche and Dr. Padilla Nervo had been mentioned.

9. Mr. Wright then recalled that the Interim Committee was to consider the procedure for the delimitation of frontiers. There were three main problems:— (a) The frontier between Cyrenaica and Egypt where the Egyptians wanted and the Emir seemed disposed to concede some rectification near the Sollum Plateau.

(b) The frontier between Cyrenaica and Tripolitania where the Emir wanted some minor rectification in his favour.

(c) The frontier between Italian Somaliland and Ethiopia which presented by far the most serious problem. The Ethiopians were aggrieved at the behavior of the United Nations in respect of Eritrea and Italian Somaliland and were angry with the Italians because of the means they had employed to arouse a movement in Eritrea in favour of independence. The undelimited frontier between Italian Somaliland and Ethiopia could provide endless opportunity for the Ethiopians to make trouble if they wished.

10. Mr. Wright then raised the question of future developments in Libya. This was the most important outstanding question. If the United Nations Resolution was passed, the United Kingdom would like, within a fairly short time, to see Cyrenaica fully independent and to sign a Treaty with her. The Emir had long been asking the British Government to do precisely that, especially because he was afraid of an Italian return and of Egyptian intentions. Mr. Wright asked whether the United States Government were satisfied that if the United Nations Resolution as it stood at present were passed by the General Assembly, that the United Kingdom would be able to go ahead in this way. Mr. McGhee replied in the affirmative but said that it depended on the method which was adopted.

11. Mr. Wright said that one of the British difficulties was that it was not possible to make a Treaty valid in international law with a country which was not independent. It was therefore impossible for the United Kingdom to sign a Treaty with Cyrenaica until the territory had been made independent. The Foreign Office were considering three alternative methods on which they would welcome the views of the United States Government. These alternatives were:— (a) The United Kingdom, as administering power, would declare Cyrenaica to be independent.

(b) The Emir would himself declare Cyrenaica to be independent and the British Government would recognize that independence.

(c) The United Kingdom would conclude a Treaty with Cyrenaica which would contain both an alliance and a declaration of independence.

12. Mr. Moose asked whether it would not be possible to make a Treaty dealing with defence alone and avoiding the subject of independence. Mr. Wright said that this would not be possible for two reasons:— (a) The Emir would not sign a Treaty unless it gave him independence, and

(b) The Treaty would not be valid if Cyrenaica were not independent at the time when it was signed.

13. In reply to a question, Mr. Wright said that the United Kingdom wanted a long-term Treaty of, say, twenty years’ duration, perhaps on the lines of the Treaties with Iraq and Jordan. It was also asked on the American side what would happen to the Treaty when the Union of Libya came about. Mr. Wright replied that this was one of the questions which had caused the British uneasiness about the wording of the Resolution. It might be necessary to revise the Treaty or renegotiate it with a central Libyan government in respect of Cyrenaica. The British Government had decided that it was unwilling to make a Treaty which would commit them to the defence of all of Libya. Mr. McGhee said that there was an agreement on the objective which the United Kingdom had in mind and the United States must accept the British decision regarding the size of the territory of which it was prepared to undertake the defence. It would be desirable to discuss in future meetings what could be done to further this objective. Mr. Wright said that if the United Nations Assembly wanted to withdraw Cyrenaican independence once it had been granted by the administering power, the Assembly would find itself engaged in an unpleasant task.

14. Mr. Wright then said that the United Kingdom planned to begin setting up a Tripolitanian administration and to start turning over powers to it in a manner similar to what had been done in Cyrenaica. He understood that the United States had defence interests in Tripolitania and it would be helpful to the British authorities in trying to further these interests if they could be informed of the United States desires in this regard. As long as the United Kingdom remained the administering power in Tripolitania everything would be done to safeguard United States interests. But the question remained as to what would happen once independence was achieved? Did the United States Government intend to conclude a Treaty with the authorities that would become responsible for Tripolitania? Events might move quickly and it would not be safe to assume that independence would not come until 1952. Mr. McGhee replied that the United States did wish to maintain its base rights in Tripolitania, but he promised to check with the United States military authorities what their requirements were. Mr. Wright said that it might be possible for the British authorities to give a helping hand as events moved along and that they would be anxious to do so. But this would depend on their knowing what U.S. requirements were in the area. Mr. McGhee expressed appreciation and said that the United States member of the U.N. Council for Libya might also be able to keep an eye on the United States interests.

15. It was pointed out on the United States side that there was no tribal system to build on in Tripolitania as there had been in Cyrenaica. It was thought that Boshir Bey Saadawi was satisfied with the present United Nations resolution and might form one of a group of notables who would be willing to cooperate in setting up an administration.

16. The discussion then turned to the Fezzan. Mr. Moose said that the Fezzan had always been regarded by the United States as a dependency of Tripolitania. Independence for the Fezzan alone was not feasible. Mr. Wright said that the problem of the Fezzan was particularly difficult because of the French attitude. The French had always been opposed to progress in Tripolitania. Otherwise the United Kingdom would have probably pressed faster with the constitutional development in that territory. The French were also suspicious of the Senussi and worried about the future of their own North African territories.

17. Mr. Moose said that the present United Nations Resolution would seem to preclude the French from taking over the Fezzan. Mr. McGhee added that the United States was interested in the stability of French North Africa for strategic reasons but was not too happy about French policy there. In fact, the United States had urged the French to allow the local population a greater share in the government of those areas. He wondered whether it would be possible for the United States and the United Kingdom to keep up a gentle pressure on the French with regard to their North African possessions. Sir Derick Hoyer Millar13 pointed out that the French were very touchy about this matter and that it was very difficult to give them advice in such a way that they would not resent it. Mr. Wright said that the United Kingdom was not at present prepared to approach the French in this matter. Experience showed that this was only likely to do more harm than good.14

[Annex 7]

Statement by the United States and the United Kingdom Groups

secret [Washington,] November 17, 1949.

Discussion on Long-Term Economic Development in the Middle East Based on Papers Submitted by Foreign Office Representative

1. Mr. McGhee said that he had carefully read the Interim Report of the Middle East (Official) Committee on Economic and Social Development15 and found himself in general agreement with the policy outlined therein. This policy was consonant with President Truman’s Point Four Statement and also with the statement which he issued at the time of the establishment of the Economic Survey Mission. The Interim Report of the Economic Survey Mission did not cover Egypt and Iraq but with this difference the two reports fitted in well together. Any differences in the United States’ thinking were mainly matters of emphasis, e.g. the United States connected the problem of economic development with that of the Palestine refugees generally more closely than was the case in the M.E. (O.) C. report.

2. Mr. McGhee said he wished to consider the question of technical assistance to the Middle East under the Point Four program, particularly the impact of the large number of American experts who would be available, both on the British position in the Middle East and on the Middle East countries themselves. Around five million dollars would be available for the Near East under the Point Four program and this represented a very large number of experts. The availability of technicians would, in all probability, be the limiting factor, not funds available. There was the possibility that in exceptional cases Point Four funds might be available to pay the salaries of suitably qualified local technicians. Nevertheless, the number of American experts might be very considerable in comparison with the eight or nine experts at present employed by the B.M.E.O. The problem of coordinating the British and American efforts in the technical field was clearly important.

3. Mr. Wright said that he warmly welcomed any effort which the United States Government felt it could make in the technical field in the Middle East. On this subject, the United Kingdom Government had absolutely no reservations. He pointed out, however, that a great deal of survey work had already been done in the Middle East and that what was generally required was not fresh surveys and “winter visitors” but the selection and execution of projects which had already been worked out. This did not, of course, mean that no survey work was required—Mr. Wright referred in particular to the need for water surveys in Cyrenaica and Tripolitania. In general, however, the need was for the early execution of projects. He also pointed out that there was a great need for education, particularly in the technical field, which many competent observers thought was the ultimate key to the problem. As regards the coordination of the British and American effort, Mr. Wright said that he had given thought to the possibility of a joint Anglo-American Middle East Office to replace the existing B.M.E.O. There was, however, the danger that such an effort would incur the charge of Anglo-American imperialism and it might be preferable to leave the British Middle East Office as it was, provided links could be created to prevent overlapping between British and American technicians. Alternatively, the Americans might establish an American Middle East Office parallel to the B.M.E.O. but here too there was an inevitable risk of duplication.

4. Mr. McGhee said that such arrangements might be neat and tidy from the organizational point of view but there was the danger that the Middle East Governments would consider them as an attempt to develop the Middle East from the West and they would consequently resent it. In the diplomatic and political field the United States had no coordinating mission in the Middle East. Coordination was effected in Washington and Mr. McGhee thought that in the field of technical assistance the coordination of American effort throughout the area might best be effected in Washington. This was the case as regards South America and effort there was coordinated by the Institute of Inter-American Affairs in Washington. He agreed that it might be preferable not to embark on any new organization in the field as the risk of any charge of imperialism would in this case be less and there was also the point that communications with Middle East capitals were easier from Washington than from any point in the Middle East. Coordination between the British and the Americans could best be achieved in London and Washington.

5. As regards Point Four assistance in the educational field Mr. McGhee said that American experience in Latin America was that assistance on the primary and secondary level was likely to raise political, religious and social difficulties. Technical or vocational training on what was known as “basic education” was on the other hand a field in which the Point Four assistance might play a part. In connection with water surveys for Cyrenaica and Tripolitania, Mr. McGhee said that the Point Four budget had not yet been worked out in detail and that American representatives in the countries concerned and the local governments would need to be consulted. He recognized the need for the execution of projects already surveyed rather than for new surveys but the difficulty was that Point Four legislation as at present proposed only provided funds for the salaries of experts and for limited technical equipment.

6. Mr. Wright handed Mr. McGhee as background information to the recommendations contained in the M.E.(O.)C. Interim Report copies of reports on economic and social development in Egypt, Iraq, Syria, Jordan, Lebanon, Saudi Arabia, Aden and ex-Italian colonies.

Mr. Wright agreed that the United States should send copies to the American representatives concerned on condition that they should not discuss the reports with the local governments or give any publicity to them in the press.

7. Finally, Mr. Wright said that he had been authorized to discuss with the International Bank the recommendations contained in the interim report, and also a suggestion for the establishment of an International Nile Waters Advisory Board. He inquired whether the State Department would care to send a representative to be present at the talks. Mr. Wright explained that the membership of the International Board would be confined to the principal technical advisers of the government concerned though it might be attended by a representative of the International Bank as an observer. It was intended that the Board would serve as a link with the International Bank and that it might serve as a pattern for similar organizations in other areas. He emphasized that it was important in order to avoid any possibility of Slav intervention that Nile waters development should not be dependent on the United Nations. The International Bank was, of course, another matter and the proposed Board might also call on United Nations’ technicians under the expanded program of technical assistance. He emphasized the great experience which the Egyptians had in the control and utilization of Nile waters and pointed out that it was important to encourage local responsibility in this field.

8. Mr. McGhee said he thought it would be preferable for the discussions with the International Bank to be conducted without American representation but added that he would, of course, welcome any indication which Mr. Wright might feel he could give him regarding their outcome.

9. The following general conclusions emerged from discussion:— (i) There was general agreement on the program of Economic and Social Development outlined in the M.E.(O.)C. Interim Report.

(ii) The United Kingdom would welcome any measures which the United States felt it could take in the field of technical assistance.

(iii) The coordination of United States and United Kingdom effort in the field of technical assistance could best be achieved in London and Washington. This matter would be further studied in London and at Conference of United States representatives at Istanbul.

(iv) It was recognized that great progress had already been made in surveying the economic resources of the Middle East and that what was most required at the present state was the execution of selected projects.16

[Annex 8]

Statement by the United States and the United Kingdom Groups

secret [Washington,] November 17, 1949.

Discussions on the Haifa Refinery 17

Mr. Wright said that the aim of the U.K. Government was to get the refinery working at full capacity as soon as possible. It had been estimated that failure to reopen the refinery would represent a drain on the U.K.’s dollar resources amounting to $50 million a year. Every effort had been made to induce the Iraqi Government to allow oil to flow again through the pipeline. This was undoubtedly to the economic advantage of Iraq. The U.K. Government had, however, failed and it was a case where economic arguments carried no weight against political considerations. The Iraqis would only reopen the pipeline if the Egyptian Government first allowed oil tankers to pass through the Suez Canal. The U.K. Government had also exerted pressure on the Egyptian Government with a view to their permitting the passage of tankers. The Egyptian Government had relaxed their restrictions on shipping but the relaxation did not extend to tankers. Both the Egyptian and the Iraqi Prime Ministers were afraid to take the first step and to incur the charge of being the first to break the boycott. Attempts to arrange for action simultaneously by the Egyptians and Iraqis had also failed. The most recent development was a suggestion by the Iraqi Prime Minister that a tanker should take oil from Tripoli (Lebanon) to Haifa and the Lebanese Government was being approached in this connection. No reply had yet been received. Mr. Wright inquired whether the State Department would consider the desirability of instructing its representative in Beirut to support our representations to the Lebanese Government.18 There was also the possibility that the Israelis would raise in the Security Council the question of Egyptian refusal to allow the free passage of tankers in the Suez Canal. This might have the unfortunate result of making the problem a purely Israeli-Egyptian issue. In all the representations to the Arab Governments the U.K. Government had emphasized that the reopening of the Haifa refinery would be to the benefit of the U.K. and Europe and that the advantage to Israel would be relatively small. There was also the point that such action would give rise to a debate on Palestine in the Security Council. The U.K. Government was as anxious to avoid this as to avoid a general Palestine debate in the General Assembly.

2. In the course of discussion Mr. Wright said that consideration had also been given to a suggestion that the hand of the Egyptian Government should be forced by routing a tanker through the Canal. This had not been proceeded with as it was anticipated either (i) the Egyptian authorities would stop the ship in which case it would have to be sent back or (ii) the ship would have to be provided with armed guards and this would result in a major Anglo-Egyptian clash or (iii) if the Egyptians stopped the ship the matter might be referred to the Security Council which was also undesirable. … Mr. Wright said it was hoped that U.S. representatives in the capitals concerned would continue to support our representations and enquired whether the State Department had any suggestions to make.

3. The United States views as they emerged from discussion are as follows:—

Unlike the U.K. and France the U.S.A. was not directly concerned in the reopening of the refinery and the representations which the U.S. Government had already made in Iraq and Egypt had been in the nature of a supporting action. The U.S. Government fully agreed regarding the desirability of reopening the refinery at the earliest possible date and also regarding the need for continued pressure on the Governments concerned. Pressure should not, however, be made to the extent of bringing about a major clash as the risk to oil investments generally would be too great. Anglo-Egyptian relations might be gravely prejudiced and the United States strategic position in the whole area might be seriously impaired. The reaction in Iraq to shipments of oil from Tripoli to Haifa under U.S.–U.K. encouragement might be serious. It was also felt that the adoption of the “switching” device suggested by the Egyptian Prime Minister involved considerable risks. The proposal for establishing a free port under international control at Haifa was not considered a practical suggestion. Israel had indicated that as part of a general settlement, she would be prepared to give the Arab states free zones in the port of Haifa but this was another matter. It was thought possible that the operation of the refinery on the basis of oil imported from the Caribbean was a profitable proposition under existing world oil prices. American companies found it possible to ship crude oil profitably from the Persian Gulf to Philadelphia; the distance from the Caribbean to Haifa was less and although profits might not be as great as in the case of oil routed through the pipeline there should still be a margin and less risk would be involved. If the Arabs were shown that the refinery was a going concern they might in due course relent and lift restrictions. Finally, it was suggested that if oil production in Iraq were speeded up, for example by the early start on the 30” pipeline, the Iraqis might be less intransigent. Reports that the oil companies were considering the postponement of the 30” pipeline were disturbing.

4. The conclusions which emerged from the discussion were:— 1. It was agreed that it was most desirable that the refinery should be reopened at the earliest possible date.

2. That pressure on the Governments concerned should be maintained but a major clash should be avoided.

3. The United States would continue to instruct its representatives in the capitals concerned to make appropriate supporting representations to the governments concerned.19

[Annex 9]

Statement by the United States and the United Kingdom Groups

secret [Washington,] November 22, 1949.

Discussion on the Persian Gulf 20

Mr. Hare began the discussion by saying that we approached the question of the Persian Gulf on the basis that the United Kingdom has not only oil interests in the area but also a primary political interest as well. The United States likewise has oil interests and of course also has an interest in connection with the maintenance of peace and stability in the Persian Gulf area.

Referring to the question of development of off-shore oil, Mr. Hare observed that British and American representatives had conferred at great length on that subject in Washington early this year and that the idea of working out some sort of master plan for orderly development in the matter had been explored. However, in going into greater detail, it had been found that so much uncertainty existed regarding basic questions such as the determination of land frontiers and the ownership of islands that it seemed preferable to adopt a less comprehensive approach and to proceed on a more or less ad hoc basis. Subsequent developments would seem to have justified the wisdom of this course of action and proclamations had been made by practically all of the littoral countries of the Persian Gulf without resulting in the serious repercussions which some had feared. On the other hand, it was clear that we were only at the beginning of a long difficult road and that much patience and diligent endeavor would be required in order to reach final settlement.

Mr. Funkhouser21 stated that there appeared to be ten major points of conflict in the Persian Gulf. He enumerated them as follows: 1. Trucial–Oman Boundary.

2. Submerged areas off the Trucial coast.

3. Qatar Boundary.

4. Submerged areas off Qatar Peninsula.

5. Abu Saafa problem.

6. Boundary between the Arab Sheikdoms.

7. Island controversies.

8. Submerged areas off Kuwait neutral zone.

9. Southern boundary of Kuwait.

10. Mechanical determination of boundaries.

Mr. Funkhouser briefly described the status of the above issues and stated that any comments on the issues described or any agreement or differences of opinion as to the disputes involved would be welcomed from the United Kingdom.

Mr. Wright said he thought it was desirable to handle these involved questions as in the past either in London or in Washington or through the people on the spot rather than to consider them in any great detail in the present discussions. He said that the United Kingdom approached these questions on the basis of showing impartiality toward oil companies involved whether American or British. In this connection he pointed out that in various negotiations the United Kingdom had made particular effort to make sure that American oil companies were not discriminated against vis-à-vis British oil companies.

Mr. Wright indicated that with respect to the boundary negotiations with the Saudi Arabian Government this question had been discussed in Jidda at the end of August and the United Kingdom had endeavored to persuade the Saudi Arabian Government to state its claims. It was not until the middle of October before these claims which appeared to be extreme were submitted. The United Kingdom would prefer to settle this matter with the Saudi Arabian Government by direct negotiations rather than by arbitration in view of the special relationship which the United Kingdom has with the Sheikdoms. He thought the situation could be handled successfully provided that the United Kingdom and the United States maintain cooperation. He feared that a most difficult situation would arise if the Saudi Arabian Government felt that the United States was supporting all of its claims.

Mr. Hare replied that the United States would like to stay out of this question as much as possible but of course the possibility that the United States might be brought into the picture by the claims of certain American oil companies could not be excluded. He said that in the case of the controversy over islands off Kuwait neutral zone, the American Company involved had been more than satisfied by the support given by the United Kingdom.

Mr. Wright said he hoped the United States in approaching these questions would adopt the same principle as that adopted by the United Kingdom in considering the claims of the British and American oil companies. He felt it would be better to support the claims on the basis of their merits rather than on whether they were submitted by American or British oil companies.

Mr. Hare suggested that it might be useful to discuss various questions with the oil companies at top level in order to persuade them to be as helpful as possible and to take the initiative themselves in minimizing the areas of conflict. In this connection he referred to the fact that there were cross interests involved. Mr. Funkhouser indicated that although it was highly desirable to talk with the oil companies involved in the disputed areas in order to minimize chances of serious conflict, parent companies customarily defended the position that partially-owned subsidiaries acted [took?] independently.

Mr. Hare said that he thought that both the United States and United Kingdom were hunting for reasonable solutions of the questions, although it was difficult at times to know what a reasonable solution constituted. However, he felt that the United States would not support ipso facto the assertions of claims.

Mr. Wright then adverted to his previous statement that the United Kingdom has an open public policy regarding the equality of treatment for British and American oil companies and expressed the hope that the United States could adopt the same attitude.

Mr. Hare said that the United States’ position was not quite comparable with that of the United Kingdom which had political primacy in the area. Consequently, as both Mr. Hare and Mr. Funkhouser pointed out, there would be many issues not involving American interests on which the United States would have no particular position. Mr. Hare stated that the United States–United Kingdom positions were often parallel and cited the recent instructions to the American Embassy in Jidda taking exception to the Saudi Arabian claims on the six-mile territorial limit.22

Mr. Funkhouser, referring to the previous remarks on the United Kingdom–Saudi Arabian boundary negotiations, asked whether it might not be possible for the United Kingdom to proceed with negotiations at the present time on boundary issues involving only those Arab Sheikdoms with United Kingdom Treaty relations. Resolutions by the United Kingdom of such issues might establish a basis for settlement of the more complex boundary problems. Mr. Wright said that he would follow this question up upon his return to London.

On the subject of the current Abu Saafa dispute, Mr. Greenhill23 stated that the United Kingdom was likely to accede to Saudi Arabian demands that all oil operations in the disputed area be stopped but added that in the case of the Bahrein Petroleum Company radar installations on Arabi Island which involved no Bahrein territorial claim, company operations should be permitted.

Mr. Funkhouser asked if it would be practicable and desirable to seek to prevent oil companies from operating in disputed areas by a mutual call for restraint. Mr. Wright said that he would also look into this question in London.24

[Annex 10]

Statement by the United States and the United Kingdom Groups

secret [Washington,] November 22, 1949.

Discussion on the Establishment of an American Consulate in Kuwait 25

Mr. Wright said that the United Kingdom was awaiting a reply from the United States Government on the question which the United Kingdom had raised several months ago regarding the establishment of a consulate in Kuwait.

Mr. Clark26 described briefly the background of this question and said that one of the main points was the British concern regarding the political effects which the establishment of the Consulate might have in Kuwait. Mr. Clark said that the Department wished to raise the question whether the establishment of the Consulate would necessarily alter the situation and result in serious political repercussions.

Mr. Wright said that while he repeated that the United Kingdom understood the needs of the United States Government it did not in fact see how it would be possible to avoid the appointment of consular representatives from a number of other countries if United States consular officers were appointed.

Mr. Clark observed that the United States had greater interests in Kuwait than other countries in view of the number of American citizens connected with American oil companies operating in Kuwait. He indicated that there were certain legal questions involved and that the Foreign Office had requested the United States Government to consider the following three points: 1. That the exequatur be issued by the United Kingdom;

2. That the United States should respect the jurisdictional responsibility of the British political Resident; and

3. That the United States should recognize provisions of existing concessions agreements regarding political matters.

Mr. Clark felt that there would be no difficulty on the last two points, although the United States would probably wish to include observations of a minor nature in its reply. However, the question of exequatur was a most complicated one. It had occurred to the United States that it might be possible to have the exequatur signed both by the Sheik and by the United Kingdom Government. In other words the exequatur would represent not only the authority flowing from the Sheik himself but also would take into account the special relationship between the United Kingdom and the Sheik under the 1899 Treaty. There was also a discussion on the legal necessity for having an exequatur.

Mr. Wright said that he would look into the matter of a double signature upon his return to London. Mr. Clark said that he believed the Department’s reply to the points raised by the Foreign Office would be forthcoming soon.27

[Annex 11]

Statement by the United States and the United Kingdom Groups

secret [Washington,] November 22, 1949.

Discussion on Ethiopia

1. Mr. Wright suggested that the discussion turn to Ethiopia and Mr. Hare said we would be happy to discuss any points which Mr. Wright might bring up. Most important points raised are summarized in the following paragraphs.

2. Mr. Wright said that the British Ambassador in Addis Ababa and the Foreign Office were particularly concerned about the general decline of the political and economic conditions in Ethiopia. A recent incident which raised a matter of principle was the abrupt dismissal of a British judge, Mr. Abbott, of the Ethiopian High Court. Mr. Wright said that it was clear that a clique in the government close to the Emperor had forced the firing of Judge Abbott because he had insisted on taking impartial judicial decisions even when the results were contrary to the desires of the clique. Since the independence of the judiciary was essential to the advancement of any country, the Foreign Office was considering whether they should agree to the nomination of any other Britishers to the vacant posts on the Ethiopian High Court unless they received assurances from the Emperor that the operation of the judicial system would not be interfered with by other branches of the government. While no formal American view had been formulated on the matter, it was agreed that everything possible should be done to maintain and improve the standards of the judicial system in Ethiopia. It was recognized by those present that if British judges are not supplied for the High Court, the situation might become worse than it is now. Mr. Hare said the Department would consider the matter further and let Mr. Wright know further of any views we might have on the matter.

3. Mr. Wright inquired if the Ethiopians had tried to obtain arms from the U.S. The answer was that, while the Ethiopians had requested military assistance in obtaining military equipment from the U.S., they had not been granted any credit or priorities for the purchase of such equipment and, in practise, had obtained practically nothing. Mr. Wright said that when the Ethiopians had not been able to obtain as much as they wanted from British sources, the Ethiopians had gone to the Czechs, from whom they had purchased a small arms plant. The British Government were somewhat concerned over the possibilities of Czech, and therefore Communist, infiltration into Ethiopia via this particularly obnoxious means of military assistance. Mr. Hare agreed that the U.S. is equally concerned about the matter but pointed out the difficulty of our doing anything about it unless means could be found for giving greater assistance than had hitherto been the case. In this connection, he mentioned the possibility of the amendment of MAP legislation to restore the originally included provision for arms procurement on a cash reimbursable basis. However, no predictions in that regard could be made at this time. It was agreed to keep in close touch on developments in this matter.

4. Mr. Moose asked if the Foreign Office had any information indicating Ethiopia was being used as a center for training Communist agents and for spreading propaganda through central Africa. Mr. Wright said that they, like the State Department, had received such reports but had failed to obtain confirmation thereof.

5. An American question concerned the present status of negotiations for a new Anglo-Ethiopian treaty and the proposed Zeila-Haud exchange of territory between British Somaliland and Ethiopia. Mr. Wright said these negotiations had been delayed pending a General Assembly decision on Eritrea and Italian Somaliland and the return to Addis Ababa of the Ethiopian Foreign Minister, Mr. Aklilou. He reaffirmed, however, that if the proposed ZeilA–Haud exchange were effected, it would be subject to Ethiopia retaining full sub-soil rights to that part of the Ogaden Province (Haud) annexed to British Somaliland. He added that further conversations concerning the Lake Tana project were also dependent on the return to Addis Ababa of Mr. Aklilou.

6. Mr. Wright observed that one of the most serious problems confronting the British administrations of Eritrea and Italian Somaliland was the maintenance of order along the borders of those territories with Ethiopia. He feared serious disturbances when the Italians returned to Italian Somaliland and predicted continued agitation in Eritrea for at least as long as the UN Commission of Investigation remains in that territory. Mr. Hare agreed that these were very real problems and it was agreed that the Foreign Office and State Department would keep in close touch on them.28

[Annex 12]

Statement by the United States and the United Kingdom Groups

secret [Washington,] November 22, 1949.

Discussion op King Ibn Saud’s 29 Apprehensions Regarding the Hashemites 30

Mr. Hare said that over a period of time the United States had received appeals from King Ibn Saud for guarantees for the security of his kingdom. The King feared particularly the fact that he was surrounded by the Hashemites. While on frequent occasions the United States has informed the King that we had counselled moderation and restraint both in Amman and in Baghdad, the King constantly adverted to his apprehensions. The United States had noted in the most recent expressions of concern made to our Ambassador by the King that the emphasis was slightly different than in previous appeals. … This time the King had referred to the fact that he was surrounded by the Hashemites as well as by the Persian Gulf Sheikdoms with whom the United Kingdom had special treaty relations and he seemed to believe that these countries harbored ill-intentions towards Saudi Arabia. He also appeared to believe that the United Kingdom was not-exercising a restraining hand. Mr. Hare wondered whether it might not be possible for the United Kingdom, in the framework of its present discussions and negotiations with the Saudi Arabian Government, to take the opportunity to reassure the Saudi Arabian Government that the United Kingdom was deeply concerned with peace and stability in the area and would not countenance any action by any country which might disturb peaceful conditions.

Mr. Wright said the United Kingdom had also received similar expressions of apprehension on several occasions and that several years ago the United Kingdom had offered to negotiate a treaty with Saudi Arabia similar with those which it has with Jordan and Iraq. While the United Kingdom realized at the time that King Ibn Saud might not wish to conclude such a treaty, it nevertheless had offered it to him in the hope that it might calm his fears. He expressed the belief that the United Kingdom would probably not be inclined to offer such a treaty at this time. Mr. Wright said it had been hoped that the sending of the military missions would be a steadying influence.

Mr. Wright stated that the United Kingdom was constantly endeavoring to allay the fears of Ibn Saud and that the British representatives in Amman and Baghdad had on frequent occasions discussed the situation with Jordanian and Iraqi statesmen. Mr. Wright said he would have no objection if the United States Government wished to inform Ibn Saud that the United Kingdom was exerting a restraining and moderate influence on Jordan and Iraq and had no desire to disturb existing conditions.31

1 Not printed.

2 Printed below as annexes 1–12.

3 Memorandum of November 29 not printed; for documentation on the position of the United States regarding the disposition of the Italian colonies, see vol. iv, pp. 526 ff.

4 This paper was approved by Messrs. McGhee and Wright on November 20.

5 For documentation on this subject, see pp. 594 [Pg. 594 is part of Doc. 341] ff.

6 This paper was approved by Messrs. McGhee and Wright on November 20.

7 For information on this report, see editorial note, p. 1472 [Pg. 1472 includes portions of Doc. 1024 and Doc. 1025].

8 This paper was approved by Messrs. Wright and McGhee on November 20.

9 This paper was approved by Messrs. McGhee and Wright on November 20. The papers referenced at this point were draft resolutions for the implementation of the Interim Report of the Economic Survey Mission and for assistance to Palestine refugees, and a draft statement on the Near East Relief and Works Agency. The draft resolution for assistance to Palestine refugees is printed on p. 1500 [Pg. 1500 is part of Doc. 1038] (see particularly footnote 1 to that draft); the remaining papers are not printed.

10 For documentation on this subject, see pp. 180 [Pg. 180 is part of Doc. 76] ff.

11 This paper was approved by Messrs. McGhee and Wright on November 20.

12 See also the memorandum of conversation of November 18, p. 59 [Pg. 59 includes portions of Doc. 10 and Doc. 11]; for further documentation on the position of the United States regarding the disposition of the former Italian colonies in Africa see vol. iv, pp. 526 ff.

13 British Minister in the United States.

14 This paper was approved by Messrs. McGhee and Wright on November 20.

15 Presumably a paper handed to Department of State officers by Mr. Wright; copy not found in Department of State files.

16 This paper was approved by Messrs. McGhee and Wright on November 20.

17 For additional documentation on this subject, see pp. 91 [Pg. 91 is part of Doc. 14] ff.

18 For Departmental action on this request, see telegram 716, November 23, to Beirut, p. 156 [Pg. 156 includes portions of Doc. 63, Doc. 64, and Doc. 65].

19 This paper was approved by Messrs. McGhee and Wright on November 20.

20 The Department, on November 4, had suggested to London that this subject be placed on the agenda because it was “increasingly concerned over possibility serious incidents developing from land and sea boundary disputes between Persian Gulf States and their respective oil interests.” (telegram 3981, 711.90F/11–449) London, on November 7, reported Mr. Wright’s agreement (telegram 4460, 890.0145/11–749). For additional documentation on this subject, see pp. 91 [Pg. 91 is part of Doc. 14] ff.

21 Richard Funkhouser, International Economist in the Office of African and Near Eastern Affairs.

22 See instruction 60, November 30, p. 157 [Pg. 157 includes portions of Doc. 65 and Doc. 66]. The instruction was drafted on November 21.

23 Denis A. Greenhill, First Secretary of the British Embassy in the United States.

24 This paper was approved by Messrs. Hare and Wright on November 25.

25 For further documentation on this subject, see pp. 1566 [Pg. 1566 is part of Doc. 1096] ff.

26 Harlan B. Clark, Officer in Charge of Lebanon–SyriA–Iraq Affairs in the Office of African and Near Eastern Affairs.

27 This paper was approved by Messrs. Hare and Wright on November 25.

28 This paper was approved by Messrs. Hare and Wright on November 25.

29 Abdul Aziz ibn Saud, King of Saudi Arabia.

30 For further documentation on this subject, see pp. 1573 [Pg. 1573 is part of Doc. 1099] ff.

31 This paper was approved by Messrs. Hare and Wright on November 25.

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom 790.00/1–550: Telegram

[Document 13]

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom

secret Washington, January 5, 1950—9 p. m.

51. Re Embtel 5148, Dec 29.1 Pls convey fol to Wright from McGhee.

We have given careful consideration to suggestion of joint talks on NE by US, UK and France and have following comments: We believe informal talks between any two of three powers at frequent intervals have become routine development as continuing procedure and are no longer subject of widespread publicity and speculation. On the other hand we feel that talks between three powers at this time wld receive full spotlight of publicity, thereby removing any possibility of talks being kept quiet and increasing security hazards. They wld also give rise to unfortunate misapprehensions in various quarters, particularly in view of recent developments in NE, and provide ready-made propaganda for Sov use in NE. On balance we believe that it wld be preferable and more advantageous to all concerned for three powers to continue helpful bilateral conversations for time being. However, we will bear matter in mind shld situation at future date appear to make tri-partite talks desirable. This of course does not preclude tri-partite discussion on ad hoc basis such as took place in ESM activities.

In connection foregoing and as indication our interest in maintaining close relations with France on NEA matters, Wright may be interested to know of recent assignment of Utter2 to Paris in capacity similar that of Palmer in London. [McGhee.]

Acheson

1 Not printed; it reported that Mr. Wright recalled to an Embassy officer that “during his conversations Washington he had raised question joint talks on NE by US, UK and France. Assistant Secretary McGhee said Department would look into matter and let Wright know after Istanbul conference whether US agreeable such conversations.” Mr. Wright also informed that the “French were frequently pressing Foreign Office to ascertain whether UK and US willing participate.” (890.00/12–2949)

2 John E. Utter, Second Secretary of Embassy in France.

Participation by the United States in the development of the petroleum resources of the Near EastParticipation by the United States in the development of the petroleum resources of the Near East1

1 Continued from Foreign Relations, 1948, vol. v, Part 1, pp. 4 ff.

[14] Memorandum of Conversation, by Mr. Richard H. Sanger of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs

[Washington,] January 5, 1949.

890.0145/1–549

[15] The Chargé in the United Kingdom (Holmes) to the Secretary of State

London, January 17, 1949—7 p. m.

890.0145/1–1749: Telegram

[16] Memorandum by Mr. Harlan B. Clark of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs to Mr. Gordon H. Mattison, Chief of That Division

[Washington,] January 25, 1949.

890B.6363/1–2549

[17] Memorandum of Conversation, by Mr. Richard H. Sanger of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs

[Washington,] January 25, 1949.

890F.6363/1–2549

[18] Memorandum of Conversation, by Mr. Richard H. Sanger of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs

[Washington,] January 27, 1949.

890F.6363/1–2749

[19] The Secretary of State to the Legation in Saudi Arabia

Washington, January 28, 1949—7 p. m.

890.0145/1–349: Telegram

[20] The Officer in Charge of the Embassy in Egypt to the Secretary of State

Cairo, January 29, 1949.

890F.6363/1–2949

[21] Memorandum of Conversation, by Mr. Richard H. Sanger of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs

[Washington,] January 31, 1949.

890F.6363/1–3149

[22] The Chargé in the United Kingdom (Holmes) to the Secretary of State

London, February 2, 1949—7 p. m.

890.0145/2–249: Telegram

[23] The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom

Washington, February 8, 1949—2 p. m.

890F.6363/1–2149

[24] Editorial Note

[25] The Secretary of State to the Legation in Saudi Arabia

Washington, March 2, 1949.

890.0145/3–249: Airgram

[26] The Secretary of State to the Legation in Saudi Arabia

Washington, March 3, 1949—12 noon.

890F.6363/2–2349: Telegram

[27] The Secretary of State to the Legation in Saudi Arabia

Washington, March 12, 1949—4 p. m.

890F.6363/3–1249: Telegram

[28] Editorial Note

[29] The Secretary of State to the Legation in Saudi Arabia

Washington, March 16, 1949—7 p. m.

890.0145/3–1649: Telegram

[30] The Secretary of State to the Embassy in Iran

Washington, April 14, 1949—6 p. m.

891.6363/4–749: Telegram

[31] The Secretary of State to the Embassy in Iran

Washington, April 14, 1949—6 p. m.

891.6363/4–1449: Telegram

[32] Memorandum of Conversation, by Mr. Richard H. Sanger of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs

[Washington,] April 22, 1949.

890F.6363/4–2249

[33] The Consul at Dhahran (Meloy) to the Secretary of State

Dhahran, April 27, 1949—5:51 p. m.

890.0145/4–2749: Airgram

[34] The Ambassador in Iran (Wiley) to the Secretary of State

Tehran, April 28, 1949—6 p. m.

891.6363 AIOC/4–2849: Telegram

[35] The Minister in Saudi Arabia (Childs) to the Secretary of State

Jidda, May 3, 1949—1 p. m.

890.0145/5–349: Telegram

[36] The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom

Washington, May 6, 1949—7 p. m.

890.0145/5–349: Telegram

[37] The Secretary of State to the Legation in Saudi Arabia

Washington, May 13, 1949—2 p. m.

890F.6363/5–4049: Telegram

[38] The Secretary of State to the Legation in Saudi Arabia

Washington, May 19, 1949—2 p. m.

890.0145/5–1649

[39] The Ambassador in Iran (Wiley) to the Secretary of State

Tehran, May 24, 1949.

890.0145/5–2449: Telegram

[40] The Acting Secretary of State to the Embassy in Iran

Washington, May 24, 1949—7 p. m.

890.0145/5–2549: Telegram

[41] The Acting Secretary of State to the Embassy in Iran

Washington, May 27, 1949—7 p. m.

890.0145/5–2049: Telegram

[42] The Minister in Saudi Arabia (Childs) to the Secretary of State

Jidda, May 28, 1949.

890.0145/5–2849

[43] The Ambassador in Iran (Wiley) to the Secretary of State

Tehran, June 1, 1949—8 a. m.

890.0145/6–149: Telegram

[44] The Chargé in the United Kingdom (Holmes) to the Secretary of State

London, June 10, 1949—7 p. m.

890F.6363/6–1049: Telegram

[45] The Acting Secretary of State to the Embassy in Iran

Washington, June 11, 1949—2 p. m.

890.0145/6–149: Telegram

[46] Memorandum of Conversation, by Mr. Richard H. Sanger of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs

[Washington,] June 21, 1949.

890.014/6–2149

[47] Editorial Note

[48] Memorandum by the Chief of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs (Mattison) to the Deputy Director of the Office of Near Eastern and African Affairs (Hare)

[Washington,] July 12, 1949.

501.BB Palestine/7–1249

[49] The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom

Washington, July 20, 1949—6 p. m.

501.BB Palestine/7–2049: Telegram

[50] The Ambassador in Iran (Wiley) to the Secretary of State

Tehran, July 21, 1949.

891.6363/7–2149: Telegram

[51] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State

London, August 15, 1949—7 p. m.

501.BB Palestine/8–1549: Telegram

[52] Memorandum by the Chief of the Petroleum Division (Eakens) to Mr. John R. Barrow of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs

[Washington,] August 19, 1949.

501.BB Palestine/8–2049

[53] The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom

Washington, August 20, 1949—1 p. m.

501.BB Palestine/8–2049: Telegram

[54] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State

London, August 23, 1949—1 p. m.

867N.6363/8–2349: Telegram

[55] The Chargé in the United Kingdom (Holmes) to the Secretary of State

London, September 9, 1949—7 p. m.

501.BB Palestine/9–949: Telegram

[56] Editorial Note

[57] The Ambassador in Iran (Wiley) to the Secretary of State

Tehran, September 20, 1949—10 a. m.

891.6363 AIOC/9–2049: Telegram

[58] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State

London, October 20, 1949—6 p. m.

891.6363 AIOC/10–2049: Telegram

[59] The Secretary of State to the Embassy in Saudi Arabia

Washington, October 21, 1949.

890.0145/10–2049: Telegram

[60] The Chargé in Saudi Arabia (Hill) to the Secretary of State

Jidda, October 25, 1949—1 p. m.

890.0145/10–2549: Telegram

[61] The Secretary of State to the Legation in Saudi Arabia

Washington, November 1, 1949—6 p. m.

890.0145/10–2549: Telegram

[62] The Chargé in Saudi Arabia (Hill) to the Secretary of State

Jidda, November 3, 1949—6 p. m.

890.0145/11–349: Telegram

[63] The Chargé in Saudi Arabia (Hill) to the Secretary of State

Jidda, November 8, 1949—11 a. m.

890.0145/11–849: Telegram

[64] Editorial Note

[65] The Acting Secretary of State to the Legation in Lebanon

Washington, November 23, 1949—5 p. m.

867N.6363/11–2349: Telegram

[66] The Secretary of State to the Embassy in Saudi Arabia

Washington, November 30, 1949.

890.0145/6–149

[67] The Minister in Saudi Arabia (Childs) to the Secretary of State

Jidda, December 6, 1949—9 a. m.

890F.6363/12–649: Telegram

[68] The Secretary of State to the Legation in Saudi Arabia

Washington, December 17, 1949—2 p. m.

890F.6363/12–649: Telegram

[69] The Chargé in the United Kingdom (Holmes) to the Secretary of State

London, December 29, 1949.

891.6363 AIOC/12–2949: Airgram

[70] The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom

Washington, December 30, 1949—6 p. m.

867N.6363/12–2349: Telegram

Memorandum of Conversation, by Mr. Richard H. Sanger of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs 890.0145/1–549

[Document 14]

Memorandum of Conversation, by Mr. Richard H. Sanger of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs

secret [Washington,] January 5, 1949.

Subject: Review of Mr. Boggs’ Trip to London on Subject of Persian Gulf Offshore Boundaries

Participants: OIR/GE—Mr. Boggs2

NEA—Mr. Hare3

NE—Mr. Sanger

NE—Mr. Clark4

GTI—Mr. Kitchen5

L/P—Mr. Furman6

PED—Mr. Moline7

Mr. Hare welcomed Mr. Boggs back from the trip to England and explained to him that Ambassador Wiley8 was now in the United States. He said that Mr. Wiley felt it was all right for us and the British to proceed with our plans provided (a) the central division of the Persian Gulf was not called a “median line”, and (b) that no proclamations or publicity were put out on this subject. On the other hand, Mr. Hare told Mr. Boggs that Minister Childs at Jidda had sent numerous telegrams to the Department urging us to stop “backing and filling” because the Saudi Arabian Government would not wait indefinitely for our advice on what position it should take on its Persian Gulf offshore boundaries.

Mr. Boggs then described his trip to England in detail. He spoke most highly of the help he had received from First Secretary Lewis Jones. Most of Mr. Boggs’ work was with Commander Kennedy at the Hydrographic Department of the Admiralty in London, from the period November 23 to December 16, 1948. The American data had been based on American aeronautical charts but it was mutually agreed to do the work on British hydrographic charts. In this connection Mr. Boggs was surprised that in several important areas in the Gulf the British have made no new hydrographic surveys, since 1820’s.

Mr. Boggs went into considerable detail about the technical side of the work, pointing out that he and Commander Kennedy had decided to fix the northern end of the median line at the 29th parallel. Commander Kennedy worked out the lower Gulf and Mr. Boggs worked out the complicated problem of running transverse boundaries for the Saudi Arabian [-Kuwait?] Neutral Zone, Kuwait, Iraq and Iran. For the most part these were approximately at right angles to the coast line, a procedure which was discussed at some length in the meeting. Mr. Boggs noted that this procedure resulted in placing a certain number of islands which were claimed by one country in the waters of another, and he made it clear that he felt the solution as proposed would not be accepted without questioning.

Several maps were presented by Mr. Boggs along with a draft of a report9 which he and Commander Kennedy are to complete. It will then be submitted to the British and American Governments for comment and approval along with two detailed appendices.

Mr. Hare thanked Mr. Boggs for his careful and skillful labors in London and said that the Department was now faced with the problem of (1) going ahead with the overall “median line” scheme covering all the countries of the Persian Gulf as contemplated last autumn, or (2) endeavoring to work out the problem on an ad hoc basis using the work done by Mr. Boggs and Commander Kennedy as a basic concept.

It was agreed that the immediate problem was the sending of an answer to the Government of Saudi Arabia on its request for guidance10 in regard to the extension of its jurisdiction and control of the sea bed and natural resources of the Persian Gulf.

After a certain amount of discussion, it was agreed that Mr. Hare would ask Mr. Bromley11 to call at the Department on Thursday, January 6. At that time he would be notified of the United States’ plan to (a) approach the Saudi Arabian Government giving certain advice which had been requested by that Government and asked about (b) British acceptance of the Saudi Arabian-Bahraini lateral line and the Saudi Arabian-Kuwait Neutral Zone lateral line. In view of the fact that there was pretty general agreement about the median line (other than general agreement not to call it a median line) British acceptance of these lateral lines would enable us to give Saudi Arabia the advice she has requested about her Persian Gulf offshore boundaries. It was emphasized that, whereas recommendation in respect of the median line could be specific and based on certain principles, suggestions regarding lateral lines would be subject to negotiation by the authorities concerned and would also probably require final delimitation on the spot in view of the apparent inaccuracy of available charts.

2 Samuel W. Boggs, Special Adviser on Geography in the Office of Intelligence Research.

3 Raymond A. Hare, Deputy Director of the Office of Near Eastern and African Affairs.

4 Harlan B. Clark of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs.

5 Jeffrey C. Kitchen of the Division of Greek, Turkish, and Iranian Affairs.

6 John P. Furman of the Office of the Legal Adviser (Political Affairs).

7 Edwin G. Moline, Assistant Chief of the Petroleum Division.

8 John C. Wiley, American Ambassador to Iran.

9 Copy not found in Department of State files.

10 See telegram 164, March 29, 1948, from Jidda, Foreign Relations, 1948, vol. v, Part 1, p. 11.

11 Thomas E. Bromley, First Secretary of the British Embassy.

The Chargé in the United Kingdom (Holmes) to the Secretary of State 890.0145/1–1749: Telegram

[Document 15]

The Chargé in the United Kingdom (Holmes) to the Secretary of State

secret London, January 17, 1949—7 p. m.

206. 1. Chadwick1 said today that Foreign Office comments re median line (generally in accord paragraph 2, Embassy’s 166, January 132 ) were put to Bevin3 over weekend and that latter returned same with comment that he is not prepared to commit himself to any concerted action at this time. Consequently Foreign Office is telegraphing to British Embassy Washington today its views re Department’s ideas (paragraph 2 Embassy’s reference telegram) with statement that if USG feels it must do so, UK would have no objection to US advising SAG. However, telegram will express hope that US will be willing to wait a “little longer” because Eastern Department does not despair of obtaining Bevin’s approval to median line scheme very much in its original form. Receipt of legal opinions (paragraph 5 Embassy’s reference telegram) will probably offer suitable occasion.

2. Chadwick said that if SAG does produce proclamation, it is likely UK will have to give similar advice sheikhdoms (paragraph 2 Embassy’s reference telegram).

3. Embassy understands Bevin’s unwillingness to commit himself (paragraph 1 above) is occasioned not so much by merits median line, as by fact that he is already deeply involved personally in Palestine controversy and consequently does not relish taking any steps which might involve him in another ME controversy.

Sent Department 206, repeated Jidda 5, Tehran 5.

Holmes

1 John E. Chadwick of the British Foreign Office.

2 Not printed; paragraph 2 reads in part as follows: “Chadwick said trend Foreign Office thinking after careful look at Department’s ideas … is that in principle original plan is best and only one which will keep US and UK out of serious trouble in Persian Gulf. Officials are inclined to believe that if SAG and Kuwait should be advised quietly to grant offshore oil concessions … news of this would rapidly leak and HMG would have to give same advice shortly thereafter to sheikhdoms. Consequently … it would be better to ‘hold back every one’ for a limited period of between six and twelve months: i.e., continue to advise all states including SAG, Kuwait to refrain from granting concessions and all oil companies to refrain from asking for them. … Chadwick said that if SAG issued proclamations other sheikhdoms would have to follow suit fairly quickly.” (890.0145/1–1349)

3 Ernest Bevin, British Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs.

Memorandum by Mr. Harlan B. Clark of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs to Mr. Gordon H. Mattison, Chief of That Division 890B.6363/1–2549

[Document 16]

Memorandum by Mr. Harlan B. Clark of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs to Mr. Gordon H. Mattison, Chief of That Division

[Washington,] January 25, 1949.

Discussion

i. department’s position

Recent telegrams from London in regard to views of the British Government on the 3 islands of Qaru, Kubbar and Umm al Maradim contended by the American Independent Oil Company (AMINCO) to be within its concession area,1 as well as the opposing views of Kuwait Oil Company (KOC)2 in that regard, emphasize the correctness of the Department’s position that its attitude must be one of complete neutrality with respect to the opposing claims. As appears below, the interests of at least 3 and possibly 4 American companies will possibly be affected by any decision that is made in the dispute and any endeavor to influence its settlement in favor of one or the other parties would clearly be out of place. It nevertheless is the duty of the Department to ensure that neither the British special treaty position in Kuwait nor its controlling interest in the British company which owns a one-half share in the Kuwait Oil Company does not operate to the disadvantage of American interests in general, or result in discrimination against the American Independent Oil Company in particular. It must be kept in mind that a delay in settlement of the dispute may operate to the advantage of the British, possibly by embarrassing AMINCO in its relations with the Shaikh of Kuwait or even in producing a de facto breach of its concession agreement should exploratory operations required thereunder to be commenced on or before March 28, 1949 be postponed beyond that date. On the other hand, it may be that in the long run the delay may work to the advantage of AMINCO if in the meanwhile (a) the Shaikh agrees that such delay in exploratory operations was due to force majeure and therefore does not constitute breach of the contract and (b) a concession is granted by SAG for its undivided half interest in the Neutral Zone and the way is thus cleared for AMINCO to make suitable arrangements with the SAG concessionaire to commence operations in the on-shore areas of the Zone.

ii. propriety of british advising shaikh

In directing our attention to the question as to whether there has been undue interference by the British in the relations of the Shaikh with AMINCO, we must examine their cogent arguments, as presented in London’s 267, January 21, 7 p. m.,3 that the British Government is justified in giving advice to the Shaikh because such advice (a) has regard for his best interests and (b) involves the conduct of his foreign relations with the King of Saudi Arabia. In paragraph 3 of this telegram the point is made that the inclusion of the 3 islands in the Neutral Zone concession might encourage Ibn Saud or his concessionaire to claim half interest in them as belonging to the Neutral Zone. According to statements made by Manley Hudson, George Kay and Richard Young, Legal Counselors for ARAMCO, to officers in the Department today the possibility in fact exists that SAG may at some future date extend claim to the two islands of Qaru and Umm al Maradim as appertaining to the Neutral Zone. These statements lend considerable substance to the British contentions and it would seem that the Department must recognize that British advice to the Shaikh regarding the status of the islands may well be in his own best interest and also have a direct bearing on his relations with the King of Saudi Arabia.

This fact, of course, does not in any way diminish the propriety of the Department’s action in insisting that such advice should not operate to discriminate against AMINCO’s interests or prevent it from having direct access to both the Shaikh and the British authorities. We should also continue to ensure that AMINOO has recourse to all legal remedies, unhampered by political interference.

[Here follows Section III of the memorandum, dealing with “Alternatives Open to AMINCO”.]

1 Regarding the concession granted by the Shaikh of Kuwait to AMINCO covering his undivided interest in the Saudi Arabian-Kuwaiti Neutral Zone, see telegram 2221, June 14, 1948, to London, Foreign Relations, 1948, vol. v, Part 1, p. 19.

2 The Gulf Oil Corporation had a 50% interest in the Kuwait Oil Company; the Anglo-Iranian Oil Company held the remaining interest.

3 Not printed.

Memorandum of Conversation, by Mr. Richard H. Sanger of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs 890F.6363/1–2549

[Document 17]

Memorandum of Conversation, by Mr. Richard H. Sanger of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs

secret [Washington,] January 25, 1949.

Subject: Further Proposal by Judge Hudson and ARAMCO Officials Regarding Offshore Oil

Participants: Judge Manley Hudson—Retained by ARAMCO for Legal Advice

Mr. Richard Young—Ass’t to Mr. Ray—Legal Counsel for ARAMCO

Mr. George W. Ray—Legal Counsel for ARAMCO

Mr. Terry Duce—Vice President ARAMCO

Mr. Philip Kidd—Ass’t to Mr. Duce

State Department

NEA—Mr. Hare

L/P—Mr. Furman

GTI—Mr. Dunn1

GTI—Mr. Kitchen

PED—Mr. Eakens2

OIR/GE—Mr. Boggs

NE—Mr. Mattison3

NE—Mr. Clark

NE—Mr. Sanger

Mr. Geo. Ray read a statement to the effect that he saw no objection, from the point of view of ARAMCO, to the declaration such as that drafted by Judge Manley Hudson. In his statement (a copy of which is attached)4 Mr. Ray indicated that ARAMCO could not evade the necessity of offering some suggestions to the Saudi Arabian Government. Furthermore, only “notoriety” regarding the action taken by the Saudi Arabian Government with reference to the submarine areas of the Persian Gulf would furnish the needed protection to ARAMCO. Mr. Ray went on to say that replies to the questions asked ARAMCO on December 6, 1948 by Ahmed Bey Taufiq, the Legal Advisor of SAG, had now been formulated and that unless the Department interposes positive objections ARAMCO wished to communicate these replies as soon as the Company had given final approval.

Judge Hudson then read over the pertinent passages of the replies to Ahmed Bay Taufiq’s questions. The Judge pointed out that in preparing these replies he had not wished to prejudice the position which it was understood the Government of the US would take in giving advice to the Saudi Arabian Government. In fact the proposed ARAMCO replies led up to a situation in which the proposals of the US Government to the Saudi Government would fall on hospitable ground.

Judge Hudson discussed Annex 1 “Draft Decree Concerning Certain Islands in the Persian Gulf”. Various questions were raised by Mr. Dunn concerning this Annex, including the use of the words “Noting” and “appertain to”. With reference to the islands off the Neutral Zone Judge Hudson said that Mr. Young did not reach any final conclusion regarding ownership and he believed the Government of Saudi Arabia was undecided in regard to that. Judge Hudson stated he felt that that there was little or no doubt about the ownership by Saudi Arabia of the 13 islands mentioned in this Draft Decree.

The Judge then discussed Annex 2, “Draft Decree on the Territorial Waters of Saudi Arabia”, a highly technical document which he said had been prepared after careful study of the Norwegian, Dutch and other comparatively recent Legislation on this subject.

Judge Hudson then referred to Annex 3,5 “Draft Decree Concerning the Policy of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia with Respect to the Sub-Soil and Sea Bed of Areas in the Persian Gulf Contiguous to the Saudi Arabian Coast”. He explained to those present at the meeting the next to last paragraph of this Statement which reads:—

“The Sub-soil and sea bed of those areas of the Persian Gulf which, though outside the inland waters and the coastal sea along the shores of Saudi Arabian territory (including islands), are contiguous to the coasts of Saudi Arabia, are declared to appertain to the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia and to be under its jurisdiction and control. Where such areas extend to the shores of another State, or are shared with another State, boundaries: will be determined by Saudi Arabia in agreement with the State concerned in accordance with equitable principles. The character as high seas of the waters above such areas, the right to the free and unimpeded navigation of such waters, the traditional freedom of the pearl banks in the Persian Gulf and access to such banks by the peoples of the Gulf, are in no way affected.”

According to the Judge such an inclusive program as envisaged in these three Decrees would go a long way towards helping an orderly development of the Persian Gulf. It would allow parallel programs to be put into effect by other States, but it would leave the question of conflicting water boundaries open and did not prejudice the suggestions which the Department of State was expected to present soon to the Government of Saudi Arabia. He concluded by saying that if the Board of Directors of ARAMCO approved it was planned to make these replies to the four questions asked by Saudi Arabia and suggest that that country put out the three Decrees referred to above as Annexes 1, 2 and 3.

Mr. Ray thereupon said that Mr. Spurlock the ARAMCO senior legal representative in Saudi Arabia was now in the US. Mr. Ray planned to go over these four replies and three proposed Decrees with him so that he would be completely familiar with them when he returned to Saudi Arabia next month.

Mr. Hare replied that the program as suggested by Judge Hudson covered not only a proposed decree concerning Persian Gulf subsoil and sea bed but also decrees concerning islands in the Gulf and the territorial waters of Saudi Arabia. He pointed out that these last two points had not been studied by the Department up until now and that the Department might have to remain silent in regard to them.

Mr. Ray explained that the Government of Saudi Arabia had asked ARAMCO for advice on all pertinent subjects relative to offshore waters and that it therefore seemed best to present a complete line of action which SAG might follow including positions regarding islands and territorial waters.

Mr. Hare said that the draft decree concerning subsoil and sea bed of the Persian Gulf, Annex 3, appealed to him personally.

Mr. Dunn suggested that the phrase “by competent experts” be omitted from paragraph 2 of Annex 3 and this was agreed to. He also suggested that the term “and are hereby placed under its jurisdiction and control” (line 5 and 6 page 19) be changed to read “and to be under its jurisdiction and control”.

It was noted with approval that no mention of Bahrein Island was contained in any of these documents and Judge Hudson pointed out that if any question was raised regarding Bahrein it would, under the terms of Annex 3, be settled “in agreement with the state concerned in accordance with equitable principles”, (page 19)

Judge Hudson repeatedly referred to the fact that the Saudi Arabian Government had a high regard for the Truman Proclamation regarding the American continental shelf6 and that he had therefore relied heavily upon that document in drawing up these Decrees.

Mr. Ray said that the actual result of Saudi Arabia proclaiming these three Decrees would be to bring the Saudi Arabian Legislation up to a point where Iranian Legislation was.

On being asked by Mr. Clark if the three draft decrees should follow each other in timing Mr. Ray said that he felt the safest and best thing was to settle all these problems at the same time.

Mr. Duce discussed the geology of the Persian Gulf briefly and said he did not expect ARAMCO’s explorations to go as far east as the center of the Persian Gulf for a long time to come.

Judge Hudson agreed with Mr. Hare’s statement that the subject matter of the decree on islands and the decree on territorial waters had not been specifically studied by the Department of State and said that he and Mr. Young would be glad to review these drafts with interested officers of the Department. He said that he felt that Annexes 1 and 2 were outside the area of advice to be given Saudi Arabia by the Government of the US. He hoped that the Department would not object to these, ARAMCO’s, suggestions in the field of islands and territorial waters. He said that ARAMCO did not ask Departmental approval of Annexes 1 and 2, but hoped that we would shortly be able to say that we had no objections in regard to them.

Mr. Hare told the ARAMCO representatives present that we are now disengaging ourselves from our previous close working arrangement with the British in regard to this matter, and that the Department hopes to be able to go ahead alone and give the Saudi Arabian Government the advice which it has requested. He pointed out, however, that the Department and ARAMCO should not submit competing drafts.

Judge Hudson reminded everyone present that ARAMCO felt it must submit one or more proposed proclamations to SAG soon in order to forestall unwise action by SAG and to retain the good will of that country.

Mr. Hare replied that he felt it would be desirable if there could be a similarity in the proclamations suggested to Saudi Arabia by the Government of the US and by ARAMCO.

When Mr. Eakens suggested that they should be identical Mr. Ray agreed, providing Saudi Arabia knew of the talks which had been going on between ARAMCO and the Department of State on this subject.

It was agreed that the ARAMCO officials would confer with Mr. Boggs that afternoon, January 25th, that the interested officials of the Department after talking with Mr. Bromley at 10:30 a. m. on January 26th, would confer among themselves regarding the ARAMCO proposals, and that the present group would reconvene in Mr. Hare’s office on Thursday, January 27th at 3:00 p. m.

1 W. Clyde Dunn, Assistant Chief of the Division of Greek, Turkish, and Iranian Affairs.

2 Robert H. Eakens, Chief of the Petroleum Division.

3 Gordon H. Mattison, Chief of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs.

4 Not found attached.

5 None of the annexes found in Department of State files.

6 President Truman issued two proclamations on September 28, 1945, concerning United States jurisdiction over natural resources in coastal areas and the high seas; see the press release of the same date issued by the White House, Foreign Relations, 1945, vol. ii, p. 1528.

Memorandum of Conversation, by Mr. Richard H. Sanger of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs 890F.6363/1–2749

[Document 18]

Memorandum of Conversation, by Mr. Richard H. Sanger of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs

secret [Washington,] January 27, 1949.

Subject: Departmental Reaction of ARAMCO Proposals Regarding Advice to be given SAG on Offshore Oil

Participants: Aramco

Judge Manley Hudson (retained for legal advice)

Mr. Richard Young—Ass’t to Hudson

Mr. George W. Ray—Legal Counsel

Mr. Philip Kidd—Washington Representative

State

NEA—Mr. Hare

GTI—Mr. Dunn

GTI—Mr. Kitchen

L/P—Mr. Furman

PED—Mr. Eakens

NE—Mr. Mattison

NE—Mr. Sanger

NE—Mr. Clark

Mr. Hare pointed out that the Department had given careful study to the draft of replies to the questions put to ARAMCO by Ahmed Bey Taufiq at the conference in Jidda on December 6, 1948 and that he wished to discuss the three Annexes separately.

In regard to Annex 1 entitled, “Draft Decree Concerning Certain Islands in the Persian Gulf”, Mr. Hare pointed out that this did not fall within the scope of previous discussions. He said the Department was not in a position to determine the ownership of islands in the Persian Gulf and was therefore worried by the prospect of ARAMCO presenting to the Saudi Arabian Government the recommendation of a proclamation covering sovereignty to islands outside territorial waters. There were various reasons for this anxiety on the part of the US including the following:— (1) Such a proclamation would undoubtedly raise the problem of Iranian claims to various islands.

(2) If, as ARAMCO contends, this is a conservative list then it might well be that such conservative claims by Saudi Arabia to certain islands in the Gulf would be followed by extreme claims to the same or other islands in the Gulf on the part of other countries.

These and other possible problems which might be raised by the proposed Decree were such that, although the Department could not ask ARAMCO to refrain from presenting the Decree, it felt obliged to record its positive objection on political grounds.

Judge Hudson replied that ARAMCO was putting up a great deal of money in connection with the development of Persian Gulf oil and would like a clear legal foundation on which to do its offshore drilling. He reminded those present at the meeting that the list of islands mentioned in Annex 1 was very conservative and did not include any controversial islands.

Mr. Ray said that, although the list was conservative, he did not think the ownership of any island in the Gulf was clear cut. When drilling starts off shore, various operations such as storage must be done on these islands which make them important from a practical point of view. He felt that for SAG to say nothing about its ownership of islands in the Gulf was merely postponing the day of conflict, if any conflicts are to arise, SAG insists on knowing what it owns in the Gulf and he felt this list was the limit of ARAMCO’s knowledge on that subject.

When Mr. Dunn suggested that the result of putting out this conservative list might well be to encourage other littoral states to lay claims to islands off the shore of Saudi Arabia not included in the list, Judge Hudson replied that in the opinion of ARAMCO some advice must be given to SAG on the subject of islands, and this seemed the safest course to follow.

When Mr. Eakens pointed out that he thought a conservative list might not help but might actually hurt SAG’s position in the Gulf because it was an invitation for other Gulf states to push in and make claims, Judge Hudson replied that the matter would have to be worked out on the basis of facts as they developed.

Mr. Ray stated that as a Company ARAMCO felt that when its advice was sought it had to give the best information that it could on all phases of whatever problem was under discussion. In this case, he felt that it was possible that SAG might wish to change the list.

Mr. Hare asked if it was true that the islands listed were not contestable because of their proximity to Saudi Arabia. Mr. Ray replied that already a conflict has developed over some of the islands of the Neutral Zone in spite of their being close to the mainland and that in his opinion there was no such thing as an island in the Persian Gulf whose ownership might not be contested.

When Mr. Dunn asked him what reaction he expected from the British, Mr. Ray said that the Department of State looks at this from a political point of view, whereas ARAMCO looks at it simply from the point of view of giving advice to SAG that has been requested. Mr. Hare said that the Department had to consider both the general interests of the US in the Persian Gulf area as well as the specific interests of ARAMCO.

Mr. Young said that all but three of the islands mentioned in Annex 1 were uninhabited and that the government of Saudi Arabia had asked help from the Oil Company as to how it could prove ownership of these islands in spite of this fact.

Mr. Dunn pointed out that these ends could be achieved by the raising of a flag, setting up of markers, or even by initiating prescriptive action in the form of actual drilling operations. To this Mr. Ray replied that ARAMCO had been asked for a decree and the company felt it must put its reply into decree form as far as Annexes 2 and 3 were concerned.

Mr. Hudson said that he did not see any reason why the Department of State should object to ARAMCO presenting the decree in Annex 1 to the Saudi Government. The presenting of advice in that form would not conflict with past or future actions of the Department or with policies of the USG. He said that it was not enough merely to suggest that the Government of Saudi Arabia apply the Truman Proclamation of September 28, 1945 to the waters around Saudi Arabia; that country must be given a complete program it could follow in the development of its offshore oil.

Mr. Ray added to this that Saudi Arabia should be given certain basic principles it could follow; and that the safest way to start applying these principles would be to proclaim ownership of what they, SAG, believed belonged to them.

In regard to Annex 2, “Draft Decree on the Territorial Waters of Saudi Arabia”, Mr. Hare felt that this Annex is essentially different from Annex 1. It was, so to speak, not in the Department’s terms of reference and there was no question of going over it substantively. He pointed out that the principles enunciated by ARAMCO in Annex 2 regarding territorial waters did not coincide with the principles generally followed by the USG. If SAG requested our views we would have to point out this fact.

Judge Hudson questioned whether or not the US had a policy in regard to high sea areas and said he knew of eleven different kinds of rulings on this matter running out as far as 50 miles, which made any 3 mile limit an anachronism.

Mr. Furman agreed that there were many interpretations out but that the US Government’s basic position was the one reaffirmed in 1930 based on a 3 mile limit.

Mr. Ray said that in view of the history of the Persian Gulf, with various claims of six and more miles having been made there in the past, he did not see how ARAMCO could advise SAG to hold fast to a 3 mile limit.

Judge Hudson asked whether the US had protested the six mile claim of Iran some years ago and it was agreed that the US had not done so.

Mr. Hare summed up the Department’s position regarding Annex 2 by saying the Department did not have any objection to ARAMCO presenting this Annex to SAG but it should be understood that this position did not preclude any future comments on this subject which might be made by the Department.

Proceeding to the subject of Annex 3, “Draft Decree Concerning the Policy of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia with regard to the subsoil and sea bed of areas in the Persian Gulf contiguous to the Saudi Arabian Coast”, Mr. Hare said that careful consideration had been given to this document by the Department during the last two days. Although we were in general agreement, we had reservations as to some points. Various changes in the wording of Annex 3 were then discussed and the Department’s suggestions noted by the ARAMCO lawyers.

On being asked for the plans of the Department, Mr. Hare said that we planned to proceed with a proposal on this subject to SAG not involving simultaneous action by other states of the Persian Gulf.

Mr. Ray said that he felt the only divergence of views remaining between the Department and ARAMCO, other than minor matters of wording in Annex 3, concerned the Saudi Arabian islands covered in Annex 1. Although ARAMCO preferred the issuance of a decree on the subject of islands, he thought that the ARAMCO recommendations to SAG might be put in the form of a memorandum setting forth a program for marking these islands. At the same time, ARAMCO would suggest that SAG issue a decree on territorial waters. Because it was undesirable to have a difference of views between an American company and the Department of State, the ARAMCO lawyers said they would give careful study to the Department’s suggestion concerning establishing sovereignty over any islands.

Judge Hudson agreed and said that he would try to improve on the ARAMCO draft of the papers submitted, after which they would like to have a further talk with the State Department before instructing the Company’s lawyer, who would shortly go to Saudi Arabia, Mr. Spurlock.

Mr. Hare brought up the fact that we had worked closely with the British on this subject and that we would like to be as frank as possible with them about the action we planned to take.

To this Mr. Ray replied that he saw no objection if the British were informed regarding the contemplated US action, but that ARAMCO’s advice to SAG should not be revealed to the British at least until after ARAMCO had submitted it to SAG.

It was decided that ARAMCO officials would review the three documents under discussion and return to the Department for a meeting with the same group of Departmental officials at 10:30 Monday morning.

The Secretary of State to the Legation in Saudi Arabia 890.0145/1–349: Telegram

[Document 19]

The Secretary of State to the Legation in Saudi Arabia 1

secret
priority Washington, January 28, 1949—7 p. m.

33. Urtels 622, Dec 28 and 4, Jan 3.2 Dept agrees ur estimate desirability early advice SAG re offshore problem.

Brit Emb has informed Dept doubts on part of Bevin FonOff legal experts, and UK Treas re appropriate action make prospect Brit agreement uncertain; in circumstances UK has no objection US Govt proceed with reply SAG request for guidance.

Recent discussions with Amb Wiley, Brit and ARAMCO have resulted our abandoning median line plan and probable substitution transmittal to SAG text Truman Proclamation with explanation pertinent principles applicable SAG offshore area, with indication we perceive no objection to ARAMCO draft embodying those principles in suggested decree. ARAMCO draft would have SAG declare its jurisdiction and control over submerged areas of Persian Gulf extending seaward beyond territorial waters Saudi Arabia, boundaries to be determined as occasion arises on equitable principles by SAG in agreement with states having jurisdiction over adjoining submerged areas.

Series conferences with ARAMCO officials and their lawyers Judge Hudson and Young expected terminate early next week after which Dept hopes wire you instructions re substance and procedure US advice through you to SAG.3

Acheson

1 This telegram was repeated to Cairo, London (as No. 324), and Tehran.

2 Neither printed.

3 Not printed.

The Officer in Charge of the Embassy in Egypt to the Secretary of State 890F.6363/1–2949

[Document 20]

The Officer in Charge of the Embassy in Egypt to the Secretary of State

secret Cairo, January 29, 1949.

No. 100

The Officer in Charge of the American Embassy at Cairo has the honor to enclose herewith a copy of a letter agreement between Pacific Western Oil Corporation and the Saudi Arabian Government1 which is to supplement the concession contract covering the oil rights of the Saudi Arabian undivided half of the Kuwait Neutral Zone.

This letter agreement deals with the very critical relationships to be established between the companies and governments interested in the oil development of the Neutral Zone. The letter states that the Saudi Arabian Government undertakes to guarantee that Pacific Western will have no interference from any other power, i.e., the Sheikh of Kuwait, British Political Resident, in the pursuit of their oil business. The letter agreement further states that the company will be allowed to commence work promptly after the concession contract is signed, that the company will be able to purchase Saudi Arabian currency in the open market, that the concession contract and this letter will be kept “secret and confidential.”

Pacific Western representatives stated that American Independent Oil Company (AMINCO) did not possess a guarantee on the part of the Sheikh of Kuwait that the Saudi Arabian Government would not interfere in AMINCO’s operations and that for this reason the company had been unduly delayed.

1 Not printed; the file copy hears no date. Jidda, on March 1, reported advice from Saudi authorities that the concession was signed at Riyadh on February 24 (telegram 143, 890F.6363/3–149).

Memorandum of Conversation, by Mr. Richard H. Sanger of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs 890F.6363/1–3149

[Document 21]

Memorandum of Conversation, by Mr. Richard H. Sanger of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs

secret [Washington,] January 31, 1949.

Participants: Aramco

Mr. George W. Ray—Ass’t to Mr. Hudson (retained for legal advice)

Mr. Richard Young—Legal Counsel

Mr. Philip Kidd—Washington Representative (Ass’t to Mr. Duce)

State

NEA—Mr. Hare

PED—Mr. Eakens

GTI—Mr. Dunn

L/P—Mr. Furman

NE—Mr. Mattison

—Mr. Sanger

—Mr. Clark

Mr. Ray said that careful consideration had been given to the Department’s reactions as expressed at the meeting on January 27th regarding the advice which ARAMCO proposed to give to the Saudi Arabian Government on the subject of offshore oil, and that every effort had been made to meet the Department’s informal suggestions.

In regard to Annex 1, “Draft Decree Concerning Certain Islands in the Persian Gulf”, although ARAMCO preferred to submit this in the form of a decree it accepted the Department’s suggestion that it be presented in the form of a memorandum advising the marking of these islands. ARAMCO felt it must recommend that SAG claim only islands whose ownership was not likely to be challenged.

Mr. Ray pointed out that Annex 2, “Draft Decree on the Territorial Waters of Saudi Arabia” was unchanged in the new version. The Company recognized the position set forth in Annex 2 was not that of the US but felt it could not restrict its suggestions to the principles of a 3 mile limit.

In reply to Mr. Hare’s inquiry as to how questions regarding lights, access to harbors, etc., which might arise under this Annex would be settled, Mr. Young pointed out that any disputes would be settled by negotiation. It was pointed out that the Persian Gulf Lighting Service is really a private organization and that at a recent meeting this organization adopted a resolution to the effect that its activities would in the future be limited to lighting the main routes through the Gulf and would be conducted without prejudice to territorial claims of littoral states.

Mr. Dunn observed that in line with the suggestions offered at the last meeting, Annex 3 (“Draft Decree Concerning the Policy of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia with respect to the Subsoil and Sea bed of Areas in the Persian Gulf Contiguous to the Saudi Arabian Coasts”), had been in several respects revised and a discussion of these changes ensued. An ARAMCO suggestion that the term “existing fishing rights” be used was checked by Mr. Dunn with Mr. Looney of U/FW, who indicated that the term “fishing rights” was preferable.

In summary, Mr. Young said that ARAMCO and its lawyers believed they now had a draft of a proclamation which could be adopted by other Persian Gulf states as well as by Saudi Arabia, without conflict of interests.

The question was raised as to when, where, and to what extent the British should be informed regarding the advice which the US and ARAMCO were planning to give to Saudi Arabia. Mr. Ray stated that it would be most unfortunate for the relations between ARAMCO and the King, if the SAG should learn of the advice ARAMCO proposed to give from the British (which might be the case were the British informed in advance of ARAMCO’s plans).

Mr. Hare pointed out that the Department had been working on this problem with the British for over a year and that it was planned to keep them informed as to the general principles on which the USG was advising the Government of Saudi Arabia.

He agreed, however, that the US should not inform the British about ARAMCO’s proposed advice, other than to state that ARAMCO was planning to give certain advice to SAG and that further information could be obtained as the matter progressed by consultation in Jidda.

On being asked for the US Government’s plan of action, he said Mr. Childs1 would be instructed to give the Government of Saudi Arabia copies of the Truman Proclamation along with a summary of principles drawn from that proclamation which will be applicable to the particular problems of the Persian Gulf. We would also inform the Government of Saudi Arabia that ARAMCO had consulted with the Department regarding the draft proclamation which it had prepared, and that in general the principles contained therein were in accord with the principles of the Truman Doctrine.

Mr. Ray asked what ARAMCO’s position should be if the Government of Saudi Arabia asked what the US Government felt about Annexes 1 and 2.

Mr. Hare replied that the Government of Saudi Arabia could be informed provided it were furnished the whole story regarding the informal discussion on Annexes 1 and 2, that we took no responsibility for them, and that the views presented represented only the suggestions of ARAMCO.

Mr. Ray said that the ARAMCO representative in Saudi Arabia will be instructed to discuss this whole matter with Mr. Childs, and that Mr. Spurlock, the Company’s lawyer, in Saudi Arabia, will probably soon be going to Arabia. It is planned that he will take with him the text of the answer to the four questions, together with the three annexes.

1 J. Rives Childs, American Minister to Saudi Arabia.

The Chargé in the United Kingdom (Holmes) to the Secretary of State 890.0145/2–249: Telegram

[Document 22]

The Chargé in the United Kingdom (Holmes) to the Secretary of State

secret London, February 2, 1949—7 p. m.

396. Embassy’s 166, January 13 paragraph 5.1 Chadwick said today legal opinion regarding Median Line has been received. Attorney General has ruled that proclamations would be good in international law “provided they are followed by effective occupation.”

2. Bevin told officials today that he wished to settle this question soon and instructed Eastern Department to prepare for submission to British Cabinet at early date various possible alternatives so that Cabinet can choose between them. Among other alternatives Eastern Department paper will include original Median Line plan which Eastern Department still considers mechanically easiest. Against plan are combined views British and American Embassies Tehran where “political situation is undoubtedly unpropitious.”

3. Chadwick could not say definitely when Cabinet would act but he believes this not later than week ending February 12. Consequently while recognizing that US might feel impelled to go ahead along lines Department’s 324 January 282 (Embassy’s 206, January 17 paragraph 1), Chadwick hoped that in view imminence British Cabinet decision Department would take advantage of any reasonable opportunity to delay definite action before end next week.3

Sent Department 396, repeated Tehran 8. Passed Jidda as 10 from London.

Holmes

1 Not printed; paragraph 5 read as follows: “Asked whether Attorney General and other legal officers had made pronouncement Chadwick explained that this is still being worked upon but Foreign Office legal adviser considers that risk in going ahead would not be great and has so advised Attorney General and sought his concurrence.” (890.0145/1–1749)

2 This was a repeat of telegram 33 to Jidda, p. 104 [Pg. 104 includes portions of Doc. 19 and Doc. 20].

3 London advised, on February 18, that “While Eastern Department has not seen test Cab decision February 17 re median line Chadwick said today that he understands it to be that Foreign Office authorized take same action with Sheikhs as US now contemplating with Ibn Saud. Chadwick understands Cab idea is that timing UK action should be coordinated with that US.” (telegram 623, 890.0145/2–1849) Abdul Aziz ibn Saud was King of Saudi Arabia.

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom 890F.6363/1–2149

[Document 23]

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom 1

confidential Washington, February 8, 1949—2 p. m.

451. Embtel 267, Jan 21.2

(1) Dept agrees possible contest by foreign Govt such as SA of Shaikh’s claim to exclusive ownership of islands wld raise question on which Brit advice to Shaikh wld be proper. However, Dept is gratified to note that once advice given, UK wld not endeavor influence his course of action. It also notes with satisfaction UK wld not withhold consent new contract covering islands.

(2) Qualifications of FonOff on above assurances wld seem to fall in different category on which US might not be in agreement. E.g., for Brit to block Shaikh from making separate contract re islands until any difference of opinion with concessionaire settled wld seem interference of sort envisaged in Deptel 132 Jan 11.3

(3) AMINCO has decided request Shaikh clarify status islands by letter, in such form as remove basis any fears concession might open claim by outside power to islands. In AMINCO’s draft of proposed letter Shaikh wld affirm its right undertake operations in islands subject only any claims which KOC might advance. AMINCO instructing Stevens request Brit inform him in writing they wld not object Shaikh clarifying in writing his intentions re oil concession rights for Islands. AMINCO says such letter necessary since Shaikh would not otherwise write letter while matters still pending in London.

(4) Pls inform FonOff foregoing and state Dept hopes Brit will find AMINCO suggestion satisfactory. In this event, AMINCO proposal wld both meet Brit argument re possible SA claim and place dispute on normal basis as between interested companies. Dept wld be prepared support similar request from Gulf Oil.4

(5) Pls continue facilitate Stevens access to Brit authorities.

(6) For urinfo AMINCO reports pol agent recently told Shaikh he wld soon receive a letter re islands from FonOff and discussed nature reply he shld make, implying Brit may have endeavored influence such reply. (Emb London and Cons Basra shld continue watch negots and report any development not in line with Brit assurances para 1.)

Acheson

1 This telegram was repeated to Baghdad, Cairo, Basra, and Jidda.

2 Not printed.

3 Not printed; it expressed the hope of the Department that “in the spirit of the Anglo-American informal conversations on social and economic affairs in Middle East in Oct 1947 Brit Govt will not interpose through political channels objection to independent decision of Shaikh on this matter. Should that decision be contested by one or other concessionaire Dept believes matter could then be settled by methods prescribed in concession contracts.” It also requested, “In your discretion”, that the substance of the telegram be conveyed to the Foreign Office (890F.6363/1–649). For the “Summary Memorandum of Informal Conversations Relating to Social and Economic Affairs in the Middle East” that took place In October 1947, see Foreign Relations, 1947, vol v, p. 614.

4 In a letter of February 8 to C. W. Hamilton, Vice President of the Gulf Oil Corporation, Mr. Mattison informed him that “the representations made by the Department [concerning the islands] have been confined to ensuring that one of the parties of interest had free access to the British officials concerned and the Shaikh of Kuwait. Should the Gulf Oil Company experience any difficulties of such nature the Department would be prepared to invoke similar representations on its behalf. The Department has taken no position regarding the merits of the claims involved.” (890.6363/2–849) A new agreement was signed at Kuwait on September 22 by the Shaikh of Kuwait and AMINCO, which gave the company concessionary rights on the islands. A copy of the agreement was transmitted to the Department by Basra in despatch 97, December 28 (890G.6363/12–2849).

Editorial Note [Document 24]

Editorial Note

Damascus reported, on February 14, that the agreement covering the concession of the Trans-Arabian Pipeline Company (TAPLINE) had been approved by the Syrian Cabinet early the previous week. President Shukri al-Kuwatly was said to have informed Minister Keeley that he was sanguine concerning Parliamentary ratification of the agreement and that such action was “a necessary first step in our desire for economic and political collaboration with the West” (telegram 59, 890D.6363/2–1449).

Various disagreements arose thereafter between the Syrian Government and TAPLINE and anti-TAPLINE student demonstrations erupted. The Syrian Government thereupon postponed consideration of the agreement by Parliament (telegram 114, March 8, 2 p. m., from Damascus, 890D.00/3–849).

The Syrian Government was overthrown on March 30 in a coup led by Colonel Husni Zaim; for relevant documentation, see pages 1630 ff. The Husni Government approved the TAPLINE agreement and it was ratified by Legislative Decree No. 74 on May 16 (telegram 284, May 17, 8 p.m., from Damascus, 890D.6363/5–1749).

An internal weekly summary report of the Department of State, entitled Current Economic Developments, noted that Syrian ratification of the TAPLINE agreement “removes the last major barrier to the building of the long pending Trans-Arabian pipeline. … The project is now due for completion sometime in 1950—about a year behind the original schedule. Approval of the transit agreement was delayed by the Syrians for many months partly in disapproval of the US position regarding Palestine. The matter was further complicated by the political coup in Syria during March....

“The recent approval by the inter-departmental Export Review Board of the first and second quarter steel exports for 1949 removed another impediment to construction of the pipeline. Export licenses had been suspended for almost a year because of disturbed conditions in the Middle East. When completed, the Tapline is to have a capacity of 300,000 to 450,000 barrels a day and will extend for almost 1,100 miles from Saudi Arabia to the Mediterranean port of Sidon in Lebanon.” (Page 6 of summary report 203, dated May 23, 1949. It was prepared by the Policy Information Committee of the Department and is found in the files of the Foreign Reporting Division of the Bureau of Economic Affairs, lot 70–D467.)

A second pipeline company, the Middle East Pipeline Company (MEPCO), entered into negotiations with the Syrian Government early in 1949. The pipeline was planned to extend from Abadan, Iran, to an Arab city on the Mediterranean, to move oil owned by the Anglo-Iranian Oil Company and the Kuwait Oil Company to be sold to the Standard Oil Company of New Jersey and the Socony-Vacuum Oil Company. The negotiations, like those involving TAPLINE, were not successful until the accession to power of Colonel Husni. Apparently it was early in June that the Syrian Government signed an agreement with MEPCO (telegram 2247, June 10, 6 p. m., from London, 890D.6383/6–1049).

A MEPCO official, on November 22, informed officers of the Department that his company had postponed orders for “34–36 inch pipe” until the third quarter of 1951, a one-year delay, because of its inability to secure an agreement with Iraq. The Department was informed that Prime Minister Nuri “had assured MEPCO officials that Iraq would grant MEPCO transit rights as soon as IPC difficulties were out of the way. Unfortunately the Iraqi Government did not wish to carry on negotiations with the IPC until the results of the Anglo-Iranian concession contract negotiations in Iran were completed. Since no progress toward breaking the AIOC-Iranian impasse was apparent, MEPCO officials decided on the one year postponement.” The Department was also informed that the terminal of the MEPCO pipeline would be Tartous, in Syria, and that the pipeline would move 1,000,000,000 barrels of crude oil over a period of twenty years (memorandum of conversation by Richard Funkhouser of the Office of African and Near Eastern Affairs, 890.6363/11–2249). For documentation on the agreement between the American companies and the Anglo-Iranian Oil Company, see Foreign Relations, 1946, volume VII, pages 18 ff.

The “IPC difficulties” referred to in the paragraph immediately above concerned the Iraqi desire to renegotiate the oil concession agreement of the Iraq Petroleum Company; for the Iraqi desire to initiate such renegotiations, see airgram 241, August 23, 1948, from Baghdad, ibid., 1948, volume V, Part 1, page 39.

The Secretary of State to the Legation in Saudi Arabia 890.0145/3–249: Airgram

[Document 25]

The Secretary of State to the Legation in Saudi Arabia 1

secret Washington, March 2, 1949.

A–23. Deptel to Jidda 33, Jan 28. Fol summarizes recent discussions with ARAMCO relative to SA offshore oil and gives Dept reaction to the several proposals which ARAMCO intends to make to SAG. The final paras constitute Dept’s instr to you on the way in which you should reply to long standing request for advice on manner in which SAG’s claim to offshore oil rights should be asserted.

In initial mtg with ARAMCO officials they revealed that Ahmed Bey Taufiq had propounded four questions on Dec 6, 1948. The questions and the replies which ARAMCO (as advised by Manley Hudson and Richard Young of Harvard Law School who were especially retained to work on this problem) proposed to make are summarized below:—

Question One

“Should HMG issue a proclamation along the lines of President Truman’s proclamation of Sept 28, 1945”.

Reply

ARAMCO quotes certain pertinent portions of the Truman Proclamation; reviews litigation between USG and State of Texas, in which USG contends for domestic purposes that it has complete ownership, jurisdiction and control over subsoil and sea bed of the continental shelf within boundary of State of Texas; points out that nr of Latin American States have followed President Truman’s Proclamation with similar proclamations and states that on basis this history ARAMCO feels that SAG would be fully justified in issuing declaration along the lines of Truman’s Proclamation adapted to suit conditions in Persian Gulf.

Reply suggests that SAG give careful consideration to the geographic and economic features of offshore area in which water boundaries have not been drawn and where they can be drawn definitely only in agreement with neighboring states. Particularly, it is pointed out that there is no true continental shelf in the Gulf but rather a continental depression and that a proclamation referring to a continental shelf would have no clear meaning. The risk of controversy with SA’s neighbors is balanced against advantage gained by an early pronouncement.

ARAMCO then concludes that it would be desirable for SAG to have an integrated program to cover all aspects of territorial waters, islands, subsoil and sea bed resources. Such a program would deal with the fol points:— (1) the estab of SA’s sovereignty over certain islands in the Gulf;

(2) the delimitation of SA’s inland waters (within bays and shoals, and between the mainland and offlying islands); and the fixing of the extent of SA’s coastal sea outside the inland waters;

(3) the extension of SA’s jurisdiction and control over contiguous submarine areas; and

(4) the establishment of water or sea bed boundaries by agreements with the neighboring states.

Question Two

“If so, when is the best time to publish such a proclamation”.

Reply

According to ARAMCO a declaration might be made as soon as His Majesty’s Government is prepared to act upon the program as a whole.

Question Three

“If such a proclamation is issued, is a ‘confirming proclamation’ from the American State Department necessary to protect American interests”.

Reply

In ARAMCO’s opinion a declaration by His Majesty’s Government would have the effect of clarifying SA’s legal position and would require no confirmation by any other Government. It seems probable, however, that the Government of SA would wish to have previous consultation with the Government of the US before issuing such a declaration.

Question Four

“If a ‘confirming proclamation’ is necessary can it be obtained”.

Reply

On this pt the ARAMCO lawyers feel that because the reply to the third question indicates that no ‘confirming proclamation’ is necessary this question does not arise.

In its proposed reply ARAMCO further suggests that if a program of this sort should prove to be acceptable to the Government of SA it may wish to give consideration to three annexes which cover problems 1, 2, and 3 outlined above.

Annex One: This is a memorandum listing 13 islands which to ARAMCO seem quite clearly to be under the sovereignty of SA and referring to other islands which His Majesty may wish to place in this category. It suggests that SAG may wish to proceed immed with the erection of suitable markers on the islands over which it claims sovereignty for the purpose of giving “notoriety” to its claims.

Annex Two: This is a draft of a Decree concerning the territorial waters of SA covering both inland waters and the coastal sea. It was prepared with reference to the laws of various other countries and the suggestion of six miles as the width of the coastal sea follows action taken in the Persian Gulf by the Ottoman Empire in 1914 and by Iran in 1934. It takes the position that there is no general agreement on the proper width of coastal seas.

Annex Three: This is a draft of a Decree concerning the policy of the Kingdom of SA with respect to the subsoil and sea bed of areas in the Persian Gulf contiguous to the Saudi Arabian coasts. The language of this draft is borrowed for the most part from President Truman’s Proclamation of 1945 but it also takes account of developments since that date both in the US and in other countries.

The text of the proposed proclamation is as follows:—

“Aware of the need for the greater utilization of the world’s natural resources, and of the desirability of giving encouragement to efforts to discover and make available such resources,

Recognizing that valuable resources may underlie parts of the Persian Gulf off the coasts of Saudi Arabia, and that modern technology makes it increasingly practicable to utilize these resources,

Appreciating that recognized jurisdiction over such resources is required in the interest of their conservation and prudent utilization when and as development is undertaken;

Deeming that the exercise of jurisdiction over such resources by the contiguous nation is reasonable and just, since the effectiveness of measures to utilize or conserve these resources would be contingent upon cooperation and protection from the shore and since self-protection compels the coastal nation to keep close watch over activities off its shores which are of a nature necessary for the utilization of these resources; and

Considering that various other nations now exercise jurisdiction over the subsoil and sea bed of areas contiguous to their coasts,

Declares the fol policy of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia with respect to the subsoil and sea bed of areas of the Persian Gulf contiguous to the coasts of Saudi Arabia:

The subsoil and sea bed of those areas of the Persian Gulf seaward from the coastal sea of Saudi Arabia but contiguous to its coasts are declared to appertain to the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia and to be subject to its jurisdiction and control. The boundaries of such areas will be determined in accordance with equitable principles by the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia in agreements with other States having jurisdiction and control over adjoining submerged areas. The character as high seas of the waters of such areas, the right to the free and unimpeded navigation of such waters and the air space above those waters, fishing rights in such waters, and the traditional freedom of pearling by the peoples of the Gulf are in no way affected.

This Decree shall be published in Umm al Qura. English and French translations will be published simultaneously”.

The Dept and ARAMCO have engaged in lengthy discussions on the subject. ARAMCO has made a number of modifications in its presentation in response to the informal suggestions of a working group within the Dept. The Dept’s official position with regard to the various points raised above is as follows:— 1. Reply to the four questions: Having been requested by SAG to furnish answers to the questions, and having obtained the advice of competent international lawyers, it would seem proper that ARAMCO submit replies to SAG. The Dept feels that it is not in a position to interpose objections to ARAMCO making replies to SAG.

With regard to the Annexes the Dept’s position is as follows:— Annex 1: This represents a new subject on which the Dept has not been requested to give advice by the SAG. Originally ARAMCO had prepared this Annex in the form of a draft decree, but in response to the Dept’s informal suggestions has changed it to a memorandum supporting the erection of markers on islands to which SAG has an absolute claim. The Dept had positive objection to a public proclamation, mainly on the ground that the ceremonial drama of royal proclamation (as opposed to quietly erecting a derrick or a marker) would probably evoke a rash of counterclaims by other Persian Gulf States. It does not feel that it can interpose positive objections to submission of this memorandum by ARAMCO, but if its advice is requested by SAG it will feel obliged to state its reservations.

Annex 2: This again is a matter in which the advice of USG has not been requested by SAG and to which USG therefore does not feel it can properly interpose positive objection. Some of the principles contained therein are not those recognized by the USG. If SAG should ask advice of USG it would be forced to state its reservations, and if such a proclamation is issued it would probably be necessary for USG to make known its own position.

Annex 3: The proposed proclamation is based essentially upon the Truman Proclamation as modified to apply to the Persian Gulf and closely conforms to Dept’s position on subject.

The fol course of action has been decided upon by the Dept; and unless you perceive serious objections you shld follow procedure outlined below:— (1) In response to SAG’s long standing request for USG advice you shld present SAG with copy Truman Proclamation (Depcirin Oct 17, 19452 ). You shld also present the fol set of principles drawn from the Truman Proclamation which in Dept’s view apply to Persian Gulf. You shld then emphasize Dept does not feel it could properly present to SAG the draft of a proposed proclamation but that it has seen the draft which ARAMCO proposes to present to SAG and feels that this generally conforms to principles set forth below:— 1. It is desirable to give encouragement to any efforts which will bring about a greater utilization of the world’s natural resources.

2. Valuable resources may underlie parts of the Persian Gulf off the coasts of SA and it is becoming increasingly practicable to utilize such submerged resources.

3. It is necessary that the littoral state exercise jurisdiction over these resources in order to conserve and control the utilization of such resources.

4. The practice of other nations in exercising jurisdiction over the subsoil and sea bed of areas contiguous to their coasts might be taken as precedent for SA in asserting that the subsoil and sea bed of those areas of the Persian Gulf contiguous to its coast appertain to the Kingdom of SA and are subject to its jurisdiction and control.

5. Whenever it might become necessary to define more precisely the boundaries of such submerged areas, they should be determined in accordance with equitable principles by the Kingdom of SA in agreements with other states having jurisdiction and control over adjoining submerged areas.

6. Assertion of jurisdiction over submerged areas beyond the coastal sea should not affect freedom of navigation of the waters of such areas, or the air above such waters, or fishing and traditional pearling rights in the Persian Gulf.

The fol timing of presentation has been decided by ARAMCO:—

Spurlock or substitute will shortly, proceed to Jidda with full documentation of ARAMCO reply. Upon his arrival he has been instr to confer with you in light of these instructions, in order that you may be fully acquainted with ARAMCO proposals. You shld then present copy of Truman Proclamation and set of principles to SAG, making clear that Dept’s advice is limited solely to offshore submerged area questions upon which SAG had requested advice USG and make clear Dept’s position as stated in (1) Reply to four questions Annex 2 above. Fol your presentation Spurlock will be free to present ARAMCO reply to Ahmed Bey Taufiq’s questions.

At the time of presentation Dept’s views you shld make available to Brit copy of principles submitted to SAG. As matters presented in Annexes 1 and 2 concern questions which have been raised solely between SAG and ARAMCO, Dept does not feel it would be proper for you to advise Brit in advance regarding these proposals. However, after Spurlock has made presentation Dept perceives no objection to your informing Brit Amb that it is your understanding that ARAMCO has been asked for and given advice on matters other than offshore features.

It is quite possible that fol ARAMCO presentation SAG will request USG advice on proposals contained in Annexes 1 and 2. You may then state that this is a new and complicated subject on which SAG has not previously requested advice, and that you will have to request further instr on these subjects.

Dept hopes that SAG will not give undue publicity to their claim to islands or submerged areas as this might well provoke undesirable counterclaims and disputes from other Persian Gulf states.

Dept fully appreciates that procedure outlined above is not ideal, but feels that in view of complicated relationships vis-à-vis USG, ARAMCO and Brit Govt that course suggested will best avoid difficulties inherent to the whole problem.

Copies of memoranda covering recent conversations with ARAMCO are going forward by air-mail pouch. The contents of these and other memoranda which have been furnished ur off during recent months may be used discreetly as background info in explaining the difficulties and delays which have occurred in preparation of a reply to the SA Govt.

Jidda is requested acknowledge receipt this airgram by telegraph.3

Acheson

1 This airgram was drafted on February 8. Department spokesmen discussed the proposed advice to the Saudi Arabian Government with officers of the Departments of the Navy, Justice, and the Interior, beginning on February 18. These officers, at the conclusion of the discussions, concurred or made no objection to the proposed advice (Mr. Furman’s memorandum of February 21 to Mr. Hare, 890.0145/2–2149; Mr. Eakens’ memorandum of February 23 to Mr. Hare, 891.6363/2–2349; and Mr. Eakens’ memorandum of February 23 to Paul H. Nitze, 890F.6363/2–2349). Mr. Nitze was Deputy to the Assistant Secretary of State for Economic Affairs.

2 Not printed.

3 This airgram was repeated to Baghdad, Cairo, London, and Tehran. Jidda advised, on March 14, that airgram 23 had been received (telegram 188, 890.0145/3–1449). Two days later, Ambassador Childs reported an interview with several ARAMCO officials, who anticipated making the company’s views known to the Saudi Arabian Government after various documents were translated. He then communicated the content of airgram 23 to the Minister of Finance who “expressed great thanks SAG” (telegram 201, 890.0145/3–1649).

The Secretary of State to the Legation in Saudi Arabia 890F.6363/2–2349: Telegram

[Document 26]

The Secretary of State to the Legation in Saudi Arabia 1

secret Washington, March 3, 1949—12 noon.

79. A[ir] gram going forward today2 summarizing recent conversations ARAMCO and giving you detailed instrs on manner in which advice shld be given SAG re offshore oil. Subject too lengthy for telegraphic instr.

While this action independent of overall approach previously contemplated with Brit, advice in no way conflicts with principles evolved for such approach. Dept feels that it can no longer delay advice to SAG and that certain advantages wld accrue from gradual evolution of problem rather than concerted proclamation. Although specific mention of median line not made, it is inherent to principles involved but Dept believes it is undesirable at present to give publicity by proclamation or otherwise to this principle.

RefAgram also instructs manner in which your Brit colleague shld be advised, and Dept prefers that you not discuss matter with him until agram recd.

Dept feels matter now too far advanced to follow course suggested in London’s 670 Feb 23.3

Acheson

1 Repeated to London and Tehran.

2 No. 23, p. 111 [Pg. 111 includes portions of Doc. 24 and Doc. 25], is actually dated March 2.

3 Not printed; it reported that the Eastern Department of the British Foreign Office had prepared draft instructions to the British Embassy at Washington “to put to Department idea that if Department plans speak SAG along lines under consideration UK would like to join US in giving same advice SAG and also to UK protected Sheikhs.” (890.0145/2–2349)

The Secretary of State to the Legation in Saudi Arabia 890F.6363/3–1249: Telegram

[Document 27]

The Secretary of State to the Legation in Saudi Arabia

secret Washington, March 12, 1949—4 p. m.

96. Six principles regarding application relevant Truman Proclamation concepts to Persian Gulf, pages 8 and 9, A–23,1 given Brit Emb here Mar 10. Because these principles en route Jidda by airgram, Dept has requested Brit Emb not telegraph them their Emb Jidda which will shortly receive copy from you.

Dept also reminded Brit that ARAMCO has obtained advice from international law experts, which is being passed SAG. Dept stated this advice private concern ARAMCO and SAG until acted upon, but assured Brit offshore proclamation proposed by ARAMCO for issuance by SAG corresponded closely six principles mentioned above. (Lontel 862, Mar 82 )

Brit Emb was informed Dept saw no reason for and did not wish publicity on fact USG had advised SAG re offshore oil. Shld necessity arise Dept plans merely say SAG asked US views development resources offshore areas and was informed principles Truman Proclamation.

Brit Emb further informed question whether or not Brit advise SAG regarding offshore oil entirely up to them, but we frankly saw no compelling reason therefor. Because treaty relations Sheikhdoms, Brit plan advise Gulf Sheikhs of SAG proclamation and what action they should take. Brit believe 1930 Treaty with Iraq requires UK info Iraq re proposed action Kuwait.

Question informing Iran discussed at length. Possible alternatives mentioned: (1) Await Iran inquiry SAG, UK or US after routine publication proclamation SAG press and give straightforward answer, (2) SAG furnish copy public proclamation to all Persian Gulf littoral states, including Iran, and (3) Supplementing “2” above with reassuring explanation that should in future it possibly become necessary define boundaries submerged areas more precisely this will be done through agreements with other spates involved. Pls comment these and other possible alternatives.3

Acheson

1 Dated March 2, p. 111 [Pg. 111 includes portions of Doc. 24 and Doc. 25].

2 Not printed.

3 This telegram was repeated to Baghdad, Cairo, London, and Tehran. Jidda commented, on March 15, that “While SAG would probably prefer alternative (1) feel they can be prevailed upon accept (2) which would presumably assist Embassy Tehran in counseling against immoderate action by Iranians.” (telegram 193, 890F.6363/3–1549). Baghdad, on March 18, pointed out that “Because special treaty relationships with Iraq and Kuwait, British Embassy feels desirable for British alone make representations Baghdad on off-shore oil. We concur and believe preferable for US take no action unless Iraqis initiate discussion re US advice to SAG.” (telegram 119, 890.0145/3–1849). Cairo advised, on March 14, that “Third alternative favored unless entails delay.” (telegram 251, 890F.6363/3–1449) Tehran suggested on March 16, that “SAG and ARAMCO can go ahead with their project (alternative one …) without repercussions in Iran where sovereign authority of Ibn Saud is not contested. This may not be case with Sheikhdoms. It seems highly advisable (1) make every effort avoid appearance concerted Anglo-American action; (2) prevent raising of any general question of principle; and (3) approach whole matter on an ad hoc basis.” (telegram 297, 890.0145/3–4649) The Department, on March 23, informed Baghdad of its concurrence with the latter’s telegram 119 (telegram 107, 890F.6363/3–1849).

Editorial Note [Document 28]

Editorial Note

Chargé Dorsz reported from Baghdad on March 12 that H. H. Wheatley, the second ranking officer of the Iraq Petroleum Company, had arrived at Baghdad on February 21 to undertake renegotiation of the company’s oil concession agreement. The Chargé advised that Mr. Wheatley “was prepared to demand reopening Haifa pipeline, port and refinery as a corollary to renegotiation oil conventions on his own terms.” He also offered to raise the royalty rate from the current eight shillings per ton of crude oil to 18 but the Iraqis scorned the offer.

Mr. Wheatley returned to London on March 12 for consultations with his Board of Directors concerning the high terms demanded by the Iraqis. Prior to his departure “Wheatley said that chances reopening southern pipe[line] much before June or July seemed remote and that policy of even suggesting to Iraqis that their crude might be used to supply Haifa refinery was out of the question at this time.” (airgram 108, 890G.6363/3–1249)

The IPC pipeline bifurcated at Haditha, Transjordan, the “southern pipeline” continuing through Arab Palestine and Israel to Haifa. The northern section continued through Syria and Lebanon to Tripoli.

The Secretary of State to the Legation in Saudi Arabia 890.0145/3–1649: Telegram

[Document 29]

The Secretary of State to the Legation in Saudi Arabia 1

secret Washington, March 16, 1949—7 p. m.

99. Fol for ur background use in discussions with SAG and ARAMCO. It deals with relatively minor differences between Dept and ARAMCO re recommendations SAG.

Although officials Interior approved in general text proposed proclamation ARAMCO plans recommend SAG (pages 5 and 6, A–23),2 they felt para 3,3 page 6, cld be improved and clarified make clear territorial waters (coastal sea) not affected by decree. If, for example, “such areas” in third sentence of para were interpreted as including coastal sea proclamation seems suggest coastal sea has character of high seas and subject free navigation, etc.

Whereas line 3, para 3, page 6, proposed ARAMCO draft begins “to its coast”, Interior officials suggested this shld read “to that coastal sea”. Whereas line 9, para 3, page 6 proposed ARAMCO declaration begins “of waters of such areas”, Interior officials felt clearer “of waters of areas of Persian Gulf seaward from coastal sea of Saudi Arabia”.

Dept agrees with Interior that above suggested changes wld clarify proclamation.

Manley Hudson, expert engaged by ARAMCO for advice offshore oil wld not accept these suggestions. Regard first change, he said area he had in mind was contiguous to coast and not to coastal sea. Second change he felt redundant. Accordingly, A–23, Mar 2 went forward without these proposed changes.

Dept not considered Annex 2 in detail and therefore did not discuss thoroughly with ARAMCO lawyers. However, seems clear if Dept were do so and were consult fully other Govt agencies on subject; at least fol objections wld be made: 1) Decree uses 6-mile rule where US and UK have always insisted 3-mile limit;

2) Manner drawing lines around islands and shoals seems extend claims unduly, given configuration and shallowness Persian Gulf; and

3) Assertion 12-mile zone beyond coastal sea takes form which differs from US handling analogous problem in enforcing customs and prohibition laws.

Dept notes that in discussing “territorial waters” with PWOC (urdesp 42, Feb 18, 19494 ) Tawfiq suggested 3-mile limit presumably because 3-mile rule wld give SAG greater area to offer bidders for offshore rights neutral zone. If Leg aware other SA precedents for use less than 6-miles, advise Dept.

Renew suggestion you caution both SAG and ARAMCO that precipitate action in making any pretentious seaward claims might produce polit repercussions from Iranian side which shld if possible be avoided.

Acheson

1 This telegram was repeated to Tehran and Dhahran and was sent by air to Baghdad, Cairo, and London.

2 Dated March 2, p. 111 [Pg. 111 includes portions of Doc. 24 and Doc. 25].

3 This paragraph begins with the words “The subsoil and sea bed of those areas of the Persian Gulf”, p. 114 [Pg. 114 is part of Doc. 25].

4 Not printed.

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in Iran 891.6363/4–749: Telegram

[Document 30]

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in Iran 1

secret Washington, April 14, 1949—6 p. m.

342. Conversations with reps Brit Emb2 re offshore oil reveal fol agreed points: 1. Brit agreed [with] principles US has passed to SAG. If SAG ask Brit for opinion, Brit will indicate agreement. Brit desire be informed earliest possible by Amer Emb Jidda or Dept (1) text of proclamation when known and (2) proposed release date. Emb Jidda shld, of course, provide info release date all addressees this cable.

2. Iran: Amb Wiley will speak informally to Iranians as soon as release date Saudi Arabian proclamation known. Brit do not wish to exclude possibility Amb Le Rougetel speaking to Iranians fol Wiley. Le Rougetel must be prepared to answer Iran’s questions and wld reply along lines taken by Wiley, He will not volunteer advice or comment. If IranGov inquire directly whether US and UK discussed question in advance, reply will be affirmative and refer to obvious interest Brit-protected Sheikhdoms touching SA mainland. Agreed both Ambs must seek middle ground between (1) implication to Iranians of US–UK collusion for purpose imposing plan upon other littoral states which wld either commit Iran to precedent or affect adversely Iran interests now or in future, and (2) implication of rift or possibility thereof between US and UK which might be capitalized by some elements in Iran.

3. Kuwait, Bahrein and Qatar will now be informed confidentially by Brit that Saudis expected act shortly and that Sheikhdoms will be advised when to issue own proclamation. Brit propose latter date be approx three days fol SAG action.

4. Re Iraq, agreed Brit will inform Iraqi forthcoming proclamation but will not make ref, unless asked directly, to US Govts advice to SAG. US Amb Baghdad will only answer specific questions by Iraq Govt (Baghdad’s 119, Mar. 18 and Deptel 107, Mar. 23).3 Brit Amb will be instructed inform Iraqi soon as Brit have firm info date on which Saudis will act. On Dept suggestion, Iraqi will not be informed earlier than one week before Saudis issue proclamation since longer period wld provide interval for rumors to develop in Iraq and for tension to develop between Iraq and Saudis.

5. Brit will inform Sultan of Muscat generally re developments when Brit Polit Resident Bahrein next Dhofar. Brit will make clear US interest in Sultan’s being informed. Remaining states having special relations with UK will be informed after SAG issues proclamation and will be advised later action they shld take.

Acheson

1 This telegram was repeated to Jidda, Baghdad, Cairo, and London.

2 These conversations were held with E. E. Jones, the Petroleum Attaché of the British Embassy, on March 28 and April 4 (memoranda of conversation by Mr. Kitchen and Mr. Sanger, 891.6363/3–2849, 890.0145/4–449).

3 Neither printed; but see footnote 3, p. 118 [Pg. 118 includes portions of Doc. 27 and Doc. 28].

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in Iran 891.6363/4–1449: Telegram

[Document 31]

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in Iran 1

secret Washington, April 14, 1949—6 p. m.

343. Ref Deptel 342, Apr. 14, re offshore oil. In conversations with Brit Dept took position based on Embtel 297, Mar. 162 that since Iranians aware discussion you shld approach Iran PriMin as soon as release data SAG proclamation known and explain Saudis, motivated by urgent, practical consideration—namely, bids offshore concessions—asked for US advice and were given copy Truman Proclamation together with statement certain its principles which might be applicable to submerged areas PG offshore SA. Amer Govt, therefore, understands SAG will make announcement embodying ref principles. You shld point out that Saudis will probably and logically refer to seaward extension their jurisdiction and control, limits of which will not be established until need arises, therefore Saudi extension wld not have immediate bearing upon possible future extension Iran assertion jurisdiction adjacent submerged areas Gulf.

Specifically, it is expected that conversations will be held between neighboring littoral states regarding transverse lines as need might arise in near future. You shld state understanding SAG will base proclamation on reasonable and stable principles and that it may be assumed any problems of specific delineation between littoral Govts will be worked out amicably as occasion arises.

Refer Deptel 1025, Nov. 1, 19483 numbered paras 2 through 7 info possible pertinence present situation, especially Bahrein.

Acheson

1 This telegram was repeated to London.

2 Not printed.

3  Foreign Relations, 1948, vol. v, Part 1, p. 57.

Memorandum of Conversation, by Mr. Richard H. Sanger of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs 890F.6363/4–2249

[Document 32]

Memorandum of Conversation, by Mr. Richard H. Sanger of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs

secret [Washington,] April 22, 1949.

Subject: Problems Arising from ARAMCO Activities in Disputed Border Areas between Saudi Arabia, the Qatar Peinsula, and the Sheikhdoms of the Trucial Coast.

Participants: Mr. T. E. Bromley—First Secretary, British

Embassy Mr. E. E. Jones—Petroleum Attaché, British Embassy

Mr. Jernegan—NEA (Acting Deputy Director)

Mr. Moline—PED

Mr. Sanger—NE

Mr. Bromley said that London was worried by reports which it had received during the last few weeks that ARAMCO surveying parties were operating in the south west corner of the Qatar Peninsula, in the area between Salwa and Jebel Nakhsh. Word had reached London that engineers for ARAMCO had erected cairns along the road joining these points and as far north as the 25th parallel. Apparently the intention of the ARAMCO engineers was to core drill along this road.

Disturbing reports have also reached London regarding ARAMCO’s actions along the border between Saudi Arabia and the Trucial Coast. Company engineers were reported to have put up a beacon on the promontory of Ras al Hazra and on Ghara island on the Gulf. Mirfaha (Mirfa) and Jebel Dhanni had also been visited and six ARAMCO vehicles were reported to have advanced into the Trucial Coast as far as Jebel Ali. This represented an advance beyond the previous Saudi Arabian claims in this area.

Mr. Jones sketched in the history of British-American talks on these frontiers, which he said went back to informal discussions which were held in London in November of 1946, in which Dr. Loftus and Mr. Levy took part.1 The upshot of these talks was that the British and American Governments agreed to consult their respective nationals who had oil interests in the disputed area between Saudi Arabia and Qatar, and Saudi Arabia and the Trucial Coast. It was the opinion of those taking part in these talks that a “no man’s land” should be set up temporarily along these boundaries pending settlement of the problem. Following these talks Dr. Loftus discussed the matter with ARAMCO. The views of the oil company on the dispute, as set forth in February of 1947, was that ARAMCO must look to Saudi Arabia for the delimitation of territory in which it drills. While ARAMCO intended to keep the Department of State informed on its plans and actions in this area, such action was not to be construed as a request for clearance.

The Foreign Office decided not to take action in regard to this ARAMCO position, particularly in view of the fact that in 1937 the Government of Saudi Arabia had told the British Government that there was no reason to fear that drilling would be started in these disputed areas.

Mr. Sanger with the aid of a CIA map of the Arabian Peninsula (No. 10738, October 1947), and a map from the Department of State Map Division (No. 10659, April 1947), entitled “Qatar and Bahrein Territorial Problems”, explained something of the background of these boundary disputes. He mentioned the line drawn in the Anglo-Turkish Agreement of 1913–1914, which comes out on the Persian Gulf in the Khor Zakh Nuniya, just east of Ain Abwab, and the line proposed by the British in 1937, as the south eastern boundary of Saudi Arabia which starts at the bottom of the Bahr Salwa and goes from there to 52°E–23°N to 55°E–22°N thence down to 55°E–20°N. Also the boundary proposed by the Saudi Arabian Government in 1937 which cuts across the base of the Qatar Peninsula from the middle of Jebel Nakhsh to a point on the Persian Gulf a little north of the Khor al Odaid and then follows the coast line to the bottom of the Khor ed Dhuwaihin whence it goes in a direct line to a point in the Sabkhat Mutti near the Suf uk Wells and thence to 56°E–22°N.

On being asked by Mr. Jernegan if the Foreign Office requested action from the Department of State in regard to the moves being made by ARAMCO in these disputed areas, Mr. Bromley replied in the affirmative. He said the Foreign Office does not at present want to raise the question of these boundaries with the Government of Saudi Arabia but inquired if the Department of State would be prepared to ask ARAMCO to restrict its activities in these areas. The Foreign Office would meantime speak to PDQ (Petroleum Development Qatar) and suggest that that company try to work out a gentlemen’s agreement with ARAMCO to leave the disputed areas alone for the present without prejudice to either party.

Mr. Sanger said that about three weeks ago ARAMCO had told him that it was sending some survey parties into this general region and that in doing so it was adhering to the position which it expressed in 1947, to the effect that it was Ibn Sand’s agent in such matters and drilled in whatever areas he said came within his boundaries.

Mr. Jernegan said that he thought the basic question involved the exact instructions which King Ibn Saud had given to the oil company as to where it should drill. If the instructions given to ARAMCO by the Saudi Arabian Government were general then ARAMCO would be in a position to withdraw its crews. If, however, the instructions given were specific as to the exact location the King wished surveyed then ARAMCO would not be in a position to withdraw and the approach would have to be made to the Saudi Arabian Government.

A–445 of April 16,2 from Cairo was then discussed and it was felt that this action on the part of ARAMCO might be connected with Tewfik Bey’s idea of drilling in controversial areas in order to bring boundary problems to the active attention of all concerned.

In conclusion Mr. Jernegan said that the Department would inquire informally of ARAMCO regarding the nature of the instructions on which it was working along the boundaries of Qatar and the Trucial Coast. He suggested that perhaps ARAMCO’s actions might have been caused by moves to the southward on the part of PDQ, and he said that he did not feel we would be justified in taking further steps vis-à-vis the company or the Saudi Government until the exact nature of ARAMCO’s instructions had been ascertained.

1 For the “Record of Informal Anglo-American Oil Talks, November 1946”, see Foreign Relations, 1946, vol. vii, p. 44. At the time, John A. Loftus was Chief of the Petroleum Division and Walter J. Levy was Petroleum Specialist in the Division of International and Functional Intelligence.

2 Not printed.

The Consul at Dhahran (Meloy) to the Secretary of State 890.0145/4–2749: Airgram

[Document 33]

The Consul at Dhahran (Meloy) to the Secretary of State 1

secret Dhahran, April 27, 1949—5:51 p. m.

A–83. The Consulate has learned from a reliable source that the Arabian American Oil Company, acting for the Saudi Arabian Government, is preparing markers to be placed on certain islands, presumably unoccupied, off the east coast of Saudi Arabia in the Persian Gulf. These markers are for the purpose of establishing Saudi Arabian jurisdiction over the particular islands on which they are set up. Although this action is ostensibly being taken by the Saudi Arabian Government, the oil Company is actually designing the markers and will “assist” the Saudi Arabian Government in their construction and emplacement.

In addition, ARAMCO acting for the Saudi Arabian Government is reported to be secretly engaged in dragging a road across the base of the Qatar peninsula, eastward from Selwa, with the intention that this will be the boundary line claimed by the Saudi Arabian Government. Further details will be reported as they are learned.

Meloy

1 This airgram was repeated to Jidda and London.

The Ambassador in Iran (Wiley) to the Secretary of State 891.6363 AIOC/4–2849: Telegram

[Document 34]

The Ambassador in Iran (Wiley) to the Secretary of State

confidential Tehran, April 28, 1949—6 p. m.

573. Long protracted negotiations revision concession AIOC have now been actively resumed.1 Representatives AIOC have recently returned and Sir William Fraser, chairman board, expected to arrive tomorrow. British Ambassador tells me, most privately, that negotiations, however, are difficult and that on Iran side there is no one truly competent from technical point of view to represent Iran Government.

[Here follow observations by the British Ambassador in Iran concerning the Iranian petroleum delegate at London.]

British Ambassador states AIOC production is at peak level and Iran Government is devising every possible means to cash in. It has made some 20 to 25 specific demands, including Iranization and modification of arbitration clause. Moreover, Iran Government desires 50% gross profits. British Ambassador states that so many elements enter into gross profits that this presents an impossible condition. Moreover, he says, Board of Directors AIOC almost entirely Scotch and will, under no circumstances, accept conditions which would deprive them of control. British Ambassador says way things now stand Company is prepared raise royalties and make other concessions which would substantially double under present circumstances Iran revenue from AIOC. AIOC is in fact subject to very exacting regulations by British Government. For example of its profits last year 11 million pounds have had to be turned over to Treasury as reserve. This is source of lively complaint on part Iran Government. But, says British Ambassador, AIOC is ready hereafter to turn over whatever part of reserves accrue to Iran Government in accordance with contract. British apparently hope that negotiations will be concluded within next fortnight, but:

Thoroughly competent and entirely reliable American source intimately acquainted with course of petroleum matters here has informed me as follows: informant believes that one might mistake tactical moves on Iran’s part for objectives actually sought. For example, according to informant, the 25 specific demands cited represent only catalog of sources of dissatisfaction for discussion. Also he believes that Iran has no present intention demanding Iranization of Company. Also that Iran does not demand 50% gross profits but insists only that principle of equal division of benefits established Venezuela 19422 be used as criterion here in appraising equitability of revised royalty. Iran negotiators have insisted that this principle be accepted before any discussion other issues and until accepted have stubbornly refused yield on any point. Informant believes Iran prepared accept 2½ to 3 times present revenue per ton as representing equitable share on Venezuelan basis continuing same simple-type formula as in past and providing for rescision if warranted by either party after 5 years. AIOC negotiator, Gass, has apparently not been authorized make such settlement hence dispute has been confined to subsidiary issues without progress. Chairman Fraser’s arrival tomorrow may open way for resolving this basic issue which informant savs involves no technical problem.3

Wiley

1 Regarding the initiation of these negotiations on September 30, 1948, see editorial note, Foreign Relations, 1948, vol. v, Part 1, p. 49. For the text of the Convention concluded at Tehran on April 29, 1933, between the Iranian Government and the Anglo-Persian Oil Company (as the Anglo-Iranian Oil Company was then known), see British Cmd. 8425, Persia No. 1 (1951): Correspondence between His Majesty’s Government in the United Kingdom and the Persian Government, and Related Documents concerning the Oil Industry in Persia, February 1951 to September 1951, p. 9.

2 For documentation on discussions between the United States and Venezuela regarding proposed legislation for control of the petroleum industry in Venezuela, see Foreign Relations, 1942, vol. vi, pp. 743 ff.

3 London, on April 30, advised of information from the British Foreign Office that Mr. Bevin had informed the Iranian Ambassador that the negotiations between Iran and the Anglo-Iranian Oil Company were “between company and Iran Government. He said HMG could not negotiate with Iran over head of company and could not put pressure on company to increase its present offer.” (telegram 1675, 891.00/4–3049) London reported further, on May 17, that the “Iranian Finance Ministry is unwilling accept terms offered by Fraser. AIOC, which is secretive even with Foreign Office, indicates that it has made its ‘final’ offer which is ‘better than terms any other oil company in ME except Kuwait neutral zone concessionaires’.” (telegram 1940. 891.00/5–1749)

The Minister in Saudi Arabia (Childs) to the Secretary of State 890.0145/5–349: Telegram

[Document 35]

The Minister in Saudi Arabia (Childs) to the Secretary of State

secret Jidda, May 3, 1949—1 p. m.

326. Following conversation with Prince Faisal1 re proclamation, Foreign Office telegraphed Riyadh and has received following reply.

“Subject still under discussion. No action will be taken until return Finance Minister”.

I asked if anyone other than Finance Minister knew when he would return from Cairo. Jocular reply made doubtful even he knew.

Said I wished express certain personal views and while I thought they reflected views US Government, I emphasized were made on my own responsibility.

(1) There was distinct danger that if offshore oil proclamation went beyond very general terms such as we had indicated in our general principles there might be serious problems raised for which there were no ready solutions. USG had given subject most extensive and intensive study. Extreme caution was therefore desirable that proclamation should not venture into uncharted fields.

(2) On other hand there was, in my personal view, danger of undue delay in issuance. I mentioned possibility ill-considered action by other governments which might provoke those complications we had in mind avoiding, when offering our advice SAG.

Foreign Office assured me my personal views would be greatly welcomed Riyadh and indicated the logic of them would be understood. Sent Department 326, repeated London 57, Tehran 15, Cairo 73.

Childs

1 Saudi Arabian Minister for Foreign Affairs.

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom 890.0145/5–349: Telegram

[Document 36]

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom 1

secret Washington, May 6, 1949—7 p. m.

1558. In light info Tehran’s 603, May 4,2 Dept believes may be desirable for Wiley approach Iran PriMin shortly for conversation along lines instructions contained Deptel 1304, Apr. 14.3 Such approach wld be altered to fit possibly Iran proclamation may actually precede that of SAG.

Iran draft bill appears to take very favorable line. Under circumstances, Dept believes might be useful if Iranians did act shortly, since this wld undoubtedly push SAG into early action and thereby tend to prevent dangers pointed out by Childs in Jidda’s 326, May 3.

Before instructing Wiley to make approach, Dept requests Emb London ascertain and report views Brit Govt and desires Amb Childs’ views desirability such action.

Acheson

1 This telegram was repeated to Jidda, Dhahran, Tehran, and Cairo.

2 Not printed; Ambassador Wiley reported information that “Council Ministers has been given for consideration draft bill dealing with Iran rights in subsea Persian Gulf beyond territorial six mile limit. Bill … is said to follow closely Truman Declaration, asserting Iran’s right to control development of any oil or other riches in subsea beyond six mile limit and extending as far as continental shelf extends. In event continental shelf extends into jurisdiction of neighboring country, division is to be determined by mutual agreement among countries concerned.” (890.0145/5–449)

3 This was a repeat of No. 342 to Tehran, p. 120 [Pg. 120 includes portions of Doc. 29 and Doc. 30].

The Secretary of State to the Legation in Saudi Arabia 890F.6363/5–4049: Telegram

[Document 37]

The Secretary of State to the Legation in Saudi Arabia

secret Washington, May 13, 1949—2 p. m.

184. Re Dhahran tel 153, May 10.1 There is increasing evidence Persian Gulf boundary questions will rapidly come to fore, especially as various states make offshore proclamations.

In response Fuad’s specific question you may reply USG hopes question may be settled by direct and amicable negots between parties concerned. If matters come to impasse it wld seem logical that both parties agree to appointment of a neutral boundary commission to decide question by arbitration. USG wld be prepared suggest this to both parties.2

Acheson

1 Not printed; this message from Ambassador Childs stated that Fuad Hamza had referred to “recent frontier dispute with British over activities ARAMCO exploratory party in vicinity southeast coast. … He said SAG would like to know if matter came to impasse in discussions with UK in what way might US help. Fuad made interesting statement territory dispute was of considerable extent and of great value for oil and if SAG were pushed too hard it might even go so far as to challenge right British to speak in behalf of Arab Sheikhdoms concerned.” (890F.6363/5–1049) Fuad Hamza was Saudi Arabian Minister of State.

2 Ambassador Childs, on May 13, advised that the previous day at Bahrein he had lunched on invitation with Lt. Col. Sir Rupert Hay, British Political Representative at Bahrein, and Bernard A. Burrows, Head of the Eastern Department in the British Foreign Office. The British officials were said to have “stated UK Government prepared enter into direct negotiations SAG regarding boundary conflicts subject recent SAG note. Neither was optimistic early agreement.” (telegram 163 from Dhahran, 890F.6363/5–1349) The Ambassador, on May 25, transmitted information from the British Chargé that a note had been sent to the Saudi Arabian Foreign Office “re reported intention SAG claim sovereignty over Farsi-Arabi group islands Persian Gulf suggesting in view Kuwait claim to same group issue not be raised publicly.” (telegram 362 from Jidda, 890.0145/5–2549)

The Secretary of State to the Legation in Saudi Arabia 890.0145/5–1649

[Document 38]

The Secretary of State to the Legation in Saudi Arabia

secret Washington, May 19, 1949—2 p. m.

190. Jidda tel 343, May 16.1 Dept agrees Jidda’s reasoning that first offshore proclamation shld be by sovereign state rather than sheikhdoms. Also considered highly desirable its terms conform points of US proclamation already presented SAG as applicable Persian Gulf. In view possibility contemplated Iran proclamation may not adequately conform (Jidda [Dhahran] tel 165, May 141 ), Dept believes Emb Jidda shld strongly urge SAG take action quickly. Emb shld in its discretion inform SAG US understands Iran planning action and that it would seem in best interests SAG to take first action.

If SAG reply indicates it will take action soon, then program for approaches to Iran by US followed by UK and to Iraq by UK as previously contemplated cld be followed. Although we believe SAG will see advantages of its enunciating acceptable principles for PG prior to any other littoral state, nonetheless if reply indicates SAG unable or unwilling act soon, consideration may have to be given by US & UK to advisability approaching Iran independently of SA’s plans for purpose encouraging Iran adopt equitable principles in any action it contemplating.2

Acheson

1 Not printed.

1 Not printed.

2 This telegram was repeated to Tehran, Cairo, London, and Baghdad. Ambassador Childs reviewed the situation with the Saudi Arabian Foreign Office in the light of telegram 190. He emphasized “again danger of delay, advantage initial action being taken by SAG and possibility untoward action [by] Iran”. The Ambassador was given copies of draft decrees representing the latest versions of ARAMCO annexes 2 and 3 as set forth in airgram 23, March 2, to Jidda, p. 111 [Pg. 111 includes portions of Doc. 24 and Doc. 25] (telegram 357, May 21, 5 p. m., from Jidda, 890.0145/5–2149).

The Ambassador in Iran (Wiley) to the Secretary of State 890.0145/5–2449: Telegram

[Document 39]

The Ambassador in Iran (Wiley) to the Secretary of State

plain Tehran, May 24, 1949.

691. Following is text of bill regarding Persian Gulf subsea resources approved by Council of Ministers and submitted Majlis May 19:

“The importance of natural resources lying at the bottom of the sea and under the seabed in the vicinity of Iranian territories necessitates action on the part of the Iranian Government to signalize its rights to the said resources. In addition to the law of 24th Tir 1313 (15 July 1934) concerning the coastal waters of Iran and in view of international regulations passed recently on the subject of natural resources, especially oil resources lying in the continental shelf of countries, it is considered necessary by the Iranian Government, on whose continental shelf important natural resources are available, to make new regulations and declare Iran’s proprietary rights with respect to these resources. In consequence, this bill is submitted for approval.

“1. The natural resources existing at the bottom of the sea or under the bottom of the sea up to the limits of the continental shelf of the Iranian coasts in the Persian Gulf and Oman Sea belong to the Iranian Government.

“2. Should the continental shelf of Iran extend to the coasts of another country or be common with another adjacent country, the limits of the interested countries will be fixed equitably between the interested governments with respect to the natural resources of the continental shelf.

“3. This law does not alter the situation of non-coastal waters on the continental plateau and free shipping rights in said waters will remain in force.

“4. The provisions of the law of 24th Tir 1313 are not changed hereby and will remain in force”.1

Sent Department, repeated Jidda 7, Baghdad 61, Cairo 29, London 113, Dhahran 60.

Wiley

1 The Department, on May 23, notified Jidda that this legislation had been introduced into the Majlis, the Iranian Parliament (telegram 195, 890.0145/5–2349). Jidda, in reply on May 27, stated that it had given a copy of telegram 691 to the Ministry for Foreign Affairs and had “lost no occasion to keep question alive.” (telegram 372, 890.0145/5–2749)

The Acting Secretary of State to the Embassy in Iran 890.0145/5–2549: Telegram

[Document 40]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Embassy in Iran 1

confidential Washington, May 24, 1949—7 p. m.

us urgent

474. [Here follow two paragraphs concerning a broadcast on May 20 by Radio Tehran which gave the text of Iranian legislation dealing with subsea resources, along the lines of telegram 691 from Tehran, supra.]

Dept believes Iran action, if verified by you, makes it imperative Emb approach Iran Gov earliest with view achieving purpose set for Para 2 Jidda’s [Dhahran’s] 165, May 142 (to Tehran as 58). Conversation wld be based on Dept’s A–23, Mar 2 and subsequent communications setting forth desirable principles.

Dept is concerned lest ambiguous wording Iran bill (such as “riches in the sea” which cld be interpreted as not referring to minerals under the sea but including fish) set undesirable precedent in regard to both tone and content.

You shld inform Brit Amb this instr and discuss desirability Brit following action in light Emb London’s 2006, May 233 (to Tehran as 61). Emb London shld inform Brit Govt Dept believes impending Iran action makes immediate approach necessary.

Dept hopes you can influence Iran Gov to amend bill to set forth clearly principles contained Truman Proclamation Sept. 28, 1945.

Webb

1 The telegram was repeated to Jidda, London, and Cairo.

2 Not printed; this paragraph read as follows: “Most important consideration believed to be issuance initial proclamation which follow most closely lines Department general principles and in general pattern laid down after extensive consultation of Department with various interested authorities and parties.” (890.0145/5–1449)

3 Not printed.

The Acting Secretary of State to the Embassy in Iran 890.0145/5–2049: Telegram

[Document 41]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Embassy in Iran 1

confidential Washington, May 27, 1949—7 p. m.

487. Embtels 691, May 21 [24]; 703, May 26.2 Scrutiny text Iran Gov bill re P.G. subsea resources has partially allayed Dept’s concern re possible ill effect ambiguous and incomplete proclamation. Generally draft law apparently attempts fol Truman Proclamation principles.

We believe it desirable, however, for Emb, in addition to transmitting gen principles as requested Deptel 474, May 24, to draw Iran attn to several specific points. Draft bill refers to “Internatl regulations”. Emb might point out that several countries unilaterally have issued proclamations and that precedent has thereby been established which apparently is receiving gen acceptance. However, to our knowledge, no internatl body has approved such procedure thereby giving proclamations stature internatl regulation.

Para 5 Dept’s A–23, Mar. 2 indicates undesirability use of phrase “continental shelf” in connection Persian Gulf. If portion seabed “Oman Sea”, to which Iranians might lay claim and which wld extend to areas which might also be claimed by Sheikhdoms, is not deeper than 100 fathoms (generally accepted that land which is covered by no more than 100 fathoms water is considered continental shelf) same reasoning wld seem to apply. While Dept does not wish influence any littoral state in delimiting its claims, you might suggest that adherence to phrase “continental shelf” might be interpreted, if applied to continental depression P.G., as extending Iran claim only to deepest water of gulf (which lies closest Iran shore).

Dept questions clarity and desirability use word “rights” and phrases “proprietary rights” and “belong to”. Dept also recalls difficulties re high seas and fishing encountered by South Amer states which perverted US proclamation by employing phrase “sovereignty” in similar proclamations. You may inform Iranians that great deliberation preceded decision to utilize word “jurisdiction” and suggest Iran Gov may wish consider substituting “jurisdiction and control” in text bill.

Dept believes it desirable for Brit Amb Baghdad to approach Iraq Govt as suggested London’s 2058, May 263 May 24 Brit Emb Wash transmitted a letter to Dept4 stating that in view delay issue Saudi proclamation FonOff have instructed Polit Resident P.G. to inform P. G. Sheikhs they “will be free” to grant conditional concessions or give “lttrs of Intention as from the fourth June”. Lttr indicates Polit resident is to make clear to Sheikhs number of points including one that gen principles embodied in draft proclamation forwarded to Polit resident shld not be violated. In view foregoing, Dept requests amplification Para 4 London Emb cable.5

Webb

1 Repeated to London and Baghdad and by air to Cairo and Jidda.

2 Latter not printed.

3 Not printed.

4 Letter No. 29/106/49 from Mr. Bromley to Mr. Sanger, not printed. A partial text of this letter was transmitted to Dhahran in telegram 164, June 1, 6 p. m., and notice given that ARAMCO, AMINCO, Pacific Western, and NE Development had been notified (890F.6363/6–149).

5 Paragraph numbered 4 of London’s telegram 2058 stated that “Foreign Office which is still awaiting Saudi draft does not plan approach Sheikhdoms at this time.” (890.0145/5–2649)

The Minister in Saudi Arabia (Childs) to the Secretary of State 890.0145/5–2849

[Document 42]

The Minister in Saudi Arabia (Childs) to the Secretary of State

secret Jidda, May 28, 1949.

No. 142:

Sir: I have the honor to refer to my telegram No. 357 of May 21, 19491 as well as to the Department’s A–23 of March 2, 1949 and to transmit herewith the text of the proposed Saudi decree on territorial waters of Saudi Arabia (Annex II) as well as the proposed text of a Royal Pronouncement governing off-shore oil (Annex III).2

These annexes are those contemplated in the Department’s A–23 of March 2, 1949; regarding Annex I which would establish a public claim by the Saudi Arabian Government to certain islands in the Persian Gulf, the Department will have observed from my telegram No. 362 of May 25, 19493 that the British Embassy in Jidda, acting under instructions, has expressed the hope the Saudi Arabian Government would not make such a public claim over islands to which it is understood the Shaikh of Kuwait lays claim.

I am informed by Mr. Garry Owen, Jidda representative of ARAMCO that Mr. Floyd Ohliger, Vice President of ARAMCO was assured in Cairo by Shaikh Abdullah Sulaiman, Minister of Finance, who has been spending some time there, that the Royal Pronouncement regarding off-shore oil was intended to be published in the official newspaper, Umm al-Qura, on May 20, 1949. As yet, however, there has been no publication and it seems unlikely there will be until the return of Shaikh Abdullah from Cairo which is still being awaited. With the recent departure of Fuad Bey Hamza, one of the King’s principal advisers who has left for Beirut for reasons of health, and in the absence of Shaikh Abdullah and Shaikh Yusuf Yassin, Deputy Foreign Minister, there is an almost complete dearth of those on whom the King customarily relies for advice in foreign affairs.4

Respectfully yours,

J. Rives Childs

1 Not printed; it advised that the head of the Saudi Arabian Foreign Office had handed to Ambassador Childs on May 21 draft decrees representing the latest versions of ARAMCO annexes two and three as set forth in airgram 23, March 2, to Jidda. The Ambassador concluded that the “Proposed proclamation or pronouncement appears conform our suggested general principles.” (890.0145/5–2149)

2 Neither printed.

3 Not printed.

4 Jidda, on June 1, requested the Department to add to the English texts, transmitted in despatch 142, “the date of the promulgation of the proclamation, May 28, 1949.” (despatch 147, 890.0145/6–149) The texts were published in a special edition of the official Government newspaper Umm al-Qura on May 29 (telegram 374, May 29, 11 a.m., from Jidda, 890.0145/5–2949).

The Ambassador in Iran (Wiley) to the Secretary of State 890.0145/6–149: Telegram

[Document 43]

The Ambassador in Iran (Wiley) to the Secretary of State

secret Tehran, June 1, 1949—8 a. m.

726. Jidda 374, May 29 to Dept, 286 Cairo, 270 London.1 Since approach to Iran Government in accordance instructions Deptel 782 [487], May 27 (repeated London 1859, Baghdad 226) would now be “after the event” rather than before as contemplated by Department I would appreciate receiving any revisions in instructions Department considers advisable. For example, if asked why Iran Government was not informed before I could no longer reply that we felt obliged to reply to SAG before informing other states (Deptel 1025 November 1,2 repeated London 4160).

As we would now be in position of informing Iran Government of fait accompli taken by another state I question whether any useful purpose will be served by saying anything at this time. If any questions are asked I can emphasize that advice given [Saudis] was carefully designed to avoid offense to any other riparian state.

Moreover, as we have not seen fit to inform Iran Government what we were doing even though they had a general idea of what was going on and as Iran Government has independently sought expert counsel in drafting its own bill (Professor Gidel), I question whether it is good diplomacy at this moment gratuitously to suggest to Iran Government a number of changes in their bill which are of a highly technical nature (Deptel 782 [487]). In view of Department’s reaction that Iran bill takes a “very favorable line” (Deptel sent London 1558,3 repeated Jidda 179, Tehran 419) and similar reaction from Foreign Office London I suggest that we should avoid raising any objections unless they are of a sort really basic to our interests.

Sent Department 726, repeated Jidda 10, Baghdad 62, Cairo 31, London 120.

Wiley

1 Not printed; but see footnote 4, p. 133 [Pg. 133 is part of Doc. 42].

2  Foreign Relations, 1948, vol. v, Part 1, p. 57.

3 Dated May 6, p. 128 [Pg. 128 includes portions of Doc. 36 and Doc. 37].

The Chargé in the United Kingdom (Holmes) to the Secretary of State 890F.6363/6–1049: Telegram

[Document 44]

The Chargé in the United Kingdom (Holmes) to the Secretary of State

confidential London, June 10, 1949—7 p. m.

2249. Embassy’s 2130, June 1.1 Re offshore oil Chadwiek said today Sheikhs of Bahrein, Kuwait and Qatar issued their proclamations on or about June 4 and that remainder would be out soon in standard form. British Ambassadors Tehran and Baghdad have informed two Govts re proclamations. Iraqis inquired who had put Saudi Arabian Govt up to issuing proclamation and were told by British Ambassador that he understood it drafted with assistance ARAMCO.

2. Chadwick said he knew of no letters of intent for offshore oil having been granted by Sheikhs.2

Sent Dept 2249, repeated Baghdad 48, Jidda 43, Tehran 69, Dhahran 8.

Holmes

1 Not printed.

2 Dhahran, on July 23 and August 8, transmitted to the Department the Arabic texts and the English translations of the seabed proclamations issued by Bahrein, Qatar, and the Trucial Sheikhdoms on or about June 5. (despatches 106 and 116, 890.0145/7–2349,/8–849) The earlier despatch noted that the proclamations were issued in Arabic but were “translations from the original English prepared In uniform language by the British Government. The Political Resident in Bahrein had translations made into Arabic at the Residency in Bahrein.” Dhahran, on August 10, transmitted the original text in English used by the Political Residency as a model in preparing the proclamations (despatch 117, 890.0145/8–1049).

The Acting Secretary of State to the Embassy in Iran 890.0145/6–149: Telegram

[Document 45]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Embassy in Iran 1

secret Washington, June 11, 1949—2 p. m.

524. Embtel 726, June 1. As submission bill re subsea resources to Iran Majlis and ensuing radio commentary by radio Tehran had effect announcing to world Iran intentions and gen thinking on subj, Dept did not intend that Emb’s approach to Iran Gov wld be based on either Saudi Govt’s action or fact US had advised SAG. Instrs and timetable outlined in Deptels 342 and 343 Apr. 14 were considered modified by possibility Iran rather than SAG might issue first formal statement. In view fact SAG issued proclamation in manner not permitting advance notice Tehran, Emb is relieved obligation adhere to original instrs.

Dept believes our views re desirable gen principles might be given Iran Gov based solely on public knowledge text Iran Gov bill. Emb might state that since Iran Proclamation appears to have been drafted in light of Truman Proclamation 1945 (Dept Circ instr Oct. 17, 19452 ), US Govt believes it appropriate to mention to Iran Gov some of considerations and thinking which prompted US Govt utilize exact wording particularly with regard to navigation and fishing, employed Truman Proclamation (see paras 3 through 6 and para 8 summary memo Oct. 21, 1948;3 numbered paras (2) and (5) Deptel 1025, Nov. 1, 1948;4 para 3 page 6 Dept’s A–23 Mar 2 and Deptels 474, May 24 and 487, May 27). Emb cld even suggest that if such words as “proprietary rights” (para 4 Deptel 487) were retained in proclamation this Govt might not be able to recognize validity proclamation since such phrase appears to be contrary to established internatl law. This Govt was forced to serve notice that it reserved its position against claims made in proclamations by several South Amer states which used wording which appeared be contrary such law. However, Dept leaves entirely to Emb’s discretion whether foregoing views shld be made known Iran Gov.

This and preceding tels this subject have been discussed with Wagner.5

Webb

1 Repeated to London, Jidda, Cairo, and Baghdad.

2 Not printed.

3 Not printed; but see footnote 1, Foreign Relations, 1948, vol. v, Part 1, p. 59.

4  Ibid., p. 57.

5 Marcel E. Wagner, President of the American Eastern Corporation.

Memorandum of Conversation, by Mr. Richard H. Sanger of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs 890.014/6–2149

[Document 46]

Memorandum of Conversation, by Mr. Richard H. Sanger of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs

secret [Washington,] June 21, 1949.

Participants: Mr. Thomas Bromley—First Secretary, British Embassy

Mr. Mattison—NE

Mr. Sanger—NE

Mr. Bromley said that the British had decided to negotiate with the Saudi Arabian Government regarding the boundary disputes which affect that country and the sheikhdoms of the Persian Gulf which are in treaty relations with Great Britain, and that the British Charge had gone to Riyadh for this purpose. In this connection, he said the Foreign Office hoped that the Government of Saudi Arabia would not turn to the United States for support in these disputes, and that if that did happen the United States would not encourage the Saudi Government to believe that it would receive U.S. support.

Mr. Mattison replied that the Saudi Arabian Government had already put out a feeler on this subject and that the American Ambassador at Jidda had been instructed, on May 13th, to inform the Saudi Arabian Government that the United States Government hoped that the various Persian Gulf boundary disputes may be settled by direct negotiations between the parties concerned. However, if such a solution is not possible it was suggested that the interested parties consider the appointment of a neutral boundary commission to settle the question by arbitration. It was further pointed out that the U.S. Government was ready to suggest this to both parties. Under these circumstances Mr. Mattison felt that we had already indicated to the Saudis that we were not interested in being brought into the dispute.

Mr. Bromley said that London would be pleased to hear of the United States position. He said the British envisaged three types of disputes. The first would be between two of the British protected sheikhdoms, and thus to be handled by British officials representing both parties to the dispute. The second would be between a British protected sheikhdom and an independent country such as Saudi Arabia. The third would be between two independent countries such as Saudi Arabia and Iran.1

1 Mr. Sanger, on July 22, had a further conversation with Mr. Bromley on the question of frontier negotiations affecting Saudi Arabia. The latter advised that King Ibn Saud would welcome a British delegation to discuss the subject but that the Saudi Arabians wished to delay talks “until after Ramadan (July 27)” (memorandum of conversation by Mr. Sanger, 890.0145/7–2249).

Editorial Note [Document 47]

Editorial Note

The Iraq Petroleum Company completed a 16-inch pipeline to Tripoli, Lebanon, presumably in the summer of 1949. The first flow of crude oil through the pipeline reached the Mediterranean seaboard on or about July 9 (airgram 384, August 10, from Beirut, 890G.6363/8–1049).

Memorandum by the Chief of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs (Mattison) to the Deputy Director of the Office of Near Eastern and African Affairs (Hare) 501.BB Palestine/7–1249

[Document 48]

Memorandum by the Chief of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs (Mattison) to the Deputy Director of the Office of Near Eastern and African Affairs (Hare)

[Washington,] July 12, 1949.

In exploring the files, the following appear to be the main threads of negotiations regarding the Haifa Refinery and pipeline:1

1. April 13, 1948 (Cairo’s teleg. no. 416, April 24, to Department2 ). Strike by Arab workers forces shutdown of refinery.

2. April 24, 1948. Pipeline temporarily closed, following refinery shutdown.

3. May 4, 1948 (Cairo’s teleg. no. 462, May 4, to Dept2 ); Iraqis cut pipeline following failure of British negotiations in reaching Jewish-Arab accord to reopen Haifa Refinery.

4. June 18, 1948 (teleg. no. 2702, from London3 ). British express views to Mediator, suggesting possibility getting Arabs and Jews to agree to establishment of Haifa as international port under Mediator’s or UN auspices.

5. August 7, 1948 (Baghdad’s teleg. no. 480 to Dept4 ). Iraqi Director General of Economics said Iraq would resume pipeline exports only if Haifa under international control, and under the following conditions: (1) Not one drop of oil must pass to Zionists;

(2) Arab States must have sufficient guarantees in this respect.

6. August 9, 1948 (London’s teleg. no. 35934 ). Shertok5 says PGI would not accept anything in the nature of international control over the Haifa Refinery or pipeline terminals.

7. August 17, 1948 (London’s teleg. 3739 to Dept). Goldmann6 states informally that PGI willing to establish free zone Haifa for Arab use in future, but this to be a bargaining point when talks with Arabs begin.

8. Sept. 18, 1948. Bernadotte plan7 announced containing recommendations that a free zone be established to include the Petroleum Works at Haifa (see UN Document A/648, Paragraph 4 (c)): “(c) The port of Haifa, including the oil refineries and terminals, and without prejudice to their inclusion in the sovereign territory of the Jewish State or the administration of the city of Haifa, should be declared a free port, with assurances of free access for interested Arab countries and an undertaking on their part to place no obstacle in the way of oil deliveries by pipeline to the Haifa refineries, whose distribution would continue on the basis of the historical pattern.”

The Bernadotte Report was rejected in toto by both the Arabs and Israelis, but our files reveal no specific rejection of the Bernadotte free port proposal per se, either by Israel or by the Iraqi government. Neither, however, were favorable reactions reported, the French partners in the IPC having indicated they had sounded the Israeli Government on this matter and met with a negative response on the free zone idea. Meanwhile the French Government broached a new approach for reopening the Haifa pipeline for export of crude only. The principal developments of that approach were as follows: (1) Oct. 18, 1948, following tripartite discussion in Paris, the French presented an aide-mémoire 4 to the US containing details of a proposal that Baghdad be approached with a suggestion that the Haifa pipeline be reopened for export of crude oil only, appropriate observers to be stationed at check points to assure that none of the oil from the pipeline would be allowed to fall into Israeli hands. Israel, however, was to be supplied with essential refined products based upon an “historical pattern” from other sources. If Iraqi agreement was obtained to this proposal, Israel would then be similarly approached.

(2) Oct. 27, 1948 (Dept’s 390 to Baghdad8 ). Embassy at Baghdad instructed to indicate support of French and British colleagues who will initiate discussions with Iraq along lines of the French “for export only” proposal, later approach by the US to Israel to be contingent upon favorable response from Iraq.

(3) Nov. 23, 1948 (Baghdad’s teleg. no. 723 to Dept8 ). Prime Minister Pachachi seems favorable but wants to discuss with Council of Ministers, with Regent, and with IPC (latter concerning safeguards that oil will not reach Israelis).

(4) Dec. 3, 1948. Representative Wheatley, who has been endeavoring to reopen pipeline, leaves Baghdad confident that he can “close deal” when he returns six weeks hence.

(5) April 12, 1949 (Baghdad’s teleg. no. 177 to Dept8 ). Wheatley returns, sees Prime Minister (Nuri Said) who seems interested in the proposal for export of crude only, but does not see how he can take action in view of Iraqi public opinion; threatens to break off negotiations if Wheatley presses matter of shipment of IPC oil for use at the Haifa Refinery.9

(6) May 5, 1949, British propose approach PCC reverting to Bernadotte free zone idea.10

It appears that neither the Iraqis nor the Israelis have ever given a categoric rejection to either the Bernadotte free zone plan or the French “export only” plan, but it is evident that the Government of Iraq has evaded a decision on all proposals (save internationalization of Haifa, which the Israelis rejected) in order to assure the Iraqi public that no oil was to flow through the pipeline to territory controlled by the Israelis.

It is just possible, however, that enough time has elapsed and enough royalties have been lost (especially since IPC appears willing to double the royalty rate if the pipeline question can be solved) to cause the Iraqis to accept the free port alternative to full-internationalization.

London’s 2598, July 5,11 reports that the negotiations which IPC is currently conducting in London with the Iraqi Minister of National Economy are “thoroughly stuck” and the Economy Minister has come to the Foreign Office for aid vis-à-vis the IPC.12

It is my belief that in view of the above the free port proposal should again be tried, but in the light of the difficulties of working through the PCCI believe direct representations are the most feasible.

It is suggested you send the attached telegram to London.13

1 The references are to the Consolidated Refineries, Ltd., a British-owned company operating at Haifa, and to the pipeline of the Iraq Petroleum Company running from the Iraqi oilfields to the Mediterranean, with one of its terminals at Haifa.

2 Not printed.

2 Not printed.

3  Foreign Relations, 1948, vol. v, Part 2, p. 1122.

4 Not printed.

4 Not printed.

5 Moshe Shertok, Israeli Foreign Minister.

6 Nahum Goldmann, in 1948, President of the Executive Committee of the World Jewish Congress and representative of the Provisional Government of Israel at London.

7 For the conclusions of the Bernadotte report, see Foreign Relations, 1948, vol. v, Part 2, p. 1401.

4 Not printed.

8 Not printed.

8 Not printed.

8 Not printed.

9 Telegram 177 from Baghdad also noted that “Israel not disposed agree opening line solely for export as Israel is expected insist on obtaining IPC crude for Haifa refinery.” (890G.6363/4–1249)

10 At a conference with Department officers on May 5, Thomas E. Bromley, First Secretary of the British Embassy, and E, E. Jones, Petroleum Attaché of the British Embassy, brought a draft of a proposed note to be submitted jointly to the Palestine Conciliation Commission by the United States, the United Kingdom, and France, regarding the opening of the Haifa refinery and the IPC pipeline. The proposed note concluded “with the suggestion that a free-port area be granted to the Arab countries at Haifa to include the refinery. In the British view such an arrangement need not in any way derogate upon Israeli sovereignty over the area should that form part of the political settlement. It might, however, make it politically easier for Iraq to agree to satisfactory arrangements for the refinery.” (memorandum of conversation by John R. Barrow of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs, 867N.6363/5–549) For documentation on the activities of the Palestine Conciliation Commission, see pp. 594 [Pg. 594 is part of Doc. 341] ff. The draft of the proposed note is dated April 29 and is filed under 867N.6363/4–2949.

11 Not printed.

12 Baghdad advised, on May 5, that the IPC group had left empty-handed for London the previous week (telegram 249, 890G.6363/5–549) and on July 5 that the negotiations had been transferred to London late in June (despatch 219 and enclosure, 890G.6363/7–549).

13 Not found attached; the reference is possibly to an early draft of telegram 2515, July 20, infra.

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom 501.BB Palestine/7–2049: Telegram

[Document 49]

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom

confidential Washington, July 20, 1949—6 p. m.

2515. Ref Deptel 2232, June 29.1 Dept’s views re renewed effort reopen Haifa refinery and pipeline on basis free port proposal as fol:

While in principle no objection perceived channeling proposal through PCC scope Lausanne talks likely be limited immediate future questions refugees, territory, and Jerusalem. Ethridge’s2 favorable response to idea PCC approach made at time when it was hoped initiate discussions economic problems but efforts by PCC this direction proved fruitless at least for time being Arabs not having sent economic specialists Lausanne and Israelis having withdrawn theirs.

PCC approach furthermore cumbersome and likely ineffective in view Iraqi non-participation Lausanne discussions and current refusal be associated with PCC in any manner. Thus, though possible approach Israel through PCC, Iraq must be contacted through regular diplomatic channels by three Govts.

In light above Dept believes direct approach by three Govts Israel followed by similar representation Iraq likely bring best results. Such discussions might be held London where all parties represented.

You are authorized communicate this view FonOff and to your Fr colleague and if they concur to discuss with them terms in which direct representations might be framed. Suggest you obtain additional views re free zone proposal for oil installation since Brit approach on subj fails cover physical or polit practicability. Furthermore according urtel 2715 July 123 wld appear increased royalties possibly controlling factor.4

Acheson

1 Not printed.

2 Mark F. Ethridge, United States Representative on the Palestine Conciliation Commission.

3 Not printed; it advised of information from the British Foreign Office that the IPC negotiations continued deadlocked, that the Iraqis had nearly broken off negotiations and that they had been dissuaded from returning home, in order to continue negotiations (890G.00/7–1249).

4 This telegram was repeated to Paris and Bern (for the American Delegation at Lausanne) and sent by air to Baghdad and Tel Aviv. London, on July 22, reported the preliminary reaction of the British Foreign Office to the Department’s views. The Foreign Office was said to be “considering following alternative course of action with Iraq, which … would require careful handling and timing; now that Syrian armistice agreement has been concluded, time is approaching when it may be propitious lift arms embargo. … At such time as lifting embargo appeared imminent (or perhaps after actually lifted), British would point out to Egyptians that Britain would be more amenable shipment arms if Egypt permitted passage tankers through Suez with Persian Gulf Oil for Haifa. If Egyptians agreed permit such shipment, Foreign Office feels Iraqis might then agree reopen pipeline since they could point to Egyptian action as deciding factor, thereby saving own face.” (telegram 2894, 501.BB Palestine/7–2249) For documentation on the Syrian armistice agreement and the arms embargo, see pp. 594 [Pg. 594 is part of Doc. 341] ff.

The Ambassador in Iran (Wiley) to the Secretary of State 891.6363/7–2149: Telegram

[Document 50]

The Ambassador in Iran (Wiley) to the Secretary of State

plain Tehran, July 21, 1949.

935. Iranian Government has now released to press Persian text of agreement concluded July 17 with AIOC representatives1 for revision AIOC concession terms. Agreement was submitted to Majlis July 19. Under agreement additional payments will be due from AIOC to Iranian Government within 30 days after agreement becomes effective amounting to just under 15 million pounds, made up as follows: (a) Royalty rate per ton production increased from 4 to 6 shillings gold, retroactive to January 1, 1948. Additional payment for 1948 is 3,364,459 pounds;

(b) Tax payment to Iranian Government per ton production readjusted to one shilling per ton oil production, from January 1, 1948. Additional payment for 1948 is 312,900 pounds;

(c) AIOC agrees to pay to Iran, as its share of general reserves outstanding at end of 1947 a sum of 5,090,909 pounds;

(d) A formula has been agreed upon whereby the Persian share of the reserve is calculated only on the gross allocation to reserve, and not the net after reduction of income tax, with a provision that annual payment under this formula shall not fall below 4 million pounds. Payment due for 1948 amounts to approximately 5,900,000 pounds.

Parliament is expected to give necessary approval to agreement before its dissolution on July 26. New arrangements bring total Iranian Government revenue for oil revenue for 1948 to approximately 18,750,000 pounds. According unofficial Iranian estimates corresponding revenue for 1949 expected amount something over 17 million pounds.2

Repeated London 140.

Wiley

1 For the text in English, see British Cmd 8425, Persia No. 1 (1951), p. 19 [Pg. 19 is part of Doc. 3]. Tehran, on July 18, reported information from the British Ambassador that final agreement had been reached on all points except Article 16 of the concession agreement “relating to the gradual reduction in the proportion of non-Iranian employees. Iranians have now agreed to accept basic principle of British proposals on this article but since agreement could not be reached at once on exact wording it was decided to go ahead with conclusion remainder of agreement, since changes relating to royalty payments require approval of Majlis which will be dissolved next ten days.” (telegram 926, 891.6363/7–1849)

2 The fifteenth session of the Majlis came to a close on July 28 without a vote on the oil agreement (telegram 965, July 28, from Tehran, 891.6363/7–2849). Tehran, on July 31, gave its “impression on basis conversations with important Iranians as well as general press comment that there is increasing consensus opinion among Majlis deputies and other public personalities that the bargain was not nearly good enough.” (telegram 973, 891.6363/7–3149)

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State 501.BB Palestine/8–1549: Telegram

[Document 51]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State

secret London, August 15, 1949—7 p. m.

3224. Embtel 3074, August 5.1 At request Foreign Office, meeting held today in Burrows2 office re Haifa refinery and pipeline. Present were Burrows and Sheringham, Foreign Office; Boudet, French Embassy; Willoughby, ECA; and Palmer, Embassy.

Burrows apologized for long delay in giving Foreign Office’s reactions suggestion US-UK-French approach Israel and Iraqi Governments. He attributed delay to (A) question of lifting arms embargo, and (B) prior conversations with IPC and Iraqi Government.

Burrows stated Consolidated Refineries has now indicated it wishes resume operations at Haifa at earliest possible date, and that it feels best way to break ice is to start refineries with tanker oil. Burrows stated Foreign Office agrees this point of view. New Foreign Office proposals contemplate following steps: (A) One tanker of Western Hemisphere crude would be sent to Haifa to get refinery going. At about same time one or more tankers would be sent from Persian Gulf via Suez. British hope Egyptian Government would permit passage tankers, but if not, appropriate pressure would be brought upon Egypt.

(B) Simultaneously with foregoing, US, UK, and French would urge Iraqi Government not to discourage Egypt from permitting passage tankers through Canal. At same time Nuri would be reminded of his statement that if tankers could be put through Canal, it would provide excuse he required and that he could then reopen pipeline. (This is more positive statement Nuri’s attitude than that given by Chadwick:3 see Paragraph 4 Embtel 3180 August 12.4

(C) US, UK and French would meanwhile approach Israel Government and urge it make statement re its intention establish free port at Haifa. If Israeli Government concurred, this statement would be timed to coincide with arrival tankers Suez and would, Foreign Office believes, make it easier for Egyptians permit passage. Burrows said if Israelis refuse make statement, Foreign Office would still wish go ahead with steps (A) and (B), paragraph 2.

Burrows gave following additional amplifying details: (a) It would be possible operate Haifa refineries indefinitely on Western Hemisphere oil which is expensive and of wrong type, but “pump-priming” with crude from this source would demonstrate to Egypt and Iraq that refineries can be operated without Iraqi and Persian Gulf crude.

(b) With regard prospect getting tanker through Canal, Burrows stated there has been some loosening by Egypt on restrictions some goods passing through Canal en route Israel. Foreign Office had thought at one time of discussing question of passage of tankers with Egypt in advance, but had dropped this idea since it was afraid that it might constitute tacit recognition of Egypt’s right stop tankers which British do not admit.

(c) Nuri has stopped insisting on complete internationalization Haifa and has told Foreign Office that if refineries reopen he would not ask what was happening to oil.5

(d) Foreign Office believes details re free port at Haifa should be left for negotiations between Israel and Arab States, perhaps through PCC. Foreign Office does not suggest details should be worked out at present time in connection approach to Israel which, as previously stated, would merely be asked to make statement of its preparedness set up free port. Re timing Burrows stated it would take three or four weeks to get tanker from Western Hemisphere to Haifa, and approaches would be made to governments of Israel and Iraq before that time. He suggested approaches be made verbally with aides-mémoire and that they be made as concerted démarches rather than as joint démarche.

Both US and French representatives said they would pass foregoing on to their governments with request for urgent reply thereto.

Sent Department 3224, repeated Baghdad 71, Cairo 111, Paris 628, pouched Haifa unnumbered.

Douglas

1 Not printed.

2 Bernard A. Burrows, Head of the Eastern Department in the British Foreign Office.

3 John E. Chadwick of the British Foreign Office.

4 Not printed.

5 Baghdad, on August 24, reported the belief of the British Chargé that the Foreign Office must have misunderstood the position of Prime Minister Nuri. The Chargé was said to feel that “supplying Iraqi crude to Haifa refinery is such explosive issue that Nuri’s presently weak government would hesitate considerable time before taking risk agreeing this. Nuri might prefer resign rather than risk consequences such as befell Saleh Jabr in January, 1948 when Portsmouth Treaty, like Haifa refinery question now, was ready-made issue around which most Iraqis united.” (telegram 508, 501.BB Palestine/8–2449) For documentation on the proposed treaty to revise the British-Iraqi Treaty of Alliance of 1930, see Foreign Relations, 1948, vol. v, Part 1, pp. 202 ff. London reported, on September 14, that an Iraqi spokesman had “argued that for ten million dollars, Haifa refineries could be moved Syria and pipeline diverted. Foreign Office told him figure ridiculous and that it would be very much more expensive proposition.” (telegram 3702, 501.BB Palestine/9–1449)

Memorandum by the Chief of the Petroleum Division (Eakens) to Mr. John R. Barrow of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs 501.BB Palestine/8–2049

[Document 52]

Memorandum by the Chief of the Petroleum Division (Eakens) to Mr. John R. Barrow of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs

confidential [Washington,] August 19, 1949.

Subject: Attached Cable on Reopening of Haifa Refinery.

As you and I discussed yesterday, the attached cable1 deviates considerably from the general agreement which you, Harlan Clark2 and I previously reached on what should be said in the cable.

As I have indicated to you in our discussions of this problem, it seems to me that the primary interest in the reopening of the Haifa refinery is British and not ours. I therefore feel that it is up to the British to take the lead in this problem and that it should be clear at all stages that we simply support the action. As I have indicated before, I believe the British have not been too interested in reopening the pipe line for the export of crude oil unless this could be used to get the refinery reopened. The French are of this opinion also, yet our primary interest as well as that of the French is in the reopening of the pipe line. It seems to me from an oil and an economic standpoint that such interest that we have in the reopening of the Haifa refinery stems primarily from this fact.

What I do not understand in the attached cable is the indicated interest in supporting the British in getting the refinery and ancillary works set up if [in?] a free trade zone. It seems to me that this does not have anything to do with the reopening of the pipe line for the export of crude oil and the reopening of the refinery on the basis of tanker shipments. I therefore strongly believe that we should leave the question of whether Haifa is to enjoy a privileged position which may well not be enjoyed by any other refinery in the world to the British to work out if they wish to try to do so since the refinery is 100 per cent a British-owned facility.

Another thing which we should bear in mind is that the reopening of the Haifa refinery may give rise to more problems for us than its reopening solves, if there are any it does solve. Today one of our greatest problems in regard to oil is in the threat that British oil production is going to make it impossible for American companies producing oil in the Middle East to sell their output. The reopening of the Haifa refinery is going to make it more difficult for ARAMCO to maintain its production in Saudi Arabia than is now the case. While we do have a secondary interest in the reopening of Haifa to the extent that it may contribute toward an improvement in the British balance of payments, our interest in helping their balance of payments problem cannot go so far as to wreck American oil operations in the Middle East. I believe the maintenance of those operations is of greater importance to us than going much further in regard to oil in helping to improve the British balance of payments.

In brief, therefore, my view in regard to the attached cable is that it should be clear throughout that we support the British and French in regard to this problem, that our interest in reopening Haifa is secondary, and that as far as we are concerned whether or not the refinery is set up in a free zone is irrelevant to the question of reopening the refinery.

Robert Eakens

1 No. 2987 to London, infra.

2 Of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs.

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom 501.BB Palestine/8–2049: Telegram

[Document 53]

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom 1

confidential Washington, August 20, 1949—1 p. m.

2987. Dept’s views re procedure outlined by Burrows urtel 3224 Aug 15 as fol: (1) Dept concurs steps outlined para 3-A which urtel 3256 Aug 172 indicates already being implemented. As Brit aware Dept has handed Egypt note3 re lifting shipping restrictions and hopes there will be no difficulty getting Persian Gulf crude Haifa. Re Embtel 3256 while Dept appreciates receiving full info on subject it feels matter is of primary concern to Brit and it is therefore not in position to express any opinion re desirability or non-desirability movement of tankers from Western Hemisphere. Re para 3-B4 Dept suggests this might best be handled informally with Nuri in London.

(2) Nuri’s statement para 4(c) Embtel 3224 wld not necessarily seem indicate offer of free port sine qua non reopening pipeline since prior resumption refinery operations by “pump priming” with non-Iraq crude plus question IPC royalties and loan probable controlling factors Iraqi attitude. While Econ Survey Mission5 (para 3 below) may well find it desirable recommend establishment free trade area Haifa for export–import general merchandise, Dept feels no advantage inclusion refinery and ancillary works in proposed free trade zone unless this step necessary and likely be successful persuade Iraqis reopen pipeline. Dept also inclined doubt practicability proposal in view likelihood negative Israeli attitude. However, Dept wld be prepared reconsider if convincing argument to contrary elicited in discussions with Brit and Fr.

(3) Dept believes negots at this time through PCC re details free zone impractical in light analysis Depcirtel Aug 16.6 On other hand Haifa question wld seem appropriate problem for study and recommendation by Econ Survey Mission and wld be in line with recommended shift to economic approach gen Palestine problem (para 6 cirtel under reference).

Pls communicate foregoing FonOff and French colleague.

Acheson

1 This telegram was repeated by air to Paris, Tel Aviv, Baghdad, and Cairo.

2 Not printed; it reported that the British Foreign Office had “told Consolidated Refineries end last week proceed with bringing tankers from western hemisphere and Persian Gulf.” (501.BB Palestine/8–1749)

3 Dated August 12, p. 1304 [Pg. 1304 is part of Doc. 903].

4 Of telegram 3224, p. 142 [Pg. 142 includes portions of Doc. 50 and Doc. 51].

5 For documentation on the Economic Survey Mission, see pp. 594 [Pg. 594 is part of Doc. 341] ff.

6 See p. 1317 [Pg. 1317 is part of Doc. 911].

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State 867N.6363/8–2349: Telegram

[Document 54]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State

secret London, August 23, 1949—1 p. m.

3333. Deptel 2987, August 20. Department’s reactions British program for reopening Haifa refinery and pipeline communicated Burrows August 22. During latter part of conversation, Le Roy of French Embassy joined meeting and gave following comments his government: (a) French Government dubious re likelihood Israeli Government making statement free port proposal for Haifa.

(b) In view foregoing, French Government feels it would be mistake to make approach to Iraqi Government conditional on Israeli statement. (Burrows pointed out Foreign Office did not propose make approach to Iraqis conditional on Israeli Government making proposed statement and had in fact indicated that even if Israel not willing make such statement, Foreign Office would wish proceed with rest of program—see paragraph 3(C) Embtel 3224, August 15.)

(c) In event Israeli Government were willing make statement re free port, French Government did not feel British Government should approach Egypt on basis that since Israeli Government had stated willingness establish free port, Egyptian Government should permit passage tankers. French Government felt that such an approach would constitute British recognition Egypt’s violation of 1888 Suez Canal agreement. (Burrows pointed out he had not proposed the two questions should be tied up in this fashion. Foreign Office would merely rely on publicity value of Israeli statement, hoping it would make Egypt more amenable permit passage tankers.)

2. Burrows stated that in light US and French views re unlikelihood any success persuading Israel make statement for free port proposal, Foreign Office would wish reconsider this aspect of problem and would give us its views later. Meanwhile, Foreign Office and company proceeding with remainder of program. First Western Hemisphere tanker due arrive Haifa about September 18 and plans are proceeding load Persian Gulf tankers which are now scheduled arrive shortly before that date. Foreign Office looking into this question in order arrange simultaneous arrival as originally planned.

3. Burrows attention was directed to numerous recent articles in British press emanating from Tel Aviv to effect Israeli Government applying pressure on company to reopen refinery, with attendant threat take refineries over and operate them itself in event company does not do so. Burrows stated that UK charge Tel Aviv has been told by Israeli Foreign Office to take no notice these press statements. Burrows admitted, however, press statements are worrying him since now it will appear that HMG has been forced take action by Israelis.

Sent Department 3333; repeated Baghdad 77, Cairo 118, Paris 645, pouched Haifa.

Douglas

The Chargé in the United Kingdom (Holmes) to the Secretary of State 501.BB Palestine/9–949: Telegram

[Document 55]

The Chargé in the United Kingdom (Holmes) to the Secretary of State

secret London, September 9, 1949—7 p. m.

3648. Embtel 3607 September 8.1 Sheringham2 said today Foreign Officer has decided approach King Farouk in advance regarding passage tankers through Suez. Decision pursue matter this high level occasioned by fact it was King who decided against admission Israeli member WHO 3 and who might, therefore, be deciding factor this case.

Approach will stress following factors: 1. West Europe requires products Haifa refinery to hasten recovery.

2. Future of Haifa refinery is important to long term strategic plans for NE.

3. If dispute arises as result Egypt’s unwillingness permit passage tankers through Canal, it might be necessary in accordance Suez Canal convention to convene meeting of signatories, which would include USSR, but not US.

4. Egypt refusal permit passage tankers would be contrary spirit Egypt armistice agreement on which SC based its action in lifting arms embargo. Under these circumstances HMG could hardly furnish Egypt arms if Egypt refuses permit Israel obtain oil.

5. If Egypt refuses permit passage tankers, Israel might raise question before SC. In these circumstances UK could not support Egypt. Moreover, Egypt’s action would have adverse effect on British public opinion, due to effect it would have on supplies of petrol for British motorist.

6. In any event, HMG can not discourage company from attempt to send tankers through Canal.

Sheringham said approach to King will probably be made in next day or two. Meanwhile, departure of tanker from Persian Gulf has been postponed for approximately one week and is now scheduled arrive around September 25. If no answer received within reasonable time, tanker will be started on its way, since, without threat of imminent arrival, Egyptians may procrastinate.

Sheringham also said HMG has now asked Nuri Pasha not to make any public statements pipeline without consulting UK. At same time, they suggested Nuri begin preparing public opinion in Iraq, pointing out to him that Iraq is chief sufferer in present situation, with West Europe next and Israel hardly affected at all. Effort is to convince Nuri that continued intransigence his part will not materially harm Israel but will harm Iraq which badly requires royalties.4

Sent Department 3648, repeated Baghdad 90, Cairo 130, Paris 688, Tel Aviv 55, Haifa 7.

Holmes

1 Not printed.

2 J. G. T. Sheringham, desk officer in the British Foreign Office for Israel and Arab refugee matters.

3 Telegram 3607 noted that the Egyptian cabinet had divided on the question of visas for the Israeli Delegation to a regional conference of the World Health Organization (501.BB Palestine/9–849).

4 Cairo advised, on September 15, of information from British Embassy sources that “the Egyptians insisted on banning munitions of war destined for Israel and that among these articles of absolute contraband were ‘combustibles’.” It also advised that the British Embassy had requested an audience with King Farouk to discuss passage through the Suez Canal of tankers bound for Haifa and that the British approach was to place the “petroleum problem as an element in the over-all strategy of military cooperation in which His Majesty had shown an interest in connection with the top secret military talks which had been intermittently carried on from some months past. It seemed to the British important to alert the King to the possibility of the situation before the first British tanker, now en route, attempted to proceed through the Canal, since otherwise the King might be placed on the spot in the absence of time for personal reflection and preparation of both government and public.” Should this approach be unavailing, “the question of freedom of navigation through the Suez Canal before the Security Council might be raised as a means of encouraging the King to adopt a view of international commerce more in accord with the prescriptions of the Suez Canal Convention of 1888 than the Egyptian authorities, civil and military, had hitherto been disposed to accept following the outbreak of Palestinian hostilities.” (airgram 976, 501.BB Palestine/9–1549)

Editorial Note [Document 56]

Editorial Note

Cairo, on September 10, reported information from British Embassy sources that tankers from Venezuela had already arrived at Haifa but that the “Critical tanker” from the Persian Gulf was not due until the end of September (telegram 902, 501.BB Palestine/9–2549).

Cairo advised, on September 27, of further information from British Embassy sources that the coming of the critical tanker had been deferred (telegram 910, 867N.6363/9–2749).

The Ambassador in Iran (Wiley) to the Secretary of State 891.6363 AIOC/9–2049: Telegram

[Document 57]

The Ambassador in Iran (Wiley) to the Secretary of State

secret Tehran, September 20, 1949—10 a. m.

1166. British Chargé Lawford informs me that there has recently been much activity regarding AIOC agreement unratified by last Majlis. Lawford stated that before British Ambassador Le Rougetel left for England on leave he was given most categoric assurances by Iran Government that there would be no question of attempting to renegotiate agreement which would be submitted as is to new Majlis when it convenes, that Iran Government would stand or fall on issue.

Lawford explained that recently Iran Government has been blowing hot and cold on prospects of Majlis ratification. One day British Embassy would be assured that agreement would certainly be ratified but the next day British Embassy would be warned that agreement had no chance of ratification and so it has been going. The question of an advance from AIOC has been presented acute question. AIOC, as previously reported,1 has offered 5 million pounds out of royalties but Iran Government has tried to insist on 6 million pounds out of undivided surplus. Lawford has taken firm position, on instructions, that this was not feasible. Iran Government has retorted that originally AIOC had offered 6 million pounds advance out of surplus. Lawford has answered that this offer was rejected by Iran Government, which insisted on renegotiation of entire concession. AIOC was adamant that, under present circumstances, no such advance could be made on the basis of an agreement which had not been and might not be ratified. The Iran Government finally decided to accept 5 million pounds advance provided no interest be paid. AIOC insists upon interest payment. The advance in question would have to do with royalties due next February. Some 4 days ago Minister Finance Golshayan received Hobson of AIOC and stated in substance that it would be necessary to renegotiate the new agreement in order to obtain ratification. He proposed that negotiations for this purpose be held secretly in London and that the British should at once study question of making further concessions. He went on to say that the IPC terms now being negotiated would be much more favorable than those accepted by AIOC. Iran Government would insist on terms equally favorable.

[Here follow two paragraphs detailing Mr. Lawford’s conversations with high Iranian officials.]

In any event Lawford has been reassured that government would stand by agreement and would submit it to Majlis. Lawford’s forthright handling of matter has received full approval his Foreign Office.

Please pass to Armed Forces.

Sent Department 1167 [1166], repeated London 153.

Wiley

1 In telegram 1123, September 13, noon, not printed.

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State 891.6363 AIOC/10–2049: Telegram

[Document 58]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State

secret London, October 20, 1949—6 p. m.

4222. Tehran’s 1309, October 14 to Department.1 Burrows said today [Iranian] Prime Minister Saed’s visit to UK entirely unofficial. He has, however, had talks with Foreign Office during which he raised question AIOC agreement and reiterated usual complaints re lack of assistance by West since war.

2. Saed stressed difficulties getting AIOC agreement through Majlis unless it is found possible make it more palatable. Since Saed somewhat vague, British suggested he commit his points to writing and said they would be glad consider them. We gathered, however, there is little if any chance British agreeing any substantial changes.

3. Asked if Iranians still pressing for renegotiation because of devaluation,2 Burrows replied affirmatively but added that Iranians have no grounds for complaint on this score. Royalties under new agreement are based on sterling price of gold and therefore unaffected, while AIOC could not reasonably be expected increase Iran’s share of profits to compensate for devaluation.

Sent Department 4222, repeated Tehran 87.

Douglas

1 Not printed.

2 Of the British pound sterling.

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in Saudi Arabia 890.0145/10–2049: Telegram

[Document 59]

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in Saudi Arabia 1

secret
priority Washington, October 21, 1949.

414. Reurtel [Dhahran’s] 302 Oct 202 BAPCO informing ARAMCO and Sheikh, Bahrein, that they have ordered immediate termination operations plus removal of equipment on Fasht Abu Saafa without prejudice Bahrein claims. BAPCO states Arabi installation temporary, no claim involved, permission for temporary use granted by Brit polit Agent. BAPCO admits issue must be settled between Bahrein and Saudi Arab authorities and will abide by their decision. BAPCO fears, however, Sheikh Bahrein may possibly insist on operations continuing.3

Dept contacting Brit on advisability earliest discussion Bahrein Saudi Arab boundaries. Does Emb consider issue cld be added to current boundary negots? If so, suggest informal approach SAG and Brit Emb urging this procedure. Dept has already informed BAPCO and ARAMCO such incidents between cos with same parents shld not arise, that Dept shld be adequately forewarned of co plans for disputed areas and that cos use this opportunity to urge respective Govts to earliest discussions possible.

Acheson

1 This telegram was repeated to Dhahran.

2 Not printed. Dhahran, on October 7, had reported that the Bahrein Petroleum Company (BAPCO) was operating temporarily a triangulation station on Arabi and that for the past three weeks the company had undertaken structural drilling on and around Fasht Abu Saafa shoals, an area claimed by the Sheikh of Bahrein (telegrams 292 and 293, 890F.6363/10–749 and 890.0145/10–749, respectively). Dhahran’s 302 advised of the landing of a party of armed Saudi Arabians on Arabi on October 17. The “Behavior visitors entirely cordial and no threat of violence made”, although their leader “pointedly asked whether BAPCO personnel aware this Saudi territory. Evasive answer given.… Landing party left after one hour making no further comment.” (890.0145/10–2049)

3 Much of the information contained in this paragraph was based on a memorandum of October 20 by Richard Funkhouser of the Office of African and Near Eastern Affairs, covering his separate conversations with ARAMCO and BAPCO officials. The ARAMCO official at one point had expressed the hope that the State Department would supply “a restraining hand”, i.e., have a United States naval vessel on duty in the Persian Gulf visit the sensitive area. Mr. Funkhouser records that “Dispatching a U.S. Navy vessel to the area of dispute for the purpose of exhibiting ‘a restraining hand’ would not be considered by the U.S. Government. The British dispatched units of the British fleet to the Persian Gulf when their AIOC concession was cancelled in 1933, but for settling oil company arguments such tactics were, if not outdated, certain to compound the difficulty.” (890.0145/10–2049)

The Chargé in Saudi Arabia (Hill) to the Secretary of State 890.0145/10–2549: Telegram

[Document 60]

The Chargé in Saudi Arabia (Hill) to the Secretary of State

secret Jidda, October 25, 1949—1 p. m.

626. At my request, Eilts1 has drafted following views regarding query contained Deptel 414 October 21, in which I concur.

Embassy considers it inadvisable include Bahrain–SA boundary problems in present British–SAG negotiations. We do believe, however, that such discussions might well be undertaken with British concurrently but independently. Choice of including above in talks now underway would seem lie entirely with SAG. British Embassy has frequently pointed out that present negotiations initiated at invitation SAG and that British Government has at very outset indicated its willingness arrive at overall settlement outstanding boundary problems in area. Hence, if SAG were to request inclusion above, its request would presumably be given every consideration within framework aforementioned instructions.

ARAMCO legal offices, who sounded out on question, strongly oppose any such inclusion since they fear, and in our view justifiably so that if PG isle-mainland claim controversies all lumped together in single negotiation, British will have opportunity play off one against the other, a development which might tend to work to disadvantage of SAG. ARAMCO has emphasized to SA Finance Ministry, however, desirability instituting early Bahrain–SA boundary talks. (In this connection, any such talks would presumably include Arabi affairs. Owen, ARAMCO, quotes statement attributed to BAPCO that Shaikh Bahrain has verbally disclaimed any interest in Arabi on grounds that it too far removed from his own domains, although no such disclaimer officially communicated to SAG.)

As Department aware, SAG has to date preferred confine present negotiations to Qatar–Abu Dhabi frontiers. Following ARAMCO’s recently informing SAG of BAPCO’s PG moves, however, King immediately appointed special committee, headed by Amir Faisal, to look into NE situation involving Bahrain. Committee has now drafted note which it plans send British shortly inviting discussions on Bahrain–SA boundary problems in accordance Article VIII King’s recent territorial letters proclamation. Owen, who has been given copy of note and believes it to be somewhat inconclusive, proposed that it be held up for few days pending receipt of advisory opinion on wording thereof from Judge Hudson, a suggestion to which SAG readily agreed. Owen wiring Hudson today. ARAMCO belief that negotiations should be undertaken directly with Shaikh Bahrain rather than British rejected by King, who very wisely apparently deems such tactics unnecessarily offensive at this time.

In view foregoing, Embassy believes no prompting necessary at moment since wheels appear to be already in motion.

Sent Department, pouched Dhahran.

Hill

1 Hermann F. Eilts, Third Secretary of Embassy in Saudi Arabia.

The Secretary of State to the Legation in Saudi Arabia 890.0145/10–2549: Telegram

[Document 61]

The Secretary of State to the Legation in Saudi Arabia 1

secret Washington, November 1, 1949—6 p. m.

421. For your info Dept disturbed peremptory nature notes drafted by Hudson for transmittal by SAG to Sheikh Bahrein and BAPCO re jurisdiction dispute Abu Saafa. Duce showed drafts Dept after their transmittal Jidda. Dept believes inadvisable ARAMCO submit Hudson drafts SAG present form and so advised Duce. Dept expressed specific objections (1) ultimatum, (2) demanded disavowal of BAPCO claims, (3) truculent phraseology, and suggested ARAMCO modify notes to create atmosphere most conducive earliest amicable settlement claims, or, if drafts already delivered, express to SAG same objections described above and urge phraseology more suited to friendship existing between Ibn Saud and Sheikh Bahrein and more appropriate to Arab traditions. Duce unwilling modify on fiction Hudson acting directly for SAG not ARAMCO.

Dept gratified learn (re urtel 626, Oct 25) of moderate attitude Feisal Comite, but disturbed over apparent ARAMCO pressure for more drastic action.

Further developments include: (1) SAG claims to six-mile marginal sea which affect area current Abu Saafa operations open serious question within Dept. and (2) BAPCO structural drill operations Abu Saafa shoals completed Oct 28 and moved to another shoal. Sheikh Bahrein instructed BAPCO continue operations in area but stated prepared order suspension operations and discuss claims if SAG (not ARAMCO) so requests.

Unless you perceive objections, informally advise SAG and ARAMCO of Sheikh’s tractable position pointing out that it appears that difficult problem can be solved by simple request of SAG to Sheikh of Bahrein.

Acheson

1 This telegram was repeated to London and Dhahran.

The Chargé in Saudi Arabia (Hill) to the Secretary of State 890.0145/11–349: Telegram

[Document 62]

The Chargé in Saudi Arabia (Hill) to the Secretary of State

secret Jidda, November 3, 1949—6 p. m.

642. Embtel 626, October 26 [25]. ARAMCO informs that following receipt by SAG of Judge Hudson’s drafts re Saudi Arabian-Bahrein claim controversy King’s special committee drafted new communication. In place four separate notes as proposed by Hudson, however, SAG prefers send only two, one each to Bahrein and BAPCO. Each note will incorporate statement re both Arabia [Arabi] and Fasht Abu Saafa trespassing incidents, Saudi Arabian Government understood have questioned desirability including Arabian [Arabi in] note after being advised of Shaikh Bahrein’s alleged verbal disclaimer of ownership but finally prevail upon by ARAMCO include same.

New draft generally follows lines Hudson’s drafts which Embassy assumes have been shown to Department by ARAMCO. Only major difference to date is that instead of impersonal note between governments new communication is to be personal letter from King to Shaikh Bahrein which will be delivered through British Embassy Jidda. After usual expressions esteem and community interests both parties, note adroitly reminds Shaikh latter is trespassing on Saudi Arabian-claimed territory and cites instances mentioned above, but indicated preparedness negotiate question in accordance Article 8 his territorial waters proclamation.

Second note is to be addressed to BAPCO and is similar in content, but to be signed by Bin Jiluwi1 rather than King.

Both drafts are now before King awaiting his final approval.

Sent Department 642, repeated Dhahran 192.

Hill

1 Amir Saud bin Jiluwi, Governor of Al Hasa province of Saudi Arabia.

The Chargé in Saudi Arabia (Hill) to the Secretary of State 890.0145/11–849: Telegram

[Document 63]

The Chargé in Saudi Arabia (Hill) to the Secretary of State

secret
priority Jidda, November 8, 1949—11 a. m.

653. ARAMCO official informs Eilts in conference that King’s note to Shaikh Bahrain re boundary problems delivered to British Embassy, Jidda, on November 5.1 No changes from text as sketched Embtel 642, November 3. Letter to BAPCO approved November 6 and has now been forwarded to Bin Jiluwi for signature.

Be Deptel 421, November 1. It would appear, therefore, that despite ARAMCO truculence and pressure for drastic action, SAG has on its own initiative most wisely preferred despatch relatively temperate communications to both Bahrain and BAPCO. In latter instance, SAG has even seen fit remove any reference to a terminal date by which BAPCO would be required cease all operations in disputed territory as had initially been proposed by Hudson.

However, despite this apparently favorable development due largely to SAG’s tact, Embassy will nevertheless informally advise SAG of US Government’s hope that outstanding SA–Bahrain boundary matters can be solved in an amicable fashion by friendly discussion between parties concerned, but would prefer to do so when Yusuf Yassin2 returns, in view of the hopelessness of accomplishing anything at the Foreign Office while it is in charge of Khairradin Bey.3

Sent Department 653, repeated London 90. Pouched Dhahran.

Hill

1 A British note of November 2 to the Saudi Arabian Government stated that Fasht Abu Saafa and Arabi were claimed by the Shaikhs of Bahrein and Kuwait, respectively. It suggested that should the Saudi Arabian Government wish to claim these areas, the matter be made one for negotiation between the interested parties, which might best be undertaken after the present boundary talks were concluded. In the meantime, the hope was expressed that there would be no objection to continued BAPCO operations, pending settlement of the controversy. The Saudi Arabian Government replied on November 8, confirming its claim to both areas but expressing willingness to negotiate a settlement and a desire to conduct the negotiations immediately but independently of present boundary discussions. It also insisted that the BAPCO cease its operations in the disputed areas pending settlement. The note made no reference to the Kuwaiti claim to Arabi but spoke only of talks with Bahrein (telegram 656, November 12, 11 a. m., from Jidda, 890.0145/11–1249).

2 Saudi Arabian Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs.

3 In reply on November 21, the Department stated in part: “In event BAPCO fails comply cessation [it] is hoped Bin Jaluwi had King’s instr not resort forceful measures to which previously inclined.” (Telegram 447, 890.0145/11–849) On November 22, Jidda advised of information from Garry Owen of ARAMCO that the Saudi Arabian Government had received two replies from BAPCO. The first note observed that the Saudi Arabian Government’s protest concerning the Fasht Abu Saafa shoals had been passed to the Sheikh of Bahrein for his consideration. The second note emphasized the temporary nature of the BAPCO installation on Arabi and contended that “the island was found to be uninhabited and that since the Sheikh of Bahrein did not lay claim to it, BAPCO felt no permission was required.” The Company disclaimed “any rights for itself re the island or any minerals which may be thereon as well as any attempts to infringe upon the rights of the legal ruler of the island, whoever he may be.” (airgram 441, 890.0145/11–2249)

Editorial Note [Document 64]

Editorial Note

Dhahran advised, on November 15, that “SAG–ARAMCO island marking has been underway since November 3. Islands so far marked include Farsi, Arabi and Harkus. To be marked are at least 20 more. … I believe most of these islands unquestionably in Saudi waters but some lie in disputed areas. Work is proceeding full speed. … In each case reinforced concrete pillar weighing 17 tons set up holding twin brass plates carrying legend composed US under Judge Hudson’s direction. One plate Arabic, other English. … Saudi guards make first landing in every case, ARAMCO men following to direct manual labor.” (telegram 318, 890.0145/11–1549)

Jidda reported, on December 29, that markers had been placed on 18 islands, completing the program (despatch 263, 890.0145/12–2949).

The Acting Secretary of State to the Legation in Lebanon 867N.6363/11–2349: Telegram

[Document 65]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Legation in Lebanon

confidential Washington, November 23, 1949—5 p. m.

716. Unrinfo only. During current conversations here Wright of FonOff 1 has emphasized importance to UK of reopening Haifa Refinery on Iraqi crude stating one semi-official estimate annual dol loss UK due non-operation refinery amounts to $50 million. Dept officials agreed US shld continue give ancillary support UK efforts resume supply Near Eastern crude Haifa.

During Arab League Polit Comm meeting Cairo Sirry Pasha stated Egypt unable permit Persian Gulf tankers en route Haifa transit Suez Canal unless Iraq reopened Kirkuk Haifa pipeline. Nuri Said declared he presently unable agree opening pipeline but hinted to Brit Emb Cairo he perceived no objection shld oil companies service Haifa refinery with tanker crude from Tripoli.

Brit Emb here advises Brit Min Beirut under FonOff instrs requested Leb PriMin Nov 10 agree proposed movement tankers carrying Iraqi crude from Tripoli to Haifa. PriMin recd proposal calmly but expressed opinion he cld see no advantage this procedure to Arabs. However, he wld submit proposal Leb cabinet and if it agreed he wld consult with other Arab States and obtain their reaction. Brit Emb has received no further info this regard. End info.

In ur discretion after consultation with ur Brit colleague pls approach Leb Govt informally as fol: USG concerned over failure resume full scale production Haifa refinery in ECA countries and exploring all practicable means reduce UK dol drain. US understands UK making specific proposals supply Haifa Refinery with Near East crude and has requested Leb Govt cooperation. View US gen interest this question as outlined above it wld welcome any assistance Leb Govt can appropriately extend facilitate reopening refinery.2

Webb

1 For documentation on these conversations, see pp. 50 [Pg. 50 is part of Doc. 8] ff; see particularly annexes 8 and 9 in the form of statements on Near Eastern oil problems by the United States and United Kingdom Groups, pp. 80 [Pg. 80 is part of Doc. 12] and 82 [Pg. 82 is part of Doc. 12].

2 This telegram was repeated to Baghdad and London and sent by air to Paris and Cairo. The Department, by circular telegram of December 1, 7 p. m., authorized Cairo, Baghdad, Damascus, Jidda, and Amman, “In ur discretion after consulting ur Brit colleague pls informally approach Govt to which you are accredited stating USG favors UK proposal for reasons outlined Deptel 716 to Beirut, and hopes Arab states will not oppose it. Amb Jidda shld not approach SAG unless Brit Amb has done so. Ambs Cairo and Baghdad shld inform Egypt and Iraqi Govts respectively USG concurs UK view re desirability lifting restr[iction]s on passage thru Suez Canal tankers bound for Haifa as well as reopening Haifa pipeline. US believes such action wld benefit primarily oil producing Arab states and consumers in Europe, and that continuation restrs unjustified.” (867N.6363/12–149)

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in Saudi Arabia 890.0145/6–149

[Document 66]

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in Saudi Arabia

secret Washington, November 30, 1949.

No. 60

Sir: Reference is made to the Embassy’s despatches Nos. 142 and 147, dated May 28 and June 1, 1949,1 respectively.

Saudi Arabian Decree No. 6/4/5/3711 of May 28, 1949 regarding the territorial waters of Saudi Arabia has been under consideration in the Department with a view to determining the desirability of United States reservations thereto. Certain of the legal aspects of the then proposed Decree were pointed out in the Department’s telegram No. 99 of March 16, 1949. Since the Decree proceeds upon legal principles at variance with those traditionally supported by the United States it is considered necessary to interpose reservations thereto on behalf of this Government to the extent that the Decree contains provisions which are not supported by accepted principles of international law. Accordingly, it is requested that you forward to the Foreign Ministry a note setting forth the following reservations:2

“The United States has taken note of Decree No. 6/4/5/3711 issued by the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia on May 28, 1949, concerning the territorial waters of Saudi Arabia, and finds itself compelled to take exception to certain provisions thereof, deeming such provisions to be unsupported by accepted principles of international law, and to reserve all its rights and the rights of its nationals with respect thereto, namely: 1. All provisions to the effect that the inland waters of the Kingdom include waters outside of ports, harbors, bays, and other inclosed arms of the sea along its coast; and

2. All provisions to the effect that the coastal sea, i.e., the marginal sea, of the Kingdom extends seaward of a belt of three nautical miles along its coast or around its islands.”

You will note that these reservations are specific enough to cover all the legal principles which are unacceptable to the United States but at the same time are sufficiently general to leave for future determination, as the need arises, the question of specific rules of base line measurement. The Department prefers to avoid, as unnecessary in connection with the United States reservations to the Decree, the stipulation of the particular principles of international law applicable to the determination of base lines. The Department will, however, be prepared to furnish advice in this respect should the Saudi Arabian Government require it. It is suggested that any questions in this regard be forwarded to the Department for instructions.

The following is offered for the Embassy’s background information in respect of the considerations underlying the United States reservations to the Decree.

Among other things, the Decree establishes a six-mile coastal sea (marginal belt) as opposed to the three-mile zone uniformly supported by the United States. It provides for a zone of inland waters extending twelve miles or farther seaward from the mainland, and implies that all bays are inland waters regardless of headland width. Moreover, the proviso in Article 9 implies a fisheries control of unspecified area over the high seas.

A number of world-wide interests of the United States would be affected, were the United States to be considered, through inaction, as having acquiesced in all the provisions of the Decree, e.g., fisheries, air commerce, shipping, and naval. In this connection it should be noted that under international law there is no right of innocent passage accorded to foreign vessels in inland waters; and no right of innocent passage accorded to air commerce in the air space above inland or territorial waters. The effect upon our fisheries alone of closure of coastal waters in the western hemisphere of a belt of from six to eighteen miles would be considerable. It is apparent, therefore, that the importance of United States reservations to the Saudi Arabian Decree lies not only in this Government’s specific interests off Saudi Arabia but also in the fact that, otherwise, the United States would lend encouragement to the use of the Decree as a precedent by a world in which a veritable epidemic of claims over the high seas has occurred since 1945.

The United States has been attempting to hold the line for the three-mile limit and to this end it recently reserved all rights in respect of high seas claims of other states as follows: a) Mexico—1948 (9 mile claim)

b) Argentina—1948 (epicontinental sea claim)

c) Chile—1948 (

d) Peru—1948 (200 mile claim)

e) Costa Rica—1948 (

Moreover, on April 22, 1935, the United States formally protested the Iranian law of July 15, 1934 which purported to establish a six-mile territorial waters zone. Acquiescence by the United States in the Saudi Arabian Decree would not be readily understood by these states.

In June, 1949 the Department was informed by the American Embassy in London3 that the British Foreign Office was preparing to protest this Decree. It would seem that the British must necessarily protest it in order to avoid prejudicing the case against Norway they are now bringing before the International Court of Justice which involves the validity of Norwegian claims based upon principles similar in some respects to the base line measurement provisions of the Saudi Arabian Decree. The Department has informed the British Embassy in Washington and the American Embassy in London of our intention to enter reservations to the Decree and of the text of the reservations. You may, in your discretion, discuss this matter with the British Embassy in Jidda. It has been decided, however, that the United States action should be independent of that to be taken by the British in order to avoid the impression of American-British collusion.

Please inform the Department by telegram when the Embassy’s note has been delivered to the Foreign Ministry.4 It is also important that the Department be promptly informed of all developments.

Very truly yours,

For the Secretary of State:
Raymond A. Hare

1 Latter not printed; but see footnote 4, p. 133 [Pg. 133 is part of Doc. 42].

2 The suggestion to enter reservations to the Saudi Arabian decree on territorial waters seems to have been raised for the first time in the Department in a memorandum of September 15 from Warren F. Looney, of the Office of the Special Assistant to the Under Secretary of State for Fisheries and Wildlife (U/FW), to Mr. Sanger. The latter’s replying memorandum of October 18 supported Mr. Looney’s suggestion. Both papers are filed under 890.0145/6–149. Of further interest is a memorandum of October 26 by Wilbert M. Chapman of U/FW to Frederick H. Await of the Office of African and Near Eastern Affairs (890.0145/10–2649). The Department’s position on the situation was conveyed to Denis A. Greenhill, First ‘Secretary of the British Embassy, on November 3 (memorandum of conversation by Edward G. Piatt, Jr., of the Office of British Commonwealth and Northern European Affairs, 890.0145/11–349) and to London on November 30 (airgram 1235, 890.0145/6–1049). The airgram noted that “The Department is informing the British Embassy in Washington of its proposed action and that it is considered advisable for this action to be taken independently of the British protest, in order to avoid the appearance of American-British collusion.”

3 In telegram 2248, June 10, from London, not printed.

4 Ambassador Childs presented an appropriate note to Yusuf Yassin on December 22. The latter indicated that “as three-mile limit principle had not been universally accepted Saudi Arabian Government would probably follow example of other states which had departed from it. … I remarked I had thought our relations with Saudi Arabian Government somewhat closer than some countries which had departed from three-mile principle and I wished to raise question whether in view our extensive maritime and other interests which ran risk of being adversely affected Saudi Arabian Government wished to follow principle which might prejudice these US interests. … Yusuf said Saudi Arabian Government wished to cooperate with US to greatest extent possible which might not prejudice its own interests.” (telegram 740, December 22, 2 p. m., from Jidda, 890.0145/12–2249)

The Minister in Saudi Arabia (Childs) to the Secretary of State 890F.6363/12–649: Telegram

[Document 67]

The Minister in Saudi Arabia (Childs) to the Secretary of State

secret Jidda, December 6, 1949—9 a. m.

704. Embtel 671, November 18.1 Owen, ARAMCO, informs His Majesty has despatched note, dated November 26, but apparently only delivered to British around December 1, to Shaikh Kuwait re Persian Gulf isle, Arabi. Contents similar to that sent Bahrain.

After preliminary expressions friendship and community of interest two rulers, King states he informed Shaikh Kuwait has given BAPCO permission one isle. (This incorrect since BAPCO never approached Kuwait but had permission forced upon it by Political Resident Persian Gulf.) Since Arabi belongs Saudi Arabia on historical and geographical grounds, His Majesty has ordered BAPCO cease operations thereon and withdraw. Note concludes by expressing willingness discuss matter with Shaikh Kuwait in order arrive at amicable settlement.

At Foreign Office this a.m. Shaikh Yusef said he had been busy with frontier question since his return. He showed me British note of May 23, 1949 requesting SAG take no action re disputed isles, including Arabi, in Persian Gulf which might in any way prejudice status. (This seems be “missing note” referred to our A–442, November 22,2 which SAG previously unable locate in its files.) Yusef Yassin remarked he had learned on his return markers had just been placed on these isles by SAG with ARAMCO assistance. Yusef Yassin has wished indicate this situation thrown into his lap without his being consulted. Department will recall that, in absence both Yusef Yassin and Fuad Hamzah, isle controversy entrusted to Feisal committee which worked in conjunction with Finance Minister.

Sent Department, pouched London Dhahran.

Childs

1 Not printed.

2 Not printed.

The Secretary of State to the Legation in Saudi Arabia 890F.6363/12–649: Telegram

[Document 68]

The Secretary of State to the Legation in Saudi Arabia

secret Washington, December 17, 1949—2 p. m.

462. Urtel 708, Dec 6.1 Dept appreciative of difficulties which SAG finding in attempts settle outstanding boundary questions, and wishes in this as in other questions to be as helpful as possible. However there are natural limits to what we can do particularly in matters which involve intervention with other govts and in which different American companies may well have conflicting interests.

For above reasons Depts position must remain basically as outlined Deptel 184, May 13. In circumstances, and in order to avoid creating impression with SAG that US willing to go further than already indicated, Dept desires that in accepting detailed report from SAG you make clear that this not a question in which Dept can give disinterested advice such as off-shore question which concerned basic principles rather than specific boundaries which involve other govts. Dept believes it desirable therefore that SAG continue with negotiations rather than awaiting comments which USG may or may not be able to make.2

Acheson

1 Not printed; it advised that Yusuf Yassin had shown Ambassador Childs the British note of December 4, “stating unless SAG willing recede its unreasonable position last note Britain would have to go back to 1913 claim.” The Acting Foreign Minister stated that the King wished the Ambassador’s advice as to how to proceed. The Ambassador referred the matter to the Department, commenting that “In view our relationship to SAG and SAG’s usual tendency to lean on us for disinterested advice, I feel we should do everything we consider appropriate to assist it in consideration problem” (890F.6363/12–649).

2 The Department instructed further, on December 29, that the “Emb shld avoid making any commitment SAG re part US may be expected play in problem.” (Telegram 471, 890F.20/12–1949)

The Chargé in the United Kingdom (Holmes) to the Secretary of State 891.6363 AIOC/12–2949: Airgram

[Document 69]

The Chargé in the United Kingdom (Holmes) to the Secretary of State

confidential London, December 29, 1949.

A–2464. According to Leavett, who handles Iranian affairs in the Eastern Department of the Foreign Office, Iranian efforts to have the Anglo-Iranian Oil Company agreement renegotiated were unsuccessful and the Iranian Government is now prepared to submit again the same agreement on which the Majlis failed to act at the last session. (See Embtels 3913, Sept 29 and 4123, Oct. 12).1

Leavett thought it unlikely that the Majlis would get around to debating the agreement before March at the earliest although the item occupies a high priority on the agenda. There will probably be considerable delay in connection with the procedure of seating members of the Majlis as well as with the continuation of debate on constitutional reforms which is expected to follow. Leavett believes that the AIOC agreement will be the first point of business to be discussed thereafter.

Leavett was uncertain how hopeful the Iranian Government is of securing parliamentary approval of the AIOC agreement but thought it of some significance that the Government had at least dropped the idea of renegotiation and was prepared to sponsor the agreement again in its present form.

It is clear from conversations with local representatives of American and British oil companies in the Near East that a great deal of interest attaches to the outcome of the Anglo-Iranian agreement, since it will help to set the pattern for other concessions in that part of the world. It is believed that further progress in the negotiations between the Iraq Petroleum Company and the Iraqi Government for a revision of the terms of IPC’s concessions in Iraq will await the result of the Majlis’ action on the Anglo-Iranian agreement.

Holmes

1 Neither printed.

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom 867N.6363/12–2349: Telegram

[Document 70]

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom

secret Washington, December 30, 1949—6 p. m.

4648. Dept comments FYI. In view current Iraq attitude re Haifa pipeline, Iraq control of situation due ownership source of oil, and premature French approach to Iraqi officials with diversion scheme,1 Dept considers problem reopening IPC pipelines through Israel increasingly difficult. Dept feels reopening must await either gen Iraq–Israel rapprochement, considerably greater inducements by Israel or IPC offer of attractive quid pro quo. Since first two contingencies not at hand, Dept feels diversion proposal worthy consideration. It offers definite opening 16-inch line, continued pipeline operation outside influence of changes Arab–Israel polit situation, possible means of impressing Israel with need for negotiating differences with Iraq and opportunity, admittedly slim, for reopening Haifa 12-inch line. Diversion further warrants study by companies since Iraq already approached and may now refuse consider reopening southern lines without diversion.2

However, unlike Brit and Fr Govts, US Govt not involved in IPC 3 and thus even more reluctant than UK (ref London 5112 Dec 234 ) to urge any course of action on US companies, Brit, Fr or Near East Govts in this matter. Dept appreciates significance to Brit and Fr of southern line operation but with oil no longer in critical short supply as in 1947 and 1948 and with ECA considering action to cut back European overexpansion of oil facilities, Dept’s active participation less urgent.

US companies expressed preliminary objections to diversion on polit grounds but have not requested Govt intervention. They informed Dept that Fr, with possible Iraq financial support, considering proceeding imilaterally. Under terms IPC Group Agreement, each partner allowed finance own oil requirements. Anglo-Iranian reported considering legal action if Fr proceed.

Re Paris 5356 Dec 21, Dept not prepared support principle producing countries have no voice in determining end-users of national resources as stated by US companies, since inconsistent with US action re export controls. Fail understand reported Brit view expressed Paris 5356 that they regard surplus undesirable since Brit claim in current oil talks5 surplus vital in reducing UK dol drain. Dept does not understand reference para 4 Paris cable as basis Brit opposition. Dept assumes Brit opposition principally due interest in Haifa refinery.

Assume Israeli officials wld be approached by company before news diversion plans recd from outside sources in order avoid provoking Israel into precipitant action. If Israeli react to plan with threats against refinery, cld Brit interests remove themselves from role in diversion leaving responsibility to Fr? In any case, Dept feels that Israel objections and/or reprisals might best be avoided by maintaining Haifa operations on Caribbean crude until Iraq crude available. Recent shutdown refinery considered unfortunate, particularly since US oil company informs Dept that at current prices Haifa shld operate profitably on Caribbean crude. Shutdown may convince Arabs blockade worthwhile and make solution more difficult.

Dept agrees that prospect of Iraq firmly committing themselves reopen Haifa line dubious. However, in view great attraction diversion presents Lebanon and Iraq, company might gain success by bargaining successively for (a) Iraq commitment reopen Haifa line, (b) Lebanese commitment permit tanker movement Haifa, (c) tacit agreement with Iraq and Lebanon overlook destination Lebanese tanker movements. Wright suggestion that Iraqi might agree to scheme if Brit imported Caribbean crude to cover Israeli consumption might also be worked in with this proposal since 12-inch line wld only half fill refinery capacity.6

Acheson

1 As explained in telegram 5356, December 21, from Paris, the scheme involved diversion of the 16–inch pipeline terminal from Haifa to Sidon, in Lebanon. The French anticipated that with such diversion, the Iraqis might be persuaded to reopen the 12-inch pipeline to Haifa. The British group in Iraq Petroleum Company were said to be cool to the French proposal “as plan would only increase sterling oil surplus.” The American group was also said to be in opposition on the ground that “diversion would constitute submission to Iraqi pressure and violation principle that no government has right to dictate where crude oil shall go after domestic requirements met. They fear that diversion would set dangerous precedent not only in Middle East but possibly elsewhere.” (867N.6363/12–2149)

2 London, on December 14, had reported that the Iraq Petroleum Company had recently discussed the French suggestion. “French interests IPC were for it, but US and UK interests opposed, not on economic but on political grounds, since it was thought that diversion of pipeline would be interpreted as un-neutral act favorable to Arabs. IPC has therefore shelved proposal for present.” (telegram 4952, 867N.6363/12–1449)

3 This reference is to the absence of any direct interest in the Iraq Petroleum Company by the United States Government. Private American interests owned 23¾% of the company’s capital stock.

4 Not printed.

5 According to a memorandum of October 14 by the Director of British Commonwealth and Northern European Affairs, the twin objectives in these talks of the United States agencies concerned, except for the Treasury Department, were to reduce the dollar drain on the sterling area and to protect the United States national interest. The text of this memorandum is printed in vol. iv, p. 845.

6 This telegram was repeated to Paris, London, on December 30, reported that Alan M. Williams, “who handles Iraq in Eastern Department, said today Foreign Office felt it had gone as far as it could in efforts solve Haifa pipeline and refineries problem without resort to ‘big stick’ and danger upsetting political balance in countries concerned, which it does not wish to risk. Foreign Office adverse making further representation to recalcitrant governments, at least until elections settle new administration in Egypt and strength and attitude recently-formed cabinet Iraq better known. In replies to proposal for shipping oil by tanker from Tripoli [Lebanon] to Haifa (Embtel 4952, December 14) Arab governments unanimously opposed this measure. Foreign Office feels that for moment nothing further can be done to overcome Arab resistance to flow of oil to Haifa.” (telegram 5157, 867N.6363/12–3049) Telegram 4952 is not printed.

Conference at Istanbul, Turkey, of American chiefs of mission in the Near East, November 26–29, 1949Conference at Istanbul, Turkey, of American chiefs of mission in the Near East, November 26–29, 1949

[71] Memorandum by the Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern, South Asian, and African Affairs (McGhee) to the Under Secretary of State (Webb)

[Washington,] October 7, 1949.

890.00/10–749

[72] Statement by the Department of State

November 10, 1949

[73] Agreed Conclusions of the Conference of Near Eastern Chiefs of Mission Held at Istanbul, November 26–29, 1949

[Istanbul ?, undated.]

867N.01/12–2849

[74] Recapitulation of Conclusions for Confidential Guidance of Chiefs of Mission in Oral Presentation to Governments

[Istanbul ?, undated.]

Ankara Embassy Files, 1949, 120 Chiefs of Mission Conference

[75] Statement by Assistant Secretary of State George C. McGhee

[Istanbul ?,] November 30, 1949.

Ankara Embassy Files, 1949, 120 Chiefs of Mission Conference

Memorandum by the Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern, South Asian, and African Affairs (McGhee) to the Under Secretary of State (Webb) 890.00/10–749

[Document 71]

Memorandum by the Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern, South Asian, and African Affairs (McGhee) to the Under Secretary of State (Webb)1

top secret [Washington,] October 7, 1949.

Subject: Proposed Plan for Development and Coordination of U.S. Near East Policies and Coordination with the U.K.

Discussion:

At the present time the US and UK and to a lesser extent certain other powers face separately and together a number of specific problems in the Near East. Important military, economic and political developments are taking place which necessitate careful and continuous study and a high degree of coordination not only between the Department and its representatives in the Near East, but between the US and the UK.

Most important problems are: 1. Activities of the Economic Survey Mission: A preliminary report will be submitted by the Mission to the UN through the PCC about November 10.2 Largely because of the importance which the US attaches to this Mission, it is proposed to arrange a meeting of American Chiefs of Mission in the Near East for the purpose, among others, of discussing the preliminary Clapp report, of advising Clapp with respect to his longer-range report scheduled for completion about the first of the year, and of determining how most effectively to support the carrying out of Clapp’s recommendations. The meeting should be held shortly after the submission of the preliminary Clapp report. The Chiefs of Mission, whose views have been requested, are in general agreement as to desirability of this meeting. (See telegrams attached.)3

2. Joint US–UK Strategic Planning: It is understood that the US and UK military establishments have been working on combined strategic military plans for the Near East for the past year and a half under the direction of Admiral Conolly,4 and that specific plans have been developed. It is also understood that during a recent conference in London of British Chiefs of Diplomatic Missions from the Near East each Chief of Mission was briefed as to how his country would be affected if it should be necessary to implement the joint US–UK strategic military plans. It is believed that appropriate Department officials and chiefs of Mission should be similarly informed, and that advantage might be taken of the meeting proposed in 1. for this purpose.

3. Proposed Iraqi-Syrian Plan of Union: 5 The British Embassy informed the Department during the past week, confirming reports received from U.S. Missions, of plans which the governments of Iraq and Syria are developing for a union of their two countries. These plans may have widespread internal and external repercussions in the Near East. The United States is presently studying these plans for the purpose of crystallizing its views. Unless solution has been reached this would also be a suitable topic for discussion at the proposed meeting.

No high level consultations have been held with the UK on Near East questions since the meetings October 16 to November 7, 1947.6 There was discussion that Mr. Michael Wright, Chief of the Middle East Section of the Foreign Office, might come to the U.S. in the summer, but nothing materialized.7 Mr. Bevin8 did not bring a Near East expert on his recent visit. It is considered desirable to bring the 1947 talks up to date, and to exchange views on the problems enumerated and other current problems, in order to coordinate US–UK policies in the Near East and as a background for the proposed meeting of the U.S. Chiefs of Mission.

Recommendation:

It is recommended that you approve the following course of action: 1. A meeting be held of the American Chiefs of Mission in the Arab countries and Israel on or about November 22 on board a suitable US Naval vessel available in the area, with Admiral Conolly, myself and possibly other Departmental officers attending. The vessel be boarded at Cyprus and not at any Arab or Israeli port. Admiral Conolly advises that arrangements for the vessel are possible; if not the meeting be held at Cyprus.

2. Admiral Conolly be authorized to inform the American Chiefs of Mission and Departmental officers present of the impact on their countries of the US–UK strategic military plans for the Near East.

3. Following the meeting of the American Chiefs of Mission, Admiral Conolly be authorized to proceed, with as little publicity as possible, to Athens and Ankara for the purpose of informing Mr. Grady and Mr. Wads worth,9 respectively, regarding US–UK strategic military plans for their areas.

4. Following submission of Clapp’s report about November 10, and before the Chiefs of Mission meeting, Mr. Michael Wright be requested to visit Washington for consultation.10

[Here follow concurrences.]

1 Addressed also to Dean Rusk, Deputy Under Secretary of State.

2 For information on this report, see editorial note, p. 1472 [Pg. 1472 includes portions of Doc. 1024 and Doc. 1025].

3 Not found attached.

4 Rear Adm. Richard L. Conolly, Commander in Chief of U.S. Naval Forces in the Eastern Atlantic and Mediterranean. For further documentation on combined strategic military plans for the Near East, see pp. 186 [Pg. 186 is part of Doc. 81] ff.

5 For documentation on this subject, see pp. 180 [Pg. 180 is part of Doc. 76] ff.

6 For documentation on these meetings, see Foreign Relations, 1947, vol. v, pp. 485 ff.

7 For documentation on the talks of Mr. Wright with officials of the Department of State, which took place in November 1949, see pp. 54–90 [Pgs. 54–90 include portions of Doc. 8, Doc. 9, Doc. 10, Doc. 11, Doc. 12, and Doc. 13].

8 Ernest Bevin, British Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs.

9 Henry F. Grady and George Wadsworth, Ambassadors in Greece and Turkey, respectively.

10 In an attached memorandum of October 11 to the Secretary, Mr. Rusk stated: “I approve of the recommendations listed in the attached paper with the exception that I do not believe that Admiral Conolly should brief our Ambassadors in the Near East on our strategic planning unless and until you and the Under Secretary as a minimum have been carefully briefed on such plans here. “I suggest that you approve only the first recommendation of this paper. We will attempt to work out the problem of briefing on strategic military plans. If we are not able to reach a satisfactory solution of this problem before the scheduled date of the meeting of the Chiefs of Mission, the meeting can profitably be held even though Admiral Conolly does not brief the Ambassadors on the strategic plans of the area.”

In another attached memorandum of October 13, Mr. Rusk informed Mr. Mc-Ghee that “The Secretary has approved your desire to have a meeting of American Chiefs of Mission in Arab countries [and] in Israel in the latter part of November in Cyprus or, alternatively, Turkey. The other matters in the attached memorandum can be handled by you.”

Recommendations 2, 3, and 4 in Mr. McGhee’s memorandum bear marginal notations by Mr. Rusk, each stating “not yet”.

Statement by the Department of State [Document 72]

Statement by the Department of State 1

November 10, 1949

The Chiefs of United States diplomatic missions in the Near East will meet in a conference under the chairmanship of George McGhee, Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern, South Asian, and African Affairs, on November 26 at Istanbul, Turkey.

The conference is part of a routine series of meetings being held with the chiefs of mission in various parts of the world.

Burton Y. Berry, newly appointed Director of the Office of African and Near Eastern Affairs, and Gordon H. Mattison, Deputy Director of the Office, will accompany the Assistant Secretary to Istanbul.

United States diplomatic representatives who will attend the conference include the American Ambassadors from Cairo, Jefferson Caffery; Athens, Henry F. Grady; Tehran, John C. Wiley; Ankara, George Wadsworth; Tel Aviv, James G. McDonald; Baghdad, Edward S. Crocker; Jidda, J. Rives Childs; the American Ministers from Beirut, Lowell C. Pinkerton; Damascus, James H. Keeley; the American Chargé d’Affaires a.i., at Amman, A. David Fritzlan; and the Consul at Jerusalem, William C. Burdett, Jr.

1 Released November 10; reprinted from Department of State Bulletin, November 28, 1940, p. 835. Mr. McGhee, on November 15, invited Gordon R. Clapp, Chairman of the Economic Survey Mission, to attend (telegram 696, identified also as Esmis 34, to Beirut, 501.BB Palestine (E)/11–1549). The Department, at the outset, intended to hold the conference at Cyprus, but was informed by London on November 1 of the Colonial Office’s concern that “such meeting would intensify Communist activity in Cyprus where party line active on theme Anglo-Americans have imperialist designs on ME. Presence conference might add fuel to fire and give local party and its sympathizers opportunity to conduct agitation which might also be embarrassing US.” The Department the next day undertook to have the conference held at Istanbul (telegrams 4370 from London and 3954 to London, both filed under 120.3 Conferences/11–149).

Agreed Conclusions of the Conference of Near Eastern Chiefs of Mission Held at Istanbul, November 26–29, 1949 867N.01/12–2849

[Document 73]

Agreed Conclusions of the Conference of Near Eastern Chiefs of Mission Held at Istanbul, November 26–29, 1949

secret [Istanbul ?, undated.]

After hearing the reports from each Chief of Mission, the Conference agreed that:

1) General policy consideration

The basic objective of U.S. foreign policy in the Near East must be the maintenance of peace and the development of area political and economic stability and security; the enhancement of U.S. prestige; and the orientation of the area to the U.S. and the Western powers and away from the USSR.

2) Need of impartiality in dealing with Arab States and Israel

In order to achieve United States objectives in the Near East we must maintain a policy of active interest within a framework of strict impartiality between the Arab states and Israel.

3) Collective security pact proposed by the Arab League 1

The proposed collective security pact would in all probability not have any significant effect on relations between the Arab states in military affairs and does not therefore necessitate the taking of a definite position by the U.S. The U.S. should, if queried, reply as Ambassador Caffery has already replied, that we favor any arrangement in the Near East which tends toward bringing stability, peace, prosperity and general well-being to the area.2

4) Means of obtaining U.S. objectives in “cold war” period

The primary United States objective during the cold war period is to prevent the USSR from gaining control of any of the Near East countries by subversion or by any other means short of actual war. a) In the case of states bordering on the USSR this can be achieved by extension of military aid and, where necessary, by economic aid and by encouraging the states to build up strong popular resistance to Communist aims.

b) In the case of countries not contiguous with the USSR military preparedness, except that required for internal stability, is not an important factor in the cold war. The technical and financial assistance required to achieve political and economic stability should be extended to these countries.

We must bear in mind that it is essential that all countries concerned keep their military forces and expenditures to the minimum consistent with the successful prosecution of the “cold war”, in order to avoid an unnecessary drain on their resources, recognizing that ultimate security can best be based on a healthy and viable economy. This point should be consistently urged upon the States concerned.

5) Security pacts between the United States and the Near Eastern States

The United States should not attempt to negotiate multilateral or bilateral security pacts with the Near Eastern States, at least until such time as it is prepared to commit military forces required to carry out the guarantees given. In the meantime, the Chiefs of Mission should do everything possible to prevent requests for U.S. consideration of any such pact, or for joint staff talks, being made by the Near Eastern States. This policy should be reviewed at such time as it appears that such pacts will be necessary in order to achieve United States objectives in the “cold war” period.

6) Saudi Arabia

It should be the continuing aim of the United States to develop particularly close relations with Saudi Arabia. Cognizant of Ibn Sand’s3 complex about encirclement we should reassure him on this score. An invitation to visit the United States would have a good psychological effect both on him and his neighbors, and, if approved by the President, should be extended to him.4 It is also felt that our Ambassador at Jidda should be able, on his return, to indicate that it is U.S. and British policy to discourage any form of, or tendency toward, aggression in the Near Eastern area, and that our Chiefs of Mission in the Near East should work actively to that end.

7) American military missions in the Near East

American military missions in the Near East are desirable adjuncts to any policy of supplying Near Eastern states with arms; and it would be definitely undesirable to supply arms to countries in the areas unless instructors were sent to ensure that the military forces of the countries concerned were adequately trained in their use. Military missions should, however, be reduced when it becomes apparent that local military forces are sufficiently trained in the use and care of American weapons. It is believed that first priority should be given to training and that as many trainees as possible, highly selected, should be sent to the United States, not to Germany.

8) Prospects of extension of Communism in the Near East

Communism is striving to spread in the Near East with the general objective of dominating states in the area through subversion. Economic and social conditions, particularly among the Palestine refugees, are ripe for such a movement; however, the situation at this juncture seems well under control by most governments through police and other repressive measures. It must be recognized that the refusal of the older political cliques to permit the introduction of young, liberal elements into the governments may induce such elements to listen to and be influenced by Communist propaganda. Notice should be taken of the Soviet technique of playing upon the nationalist feelings of tribal and other minority elements, as for instance the Kurds, to create trouble. In Iran, where organized terrorism appears to have Communist connections and is being carried out for political ends, there is grave danger of chaos if an attempt on the life of the Shah and other leaders should succeed.

9) Current Israeli-Jordan peace negotiations and annexation of Arab Palestine to Jordan

Negotiations leading to a possible peace settlement between Jordan and Israel are in progress. Although it is in our interest that these negotiations should succeed, the U.S. should take no direct part in the discussions.

Noting that it has been the Department’s policy that Arab Palestine should eventually be incorporated into the Jordan Kingdom, it is felt that the time has come for the U.S. to indicate to the British that no objection is perceived to the early incorporation of Arab Palestine into Jordan, subject to the condition that annexation should be accompanied by appropriate steps which would ensure fair representation of Palestinians in the Jordan legislature. We should also indicate our willingness to convey this information to King Abdullah, jointly with the British and at a time mutually agreed. The automatic extension of British treaty provisions following union of the two territories would contribute to the stability of the area.5

10) Cyprus

In view of the strategic position of Cyprus, it is in the interest both of the United States and Great Britain to do everything possible to promote stability in the Island.

There was a general awareness that Cyprus is complementary to Turkey in a military sense and that its security is extremely important in case of aggression against Turkey.

In connection with the existence of a strong Communist group in Cyprus, it is felt advisable to indicate to the British, at an appropriate time, our concern about the situation and our hope that they will increase their efforts to promote security there; the Conference also believed that our policy of discouraging Greek desire to acquire the Island for nationalistic reasons was the correct one to follow. At the same time it was felt that we should make clear to the Turks that we had no intention of supporting any Turkish claim to the Island and our belief that irresponsible and inflammatory statements by the Turkish press and certain Turkish organizations serve only to keep the pot boiling.

11) Foreign service morale in the Near East

The efficient operation of the U.S. Foreign Service in the area is of primary importance to the pursuance of our foreign policy objectives. It was the opinion of the conferees that a factor adversely affecting the morale of the Foreign Service and its ability to carry out U.S. foreign policy, was the housing problem and the difficulties and inordinate delays in F.B.O.’s implementation of its program.

12) Visits of Chiefs of State of the Near East to the U.S.

With the exception of the proposed visit of Ibn Saud, no other visits of Near East Chiefs of State seemed necessary or desirable during 1950. It was felt that Chiefs of Mission in the Near East should do everything possible to discourage additional visits. Such visits, it was agreed, while capable in individual cases of doing good, must continue to be carefully timed and separated in order to bring the best results.

13) Extension of military assistance to other Near Eastern States

It is not considered necessary or desirable to extend military assistance to Near Eastern States not now included in the present Military Assistance Program, except to extend the right to Saudi Arabia to obtain arms on a reimbursable basis, when authorization can be obtained from Congress. It may be desirable to send military training missions to certain states, such as Syria, on request, as a means of increasing the discipline and efficiency of the army and in recognition of the proper role of the army in assisting regularly the constituted government to maintain security and reestablish public confidence and stability. Care must be taken to observe strict impartiality as between Israel and the Arab States in fulfilling requests for military training missions and for places for trainees in the United States.

14) The McGhee–Wright talks

There was general agreement with the conclusions reached in these talks, and it was felt that we should continue to maintain close cooperation and consultation with the British on Near Eastern matters. It was recognized that closer cooperation should be obtained from some British officials in the field along common lines; however, it was agreed that we would and could work out any such problems, if not locally by referral to Washington and London.

With regard to the country papers6 handed to Mr. McGhee by Mr. Wright, the policies represented were in general approved, however, it was the general opinion that they were collections and descriptions of projects more than comprehensive plans and were in many instances outdated.

15) Proposed creation of Institute of Near Eastern Affairs

An institute, along the lines of the Institute of Inter-American Affairs, should be set up in Washington under the State Department to coordinate all of United States economic and cultural efforts in the Near East, including those through the United Nations and those jointly sponsored with the British. No regional office should be set up in the area for this purpose, coordination with the United Kingdom being effected between London and Washington.

16) Treatment of minorities in the Near East

Whenever necessary, our representatives in the Near East should take the occasion to stress United States interest in the fair and reasonable treatment of minorities, and should endeavor to ease the situation of minorities when it is found that they have been the subject of discrimination.

At the same time it is of great value for the Department to have, as promptly as possible, any information which would indicate that allegations of mistreatment of minorities are being circulated for political or other reasons.

17) The ESM report

The ESM interim report displays excellent workmanship and grasp of the situation and is heartily endorsed. Implementation of the report, particularly with respect to carrying out of the pilot projects, may be handicapped at the start in certain states because of ESM’s connection with the PCC and the Palestine problem. The draft setting up the proposed United Nations Work and Relief Agency recommended by the Interim Report is approved. It should in no way be connected with the PCC and every effort should be made, consistent with United States objectives, to separate, in the public mind, the carrying out of pilot projects from refugees, Palestine, the PCC and the ESM.

18) Position on U.S. standard treaty form

The Conference was of the opinion that the Department’s standard form for a treaty of Friendship, Commerce and Navigation could not be advanced in every case; that it was much too complex for some areas, such as Saudi Arabia, where a simple form of treaty would suffice, if needed. In other areas, such as Lebanon, the standard form of treaty would be useful and can be negotiated. It was felt that an individual approach to treaty problems was essential.

19) Point IV

It was the consensus of the Conference that the Point IV program is admirably adapted to the furtherance of U.S. policy in the N.E. and the development of the resources of that area for the benefit of its peoples. However it was felt that the program must be flexible and adapted to the particular needs of each country; and in no case should Point IV technicians be proposed until requested by the receiving country and evidence produced that the assistance would be effectively utilized.

. . . . . . . . . . . . . .

20) U.K. treaty system

The United States should not encourage the extension of the U.K. treaty system to other countries.

21) The United Nations

We should make every effort to restore and increase the prestige of the UN in the Near Eastern area. We realize that our task in this area has been considerably lightened by the existence of the United Nations and its related agencies such as UNSCOB, PCC and ESM.

22) Negotiations between Israel and the Arab States

The U.S. should encourage direct negotiations between Israel and the Arab States, but should not abandon publicly its principles on refugees and territories. It should refrain from suggesting the nature of any settlement, leaving this to be determined by the relative bargaining positions of the parties.

The conference concurred in the statement of U.S. policy on Jerusalem made before the General Assembly.

23) Role of U.S. cultural institutions and commercial interests in N.E.

The great importance of United States cultural and commercial interests in the area is recognized and our representatives should continue vigorously to support them. The training which our cultural institutions have provided, and the fair practices which are characteristic of our commercial enterprises, are accepted as a most important aid in restoring good will for the United States in the Near East.

24) Effects of U.S.I.E. program

The Conference felt that the U.S.I.E. program, as presently conducted, is an excellent means of making American ideas known, and of giving a correct impression of the United States and its people to the N.E. It is also very effective in counteracting the effect of Communist propaganda and that of other undemocratic ideologies.

25) Syrian-Iraqi Union 7

The idea of union is presently dormant but not dead. Syrian and Iraqi political and economic difficulties at present militate against it, and the proposed Arab League Security Pact seems to have diverted attention from the Union for the time being.

The feeling in both Syria and Iraq, however, is that a Pact as projected would not prevent Union. So far as Syria is concerned, pressure for the solution of her economic difficulties, or any acute aggravation of the fear of Israeli expansionism, is likely to see a return of active interest in Syrian-Iraqi union, or at least the development of much closer economic and military ties.

In the case of Iraq there is reason to believe that the economic, social and cultural bases for union which are commonly advanced by Iraqi politicians are far outweighed by and in fact used as a cloak for the advancement of Hashemite8 ambitions.

26) Iraq

With respect to the possibility of extending the technical assistance program to Iraq, now unduly restricted by privileged-position provisions of the Anglo-Iraqi Treaty of 1930, we would like to see an understanding concluded with the British on Washington-London level, envisaging, as regards American Point 4 and other experts, that such special position will not apply. We need not query the propriety of such demands because, by signature of the Portsmouth Treaty, Great Britain has already recorded its position to relinquish its exclusive rights in this regard.

27) American leadership in the Near East

Our Representatives in Near Eastern countries should, as far as possible within existing conditions, endeavor to assume a positive role in urging those countries to develop more representative and democratic forms of government and to adopt foreign policies consistent with U.S. objectives.

It was recognized, however, that the rate of progress toward these ends would be conditioned by distinctive factors in each country such as, for example, the Anglo-Iraqi Treaty and pending election in Egypt.

28) Conclusions

On the basis of experience gained during this Conference, the Department should encourage the Assistant Secretary to visit the area more frequently. The Department should authorize and encourage visits between Chiefs of Mission in the area. Advance notice should be given the Department when possible, but it would be left to the individual chiefs of mission to determine when they might be able to leave their posts for such visits. Weekend trips were suggested, and tentative boundaries of New Delhi, Addis Ababa, and Athens were proposed.

1 For text, see p. 1506 [Pg. 1506 includes portions of Doc. 1041 and Doc. 1042].

2 Ambassador Caffery had informed Hassouna Pasha, Under Secretary of State in the Egyptian Foreign Office, along these lines on October 22 (telegram 986, October 23, 9 p. m., from Cairo, 890B.00/10–2349). The same message reported that at the meeting of the Arab League Council on October 22, a resolution was adopted “calling for the conclusion of a collective security pact among all the Arab states.” The purposes of the proposed pact were “to sidetrack Syrian-Iraqi unification and to present stronger front to communism and (although not mentioned) to Israel.” Documentation on the proposed Syrian-Iraqi unification is printed on pp. 180 [Pg. 180 is part of Doc. 76] ff.

3 Abdul Aziz ibn Saud, King of Saudi Arabia.

4 Marginal notation by Secretary Acheson: “Not for 1950.”

5 Marginal notation by Secretary Acheson: “Is this correct so far as Israeli reaction is concerned?” Mr. McGhee, in a memorandum of December 28, replied: “It was the feeling of the Conference that the automatic extension of British treaty provisions following the union of Arab Palestine with Jordan would contribute to the stability of the area in that it would help to remove the Arabs’ fear of Israeli expansion to the east. It is probable that Israel would not like the automatic extension of the British treaty provisions, but would accept it in the interest of obtaining a final settlement of outstanding questions between Israel and Jordan.” (867N.01/12–2849)

6 Not found in Department of State files.

7 For documentation on this subject, see pp. 180 [Pg. 180 is part of Doc. 76] ff.

8 The ruling dynasty in Iraq and Jordan.

Recapitulation of Conclusions for Confidential Guidance of Chiefs of Mission in Oral Presentation to Governments Ankara Embassy Files, 1949, 120 Chiefs of Mission Conference

[Document 74]

Recapitulation of Conclusions for Confidential Guidance of Chiefs of Mission in Oral Presentation to Governments

confidential [Istanbul ?, undated.]

The principal purpose of the Conference was to exchange views and make recommendations to the United States Government concerning measures to safeguard and enhance security, promote political stability, and improve the economic position of the individual countries of the Near East and of the region as a whole. The consensus of opinion was that acts, not words, would constitute the best proof of the continuing interest of the United States in furthering these objectives.

With regard to security matters, it was felt that the American program of military assistance to Greece, Turkey and Iran is the clearest possible evidence of United States’ concern in the preservation of the territorial integrity and independence of these countries and of all the nations of the Near East. It was the consensus, however, that all the states in the Near East would be well advised to keep military expenditures to a minimum commensurate with security requirements so as not to place too heavy a burden on their national economy.

While approving in principle any regional pact formed within the framework of the United Nations and designed to enhance the peace, prosperity, stability and general well-being of the whole region, the Conference was of the opinion that it would be premature for the United States to consider associating itself with any possible regional grouping in this area. In this connection it was pointed out that American adherence to the Atlantic Pact constituted radical departure in the foreign policy of the United States and that any additional American commitments of like nature should not be undertaken without the most careful examination of all the factors involved.

It was believed, taking the long-range view, that security in the region could best be attained through the improvement of the economic and social position of the individual countries of the region and of the area as a whole. In this field the Conference devoted particular attention to the application to this region of the Point IV Program of President Truman, the studies and recommendations of the Economic Survey Mission of the Palestine Consultative [Conciliation] Committee and the development of mutually profitable trade and investment relations in the area. In this connection consideration was given to the possibility of negotiating treaties of peace, commerce, navigation and friendship between the United States and those countries of the region with which the United States presently has no such treaty relationships.

In the particular cases of Greece and Turkey, the operation of the European Recovery Program in these countries was examined and certain general suggestions advanced for more effective application. It was a general conclusion that in all the countries of the area as in the ERP countries, such aid and assistance as the United States might be able to furnish must be devoted to the external costs of technical assistance and economic development and in no case should be utilized for bearing internal costs.

The Conference was particularly impressed with the explanation furnished by Mr. Clapp concerning the methods, principles, purposes and objectives of the recommendations advanced by the ESM and felt that these recommendations provided hope of ameliorating the lot of the Palestinian refugees and pointed the way to more long-range economic improvement of the area.

In regard to the special problems of the area arising out of Arab-Israeli relations, the conference believed that the United States, while maintaining strict impartiality and continuing to support the PCC and the ESM as means of solving outstanding issues, favors direct negotiations as offering the best possibility of obtaining agreement between the parties concerned.

With reference to Jerusalem, the Conference saw no reason to recommend any change in the American position: internationalization in accordance with the draft resolution, before the General Assembly, incorporating the PCC statute for Jerusalem.

In regard to current movements towards the merger of Arab States, the Conference agreed that no change from the position previously announced by the United States was necessary: the United States while neither opposing nor favoring the merger of Arab States, was convinced that such union should be in accordance with the freely expressed wishes of the people concerned and not as a result of force or outside intervention.

Finally, the Conference concluded that the safeguarding of security and the improvement of economic and social conditions in this area are closely connected with maintenance of political stability in all the countries concerned. It appears obvious, therefore, that the United States should continue to take an interest in every activity contributing to increased stability and peace, as well as the prosperity and well-being of the Middle East.

Statement by Assistant Secretary of State George C. McGhee Ankara Embassy Files, 1949, 120 Chiefs of Mission Conference

[Document 75]

Statement by Assistant Secretary of State George C. McGhee

[Istanbul ?,] November 30, 1949.

Today the Istanbul Conference of the United States Chiefs of Missions in the Near East has ended. The general nature of our discussions was announced to the press on Monday.

As we close, I wish particularly to emphasize that the primary objective which we have sought has been to elaborate a program for the effective implementation of the basic policy directive voiced by President Truman when announcing two months ago the appointment of Mr. Gordon E. Clapp as Chairman of the United Nations Survey Mission to the Near East.

On that occasion the President said in part:

“Traditional American cultural interests in the Near East have in recent years been reinforced by expanding economic and commercial ties and by recognition of the important role of that historical cross roads between three continents in the maintenance of peace and security of the world of today.

“This steady expansion of our relations with the Near East has given rise to a natural interest on the part of this government in the welfare of the governments and peoples of that area.

“In so saying, I wish to emphasize that now as in the past we have no axe of special privilege to grind.

“We do, however, have an obvious community of interest with the countries of the Near East.

“It is proper that we should give that relationship the careful and understanding consideration which it merits.”

A major theme of the Interim Report which the Economic Survey Mission has submitted to the United Nations has been that through economic and social development lies the most promising path to area stability.

With this view we are in full accord; appreciating in fullest measure the differences which exist and which have deep and ancient roots tending to inhibit essential unity of constructive purpose.

In no country of the Near East is the realization of such purpose estopped or even seriously impaired by Communist agitation or propaganda. Again to quote the President: “These states have become their own masters.”

We feel that application of the President’s Point 4 Program, notably for the extension of technical assistance to underdeveloped areas, would be of material assistance to this end.

To answer a question frequently posed, we perceive no present need for American association in any regional military or mutual defense pacts designed to assure greater protection against aggression.

We emphasize the desirability of persisting in the policy which has guided American efforts in this area during recent post-war years, i.e. the Truman Doctrine supplemented, as need be, by the programs for European Recovery and for Military Assistance.1

1 Assistant Secretary McGhee exchanged visits with various political figures in Turkey and with Athenagoras, Archbishop of Constantinople and Ecumenical Patriarch, during and after the Istanbul Conference; for information on these visits, see editorial note, p. 1685 [Pg. 1685 includes portions of Doc. 1162, Doc. 1163, and Doc. 1164].

Attitude of the United States toward the proposed political union of Syria and IraqAttitude of the United States toward the proposed political union of Syria and Iraq1

1 For previous documentation on the attitude of the United States toward the question of Arab unity, see Foreign Relations, 1945, vol. viii, pp. 25 ff. For discussion on November 11 of the proposed political union by the Secretary of State and Ernest Bevin, the British Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs, see the memorandum of their conversation, p. 1482 [Pg. 1482 includes portions of Doc. 1027 and Doc. 1028].

[76] Editorial Note

[77] Memorandum by the Acting Secretary of State to the President

Washington, October 6, 1949.

790D.90G/10–649

[78] Memorandum by the Secretary of State to the President

Washington, October 14, 1949.

790D.90G/10–1449

[79] The Department of State to the British Embassy

Washington, [no date indicated].

790D.90G/10–1849

[80] The Secretary of State to Certain Diplomatic Offices

Washington, December 22, 1949—8 a. m.

890D.00/12–2249: Circular telegram

Editorial Note [Document 76]

Editorial Note

Baghdad, on June 13, expressed concern that Iraq might intervene by force of arms to unseat the Government of Colonel Husni Zaim which had taken power in Syria as a result of a coup d’état (telegram 335). The Department received this message on June 15 and the following day instructed Ambassador Crocker to “caution FonMin at convenient opportunity against intervention in Syria, pointing out that US and UN opinion wld be strongly opposed use of force. Likewise such intervention might have serious repercussions which wld endanger peace in NE.” (Telegram 252 was repeated to Damascus and London. Both telegrams are filed under 890D.00/6–1349.)

On August 14, the Zaim Government was overthrown in a military coup. The same day the Department informed Amman that “if there is any indication that govts to which you are accredited contemplating precipitate action as result Syrian coup you are authorized in your discretion emphasize desirability restraint in existing circumstances.” (telegram 128, which was repeated for action to Baghdad, Beirut and Tel Aviv). At the same time the Department directed London to inform the British Foreign Office of its instructions to these Near Eastern posts and to suggest that “If FonOff has not already taken similar action you may suggest it may care to do so.” (telegram 2891) (Telegrams 128 and 2891 are filed under 890D.00/8–1449.) The Department advised Cairo, on August 23, that the British Government had taken similar action vis-à-vis Iraq and Jordan (telegram 831, 890D.01/8–2349). The message also stated that “Dept has no information which wld seem warrant fears for Syrian independence and both Iraqi and Jordan Govt officials have assured US they do not contemplate intervention.”

For documentation on the various coups in Syria, see pages 1630 [Pg. 1630 is part of Doc. 1132] ff.

Memorandum by the Acting Secretary of State to the President 790D.90G/10–649

[Document 77]

Memorandum by the Acting Secretary of State to the President

top secret Washington, October 6, 1949.

Subject: Proposals for Union of Syria with Iraq under King Faisal, II Hashemite Ruler of Iraq.

I wish to inform you that on September 29, 1949, acting under instructions from the British Government, representatives of the British Embassy in Washington informed officers of the Department of State that the governments of Iraq and Syria had approached the British Government for assistance in negotiating a political union of these two countries under King Faisal II, Hashemite ruler of Iraq. The British representatives stated that this information was being communicated confidentially to the Department on the assumption that the United States Government would not disclose it to any other government. While the plans put forward by the Iraqi and Syrian governments vary in detail,1 they have declared their intention to resolve these differences by referring them to a mixed commission of experts. The resultant organic plan of union would be submitted to the parliaments of Iraq and Syria for ratification, in accordance with constitutional procedures.

The two governments are likewise reported to have signed an agreement on September 27 outlining the procedure they would follow in achieving unification. This agreement provides, among other things, that should the two governments learn through the British Government that the United States Government is favorably disposed, they will approach the United States and British governments directly for advice as to the degree of unification they should endeavor to achieve.

The British Government states that it has scrupulously refrained from expressing any opinion about the form which the proposed closer relations between the two governments should take, except in so far as the Anglo-Iraqi Treaty might be affected.

Officers of the Department received this information without comment, emphasizing the gravity and importance of the problem and the necessity for careful study. They also stated that pending such study the absence of a formal reply should not be regarded as acquiescence in or approval of the proposals.

The Department immediately telegraphed our Missions in London, Paris and the Arab capitals, requesting their appraisal of the consequences in the area should the unification plans be implemented. Replies have not yet been received from most of the Missions to which the Department’s telegram was addressed. Appropriate divisions in the Department and officers of the Central Intelligence Agency are making a comprehensive and coordinated study of all factors bearing on the situation in order to determine what attitude this Government should adopt toward the proposals.

I shall inform you as to the results of this study before a final decision is reached.

1 The Iraqi plan “envisaged the federation of Iraq and Syria under a single crown on a ‘commonwealth’ basis. The two states would retain their identity in the federation and would even have separate armies, separate legislatures and separate representation in the United Nations, but would ‘for purposes of convenience’ be represented in foreign countries by a single diplomatic mission. “The Syrian counter proposal was that a more centralized administration should be established with a single Iraqi and Syrian parliament in which the two countries would have equal representation and which would convene alternately in Baghdad and Damascus every six months. A federal council would be elected to draft a federal constitution. King Faisal would remain in Baghdad but would be represented in Damascus by a viceroy (not named). Appointments to the posts of Prime Minister, Minister of Defense, Foreign Affairs and Economic Affairs would be by the King’s commission.” (memorandum of September 29 by Harlan B. Clark of a conversation with British Embassy officials, 790D.90G/9–2949). Mr. Clark was Officer in Charge of Lebanon–SyriA–Iraq Affairs.

Memorandum by the Secretary of State to the President 790D.90G/10–1449

[Document 78]

Memorandum by the Secretary of State to the President

top secret Washington, October 14, 1949.

The Department of State has completed its preliminary study of the proposals being put forward by the Governments of Iraq and Syria for closer relations between their countries. It finds that its conclusions are concurred in by the Central Intelligence Agency and the Department of Defense which have been consulted on an informal basis.

These conclusions are as follows: (1) The overall United States policy objective in the Near East is to promote area peace and stability. In keeping with this objective the United States should continue to look with disfavor upon any attempt to modify the status of the Near Eastern countries by external intervention or force. However, since it is a cardinal principle of American policy to respect the right of peoples freely to choose their own form of government, this Government should not oppose unions of peoples brought about by the freely expressed will of these peoples.

(2) The Department recognizes the existence of a genuine feeling among the Arab peoples in favor of the principle of Arab unity, and believes that eventual union of Syria with one or more other Arab countries might promote long-range economic and political stability in the area. There is insufficient evidence, however, to indicate that, in existing circumstances and under present auspices, the proposals at hand correspond to the will of the Iraqi and Syrian peoples. The possibility exists that the ultimate popular reaction may not be sufficiently favorable to ensure the orderly formation of a federated Hashemite monarchy without prejudice to the stability of Syria and Iraq, and concomitantly to the stability of the Near Eastern area as a whole. A political union of this form and under these auspices may, for example, be associated locally with the so-called “Fertile Crescent” or “Greater Syria” schemes1 which have acquired a reputation in the Near East as being of “imperialistic” inspiration. A determined opposition from sizeable nationalist elements in both Syria and Iraq could develop around the anti-imperialist theme. There are also reports of opposition among factions of the Syrian Army who may be in a position to make the transition to political union turbulent.

(3) It is already evident that the movement for political union of Iraq and Syria is a matter of considerable concern to the remaining Near Eastern States and certain other powers. The King of Saudi Arabia is apprehensive that a Hashemite-dominated grouping of Arab states may in time endeavor to restore a Hashemite monarchy in the Hejaz, and may likewise interpose obstacles to the construction or operation of the Trans-Arabian pipeline which will run through Syria, especially since Iraq is anxious to expand oil production from its own vast petroleum reserves. The Government of Lebanon believes that implementation of the proposals will disturb Lebanon’s economic relations with the Arab hinterland, and fears that the larger Moslem state will have irridentist designs on Lebanese territory and endeavor to disturb Lebanon’s pro-western and Christian orientation. King Abdullah of Jordan is reported to be opposed to the present proposals because he is excluded from the leading role in the formation of a “Greater Syria”. King Farouk of Egypt is also known to be strongly opposed to the creation of a larger grouping of Arab states dominated by the rival Hashemite dynasty. There is no doubt that one of the chief motivating factors behind the unification move is fear of Israel, and it may therefore be expected that Israel itself will, in turn, consider the union of Syria and Iraq as a possible threat to its political and economic security.

The Government of France is known to be strongly opposed to the unification move, and to regard the United Kingdom as the power behind it. The USSR may likewise oppose this move as it would strengthen the power of the Hashemite family, which it regards as under British control and sponsorship. In view of Iraq’s intransigent attitude toward the United Nations efforts to achieve a settlement of the Palestine controversy and the refugee problem, it seems reasonable to believe that the proposed union may further retard settlement of these two questions.

(4) In these circumstances, the Department of State plans, if you approve, to inform the Government of the United Kingdom along the lines of Annex A.2 This procedure has the merit of testing the genuineness of the proposal without disapproving it and of placing the responsibility for the proposal with the Governments of Syria and Iraq rather than with the Governments of the United States and the United Kingdom. At the same time it is intended to inject a note of caution by reference to our feeling of concern on the basis of such information as has become available.3

1 For previous documentation on the desire of Transjordan for a Greater Syria, see Foreign Relations, 1947, vol. v, p. 538 ff.

2 Presumably the Aide-Mémoire handed to the British Embassy on October 18, infra. It was drafted on October 12–13.

3 President Truman, in a memorandum of October 17 to Secretary Acheson, stated he had read the Department’s memorandum and Aide-Mémoire and thought “the matter is being approached in the proper manner.” (790D.90G/10–1749)

The Department of State to the British Embassy 790D.90G/10–1849

[Document 79]

The Department of State to the British Embassy

top secret

Aide-Mémoire

1. The Department of State refers to the information orally communicated to Mr. Hare1 on September 29, 1949, by Mr. Allen2 regarding closer relations between Syria and Iraq and the further oral discussion of the subject with Mr. Wilkins3 and Mr. Clark on September 30. These discussions were initiated by the British Embassy at the request of the Governments of Syria and Iraq. The Department has carefully observed the strictures as to secrecy imposed by the British Government in communicating this information.

2. The United States Government recalls its previously expressed position that it would look with disfavor upon any modification of the status of the present sovereign entities of the Near East accomplished by force or external intervention. However, since it is a cardinal principle of American policy to respect the right of peoples freely to choose their own form of government, this Government would not oppose unions of peoples brought about by the freely expressed wish of the peoples concerned.

3. The Department has carefully studied the information communicated to it by the British Government and that available from other sources, and has reached the conclusion that the United States Government should not, at this time, adopt an attitude either favoring, acquiescing in or disapproving these proposals because: (a) There is insufficient evidence on which to base an opinion as to the degree of popular support such a union would find in both countries and the overall effects of the proposed action on the peace and stability of the area. Such information as is available, however, gives this Government certain ground for concern.

(b) The United States Government considers that it should not, in any event, express an opinion in advance of consideration of the proposed move in an open and constitutional way within the two countries, which might in itself influence such consideration, and before the Governments of Syria and Iraq have consulted with other countries which may feel themselves affected.

(c) In view of this Government’s concern, the United States would, furthermore, before expressing any judgment on the proposals, expect assurances by Syria and Iraq that the proposed union would safeguard legitimate interests of the United States; that it would carry out existing international obligations of the two states; and that it would undertake to respect the independence and territorial integrity of neighboring states.

4. The United States Government has no objection if the Government of the United Kingdom wishes to communicate the substance of the foregoing information to the Governments of Syria and Iraq.

Washington, [no date indicated4 ].

1 Raymond A. Hare, Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern, South Asian, and African Affairs.

2 William Denis Allen, Counsellor of the British Embassy.

3 Eraser Wilkins, Officer in Charge of Paiestine–Israel–Jordan Affairs.

4 This Aide-Mémoire was delivered to Mr. Allen on October 18.

The Secretary of State to Certain Diplomatic Offices 890D.00/12–2249: Circular telegram

[Document 80]

The Secretary of State to Certain Diplomatic Offices 1

secret Washington, December 22, 1949—8 a. m.

View opinion expressed Damascus 727 Dec 202 rptd you possibility exists more violent developments may occur in Syria giving rise to threat of outside intervention, you shld, of course, counsel Govt to which you are accredited refrain from any precipitous action and fol policy complete nonintervention, if in ur judgment situation warrants. You shld exchange views this regard ur Brit colleague.3

Acheson

1 At Baghdad, Tel Aviv, and Amman for action; and at London, Damascus, Jidda, Cairo, Beirut, Paris, and Jerusalem for information.

2 Not printed; it noted the possibility of more violent developments in Syria because of the involved political situation in the country and spoke even of the entry of the armies of Jordan and Iraq “to restore order” (890D.002/12–2049).

3 The Department, on December 22, directed London to convey the substance of the circular telegram to the Foreign Office and to suggest that the Foreign Office might wish to “give similar authorization to its representatives at Baghdad, Amman, and Tel Aviv (telegram 4575, 890D.00/12–2249).

Egypt:Egypt:

Contents

Interest of the United States in the revision of the Anglo-Egyptian treaty of August 26, 1936, and the future status of the Sudan; the issue of Egyptian participation in staff talks by United States and United Kingdom military officials concerning the defense of the Near East (Documents 81-104)

Interest of the United States in the revision of the Anglo-Egyptian treaty of August 26, 1936, and the future status of the Sudan; the issue of Egyptian participation in staff talks by United States and United Kingdom military officials concerning the defense of the Near EastInterest of the United States in the revision of the Anglo-Egyptian treaty of August 26, 1936, and the future status of the Sudan; the issue of Egyptian participation in staff talks by United States and United Kingdom military officials concerning the defense of the Near East1

1 Continued from Foreign Relations, 1948, vol. v, Part 1, pp. 85–86. Further information on combined strategic military plans for the Near East by the United States and the United Kingdom is included in Mr. McGhee’s memorandum of October 7, p. 165 [Pg. 165 is part of Doc. 71].

[81] The Chargé in Egypt (Patterson) to the Secretary of State

Cairo, January 4, 1949—7 p. m.

883.00/1–449: Telegram

[82] The Chargé in the United Kingdom (Holmes) to the Secretary of State

London, January 7, 1949.

883.00/1–749: Airgram

[83] Memorandum of Conversation, by the Counselor (Bohlen)

[Washington,] January 25, 1949.

811.2383/1–2549

[84] Memorandum by the Director of the Office of Near Eastern and African Affairs (Satterthwaite) to the Director of the Executive Secretariat (Humelsine)

[Washington,] January 25, 1949.

811.2383/1–2449

[85] Memorandum by the Secretary of State to the Counselor (Bohlen)

[Washington,] January 28, 1949.

811.2383/1–2549

[86] Memorandum by the Counselor (Bohlen) to the Executive Secretariat

[Washington,] January 29, 1949.

811.2383/1–2549

[87] The Chargé in Egypt (Patterson) to the Secretary of State

Cairo, February 1, 1949—5 p. m.

883.20/2–149: Telegram

[88] The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom

Washington, February 17, 1949—4 p. m.

811.2383/2–1749: Telegram

[89] Memorandum by Mr. Carroll F. Conover, Economic Assistant at the Embassy in Egypt to the Counselor of Embassy for Economic Affairs (Howard)

[Cairo,] March 8, 1949.

883.812/3–1049

[90] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State

London, March 17, 1949—6 p. m.

883.20/3–1749: Telegram

[91] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State

London, March 22, 1949.

883.20/3–2249: Airgram

[92] The Secretary of State to the Secretary of Defense (Johnson)

Washington, April 7, 1949.

883.20/4–749

[93] Editorial Note

[94] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State

London, April 28, 1949—5 p. m.

883.20/4–2849: Telegram

[95] The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom

Washington, April 30, 1949—2 p. m.

883.20/4–2849: Telegram

[96] Policy Statement on Egypt Prepared in the Department of State

[Washington,] May 5, 1949.

711.83/5–549

[97] Memorandum, by the Chief of Staff, United States Air Force, to the Joint Chiefs of Staff

[Washington,] 5 May 1949.

Department of Defense Files

[98] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State

London, July 12, 1949—6 p. m.

883.20/7–1249: Telegram

[99] The Chargé in Egypt (Patterson) to the Secretary of State

Cairo, July 19, 1949—10 a. m.

883.20/7–1949: Telegram

[100] The Chargé in Egypt (Patterson) to the Secretary of State

Cairo, July 23, 1949—6 p. m.

883.20/7–2349: Telegram

[101] The Chargé in Egypt (Patterson) to the Secretary of State

Cairo, August 2, 1949.

883.00/8–249: Airgram

[102] The Chargé in the United Kingdom (Holmes) to the Secretary of State

London, August 30, 1949—7 p. m.

883.20/8–3049: Telegram

[103] The Ambassador in Egypt (Caffery) to the Secretary of State

Cairo, October 12, 1949—4 p. m.

711.83/10–1249: Telegram

[104] The Acting Secretary of State to the Embassy in Egypt

Washington, November 14, 1949.

711.83/10–1249: Airgram

The Chargé in Egypt (Patterson) to the Secretary of State 883.00/1–449: Telegram

[Document 81]

The Chargé in Egypt (Patterson) to the Secretary of State

restricted Cairo, January 4, 1949—7 p. m.

6. Prime Minister Abdul Hadi Pasha in declaration new government’s2 policy to Parliament yesterday, stressed evacuation foreign troops from fatherland and unity of Sudan with Egypt under Egyptian Crown as Egypt’s supreme objectives. Pledged cabinet with support of Parliament would do all in its power to realize such demands which had “become creed sacred to all sons of Nile valley”. Praised “valiant and victorious” Egyptian army in its struggle to liberate Palestine3 which was national and humanitarian action and an expression of Egypt’s sincerity in fulfilling her undertakings. Hoped Egypt’s honorable action in Palestine would be followed by all Arab states.

After declaring Cabinet was already bringing about King’s desire for political unity, he stressed, as among new government’s duties, maintenance of public security, reduction high cost of living, and inauguration of reforms.

Preliminary reaction to statement is still “wait and see”. Meeting of Wafd4 executive called for January 5 to consider participation new government.

Patterson

2 Nokrashy Pasha had been Egyptian Prime Minister at the time of his assassination on December 28, 1948. Hadi Pasha was designated his successor within hours of the assassination.

3 London advised, on January 4, of information from George L. Clutton, Head of the African Department in the British Foreign Office, that the Egyptian Government had not requested of the British Government aid in the form of either men or arms under the 1936 treaty since Egypt did not consider the treaty valid (telegram 30, 883.00/1–449).

4 The leading opposition party in Egypt.

The Chargé in the United Kingdom (Holmes) to the Secretary of State 883.00/1–749: Airgram

[Document 82]

The Chargé in the United Kingdom (Holmes) to the Secretary of State

secret London, January 7, 1949.

Subject: Revolution in Egypt

A–29. Following for US eyes only. In a private and personal conversation recently a responsible official of the British Foreign Office, who deals directly with Egyptian affairs, remarked to an officer of this Embassy in a mood of deep gloom that “from the way things are going from bad to worse in Egypt it seems to me that a revolution there is inevitable.”

Expanding this thought, the official said that the economic and social problems of Egypt, which were already bad, had been aggravated by the war in Palestine and that instead of Egyptian leaders endeavoring to take remedial steps they seem to be vying with one another to scramble to the top of the manure pile out of reach of the rising sea of discontent, hunger and despair. He opined that the only untried force, which conceivably might be for the good, would be enlightened intervention by Farouk1 but this young man appears to share the outlook of the reactionary landowners and other vested interests. In the present circumstances the official could foresee only a struggle between the “haves” and the “have-nots”, the plight of the latter in Egypt being far worse than in most Arab countries owing to population pressure and land shortage. The official did not know how long the patient “have-not donkey” would support the heavy burden of the unenlightened “haves” but he “imagined that it would kick before long”.

The official said that if a revolution should occur in Egypt it might be just as well that the Wafd is not in the present government because there would be “someone to take over”. He presumed the King would go (“possibly feet first”) and Nahas2 would move in.

Asked re the character of such a revolution the official said it would probably be “typically Egyptian” starting with more assassinations, looting and mob violence but at no time involving very considered or very widely held political objectives. The latter would emerge from the men who “took over” the revolution and turned it to their own purposes.

The official felt personally that the future prospects for Egypt are “grim”.

Holmes

1 King of Egypt.

2 Mustafa Nahas, leader of the Wafd.

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Counselor (Bohlen) 811.2383/1–2549

[Document 83]

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Counselor (Bohlen)

top secret [Washington,] January 25, 1949.

Subject: Assignment of U.S. officers to British GHQ at Fayid [Egypt].

The British Ambassador1 called on me at his request this afternoon. He said that his instructions were to take it up with the Secretary but that as it was a relatively simple matter he did not wish to bother him at this time.

The Ambassador said that following the designation of Admiral Conolly2 to be the U.S. planner for the coordination of Mediterranean defense plans the British Middle East Command had suggested that a number of American officers from Conolly’s staff should be attached to GHQ Fayid in Egypt. Mr. Bevin3 saw no political objection to this course but wished to have confirmation from the Secretary that the U.S. Government likewise saw no objection. The second point was the manner in which the Egyptian Government should be approached in connection with the assignment of these officers to the GHQ at Fayid; that is to say, whether permission should be requested of the Egyptian Government or the Egyptian Government should be merely informed on a confidential basis without specifically requesting permission. The British Government also wished to avoid the possibility in dealing with the Egyptians that the latter would use this request as a bargaining point in their constant desire to obtain arms from Great Britain.4

I told the Ambassador I would endeavor to obtain a reply for him as soon as possible; that I had seen some messages from Egypt on this subject,5 and that I felt that if the Secretary’s decision was favorable in principle, our views were very much together as to the desirability of doing it as discreetly and as confidentially as possible.

The Ambassador would like to have (and I promised to let him know tomorrow) confirmation from the Secretary that there is no political objection in principle to having some American officers of Admiral Conolly’s staff assigned to British GHQ at Fayid.

Charles E. Bohlen

1 Sir Oliver Franks.

2 Richard L. Conolly, Commander in Chief of U.S. Naval Forces in the Eastern Atlantic and Mediterranean (CINCNELM).

3 Ernest Bevin, British Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs.

4 For references to documentation on the embargo of shipments of armaments to the Near East, see index entries in this volume under Palestine, Arms Policy for Palestine, and the Near East.

5 For the nature of these messages, see the memorandum of January 25, infra.

Memorandum by the Director of the Office of Near Eastern and African Affairs (Satterthwaite) to the Director of the Executive Secretariat (Humelsine) 811.2383/1–2449

[Document 84]

Memorandum by the Director of the Office of Near Eastern and African Affairs (Satterthwaite) to the Director of the Executive Secretariat (Humelsine)

top secret [Washington,] January 25, 1949.

Subject: Proposed Visit of Naval Officers to Fayid, Egypt.

The following summarizes action taken to date on the above subject:

On January 21, 1949 the Department received a request from Admiral Conolly through the Navy Department to make arrangements for the clearance of up to a maximum of 12 officers of the Armed Services of his staff to enter Fayid via Farouk Field, Cairo for a period of from 3 to 4 weeks beginning January 27 in connection with Combined Planning. The officers would wear civilian clothes. It was requested that they should not be represented to the Egyptian authorities as members of the Admiral’s staff. Instead he suggested that it be stated that they were detailed from Washington in a program of exchange of officers for their instructions in staff methods on a large command staff. The telegram further stated that CINCMED had sent a similar despatch to the Admiralty urging that the British Ambassador in Egypt be instructed to assist our Chargé in any way possible. He further recommended that this be handled in Cairo only on the highest government level, preferably through the King in person. He emphasized that it was most important for these officers to spend the next three weeks in Fayid and later to have the Combined Planning team assembled at Tobruk for ten days intensive work.

This telegram was sent to Cairo1 with instructions to Mr. Patterson, the Chargé d’Affaires, to endeavor to comply with the Admiral’s request unless the Chargé perceived some serious objection. The Chargé immediately replied2 to the effect that if these 12 officers possessed valid Egyptian visas he perceived no occasion for employment of the unusual procedure suggested by Admiral Conolly, since such officers should encounter no difficulty or Egyptian objection to travel from Cairo to Fayid. The Chargé felt that to raise the subject with the King or Prime Minister in the absence of factors possibly not revealed to the Embassy might jeopardize the entry of the officers into Egypt and might prove embarrassing to the Egyptian authorities by obliging them to take a specific position. He further felt that it would be unnecessary to take up the matter with or to ask the cooperation of the British Embassy.

The above mentioned suggested procedure for the entry of the 12 officers into Egypt was relayed by the Navy to Admiral Conolly last night, January 24, after clearance with NEA. We concurred with our Chargé’s recommendations, particularly since no question of a permanent assignment of these officers to Fayid was indicated. No reply has as yet been received from Admiral Conolly. Should it develop, however, that this assignment is not as temporary as indicated (3 to 4 weeks), the Department might wish to suggest, because of Egyptian sensitivities and because a prolonged assignment might conflict with the 1936 Anglo-Egyptian Treaty of Alliance, the feasibility of holding the meetings with the British elsewhere than in Fayid, for example, in Malta, Cyprus or Cyrenaica.

In his telegram of January 243 our Chargé reported a conversation which he had with British Minister Chapman-Andrews who stated that King Farouk, during a recent call at the British Embassy, had expressed discontent over his understanding that the British and Americans in Egypt were consulting together regarding the role Egypt might play in case of hostilities. The King indicated his dissatisfaction over being thus by-passed. Mr. Chapman-Andrews expressed the belief that any prolonged talks lasting a number of weeks or months would differ essentially from individual conversations which had briefly taken place between the American and British officers in Egypt in the recent past. He accordingly felt that it would be well for the British and American Embassies in Egypt to consult with a view to determining the attitude which should be adopted towards the Egyptians, who would certainly be aware of the present purpose of a prolonged residence in the Canal Zone of a group of American naval personnel. Although he thought it might be unwise to approach the Egyptian Government, it would be desirable, in view of the King’s above mentioned feeling, to apprise him of the situation. Our Chargé replied that he had informed his Government of his belief that if these officers possessed Egyptian visas valid for entry into the country they could proceed without hindrance to the Canal Zone. He also stated that he would be glad to confer with the British Minister regarding American military or naval personnel who might come to Egypt for the purpose of having conversations with their British colleagues stationed in Egypt.

Recommendation: With specific reference to the request of the British Ambassador for advice whether such an assignment would be politically unobjectionable to this Government, I would suggest that the Ambassador be told that this question had been raised with the Department as a visit of only several weeks duration and that we had accordingly felt that it could be handled as a routine matter following the precedent of previous visits by American military personnel to Fayid for consultation purposes.

On the basis of the Ambassador’s remarks to Mr. Bohlen, however, it would appear that the assignment may be of a more formal nature and longer duration than we had contemplated, and in such event a serious question might be raised regarding the regularization of the status of American officers in a situation which is already complicated by Egyptian challenging of the position of British troops in the Canal area. If the Egyptians are sensitive regarding British troops despite the provisions of their 1936 Treaty with Great Britain, it is obvious that even greater difficulty might arise in the case of the stationing of American officers on Egyptian soil without benefit of specific agreement.

The Department of State is pursuing this matter with the Navy Department and will communicate with the Ambassador further when more complete information has been received.4

1 January 21, as telegram 87, not printed.

2 On January 22, in telegram 85, not printed.

3 No. 92, not printed.

4 Bromley K. Smith, Assistant Director of the Executive Secretariat, sent Mr. Satterthwaite’s memorandum to Secretary Acheson on January 26. His transmitting memorandum endorsed Mr. Satterthwaite’s recommendation. Mr. Bohlen’s concurrence is indicated in a marginal notation on Mr. Smith’s memorandum (811.2383/1–2549).

Memorandum by the Secretary of State to the Counselor (Bohlen) 811.2383/1–2549

[Document 85]

Memorandum by the Secretary of State to the Counselor (Bohlen)

top secret [Washington,] January 28, 1949.

I see no political objection to having some of Admiral Conolly’s staff visit GHQ Fayid in Egypt for three or four weeks. They should not be detailed or assigned in any way, nor should they be attached to this British staff. Handled as a routine visit, I see no political objection to their working with the British staff in an advisory or consultative role.

I agree with Satterthwaite’s views in the event the visit is to be prolonged. Please have appropriate action taken in accordance with the above.

D[ean] A[cheson]

Memorandum by the Counselor (Bohlen) to the Executive Secretariat 811.2383/1–2549

[Document 86]

Memorandum by the Counselor (Bohlen) to the Executive Secretariat 1

top secret [Washington,] January 29, 1949.

Subject: Visit of U.S. officers to British GHQ Fayid.

I called the British Ambassador in the sense of the Secretary’s memorandum of January 28 (file attached) to inform him that we saw no political objection to some of Admiral Conolly’s staff visiting GHQ Fayid in Egypt for three or four weeks. I emphasized that we regarded this as a visit and not as an assignment with indications of permanency. I said that at the end of the three or four weeks period we would have to consider the matter further if the visit was to be extended. I told the Ambassador that our Navy Department had been working on the basis of a three or four weeks visit and that in that way it could be handled as a routine matter vis-à-vis the Egyptian Government.

The Ambassador said he understood and would so inform his Government.2

1 Addressed also to Mr. Satterthwaite.

2 The Department, on February 3, notified Cairo of its position and of Mr. Bohlen’s conversation with Ambassador Franks. It concluded that “Idea Egyp participation introduces new element about which Dept has insufficient info and strongly feels no action shld be taken pending further review. … Confer Bolger promptly re his instrs from Conolly particularly re nature and duration visit and Egypt participation or notification.” (telegram 130, 811.2383/1–2449) Rear Adm. Joseph F. Bolger was on the staff of Admiral Conolly.

The Chargé in Egypt (Patterson) to the Secretary of State 883.20/2–149: Telegram

[Document 87]

The Chargé in Egypt (Patterson) to the Secretary of State

top secret
niact Cairo, February 1, 1949—5 p. m.

125. ReEmbair 23, January 7.1 Naval Attaché informs Admiral Bolger and party due Cairo February 3 and arrangements completed with Ministry of Defense without unusual interest or inquiry on part of Egyptian liaison office. Party proposes to drive immediately from airport to Canal Zone.

I informed British Ambassador of foregoing arrangements consequent upon request for a meeting this morning on subject of pending Anglo-American military-naval conversations at Fayid. (ReEmbtel 104, January 26.2 ) I pointed out that on occasion of very recent passage through Cairo I had introduced Admiral Bolger to Foreign Minister while Defense Minister had declined to give him an appointment. I felt, accordingly, that consideration of civility toward Egyptians had already been adequately handled in Cairo.

On Ambassador’s mentioning thrice expressed interest by King Farouk in past conversations this nature I remarked that HM had not raised the subject in recent conversation with me. Since, however, the British were in a sense acting as hosts and under 1936 treaty enjoyed a special relationship to Egypt we could hardly prevent British Ambassador or other British authority from notifying HM of initiation of proposed talks, should British deem desirable.

To this Ambassador agreed adding, however, that while King Farouk had not in so many words requested that Egyptian officers participate in the Anglo-American talks he felt certain that this request would arise as soon as Egyptians found out about the talks, as they were bound to do. It was important to do everything possible to preserve Egyptian goodwill and to avoid, in case of eventualities, being confronted with a hostile government or populace.

I concurred in this observation but stated that I had no idea whether my government would view with favor Egyptian participation in what I understood to be high level conversation of equally high secrecy.

The Ambassador and also Minister Chapman-Andrews, who was present during our talk, indicated that possible Egyptian participation would be formal and not involve revelation of highly confidential plans or projects to Egyptians.

In reply, I stated that I had absolutely no information concerning attitude which my government would adopt toward even formal Egyptian participation in proposed conversations. The problem seemed to involve question of policy for decision at Washington. To this end I would, however, immediately telegraph in the hope that a decision might be communicated to London and this Embassy by the time of arrival in Egypt of Admiral Bolger and his associates, or at any rate soon after the appearance of such officers on Canal Zone.

Ambassador thanked me for this offer stating that it was important in his view that Egyptians should feel they had been let in on ground floor of talks so that early word would be highly desirable if maximum beneficial effect were to be gained. There will probably be a series of such talks which could best be held on the ground rather than on some neutral spot.

Request Department’s urgent telegraphic advices with view to my communicating further with British Ambassador.

Patterson

1 Not printed.

2 Not printed; it advised that “British civil or military authorities in Egypt are always in position (and we could not prevent them) to notify Egyptians of proposed participation by American officers in extended and important conversations to be held on Egyptian territory. His Majesty, it will be recalled, approached British Ambassador to indicate annoyance over not being consulted in respect of military conversations having apparent bearing on Egypt. HM did not consult me despite my having been received in audience subsequent to his comment to British Ambassador.” (883.20/1–2649)

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom 811.2383/2–1749: Telegram

[Document 88]

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom

top secret Washington, February 17, 1949—4 p. m.

563. Re Deptel 87 Jan 211 Cairo rptd London 234 and various tels from Cairo indicating opinion Brit Emb Cairo that projected visit Fayid several officers Adm Connolly’s staff involved assignments of more than temporary duration Dept informed Emb Cairo and Brit Emb here with concurrence Navy it saw no political objection having some of Conolly’s staff visit GHQ Fayid short period but they shld not be detailed assigned or attached Brit staff in any way. Brit Amb said he wld inform London. Subsequently Emb Cairo reported Brit Emb there had also suggested desirability participation Egyptians in some phases these mil discussions. Both Dept and Adm Conolly strongly opposed such tripartite discussions.2

In view complications arising out foregoing which apparently stemmed in no small degree from extraneous factors injected by Brit Emb Cairo Fayid visit called off and meeting arranged elsewhere but Adm Conolly foresees necessity future talks at Fayid and desires avoid difficulties type described above. Conolly arriving London Feb 21 and will give you full picture. You are authorized following discussion with him take up matter with For Off in order avoid further ambiguities.3

Acheson

1 Not printed, but see second paragraph of Mr. Satterthwaite’s memorandum of January 25, p. 189 [Pg. 189 is part of Doc. 84].

2 Admiral Conolly and Vice Adm. A. D. Struble, Deputy Chief of Naval Operations (Operations), conversed with Raymond A. Hare, Deputy Director of the Office of Near Eastern and African Affairs, and Gordon H. Mattison, Chief of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs, on February 7. Mr. Mattison’s memorandum covering their conversation (811.2383/2–749) sets forth Admiral Conolly’s suggestion that four points be made to the British. Except for minor changes of language, they were incorporated in the four numbered paragraphs in Secretary Acheson’s letter of April 7 to the Secretary of Defense, p. 203 [Pg. 203 is part of Doc. 92].

3 This telegram was repeated to Cairo as 181. Admiral Conolly spent one working day (February 21) in London before departing for Tobruk. Part of the day was spent with G. Lewis Jones, First Secretary of Embassy in the United Kingdom, and Michael Wright, Superintending Under Secretary in the British Foreign Office. On this occasion, Mr. Wright stressed to Admiral Conolly “the fact that Britain’s primary interest in the Middle East is strategic and that British Foreign Policy in that area is only the handmaiden of British strategic planners.” (letter of February 28 from Mr. Jones to Mr. Satterthwaite, 811.2383/2–2849)

Memorandum by Mr. Carroll F. Conover, Economic Assistant at the Embassy in Egypt to the Counselor of Embassy for Economic Affairs (Howard) 883.812/3–1049

[Document 89]

Memorandum by Mr. Carroll F. Conover, Economic Assistant at the Embassy in Egypt to the Counselor of Embassy for Economic Affairs (Howard)1

confidential [Cairo,] March 8, 1949.

Subject: Suez Canal Agreement with Egyptian Government

The morning papers carried stories announcing the signing of an agreement between the Suez Canal Co. and the Egyptian Government, and the supposed text of the agreement. I had a long talk with M. Daynac just now (he is No. 2 man in the Canal Co. in Cairo), and he says the company is very pleased with the outcome of the negotiations. The papers do not give the full text of the new agreement, and he has promised to send me the full text tomorrow, when copies of the actual signed papers will be ready.

The Company feels that the Egyptian Government by entering into this agreement (which they state has every chance of being approved by Parliament and the King, and thus becoming law) has recognized the special and international character of the company, its freedom from existing or future Egyptian legislation, which may run contrary to the new agreement, and in general has assured the company of a sound and unchanging policy during the life of its concession. While the agreement does not specifically state that the company is not subject to legislation, such as the Company law, yet by setting up operational standards which are in disagreement with that law, the Government has actually agreed that the company is outside the law. The new agreement, as far as the Company Law is concerned, calls for the Canal Co. to reach in 20 years (end of its concession) the same proportions of Egyptian employees that are required in 3 years under the Company Law. It is worthy of note, that the agreement does not call for changes in the existing proportion of Egyptian workers, but rather requires that in future certain percentages of new employees will be Egyptian.

The agreement to pay the Government 7% of total [gross] profits, in place of the fixed sums which were formerly required, will add some 500,000 LE per year to the sums the Company must pay the Government. However, M. Daynac states that this is no serious loss, as the Company will save close to this sum, through, savings made possible under certain of the clauses and agreements regarding the handling of labor questions. The clause granting free transit rights to ships of under 300 tons capacity (ocean going ships are all over 300 tons) is actually a concession to Egyptian coast-wise trade, and a great talking point for the Government, but the revenue received from such trade has been very small, less than 1/10 of 1%, and is no great loss to the company. A clause in an annex to the agreement, limits this right strictly to coast-wise trade, and does not permit a small Egyptian ship (under 300 tons) to take cargo that may arrive at Suez, for example, carry it through the canal free, and load it on a ship at Port Said bound for a foreign destination.

At the present time the Canal Company has a board of 32 directors. Two of these are Egyptian. Under the Company Law 40% of the board must be Egyptian before the end of three years (1951). The agreement calls for 1949 Present Egyptian directors 2 to fill existing vacancies

1949 New ” ” 2 present French vacancies

? New ” ” 1 next English vacancy

1959 New ” ” 1 next vacancy

1964 New ” ” 1 next vacancy

Thus within 15–20 years the company will have 7 Egyptian directors—25% of total, as against the 40% at end of 1951 as called for under the Company Law.

The conversation turned to the future of the canal. I asked if M. Daynac thought that the Company would be able to negotiate an extension of their concession after present expiration date. He said the question has been talked over during the discussions with the Government. Under the present regulations of the Company, stockholders rights end with the present concession. It might be simpler to form a new company with the right to operate the canal attributed to it by the Egyptian Government. Present Egyptian thinking did not seriously contemplate the Egyptian Government itself operating the canal. The Government officials agreed with the Canal directors that the strictly international character of the canal, which was never questioned during the last two wars (German ships were perfectly free to use the Canal) has undoubtedly been the decisive factor in keeping Egypt out of the wars. Under a purely Egyptian Government operation such neutrality would be impossible, and a new operating company, if formed, might well be international in character and commitments.

M. Daynac also remarked “Allah had been good to the Company” adding that if Nokrashi Pasha had lived the present agreement would never have been reached, and that also the Palestine War results had done a great deal to bring the Government to a more conciliatory frame of mind.2

[Here follows a postscript concerning the writing of the Convention in French rather than in Arabic]

1 Transmitted to the Department by the Embassy in Cairo in despatch 238, March 10.

2 Cairo, on March 3, advised that a tentative Convention had been reached that same day (despatch 214A, 883.812/3–349). Despatch 238, March 10, and despatch 266, March 19, transmitted copies of the formal Convention and annexes, signed on March 7 at Cairo by Mamdouh Riaz, Egyptian Minister of Commerce and Industry, and by François Charles-Roux, President of La Compagnie Universelle du Canal Maritime de Suez (883.812/3–1049, /3–1949). Cairo concluded, in despatch 238, that the Convention might be “construed according to the interests of the parties in two ways. The Government may claim that the requirement that the agreement be ratified by Parliament is a recognition of the existence of its sovereign control over the whole matter. The Company may on the other hand claim that the solution has merely followed the precedent of a general discussion and agreement and exchange of letters as in the case of the 1936–1937 negotiations; and that the acceptance by the Government of a basis for the fixing of the proportion of foreign employés, well under the requirements of the Company law, is in itself a recognition of the special position of independence enjoyed by the company.”

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State 883.20/3–1749: Telegram

[Document 90]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State

top secret London, March 17, 1949—6 p. m.

1030. Embassy’s 5023, November 27.1 Glutton brought Embassy up to date for Department’s information only regarding cooperative arrangements for Egyptian defense, stressing top secret character information.

2. Plans envisaged paragraph 5 Embassy reftel 2 were delayed by worsening Palestine situation and assassination Nokrashy. However, “about two weeks ago”, Farouk again raised with British Ambassador Cairo idea initiating UK-Egyptian technical talks regarding defense matters (paragraph 4, Embassy reftel 3 ). Egyptian Ambassador Amr called on Bevin March 16 to reiterate King Farouk’s interest in these talks. With idea starting talks off properly, General Slim GIGS4 will discuss them with Farouk today.

3. Glutton again went over Bevin’s idea regarding defense cooperation (Embassy’s 4556 October 205 ) he thought personally, although no agenda has as yet been prepared, informal talks with Egyptians at Fayid would begin with general appreciation world political situation followed by taking up easiest questions first. He hoped that as progress was made, the talks would gradually extend to such subjects as maintenance joint fighter bases, joint radar screen, and similar practical developments which in effect would, with full Egyptian cooperation, go far beyond 1936 treaty which is “quite inadequate for our needs”. Regarding treaty inadequacy, Glutton pointed out that it made no provision for use naval facilities or for maintenance British naval personnel in Egypt where, according to present thinking, some 800 naval officers and ratings will be required.

4. Regarding visits US personnel to Fayid (Cairo’s A–290 March 8 and A–301 March 96 ) Glutton said problem of British Ambassador Cairo was reply he could make to direct questions from Farouk as to what Americans were doing there. It was difficult on one hand to be working out close UK-Egyptian defense cooperation under Farouk’s aegis and at same time to be unable to confirm to Farouk even in general terms what he already knows or suspects. Embassy office reiterated Admiral Conolly’s views (Embassy’s A–390 March 17 ) and Clutton appeared to accept them.

Douglas

1 Not printed; but for summary, see editorial note, Foreign Relations, 1948, vol. v, Part 1, p. 85.

2 This paragraph read as follows: “Future program is that talk will take place between King and British Ambassador followed by talks between Nokrashy and British Ambassador. If these go well, British CINCME and Egyptian military experts will start at once technical discussions at Fayid along lines sketched by Bevin.” (741.83/11–2748)

3 This paragraph read as follows: “Amr reports success in selling Bevin’s defense cooperation idea to King. Question then arose as to role Nokrashy (since King would not have Nahas). King told Nokrashy he wanted technical talks to begin at once and inquired Nokrashy was agreeable to handle question. Nokrashy asked for 24 hours to think matter over and then agreed.” Abdel Fattah Amr was Egyptian Ambassador in the United Kingdom; Nahas Pasha was leader of the Wafdist Party.

4 Field Marshal Sir William J. Slim, Chief of the British Imperial General Staff.

5 Not printed; but for summary, see editorial note, Foreign Relations, 1948, vol. v, Part 1, p. 85.

6 Neither printed.

7 Not printed.

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State 883.20/3–2249: Airgram

[Document 91]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State

top secret London, March 22, 1949.

Subject: Talks of Field Marshal W. J. Slim with King Farouk and Members of Egyptian Cabinet re UK-Egyptian Defence Cooperation.

A–561. M. N. F. Stewart, Acting Head of the African Department of the British Foreign Office, on March 21 read to an officer of this Embassy two telegrams addressed by Field Marshal W. J. Slim, C.I.G.S., to the Defence Committee reporting on his conversations with King Farouk and members of the Egyptian Cabinet regarding UK-Egyptian Defence cooperation (see Emb’s 1101, March 21,1 and Cairo’s 274, March 192 ).

2. The first message (dated March 17) stated that Farouk was “cordial and forthcoming”.3 When Slim spoke of good relations existing between British and Egyptian troops Farouk said he was aware of this and hoped relations would improve even more. Slim and Farouk then discussed intentions of the USSR in the Middle East. Farouk said he agreed that Egypt must prepare to play its role in general Middle East defence. Slim expressed the personal opinion that powerful as the USSR is today it is “not so formidable as Germany was in 1939”. Farouk said he was convinced that the USSR would not only attack Europe but that it would also attack the Middle East and agreed with Slim that Egypt would be the main target. Slim took this opportunity to introduce the idea of staff talks. The King said he agreed that such talks were necessary and desirable; that the Prime Minister with whom Slim would speak that evening “knew his full mind”; and that for the purpose of the staff talks the King “would appoint his best man”.

3. According to Slim’s report Farouk on several occasions mentioned his intelligence sources which, among other things, had made him aware of US defence preparations in the Middle East such as “underground US airfields in Saudi Arabia”.

4. Farouk also mentioned the threat of Israel to Middle East security and expressed pleasure at the decision of the British Government to send troops to Akaba. This move he described as the “one good thing which UK has done in the Palestine affairs.”4

5. Farouk said that he had sent Egyptian forces to the corner of Sinai nearest Akaba in order to prevent Israeli penetration of Sinai.

6. Slim reported that at this juncture Farouk mentioned the fact that his “counter-espionage sources” had given him complete information regarding UK’s military and strategic needs in Egypt in the event of war. On the basis of this knowledge Farouk said he had already instructed Egyptian officers in the particular areas concerned to be prepared to evacuate “so that there would be no clashes when British reinforcements arrive”.

7. At this juncture Slim spoke of desirability of advance staff talks to prevent such clashes, the King said he had made up his mind in favor of such talks and closed by reiterating his warm friendship for the UK.

8. Second telegram (March 18) from Slim to Defence Committee reported a conversation March 17 with the Egyptian Prime Minister, War Minister and the Acting Head of the Royal Cabinet.

9. PriMin opened conversation by saying that he was in favor of a closer understanding between Egypt and the UK and that he accepted the idea that Egypt will be a base for any military operations in the area. He said that he was adverse to talks beginning at a purely military level (the initial British idea, see Embs 1030, Mar 17). He said that he wanted to receive at once the “whole broad picture” so that he could study it and give the necessary orders to the Egyptian military (see para 15 below).

10. Slim, with the approval of the British Ambassador, who was present, agreed to follow this method of approach. He said that General Pyman, of General Crocker’s5 staff, would prepare for the PriMin a paper giving the “broad picture” with regard to British requirements for (a) landing grounds;

(b) when war becomes imminent.6

(c) port facilities,

each topic being broken down into requirements (a) now, and

(b) when war becomes imminent.6

11. PriMin said that after he has studied and agreed to this paper it would be passed on to the service level. PriMin said he would also like to know something about British plans for general Middle East Defence: e.g. plans for British-Turkish cooperation, and whether Egypt would be on the 1st, 2nd or 3rd line of defence. Slim said he hoped very much Egypt “would not be on the First Line of Defence.” He said distance enemy would be held from Egypt would depend greatly upon what UK had there in way of bases.

12. Slim remarked that UK wanted to see Egypt militarily strong and to this end would give all possible assistance although needs of Western Union might limit the amount of equipment UK would be able to provide.

13. FonOff Comment: Stewart advised Embassy Officer that allowing time for consultation with the British Ambassador the paper promised to the Prime Minister should be ready “in about ten days”. He said the Foreign Office is anxious to assure that the British Ambassador will be jointly responsible with the British military for this paper.

14. Stewart said that the British Ambassador thinks the PriMin will again ask for more information regarding the general defence plans in the Middle East: if so it has been decided that he will be told that the plan is to defend Egypt as far forward as possible—how far will depend upon the efficiency of British bases in Egypt. No specific line would be mentioned, but discussion of the probable direction of Soviet attack would give an idea in this connection.

15. Stewart said Foreign Office was at first alarmed by idea of putting everything down on paper at the outset (para 9 above) but that the British Ambassador in reply to a Foreign Office query in this regard indicated that although the course suggested might be somewhat rash it was a fact that Egyptian military authorities in any case would have to turn to the Prime Minister at every stage of the talks, and that there was an advantage in obtaining his broad clearance at an early stage. The Ambassador also commented that he was struck by the fact that the PriMin said flatly that he favored Anglo-Egyptian military cooperation and spoke of British bases in Egypt as a matter of course. The Ambassador said he could not guess what reservations, if any, were in the mind of the Prime Minister.

16. EmbOff put to Stewart substantially the same question described final para Cairo’s 274, Mar. 19.8 Stewart replied that the British Ambassador believes that the important thing is having both the PriMin and the King working together because on this basis the talks “probably could get through”.

(Note to posts: Above information supplied for Department only: consequently knowledge of its repetition to posts should be withheld from British Missions.)

Douglas

1 Not printed.

2 Not printed; it conveyed information from an officer of the British Embassy that Marshal Slim’s visit to Egypt had cleared the ground for Anglo-Egyptian staff talks on military problems, projected the previous November during the talks between Ernest Bevin, British Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs, and Ahmed Khashaba, Egyptian Minister for Foreign Affairs (741.83/3–1949). Regarding the Bevin–Khashaba talks, see editorial note, Foreign Relations, 1948, vol. v, Part 1, p. 85.

3 Cairo, on March 25, advised of information from the British Ambassador that King Farouk had taken the initiative in proposing Anglo-American military talks (telegram 292, 883.20/3–2549).

4 For documentation on the sending of British troops to Aqaba in January 1949 after the Israeli shooting down of five British planes, see pp. 594 [Pg. 594 is part of Doc. 341] ff.

5 Gen. Sir John T. Crocker, Commander-in-Chief of British Middle East Land Forces.

6 The completed paper covered the following: “(1) The strategic aspects of the Middle East in the event of war with Russia. The strategic importance of Egypt would be emphasized. It would be pointed out that Russia in the event of war would undoubtedly strike for the Delta, the control of which would be essential to Russia. It would be thus indicated that the presence of the British in the Canal would not be the reason for Russian attack, but that on the other hand, the presence of the British in Egypt would be an asset in its defence. “(2) The role which Egypt should play in the defence of Egypt. This section concerned itself with suggesting the needs for training and organization of the Egyptian forces, together with proposals as to how this might be accomplished.

“(3) Requirements of Great Britain now and in the imminent threat of war. The number of troops would not be stressed but rather the organizational set-up. Thus, a headquarters staff, probably rather large, would be required; a certain amount of troops, organized on a skeleton basis with adequate administrative staff; certain technical troops, by which it was understood he meant technicians in radar, radio, and other fields. There would also be an expanded RAF installation with enlarged administrative set-ups. Expansion of installations slightly outside of the Canal Zone might be asked in order to provide for the new arrangements. The creation of airfields outside would also be suggested.

“(4) The creation of a liaison group of Egyptian and British officers to carry out any program which might be agreed upon, to discuss differences of opinion and to plan in case of future developments, including war.” (airgram 373, March 30, from Cairo, 883.20/3–3049)

The “he” cited in paragraph numbered 3 was Donald D. MacLean, Counselor of the British Embassy in Egypt.

6 The completed paper covered the following: “(1) The strategic aspects of the Middle East in the event of war with Russia. The strategic importance of Egypt would be emphasized. It would be pointed out that Russia in the event of war would undoubtedly strike for the Delta, the control of which would be essential to Russia. It would be thus indicated that the presence of the British in the Canal would not be the reason for Russian attack, but that on the other hand, the presence of the British in Egypt would be an asset in its defence. “(2) The role which Egypt should play in the defence of Egypt. This section concerned itself with suggesting the needs for training and organization of the Egyptian forces, together with proposals as to how this might be accomplished.

“(3) Requirements of Great Britain now and in the imminent threat of war. The number of troops would not be stressed but rather the organizational set-up. Thus, a headquarters staff, probably rather large, would be required; a certain amount of troops, organized on a skeleton basis with adequate administrative staff; certain technical troops, by which it was understood he meant technicians in radar, radio, and other fields. There would also be an expanded RAF installation with enlarged administrative set-ups. Expansion of installations slightly outside of the Canal Zone might be asked in order to provide for the new arrangements. The creation of airfields outside would also be suggested.

“(4) The creation of a liaison group of Egyptian and British officers to carry out any program which might be agreed upon, to discuss differences of opinion and to plan in case of future developments, including war.” (airgram 373, March 30, from Cairo, 883.20/3–3049)

The “he” cited in paragraph numbered 3 was Donald D. MacLean, Counselor of the British Embassy in Egypt.

8 This paragraph read as follows: “In reply to question [by an officer of the American Embassy] if British Embassy was not afraid to push conclusion of such arrangements with Abdul Hadi lest it be repudiated by Wafd if it came into power after elections he [British Embassy Counselor MacLean] replied that important fact was now that King and Prime Minister were in agreement. Believed this advantage should be pressed home. He promised to keep Embassy informed.”

The Secretary of State to the Secretary of Defense (Johnson) 883.20/4–749

[Document 92]

The Secretary of State to the Secretary of Defense (Johnson)

top secret Washington, April 7, 1949.

My Dear Mr. Secretary: The Department has received from the British Embassy the draft (Tab A) of a communication1 which the British Government would like to instruct its Embassy at Cairo to convey to the King of Egypt relative to the Anglo-American staff talks which it is contemplated will take place from time to time at Fayid, Egypt.

The question of these planning talks at Fayid has been the subject of informal conversations between officials of the Office of Near Eastern and African Affairs of the State Department and Admiral Conolly and officers of the Office of Asssistant Chief of Naval Operations for International Affairs. These conversations resulted in agreement that there was no political objection to visits of members of Admiral Conolly’s staff to Fayid for a short time, but that they “should not be detailed or assigned in any way, nor should they be attached to the British staff.”

In his conversations with the British in London subsequent to the abovementioned discussions, it is understood that Admiral Conolly has maintained that: 1) The case of the visit of officers of his staff to Fayid should be considered on its own merits;

2) No tripartite military conversations to include Egyptians will be entered into or even considered;

3) The explanation of the presence of US officers at Fayid be explained by British only and should not include admission that war planning is being conducted; and

4) UK-Egyptian bilateral planning for local defense of Egypt’s territory including the Suez Canal is a new matter requiring further consideration and consultation by both US Joint Chiefs of Staff and UK Chiefs of Staff and should be separated from the subject under discussion.

Recently, the British Embassy at Cairo has been faced with the problem of what answer to make in reply to direct questions from the King regarding the presence of Americans at Fayid, and the attached memorandum (Tab A) represents the reply which the British would like to make.

The Department believes that the reply too directly links the U.S. Government with Anglo-Egyptian staff talks, and by implication would create the impression with the Egyptian Government that it was indirectly participating in tripartite conversations relative to the defense of Egypt.

Therefore, the Department proposes to inform the British Embassy it believes that it would be undesirable for the proposed communication to go forward. It is also proposed to inform the British that if it is found that the talks at Fayid are the source of continued embarrassment, it would seem desirable to consider holding such conversations at a point outside of Egypt, such as Malta, Cyprus, or Cyrenaica.

The Department would appreciate the National Military Establishment’s comments with respect to this matter, and an indication as to whether or not it concurs with the Department’s views expressed above.

The National Military Establishment may wish to obtain Admiral Conolly’s comments on this subject. The Department, on its part, is transmitting a copy of this letter to the American Embassy at London with a request that the Embassy’s comments be cabled at an early date.2

Sincerely yours.

For the Secretary of State:
Dean Rusk
Assistant Secretary

1 Not printed; the updated draft was left with Mr. Satterthwaite by William Denis Allen, Counselor of the British Embassy, on March 21. It proposed that the British Ambassador speak to King Farouk along the following lines: (1) the British Government was considering preparations to meet Soviet aggression; (2) the British and United States Governments have been keeping in close communication regarding defense questions; (3) the United States Government recognized the special interests of the United Kingdom in questions of Middle East defense but was greatly concerned with arrangements for the defense of the area; (4) the contacts on defense measures by the British Government with the United States Government must be kept private; (5) the British Government suggested that the British and Egyptian Governments discuss measures for the defense of the Suez Canal and Delta areas as they would be key objectives of Soviet aggression, and the British Government would be in close communication with the United States Government to link plans for the defense of Egypt with plans for global defense; and (6) since the British military authorities in the Middle East required liaison with United States authorities, the British hoped that the king would agree to the visit to Fayid from time to time of a small number of United States officers. The hope was also expressed that the King would agree to the initiation of technical defense discussions between British and Egyptian defense authorities on a basis of absolute secrecy (811.2383/3–2149).

2 The British Embassy sent a further undated communication to the Department, which was received on April 13. The communication, which was intended to clarify the message left on March 21, stated that the British had not intended to suggest that the Egyptians would be associated in any way with Anglo-American planning for the defense of the Middle East as a whole or that the British would discuss with them American plans in the area. The British intent was to discuss with the Egyptians only matters dealing with the defense of Egypt, although British requirements would be those of the combined British and American forces (811.2383/4–1349). The Secretary of State transmitted a copy of the later British communication to Secretary Johnson in a letter of April 19 (883.20/4–1149).

Editorial Note [Document 93]

Editorial Note

The National Security Council, in its report No. 45/1 of April 15, recommended to President Truman that he direct the Secretary of State to undertake negotiations with the British Government regarding provision of funds for construction of airfields in the United Kingdom and in the Cairo–Suez area. The text of the report is printed in volume I, page 285. The President approved the recommendation on April 18; see footnote 3, ibid .

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State 883.20/4–2849: Telegram

[Document 94]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State

top secret London, April 28, 1949—5 p. m.

1636. Department’s instruction 186, April 18.1 Following Embassy’s comments re US–UK staff talks Fayid Egypt: 1. We believe, and Admiral Conolly concurs, that UK has genuine problem in bringing Anglo-Egyptian defense cooperation to comprehensive and effective level without arousing in minds King Farouk and Egyptian Government suspicion Egypt distrusted element in defense Middle East against Soviet aggression. We feel that UK genuinely on the spot to say something to King and government re US–UK cooperation since impossible keep secret visits US personnel Fayid and combined meetings Malta, Tobruk, etc. According Michael Wright April 27 Egyptians are still considering UK paper (Embassy’s 1536, April 202 ) but Egyptian Ambassador here recently told Wright there is “real desire” in Egypt to reach agreement with UK and that General Slim and he himself may be asked to return to Egypt soon to carry on conversations begun as reported Embassy’s A–561, March 22. Wright said that if Slim goes out and favorable progress made it is going to be increasingly difficult to keep up pretence to Egyptians that Egypt is blank spot in US and UK defense consultations. Wright said also that communications left with Department March 21 and April 13 by British Embassy Washington represented about bare minimum which could be said in circumstances of hoped-for extensive Anglo-Egyptian defense collaboration although he did not believe wording these communications “sacrosanct” (see paragraph 4 below).

2. We believe, and Admiral Conolly concurs, that consideration might be given at this time to some slight recession from rigid position expressed in Department’s letter of April 7 to the Secretary of Defense. Admiral Conolly took a firm stand initially because Atlantic Pact was still in the making, Egyptians were at war fever re Israel and because at that time UK had not made progress it has now achieved in initiating closer Anglo-Egyptian cooperation re defense matters. The Admiral now feels that favorable developments have occurred on all three points, and in addition US–UK planning teams working under him have made great progress in achieving understanding and cooperation. Consequently Admiral now considers it wise and expedient to modify his initial position to extent of permitting UK to admit to Farouk that US and UK are in close touch re global defense measures. The Admiral does not object to substance of liaison formula (paragraph (f), British Embassy communication March 21).

3. Admiral states that while alternative places for talks are possible and are being employed (e.g. London, Tobruk and Malta) there are certain definite advantages to use Fayid in some instances. British technicians and files are there and as planning progresses down to details handled by lower echelons possibility of using Fayid to a moderate degree may become increasingly important. CINCMELF attaches even more importance to use Fayid than US side.

4. Embassy has good reason to believe that Foreign Office, subject to views CINCMELF and British Ambassador Cairo, would accept following rewording paragraphs (e) and (f) of British Embassy March 21 communication designed more clearly to separate Anglo-”Egyptian planning from US–UK’s cooperation re global defense: “e. The Suez Canal and Delta areas would be key objectives of Soviet aggression, and, as the defence of Egypt is therefore a matter of special concern, it is suggested that the British and Egyptian Governments should discuss measures for its defence. Therefore we hope that King Farouk will agree to start technical defence discussions between the British Commanders-in-Chief, Middle East, and the Egyptian defence authorities on a basis of absolute secrecy.

f. To facilitate consultation between the US Government and the British Government on global defence measures it will be important for the British Commanders-in-Chief, Middle East, to have liaison arrangements with the US defence authorities. We hope, therefore, that King Farouk will be able to agree to a small number of American officers visiting Fayid from time to time in order to maintain liaison.”

5. Remainder of March 21 communication seems acceptable as drafted but Admiral Conolly agrees with us that it would be preferable to delete specific reference to French and members Brussels treaty from first sentence paragraph (d) and to substitute “other countries”. It seems to us there are advantages in not being too specific in this context.

6. There will probably always be tendency on part of British officials dealing with Egyptians to make all they are permitted to do of very high degree of US–UK cooperation since British status would thereby be enhanced. On other hand, Foreign Office appreciates fully US problem and, we believe, can be trusted not to press US beyond point fully acceptable to us. Risk situation appears to lie largely in Egyptian security but it is hard to see how much could be made of secret UK communications along line of alternative wording quoted paragraph 4 above.3

7. Admiral Conolly has approved this telegram.

Douglas

1 Not printed; it transmitted copies of Secretary Acheson’s letter of April 7 to the Secretary of Defense, p. 203 [Pg. 203 is part of Doc. 92], and of the British Embassy memorandum received on April 13, and requested comment (883.20/4–1149). The British Embassy memorandum is not printed, but see footnote 2, p. 204 [Pg. 204 is part of Doc. 92].

2 Not printed.

3 Cairo, on April 30, reported the belief of Mr. Hare, who was visiting Egypt at the time, that “the British, with a view to fortifying their position in Egypt, were endeavoring to bring the Americans into the local picture, having heard that the Egyptians were somewhat reluctant to renew or revise their bipartite treaty of 1936 with the British and that they would be more amenable to bringing the document up-to-date were Americans included in it or in other negotiations among the three powers.” (airgram 508, 883.20/4–3049)

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom 883.20/4–2849: Telegram

[Document 95]

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom

top secret Washington, April 30, 1949—2 p. m.

1480. Secy Defense upon advice Joint Chiefs of Staff apprvd in gen1 proposed course action outlined ltr sent you instr 186, Apr 18.2 He suggested fol modification:

“It is our opinion the Brit shld be informed forthwith that, irrespective of whether the talks at Fayid are, or are not, the source of continued embarrassment, any further talks between members of Admiral Conolly’s staff and Brit shld be held at a point outside of Egypt, such as Malta, Cyprus or Cyrenaica.”

Validity comments urtel 1636 Apr 28 appreciated but Dept believes that in view of circumstances Joint Chiefs of Staff opinion in this matter shld be binding on Dept and modification has been accepted.3 Brit Emb being informed.4 Urtel 1636 being transmitted NME.5

Acheson

1 In a letter of April 23 to Secretary Acheson, not printed.

2 Not printed, but see footnote 1, p. 205 [Pg. 205 includes portions of Doc. 92, Doc. 93, and Doc. 94].

3 In a letter of April 29 from Acting Secretary of State Webb to the Secretary of Defense, not printed. (883.20/5–249)

4 On May 2 (memorandum by Mr. Mattison of his conversation with Thomas E. Bromley, First Secretary of the British Embassy, 883.20/5–249).

5 The editors have been unable to find any documentation in the files of the Department of State which reflect the actual exchange of views by the staff of Admiral Conolly with British military officials.

Policy Statement on Egypt Prepared in the Department of State 711.83/5–549

[Document 96]

Policy Statement on Egypt Prepared in the Department of State 1

secret [Washington,] May 5, 1949.

A. Objectives

Our general policy in the eastern Mediterranean and the Middle East, which stems primarily from our conviction that this area is of fundamental importance to our security, is directed toward developing and maintaining stability there. Our fundamental objectives toward Egypt are to restore the cordial relations which existed for many years between the US and Egypt and to enable it to develop and maintain its political and economic stability free from outside interference.

B. Policies

As a result primarily of our Palestine policy, as well as our inability to support the extreme demands made by the Egyptians before the Security Council in connection with an attempted revision of the Anglo-Egyptian Treaty of Alliance of 1936, much of the amity between the US and Egypt built up over many years was dissipated. Now, however, it is becoming increasingly clear to many Egyptian leaders that, despite our Palestine policy, Egypt’s interests and particularly its future security can be best served through close cooperation with the US. An encouraging development is Egypt’s very recently expressed desire to consolidate its position with the west. Informal queries regarding the possibility of a broad treaty relationship with the US, UK and perhaps France indicate a decided change in the thinking of Egyptian leaders. Furthermore, Egypt’s realistic approach to the problem of Palestine in negotiating and signing an armistice with Israel despite its unabated opposition to the creation of that state evidences in a significant measure its leaders’ acceptance of the governing factors of US policy. The attitude of Egypt toward the formation of an eastern Mediterranean bloc will also in all probability be conditioned upon the degree of support that might be afforded by the US.

1. political

We continue to look with favor upon Egypt’s cooperation with other Arab states, the Arab League and the UN, and upon Egypt’s insistence on complete independence politically and economically.

Although we have never sought to undermine the special treaty position which the UK enjoys in Egypt, we would regard as outmoded any revision which left Egypt subservient to the UK. We would not object, however, to an amicable arrangement for continued British military responsibilities in the Canal Zone.

Although the Security Council still remains seized of the dispute over a revision of the Anglo-Egyptian Treaty of Alliance of 1936, the matter has not been brought up by either party since the debates in 1947. We hope that recent strategic considerations relating to the security of Egypt may enable Britain and Egypt suitably to revise the treaty. We believe, however, that it would be premature to consider recurring informal suggestions that this treaty might be supplanted by a broader treaty of alliance including the US and possibly France.

We also hope that the UK and Egypt can come to an agreement on the more recent dispute between them regarding the administration of the Sudan, particularly the actual setting up by the Government of the Sudan of a Legislative Assembly and an Executive Council. We regard these British efforts as sound transitional measures providing for greater participation of both Sudanese and Egyptians in the Government of the Sudan.

The US continues to recognize Egypt’s interest in the disposition of the former Italian colonies, particularly Libya, and we will support reasonable adjustments of the Egyptian boundary with Cyrenaica favorable to Egypt to which the British may agree if they obtain trusteeship over Cyrenaica.

We strongly urged Egyptian participation in the armistice negotiations at Rhodes and when these negotiations appeared to have reached a stalemate we urged upon both parties conciliatory attitudes which, when adopted, led to the signing of the armistice. We shall, if necessary, continue to impress upon the Egyptians our desire that they cooperate with the Palestine Conciliation Commission in its efforts to find a formula for peaceful solution of the Palestine problem.

Both in our short-term and long-term policies toward Egypt we continue to insist upon non-discriminatory treatment for US interests and nationals. Although we reserve entire independence of action with regard to our representations to the Government of Egypt, we have of late constantly consulted with and advised the British of contemplated action on major issues of vital interest to both countries.

We look upon a strengthening of our informational-cultural program in Egypt as an important means of stimulating the growth of US-Egyptian understanding, by familiarizing Egyptians with US institutions and ideals and by demonstrating US interest in the welfare of the Egyptian people. We view the Fulbright Agreement now being negotiated with Egypt, the only Arab state in which funds for this purpose are available, as an important step toward fuller and closer US-Egyptian friendship.

Egyptian legislation designed to give the Ministry of Education direct control over virtually all educational activities is still awaiting royal approval. The crux of the bill as it affects foreign school is its prohibition of religious instruction of children in any faith other than their own even with their parents’ consent. Foreign educational institutions in Egypt look on this bill as a possible infringement on their rights and as contrary to both the spirit and the letter of the Declaration of Human Eights approved in the General Assembly by both Egypt and the US. Although we view with some concern the probable results of this restrictive legislation, we feel that it would be unwise to make official representations regarding it pending further clarification of the underlying motives of the government and its plans of implementation. Certain recent pronouncements of responsible Egyptian officials regarding implementation indicate the possibility of a more liberal attitude than was originally manifested.

Intensive study is now being given to the problem of action regarding the personal status of Americans in Egypt after the expiration on October 14, 1949 of the Montreux Convention, together with the American reservation regarding consular courts. Consideration is also being given to an orderly disposition of the numerous cases before the Mixed Courts which will remain unsettled at that time. Although we are not opposed to informal discussions of these matters in Cairo among the diplomatic representatives of interested foreign governments, we would prefer a unilateral approach to the Egyptian Government should it appear to be wise to offer any suggestions regarding them.

2. economic

It is our policy to foster the creation in Egypt of conditions conducive to expanding multilateral world trade consistent with the principles of the ITO Charter, and to encourage the Egyptian Government to take measures which will contribute to improving the economic and social conditions of the Egyptian people, lending our assistance where appropriate. Some of the obstacles which we face in the implementation of our policy are of Egyptian creation, such as narrow and nationalistic economic measures taken by the Government, and can be overcome only through constructive influence, patience and education as we seek to make the Egyptians aware of the harmful effects of such actions. Other obstacles, such as those created by the dollar shortage and the limited convertibility of sterling, have broader causes and may be overcome as world economic conditions improve.

In giving renewed and increased attention to the economic and social problems of Egypt and the other Middle East countries we should keep in mind the views and objectives set forth in the “Summary Memorandum of Informal Conversations Relating to Social and Economic Affairs in the Middle East”,2 drawn up following discussions between US and UK officials in Washington in the fall of 1947 and providing that the two governments will work in close conjunction in the development of economic and social policy in the Middle East, and we should strive to increase our exchange of information and views with the British in Cairo, London and Washington, and with other leading like-minded countries with economic and social interests in Egypt.

We should encourage Egypt to ratify the Charter for an International Trade Organization which its representatives signed at Habana, although we doubt that the matter will be given serious, consideration until the Charter has been ratified by the US. We should also encourage Egypt to come into the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade signed at Geneva in 1947 by urging it to participate in the next round of tariff negotiations under the agreement, which we expect will take place early in 1950. We should not discourage Egyptian participation in any customs union or free trade area which is in accord with the provisions of Article 44 of the Charter. Participation in possible Arab League preferential arrangements not in accord with the Charter should be the subject of discussions with the Egyptians and might be protested on the basis of our 1931 Executive Agreement with Egypt on customs duties.

We should not make any representations with regard to Egypt’s recent short-term barter or bilateral agreement3 with various governments. We should, however, informally keep Egyptian officials aware of our view that barter and bilateral agreements, particularly if long-term and if developed into a network, divert trade into uneconomic channels and reduce the volume and benefits of world trade.

We should take active steps, with due regard for the political atmosphere in Egypt, to bring about negotiation of a Treaty of Friendship, Commerce and Navigation prior to the expiration in October 14, 1949 of the Montreux Convention. We should notify the Egyptian Government of our concern that no date for negotiation, has been set and endeavor to obtain a more specific idea of its reaction to the general principles enunciated in the draft treaty presented to it in September 1946. A shorter draft, incorporating the same principles, can then be drawn up to serve as the basis for negotiation.

In view of Egypt’s dollar shortage, we should continue to explore measures to supplement Egypt’s dollar earnings. One such measure would be to abolish or to expand the US import quota on cotton having a staple length of 1⅜ inches or longer. The Egyptians strongly protest the continuation of the quota on long-staple cotton which we also feel is undesirable. The Tariff Commission, the US agency responsible for recommending any change in the quotas, is however required by law to conduct its investigations under stipulations of the Agricultural Adjustment Act making supply in the US the only basis for establishing and continuing import quotas. Therefore we have not been formally presenting the Tariff Commission with any arguments based on commercial, financial or political considerations. We are prepared to discuss with the Egyptians the cancellation of our right to purchase cotton with Egyptian pounds acquired under the Bulk Sale (Surplus Property) Agreement4 provided that the Egyptians guarantee to protect such Egyptian pound holdings against loss from devaluation or currency conversion.

While appreciating the importance to US-Egyptian trade of dollars made available to Egypt by the UK, it is our policy not to intervene in or attempt to influence Anglo-Egyptian financial negotiations. In view of Egypt’s dollar shortage and its position with relation to the sterling area, we do not believe we should protest at this time the discrimination against American commercial interests in Egypt resulting from Egyptian foreign exchange and import control policies. We recognize that the problem is not peculiar to Egypt, but an aspect of the general problem of the dollar shortage and the limited convertibility of sterling.

The Egyptian Company Law and the Mining Law are two examples of nationalistic measures which do not in themselves discriminate against American as distinct from other foreign companies but which through unreasonable provisions tend to discourage American as well as other foreign companies from carrying on operations in Egypt. We have not protested the provisions of these laws although we stand ready to make representations with respect to any unduly restrictive or discriminatory use which may be made of the exceptionally broad powers left to the discretion of the administrators. We should take every appropriate opportunity to suggest to the Egyptians that they give consideration to their amendment. In the case of the Mining Law, we feel the petroleum provisions should be amended in such a way that the law would leave no uncertainty as to the security of a concession, that it would define those rights and obligations now encompassed in the regulations, that it would remedy the impractical provisions of the present law and that it would ensure the operator the right of disposing of this product on the world market at a competitive price after domestic requirements are satisfied.

The Egyptian petroleum market has been characterized in the past by cartel arrangements tightly controlled by several of the major companies. Owing to pressure from the Egyptian Government for increased supplies and with greater availability of Middle East oil more companies have recently come into the market. It is our policy to encourage this trend and, where American companies are involved, to discourage any tendency for them to join in market-sharing arrangements with the established suppliers.

We look forward to the negotiation of a tax treaty with Egypt. Meanwhile, we favor reciprocal exemption by executive agreement of the earnings of aircraft and shipping companies.

In spite of the relatively small number of industrial workers (about 300,000) in Egypt, unsatisfactory social, economic and employment conditions create a potentially explosive situation capable of being exploited by intelligent and determined Communist activity. Communist cells are known to exist among the workers, partly as a result of which the government has adopted an extremely firm position whenever labor unrest of serious proportion has developed. Up to the present, however, unions have not reached the point of being in any sense effective social, economic, or political forces, and qualified Egyptian opinion today sees the activities of extreme nationalist and religious groups, rather than labor unrest, as the greatest immediate danger to political stability.

Labor and social legislation in Egypt is both comprehensive and liberal, but badly administered. The Ministry of Social Affairs is relatively weak and ineffectual. Current information indicates some improvement in the real wages of industrial workers during the past few years, which, combined with somewhat brighter current prospects of implementation of portions of the labor and social legislation, raises the hope that some improvement in the living and working standards of Egypt’s industrial workers may be in prospect. Every effort should be made to induce the Egyptian Government to move in this direction.

While Egypt must assume primary responsibility for devising and implementing solutions to its economic and social problems, aggravated by the military activities in Palestine, the US should lend its encouragement and assistance to the greatest possible extent. We should: 1) informally encourage the Egyptians to initiate projects which will increase food production and distribute more widely the benefits of improved public health and educational facilities; 2) assist directly in such projects by making available, on a cooperative basis, technicians and demonstration materials to Egypt and bringing Egyptian nationals to the US for technical training, under the procedures to be established for implementing the technical assistance program; 3) urge the Egyptian Government to take reasonable measures which will attract private investments and commercial activity in Egypt, especially when it can help provide capital for sound economic development projects toward which the UN or the US may have provided technical assistance; 4) support moderate individual Export-Import Bank loans for sound short-term and self-liquidating projects, particularly to finance the purchase from the US of essential equipment not readily obtainable elsewhere; and 5) support International Bank loans for long-term development projects, such as the proposed Nile River development plan and related irrigation and drainage programs, all involving further control of the water supply of Egypt and the Sudan.

The US continues to be the only country with which the Government of Egypt has concluded a formal air transport agreement. Our policy is to coordinate our action with and lend appropriate support to other states, particularly the UK and France, in their current negotiations for bilateral air transport agreements with Egypt. We are encouraging the UK and France as well as other states to insist to the greatest extent possible that the terms of their agreements with Egypt be modeled closely along the lines of the so-called Bermuda agreement.5 This is important to the maintenance of our aviation policy in the Middle East. As in the case of other Arab States, through whose territory our air lines operate, we seek modification of their present policy which attempts to prevent air lines, through the threat of revocation of landing and traffic rights, from serving both Israeli and Arab territory. We also seek improvement in the standard of air navigation and communications and airport facilities in Egypt.

C. Relations With Other States

Soviet-Egyptian relations have been officially correct but Egyptian leaders have shown no inclination to tolerate any extension of Soviet influence either in Egypt or elsewhere. In fact, the strict banning of all Communist activity, including numerous arrests of both foreign and Egyptian Communist agents, and Egypt’s alignment in the UN with the western democracies on virtually all issues except Palestine, indicate fear and distrust of the USSR and a basic attitude of unfriendliness toward it. Nevertheless, the past three years have seen a considerable increase in Communist penetration in Egypt directed chiefly against British and American “imperialism.” In most instances the Soviet Legation in Cairo has been outwardly discreet in its propaganda activities; the Czechoslovak and Yugoslav Legations appear to be the chief foreign centers of Communist infiltration. The propaganda is constant and well-planned to appeal to the existing discontent and frustration of important segments of the population, attempting to reconcile the usual Communist line on all questions with alleged Egyptian national interests and aspirations.

Despite the recent armistice, Egypt’s relations with Israel remain and for some time to come will continue to remain embittered. The Egyptians still distrust Zionist ambitions and point to Israel’s refusal in the armistice negotiations to abide by the UN resolutions of November 1948. In our efforts to promote the stability of Egypt and the area, this fundamental conflict constitutes the greatest obstacle to the achievement of our objectives. We should continue to enlist Egyptian cooperation in its solution with particular reference to refugees, boundaries and the internationalization of Jerusalem.

The formation in 1945 of the Arab League,6 like the rise of intense and even xenophobic nationalism, is a manifestation of new and important forces at work in the Arab world. The future of the Arab League is uncertain. Its failure effectively to organize military resistance in Palestine is considered by influential elements, including its Secretary General, to have been nearly fatal to it. The need for closer Arab unity and cooperation, however, is still paramount in the minds of increasingly large segments of the population of the Arab world who claim that a re-evaluation and reorganization of the League, including possibly certain basic constitutional changes, must take place in order to give it effective authority. In the near future, however, it may be anticipated that individual states will be primarily concerned with their own particular political interests. For some time, therefore, the contribution of the League to regional cohesiveness may be chiefly along cultural, economic and social lines. An integrating force is the awareness of the danger of the spreading of communism for which Egypt with its great contrasts of wealth and poverty and its lack of basic liberalism provides a fertile field.

Egypt’s relations with the UK have improved and there has been a softening in its previous anti-British feeling. Egypt’s reverses in Palestine, the deterioration of Egypt’s internal security, and the increasing unpopularity of the palace regime have led some popular leaders to regard British support as a stabilizing factor. The palace has secretly shown its interest in improving Egypt’s relations with the UK but has so far proposed no definite formula for overcoming the anticipated popular reaction against any revision of the 1936 Treaty of Alliance that did not provide for complete withdrawal of British troops from Egypt and for the unity of Egypt and the Sudan. Specific evidences of the new friendliness of the Egyptian Government toward the UK are cooperation with the UK in connection with the Nile development scheme and the resumption on an informal basis of joint pilot training.

D. Policy Evaluation

In the past we have succeeded in establishing cordial relations with Egypt. The two main obstacles confronting us in our efforts to restore such relations are the Palestine problem and the existence of an extreme Egyptian nationalist sentiment. The deteriorating effect on American-Egyptian relations of our support of the partition plan for Palestine can hardly be overemphasized. This fundamental divergence between Egypt and the US has been somewhat tempered of late by the realization by some Egyptian leaders of the necessity of conforming, to a certain extent at least, with the exigencies of US and UN policy in the area. Insofar as this new trend in Egyptian-US relations adds to the prospect of greater security in the area, it should be regarded as an encouraging contribution to the attainment of our basic objective. We think that the opportunity remains for us to continue to give friendly advice and counsel which would serve to temper Egyptian tendencies toward extreme nationalism.

We are following closely a number of unresolved problems. One relates to securing from the Egyptian Government military air transit rights desired by the Department of the Air Force to facilitate flight operations affecting the US Air Base at Dhahran, Saudi Arabia. From June 15, 1946 to June 15, 1948 these rights were granted for periods of six months only,7 but we did not request a further periodic renewal in view of the known adamant objections by the Egyptians, who have, however, indicated their willingness to consider applications for individual flight clearances. This arrangement is unsatisfactory to the Air Force which is greatly inconvenienced by having to use alternate routes which are more expensive and hazardous than the one over Egypt. We hope that there may be a sufficient change in the Egyptian attitude in the near future to enable us to renew our request for periodic military air transit rights.

Since the establishment of martial law in Egypt on May 15, 1948, pursuant to military activities in Palestine, we have been confronted with many difficult problems relating to the inspection and seizure of in-transit cargoes destined for Palestine, both at Egyptian ports and through the Suez Canal.8 Our protests and those of other powers that seizures of cargoes at Egyptian ports are contrary to international practice and, in the case of cargoes transitting the Canal, are also violations of the Suez Canal Convention of 1888, have been and continue to be unheeded by the Egyptian Government. As a result, the American Export Lines has decided not to send its ships to Egyptian and Palestine ports on the same runs. Other aspects of this problem are the announced Egyptian decision that “all boats carrying aid to the Zionists of Palestine might be refused servicing in Egyptian ports,” and its orally stated intention to refuse fueling and other port facilities to all vessels belonging to a single operator if any of its ships has called at an Israeli port. Our Embassy at Cairo has succeeded upon several occasions in diverting the authorities from strict enforcement of this policy. There is no indication that the signing of the armistice of Rhodes will have any direct or immediate bearing on the Egyptian shipping policy, but it is possible that present restrictions may become outmoded even if not officially lifted before the abolition of martial law.

1 Department of State Policy Statements were concise documents summarizing the current United States policy toward, the relations of principal powers with, and the issues and trends in a particular country or region. The Statements were intended to provide information and guidance for officers in missions abroad. They were generally prepared by ad hoc working groups in the responsible geographic offices of the Department of State and were referred to appropriate diplomatic missions abroad, under cover of formal instructions from the Secretary of State, for comment and criticism. The statements were periodically revised.

2  Foreign Relations, 1947, vol. v, p. 614.

3 For information regarding the barter agreement of March 3, 1948, between Egypt and the Soviet Union, see editorial note, ibid., 1948, vol. v, Part 1, p. 85.

4 For documentation on this agreement, see Foreign Relations, 1946, vol. vii, pp. 69 ff.

5 For documentation on this subject, see Foreign Relations, 1946, vol. i, pp. 1450 ff.

6 For documentation on this subject, see Foreign Relations, 1945, vol. viii, pp. 25 ff.

7 For documentation on the securing of military air transit rights through an agreement with the Egyptian Government on June 15, 1946, see Foreign Relations, 1946, vol. vii, pp. 80 ff.

8 For additional documentation on Egyptian restrictions on shipping through the Suez Canal, see pp. 91 [Pg. 91 is part of Doc. 14] ff. and 594 [Pg. 594 is part of Doc. 341] ff.

Memorandum, by the Chief of Staff, United States Air Force, to the Joint Chiefs of Staff Department of Defense Files

[Document 97]

Memorandum, by the Chief of Staff, United States Air Force, to the Joint Chiefs of Staff

top secret [Washington,] 5 May 1949.

CFP–4/6

Proposed Anglo-Egyptian Defense Discussions

Reference: CFP–4 series

1. With reference to the memorandum by the British Chiefs of Staff on “Proposed Anglo-Egyptian Defense Discussions,”1 (Appendix to Enclosure “B”) the Joint Chiefs of Staff previously considered it inadvisable to agree with the British Chiefs of Staff that Anglo-Egyptian defense discussions be held covering certain phases of Anglo-American plans for the defense of the Middle East. The recent memorandum by the British Chiefs of Staff in the Annex to RDC 5/78 (Appendix to Enclosure “B”) indicates more specifically those points to be considered and the information to be revealed to the Egyptians in Anglo-Egyptian defense discussions.

2. In view of the statement by the British Chiefs of Staff that their minimum security requirements cannot be met under the terms of the Anglo-Egyptian Treaty of 1936, and in view of the stated difficulties in attempting to obtain Egyptian approval to expanding existing treaty rights, I believe the Joint Chiefs of Staff should agree with the request of the British Chiefs of Staff in RDC 5/78 as qualified in the accompanying proposed reply to the Representatives of the British Chiefs of Staff2 (Enclosure “A”).

3. Accordingly, I recommend that the memorandum in Enclosure “A” be forwarded to the Representatives of the British Chiefs of Staff.

Enclosure “A”

Draft

Memorandum for the Representatives of the British Chiefs of Staff

Subject: Proposed Anglo-Egyptian Defense Discussions

1. The U.S. Chiefs of Staff agree, except as noted in paragraph 2 below, with the British Chiefs of Staff to the two following points in RDC 5/78, dated 25 March 1949: a. “That discussion of the points set out in paragraphs 8 to 123 will not prejudice the security of Anglo-American plans to defend the Middle East.

b. That the information set out in paragraph 174 can be given to the Egyptians as a background for the Anglo-Egyptian defense negotiations.”

2. Although the U.S. Chiefs of Staff agree to points a and b in paragraph 1 above, political, economic, and security considerations compel the U.S. Chiefs of Staff to qualify their views as follows: a. The U.S. Chiefs of Staff are re-evaluating strategic plans in the light of recent international developments. Until this re-evaluation has been completed, the U.S. Chiefs of Staff believe it would be premature for the British Chiefs of Staff to indicate to the Egyptians that facilities or installations are required for use specifically by U.S. forces. Consequently the U.S. Chiefs of Staff suggest that during the course of Anglo-Egyptian discussions regarding requirements, the British Chiefs of Staff identify the requirements for facilities and installations as those to be used by the “United Kingdom and her allies” and not mention the “United States” directly.

b. The U.S. Chiefs of Staff believe it undesirable for the British Chiefs of Staff to indicate to the Egyptians that combined planning will take place in Egypt. The U.S. Chiefs of Staff do not consider it essential for U.S. planners to visit Fayid in order to accomplish Anglo-American planning for the defense of the Middle East. They consider that necessary Staff talks should be held at a point outside Egypt, such as Malta, Cyprus, or Cyrenaica.

c. The U.S. Chiefs of Staff appreciate that it might be necessary for the British Chiefs of Staff to disclose to the Egyptians that the British main base for conducting Middle East operations will be in Egypt. However, the U.S. Chiefs of Staff consider it inadvisable to tell the Egyptians that an Anglo-American main base for conducting these operations will be in Egypt.

d. The U.S. Chiefs of Staff hope that any Anglo-Egyptian discussion of plans concerning Middle East operations will be confined to Anglo-Egyptian interests in the defense of Egypt itself, and that no reference will be made to American interests or participation in plans concerning the Middle East.5

1 RDC 5/78, dated March 25, not printed.

2 Below.

3 These paragraphs came under the general heading of “Anglo-American Requirements in Egypt.” They dealt, consecutively, with general considerations, facilities required in peace, facilities required in war, the air defense of Egypt, and “Additional Points for Discussion”.

4 This paragraph dealt with the necessity of providing the Egyptians with certain background information, which, it was maintained, would not prejudice Anglo-American plans for defending the Middle East. The information comprised five points, as follows: (a) Egypt would be defended by keeping Soviet forces outside Egyptian borders; (b) air attack would therefore represent the main threat to Egypt; (c) the main British installations for defending the Middle East would be located in Egypt; (d) in addition to airfields and facilities to defend Egypt from air attack, bomber airfields would be required; (e) it would be necessary for Allied forces other than British forces to be based in Egypt during wartime to conduct operations in the Middle East.

5 The Joint Chiefs of Staff, on May 11, approved the recommendation in CFP–4/6 and the same day sent the memorandum in Enclosure A to the Representatives of the British Chiefs of Staff in memorandum SM–862–49 (CFP–4/7).

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State 883.20/7–1249: Telegram

[Document 98]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State

top secret London, July 12, 1949—6 p. m.

2714. Glutton said July 11 UK-Egyptian military talks proceeding satisfactorily after poor start1 when Egyptians indicated desire discuss evacuation. British delegation took position this was political and not military problem and question has therefore been held in abeyance. Egyptians have now accepted British estimate as to probable time-lag between outbreak of war and Soviet attack on Egyptian territory. Glutton commented that Egyptian acceptance British estimate meant that Egypt would have to accept presence British troops to man bases and installations in-order cope with attack at that time. Talks have now proceeded to point where both sides are endeavoring to agree on statements of UK and Egyptian military requirements. Latter understood primarily involve training and scheduling of arms shipments.

Sent Department 2714; repeated Cairo 92; copy to CINCNELM London.

Douglas

1 Anglo-Egyptian military talks were scheduled to begin on June 6 (telegram 2252, June 10, 6 p. m., from London, 741.83/6–1049). Apparently there was a delay, for on July 2, British Ambassador Campbell informed the American Embassy that the talks had “finally begun” (telegram 644, July 5, 8 p. m., from Cairo, 883.20/7–549). London, on July 1, indicated that the British wished to dissuade the Egyptians “from idea large land army” and to convince them that “their principal functions defense Egypt should be anti-aircraft, radar and fighter defense” and “water works” (telegram 2564, 883.20/7–149).

The Chargé in Egypt (Patterson) to the Secretary of State 883.20/7–1949: Telegram

[Document 99]

The Chargé in Egypt (Patterson) to the Secretary of State

top secret Cairo, July 19, 1949—10 a. m.

692. Re London’s telegram to Department 2714, repeated Cairo 92, July 12, 6 p. m. British Ambassador on sixteenth immediately prior to return for conferences London stated responsive my inquiry that Egyptian-British defense talks were proceeding slowly due at least in part to political factors connected with approaching elections. For fear of leakage to opposition of current negotiations enabling Wafd to make consequent political capital, not even Egyptian military willing put anything on paper. Egyptian negotiators realized political danger their talks becoming known while British Armed Forces remain on Egyptian territory. Accordingly, said negotiators have urged British withdraw forces to Cyrenaica, Cyprus, Transjordan or other outlying areas in vicinity Egypt alleging rapidity of modern transport renders physical presence foreign forces on Egyptian territory unnecessary even though Egyptians recognize need eventual reentry or stationing such forces on Egyptian territory in international emergency.

To meet these fears and difficulties British urging Egyptians to work out defense plans on purely technical and hypothetical basis mentioning no names and describing forces involved as those belonging to countries (A) or (B).

Ambassador dubious as to progress which talks may make pending elections which he thought would be held in October as recently publicly announced by Prime Minister.

Sent Department, repeated London 75.

Patterson

The Chargé in Egypt (Patterson) to the Secretary of State 883.20/7–2349: Telegram

[Document 100]

The Chargé in Egypt (Patterson) to the Secretary of State

top secret Cairo, July 23, 1949—6 p. m.

704. Supplementing Embtel 692, July 19, recording observations British Ambassador Cairo on subject status Anglo-Egyptian military talks, Minister Chapman-Andrews recently returned from London and now in charge of Embassy stated development had occurred following my conversation with Sir Ronald, July 15.

British Embassy had ascertained on 16th that agreement had been reached on military level between British and Egyptian negotiators on general plan which had been formulated on premise of existing danger of international hostilities.1 (My informant stated this did not imply hostilities actually envisaged but that a military plan to have any validity must make such assumption.) Agreement on military level had also been reached on establishment perhaps ten subcommittees for implementing details above mentioned basic agreement. However, Egyptian military fearful of risk of leakage through naming additional Egyptians to serve on these sub-committees, preferring present group (which I understood to be three negotiators including Colonial [Colonel?] Gazarine2 ) should handle all details. British military had refused this impractical project since implemention of basic agreement through sub-committee discussion would involve introduction number of technical experts in addition to few high-ranking military who have formulated basic agreement.

Chapman-Andrews, without being specific concerning exact terms basic agreement, indicated Egyptians would not insist on British evacuation of troops from Egyptian territory, in view of thesis on which basic agreement predicated, namely that international hostilities should be regarded as matter of relatively near future.

Chapman-Andrews added that while King Farouk had mentally accepted basic agreement, which had been reduced to writing, his own task would be to sell agreement (plus means of implementing it through studies by technical Sub-Committees) in talks with Prime Minister and Foreign Minister which he had already requested. He definitely stated that in addition to HM and military negotiators, Prime Minister and Foreign Minister were conversant with Anglo-Egyptian military talks.

On my alluding to American unwillingness to enter tripartite military conversations on Egypt, Chapman-Andrews stated US position now understood and accepted. Above mentioned basic agreement specifically referred to “allies” of British and Egypt without naming either such allies or potential enemy.

Sent Department 704, repeated London 82.

Patterson

1 The Office of the Military Attaché at the Embassy in the United Kingdom, on August 5, reported to the Department of the Army that under the tentative agreement the Egyptians recognized the necessity for peacetime British bases in Egypt and the British agreed to sell equipment to the Egyptians for their ground and air forces (telegram 75366, 883.20/8–549). The telegram also set forth the British view that the talks proceed to the Egyptian Cabinet level after the October elections, to avoid having the treaty become a major political issue in the elections.

2 Possibly Ibrahim Hasan Gazarine, a high official in the Egyptian Ministry of War.

The Chargé in Egypt (Patterson) to the Secretary of State 883.00/8–249: Airgram

[Document 101]

The Chargé in Egypt (Patterson) to the Secretary of State

Cairo, August 2, 1949.

A–819. The evacuation of British troops, the unity of the Nile Valley, the maintenance of public security, and the conduct of fair elections were announced as the new Cabinet’s principal objectives in Prime Minister Hussein Sirry Pasha’s initial policy statement to the Chamber of Deputies last night. The new premier emphasized that the King’s desire for the formation of a truly national Cabinet has now been realized. He revealed that he has already ordered the release of 295 political prisoners, but gave no indication of his attitude towards martial law.

The text of the Prime Minister’s statement, as unofficially translated, was as follows:

[Here follow the text of the statement and two paragraphs of general comment.]

It is noted that Sirry Pasha placed evacuation and Nile Valley unity at the head of the list of his government’s objectives. Information reaching the Embassy has indicated that the King’s desire to negotiate a new treaty with the British was the principal factor behind the recent Cabinet change, and that Sirry Pasha expects, after this fall’s elections, to conduct these negotiations.

[Here follows remainder of airgram on discussion of the Prime Minister’s statement by the Chamber of Deputies, the release of internees, and the like.]

Patterson

The Chargé in the United Kingdom (Holmes) to the Secretary of State 883.20/8–3049: Telegram

[Document 102]

The Chargé in the United Kingdom (Holmes) to the Secretary of State

top secret London, August 30, 1949—7 p. m.

3467. Embtel 2947 July 26,1 repeated Cairo as 102. 1. Maitland, African Department, said today Anglo-Egyptian military talks are now in quiescent state, last meeting having taken place August 2. He did not feel there would be any resumption full-scale talks until after Egyptian elections, which he felt would not take place until December at earliest.

2. Maitland stated secret nature of talks has been well kept and that only about half dozen Egyptians know details, although others may have some indication.2

Sent Department 3467, repeated Cairo 123.

Holmes

1 Not printed.

2 Cairo, on December 21, advised of information from the Prime Minister that there were no plans for Egyptian political leaders to meet with Mr. Bevin when he passed through Egypt near the end of December and that even informal negotiations with the British were out of the question until a new Cabinet took office after the coming elections (airgram 1373, 883.00/12–2149).

The Ambassador in Egypt (Caffery) to the Secretary of State 711.83/10–1249: Telegram

[Document 103]

The Ambassador in Egypt (Caffery) to the Secretary of State

top secret Cairo, October 12, 1949—4 p. m.

943. I talked to the King at some length on Monday. He gave me the expected line that while he ardently wishes for good relations with the US, these have been rendered almost impossible by our attitude in regard to Palestine. He talked for some time politely but bitterly about this, laying emphasis on our refusal to let his army have arms while, he alleged, arms were flowing merrily into Palestine from every quarter. In addition, he observed, “You have refused everything that we have asked for.”

I made due reply to all this, of course.

He then said, “Under the circumstances, my army didn’t do badly in Palestine. They were fighting with bare breasts against tanks and armored cars. The Egyptian Army did that for me and they will do anything I say and they won’t do it for anyone else. That is why I feel so strongly about them.”

Then: “Coming down to earth, the matter that interests me most, and it interests me a lot, is that of your refusal to accept our military students.” He enlarged considerably on this. (If something could be done about this it would help our current relations with Egypt more than anything else.)

He then adverted to the question of the lifting of the arms embargo and said, “I am not at all happy about the way in which the arms embargo has been lifted. I shall instruct my representatives to insist that it be lifted with the same formality with which it was imposed”. (This is, of course, not realistic.)

He spoke of his statement to his ministers regarding his Bairam prayers (reference A–1054, October 51 ) and said, “Of course, I do not pull coups but I do occasionally have to change ministers or get them back on the rails. That was a case when I had to make clear what I expected them to do. I am paid for that.”

He expressed much gratification that we had had atomic bombs for some time, and said, “I hope you make lots more of them and never under any circumstances let them get out of your hands.” He expressed much concern over growing Communist infiltration in Near East and Africa, “especially among the blacks”.

He remarked that he had reason to believe that the present British Ambassador would be soon replaced, adding, “This man is agreeable, unlike his horrible predecessor”.

I then asked him if something couldn’t be done about doing away with the Egyptian wartime shipping regulations, reference to the Suez Canal (Deptel 954, October 4 [September 26]) and the American Export Line’s difficulties (Department’s 977 October 6[4]).2 He replied, “I don’t say no, but I need time”. (He does not want this repeated to any other government.)

As I left, with reference to nothing in particular, he said, “Don’t think I know nothing of business matters. Don’t forget that the founder of my dynasty was a tobacco merchant”.

Caffery

1 Not printed.

2 These telegrams are printed on pp. 1404 [Pg. 1404 includes portions of Doc. 976 and Doc. 977] and 1418 [Pg. 1418 includes portions of Doc. 984, Doc. 985, and Doc. 986].

The Acting Secretary of State to the Embassy in Egypt 711.83/10–1249: Airgram

[Document 104]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Embassy in Egypt

top secret Washington, November 14, 1949.

A–581. Department has read with great interest Embassy’s telegram No. 943, October 12 reporting your conversation with King Farouk and believes this frank initial exchange of views will contribute to forming the basis for a new and improved phase of United States–Egypt relations

While it is regretted that the King continues to place such emphasis on the Palestine question vis-à-vis US–Egypt relations the theme is well-known and it is assumed that you related to the King the efforts of this Government, in cooperation with the United Nations, to bring about a settlement of the Palestine question. The main concern of this Government is that there should be political and economic stability in the Near East area and it considers an early settlement on the Palestine question as an essential condition to that stability. In further discussions with the King you should emphasize that the self-interest of Egypt as well as of the other countries of the area can best be served by a resolution of the present impasse of the Palestine question.

The following comments and information on certain of the specific points raised by the King may be useful to you:

Training of Students—Training facilities have already been provided by the Air Force for two Egyptian officers in the field of photography and it is understood that the Army now has six Egyptian officers participating in training. Moreover, the Army and the Air Force are now considering the feasibility of providing training for an additional number of Egyptian officers and it is hoped that definite commitments can soon be made. For your information, the Department of Defense is in the process of determining training requirements under the Military Assistance Program and is, therefore, not in a position to make definite commitments at this time on training facilities for countries not included in present legislation.

While you may transmit foregoing information in general way to the Egyptian authorities, Department and Defense Department prefer that any specific information in regard to numbers or other details should be channelled through the Army or the Air Force Attaché to the Egyptian Defense authorities.

Arms Embargo—On August 11, 1949 the Security Council determined that the armistice agreements had superseded the truce arrangements, provided for by its resolutions, including the provisions with respect to the shipment of war material. The United States supported this action at which time Senator Austin set forth the principles which would guide the United States in connection with armed shipments to the Arab states in Israel. On August 7, 1949 during the debate of the Security Council Resolution Senator Austin made the following statement:

“So far as the United States is concerned, it does not intend to allow the export of arms which would permit a competitive arms race in the area. Export of arms to this area of the world should be strictly limited to such arms as are within the scope of legitimate security requirements, again as recommended by Dr. Bunche. We hope that prudence will prevail not only among the parties but among all nations of the world which are in a position to supply arms and that they will pursue a policy similar to that which we intend to pursue.

It is essential that the resources of this area be used for works of peace, for economic development, for the resettlement of refugees, and for the achievement of higher standards of living for the populations of the area. It would be tragic and wholly wrong if the resources of the area were to be dissipated in an unproductive arms race.”

Since the adoption by the Security Council of this resolution, the United States has approved several export licenses for Egypt covering such items as bombardier training planes, spare parts and a small amount of other material. In addition, the retransfer of lend-lease gun parts valued at $350,000 from Great Britain to Egypt has also been approved by the United States as is necessary in such eases.

The Department was encouraged to note that the King’s attitude at the time of your conversation appeared favorable to the lifting of Egyptian wartime regulations for the Suez Canal. While it is regretted no further developments in this connection have occurred since that time, it is hoped that the Egyptian Government will find means at an early date whereby it can raise the restrictions on the Canal.

Webb

GreeceGreece

Contents

The United States and the conclusion of the Greek civil war; the Greek question at the United Nations (Documents 105-261)

The United States and the conclusion of the Greek civil war; the Greek question at the United NationsThe United States and the conclusion of the Greek civil war; the Greek question at the United Nations1

1 For previous documentation on these topics, see Foreign Relations, 1948, vol. iv, pp. 1 ff.

[105] Memorandum by the Director, Office of Near Eastern and African Affairs (Satterthwaite) to the Under Secretary of State (Lovett)

[Washington,] January 3, 1949.

868.00/1–349

[106] Memorandum of Conversation, by the Acting Secretary of State

[Washington,] January 4, 1949.

868.00/1–449

[107] The Ambassador in Greece (Grady) to the Acting Secretary of State

Athens, January 5, 1949—5 p. m.

868.00/1–549: Telegram

[108] The Acting Secretary of State to the Embassy in Greece

Washington, January 7, 1949—6 p. m.

868.00/1–549: Telegram

[109] Editorial Note

[110] The Ambassador in Greece (Grady) to the Acting Secretary of State

Athens, January 12, 1949—7 p. m.

868.00/1–1249: Telegram

[111] The Special Representative in Europe for the Economic Cooperation Administration (Harriman) to the Ambassador in Greece (Grady)

Paris, January 13, 1949—8 p. m.

868.00/1–1749: Telegram

[112] The Acting Secretary of State to the Embassy in Greece

Washington, January 14, 1949—6 p. m.

868.20/1–1449: Telegram

[113] The Ambassador in Greece (Grady) to the Acting Secretary of State

Athens, January 18, 1949—5 p. m.

868.01/1–1849: Telegram

[114] The Ambassador in Greece (Grady) to the Secretary of State

Athens, January 21, 1949—5 p. m.

868.002/1–2149: Telegram

[115] Memorandum Prepared by the Embassy in Greece

Athens, January 27, 1949.

Athens Embassy Files: 350 Greece

[116] Editorial Note

[117] The Ambassador in Greece (Grady) to the Secretary of State

Athens, February 7, 1949—5 p. m.

868.00(W)/2–749: Telegram

[118] The Chief of the American Mission for Aid to Greece (Grady) to the Greek Minister of Foreign Affair’s (Tsaldaris)

[Athens,] February 15, 1949.

Athens Embassy Files: 420 Greek Army

[119] The Ambassador in Yugoslavia (Cannon) to the Secretary of State

Belgrade, February 16, 1949—6 p. m.

868.00/2–1649: Telegram

[120] Editorial Note

[121] The Acting United States Representative on the United Nations Special Committee on the Balkans (Drew) to the Secretary of State

Athens, February 19, 1949—noon.

501.BB Balkans/2–1949: Telegram

[122] The Ambassador in Greece (Grady) to the Secretary of State

Athens, February 21, 1949—6 p. m.

868.00/2–2149: Telegram

[123] The Secretary of State to the Embassy in Greece

Washington, February 25, 1949—7 p. m.

501.BB Balkans/2–1949: Telegram

[124] Memorandum of Conversation, by the Assistant Chief, Division of Greek, Turkish, and Iranian Affairs (Baxter)

[Washington,] March 1, 1949.

501.BB Balkan/3–149

[125] The Secretary of State to the Embassy in Greece

Washington, March 2, 1949—6 p. m.

868.00/2–2449: Telegram

[126] Memorandum of Conversation, by the Chief of the Division of Greek, Turkish, and Iranian Affairs (Jernegan)

[Washington,] March 10, 1949.

868.014/3–1049

[127] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State

London, March 11, 1949—6 p. m.

868.014/3–1149: Telegram

[128] The Secretary of State to the Embassy in Yugoslavia

Washington, March 11, 1949—8 p. m.

868.014/3–1149: Telegram

[129] The Ambassador in Yugoslavia (Cannon) to the Secretary of State

Belgrade, March 16, 1949—5 p. m.

868.00/3–1649: Telegram

[130] Memorandum of Conversation, by the Deputy Director, Office of European Affairs (Thompson)

[Washington,] March 17, 1949.

760H.68/3–1749

[131] Informal Memorandum by the British Embassy to the Department of State

[Washington, undated.]

868.00/3–2249

[132] The Ambassador in Greece (Grady) to the Secretary of State

Athens, March 18, 1949—5 p. m.

668.0024/3–1849: Telegram

[133] Report by the National Security Council to the President

Washington, March 22, 1949.

S/S–NSC Files, Lot 63 D 351, NSC 42/1 Series

[134] Informal Memorandum by the Department of State to the British Embassy

[Washington, undated.]

868.00/3–2249

[135] The Chargé in Bulgaria (O’Donoghue) to the Secretary of State

Sofia, March 24, 1949—9 p. m.

868.00/3–2449: Telegram

[136] The Ambassador in Greece (Grady) to the Secretary of State

Athens, March 30, 1949—4 p. m.

868.20/3–3049: Telegram

[137] Editorial Note

[138] The British Foreign Secretary (Bevin) to the Secretary of State

31st March, 1949.

868.20/3–3149

[139] Memorandum of Conversation, by Mr. Leonard J. Cromie of the Division of Greek, Turkish, and Iranian Affairs

[Washington,] April 1, 1949.

Moscow Embassy Files: Lot F–132

[140] The Ambassador in Greece (Grady) to the Secretary of State

Athens, April 1, 1949—5 p. m.

868.00/4–149: Telegram

[141] The Secretary of State to the Embassy in Greece

Washington, April 5, 1949—6 p. m.

868.00/4–549: Telegram

[142] The Ambassador in Greece (Grady) to the Secretary of State

Athens, April 7, 1949—3 p. m.

868.20/4–749: Telegram

[143] The Ambassador in Yugoslavia (Cannon) to the Secretary of State

Belgrade, April 8, 1949—3 p. m.

868.014/4–849: Telegram

[144] The Secretary of State to the United States Representative at the United Nations (Austin)

Washington, April 12, 1949—7 p. m.

501.BB Balkan/4–1249: Telegram

[145] The Chargé in Greece (Rankin) to the Secretary of State

Athens, April 16, 1949—6 p. m.

868.00/4–1649: Telegram

[146] Memorandum of the Secretary of State’s Press and Radio News Conference

[Washington,] April 20, 1949.

ON Files, Lot 60 D 641

[147] Memorandum of Conversation, by Messrs. Harry N. Howard and Leonard J. Cromie of the Division of Greek, Turkish, and Iranian Affairs

[Washington,] April 20, 1949.

501.BB Balkan/4–2049

[148] The Secretary of State to the British Ambassador (Franks)

[Washington,] April 25, 1949.

868.20/3–3149

[149] Memorandum of Conversation, by the Assistant Secretary of State for United Nations Affairs (Rusk)

[New York,] April 27, 1949.

501.BB Balkan/4–2749

[150] Memorandum of Conversation, by the Assistant Secretary of State for United Nations Affairs (Rusk)

[Washington,] May 5, 1949.

868.00/5–549

[151] The Chargé in Greece (Minor) to the Secretary of State

Athens, May 5, 1949—6 p. m.

868.00/5–549: Telegram

[152] The Chargé in Greece (Minor) to the Secretary of State

Athens, May 7, 1949—noon.

868.00/5–749: Telegram

[153] The United States Representative on the United Nations Special Committee on the Balkans (Drew) to the Secretary of State

Athens, May 7, 1949—4 p. m.

501.BB Balkan/5–749: Telegram

[154] The Secretary of State to the Embassy in Greece

Washington, May 7, 1949—1 p. m.

868.00/5–549: Telegram

[155] The Secretary of State to the Embassy in Greece

Washington, May 10, 1949—7 p. m.

501.BB Balkan/5–1049: Telegram

[156] The United States Representative at the United Nations (Austin) to the Secretary of State

New York, May 12, 1949—1:49 a. m.

501.A Summaries/5–1449: Telegram

[157] The Chargé in Greece (Minor) to the Secretary of State

Athens, May 13, 1949—1 p. m.

868.00/5–1349: Telegram

[158] The United States Representative at the United Nations (Austin) to the Secretary of State

New York, May 14, 1949—1:40 a. m.

501.A Summaries/5–1449: Telegram

[159] Editorial Note

[160] Editorial Note

[161] The Secretary of State to the Embassy in Greece

Washington, May 19, 1949—1 p. m.

868.00/5–1849: Telegram

[162] The Chargé in Greece (Minor) to the Secretary of State

Athens, May 19, 1949—1 p. m.

868.00/5–1949: Telegram

[163] Memorandum of Conversation, by the Assistant Secretary of State for United Nations Affairs (Rusk)

[Washington,] May 19, 1949.

868.00/5–1949

[164] Editorial Note

[165] Memorandum of Conversation, by Mr. Leonard J. Cromie of the Division of Greek, Turkish, and Iranian Affairs

[Washington,] May 20, 1949.

868.00/5–2049

[166] The Australian Minister of State for External Affairs (Evatt) to the Secretary of State, at Paris

London, 21st May, 1949.

501.BB Balkan/5–2149

[167] The Minister in Bulgaria (Heath) to the Acting Secretary of State

Sofia, May 23, 1949—3 p. m.

868.00/5–2349: Telegram

[168] The Acting Secretary of State to the Embassy in Greece

Washington, May 24, 1949—7 p. m.

501.BB Balkan/5–2049: Telegram

[169] The Chargé in the Soviet Union (Kohler) to the Acting Secretary of State

Moscow, May 25, 1949—10 a. m.

740.00119 Council/5–2549: Telegram

[170] The United States Representative on the United Nations Special Committee on the Balkans (Drew) to the Acting Secretary of State

Athens, May 25, 1949—7 p. m.

501.BB Balkan/5–2549: Telegram

[171] The British Minister (Hoyer Millar) to the Assistant Secretary of State for United Nations Affairs (Rusk)

Washington, 25th May, 1949.

501.BB Balkan/5–2549

[172] The Acting Secretary of State to the Secretary of State, at Paris

Washington, May 25, 1949—8 p. m.

868.00/5–2549: Telegram

[173] The Ambassador in Greece (Grady) to the Acting Secretary of State

Athens, May 26, 1949—3 p. m.

501.BB Balkan/5–2649: Telegram

[174] Editorial Note

[175] The Ambassador in Greece (Grady) to the Acting Secretary of State

Athens, May 28, 1949—1 p. m.

501.BB Balkan/5–2849: Telegram

[176] The Secretary of State to the Acting Secretary of State

Paris, May 31, 1949—6 p. m.

501.BB Balkan/5–3149: Telegram

[177] The Acting Secretary of State to the Secretary of State, at Paris

Washington, June 3, 1949—7 p. m.

501.BB Balkan/6–349: Telegram

[178] The Ambassador in Greece (Grady) to the Acting Secretary of State

Athens, June 8, 1949—1 p. m.

501.BB Balkan/6–849: Telegram

[179] The Ambassador in Yugoslavia (Cannon) to the Secretary of State

Belgrade, June 9, 1949—11 p. m.

860H.00/6–949: Telegram

[180] Memorandum of Conversation, by Mr. Leonard J. Cromie of the Division of Greek, Turkish, and Iranian Affairs

[Washington,] June 17, 1949.

501.BB Balkan/6–1749

[181] The Acting Secretary of State to the Embassy in Greece

Washington, June 18, 1949.

501.BB Balkan/6–849: Airgram

[182] The Secretary of State to the Embassy in Greece

Washington, June 23, 1949—7 p. m.

868.24/6–2349: Telegram

[183] The Secretary of State to the Embassy in Yugoslavia

Washington, June 27, 1949—4 p. m.

868.00/6–2749: Telegram

[184] The Ambassador in Greece (Grady) to the Secretary of State

Athens, June 28, 1949—11 a. m.

868.20/6–2849: Telegram

[185] The Secretary of State to the Embassy in Greece

Washington, June 29, 1949—7 p. m.

868.002/6–2849: Telegram

[186] The British Embassy to the Department of State

30th June 1949.

760H.68/6–3049

[187] Editorial Note

[188] The Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Kirk) to the Secretary of State

Moscow, July 8, 1949—noon.

868.00/7–849: Telegram

[189] The United States Representative on the United Nations Special Committee on the Balkans (Drew) to the Secretary of State

Athens, July 12, 1949—4 p. m.

501.BB Balkan/7–1249: Telegram

[190] The Ambassador in Yugoslavia (Cannon) to the Secretary of State

Belgrade, July 13, 1949—8 p. m.

760H.00/7–1349: Telegram

[191] The Secretary of State to the Embassy in Yugoslavia

Washington, July 14, 1949—2 p. m.

868.00/7–1449: Telegram

[192] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State

London, July 15, 1949—7 p. m.

868.00/7–1549: Telegram

[193] The Ambassador in Greece (Grady) to the Secretary of State

Athens, July 18, 1949—2 p. m.

102.1/7–1849: Telegram

[194] Memorandum of Conversation, by Mr. Leonard J. Cromie of the Division of Greek, Turkish, and Iranian Affairs

[Washington,] July 27, 1949.

501.BB Balkan/7–2749

[195] The Chargé in Greece (Minor) to the Secretary of State

Athens, July 29, 1949.

102.1/9–2949

[196] Editorial Note

[197] Editorial Note

[198] Editorial Note

[199] The Ambassador in Yugoslavia (Cannon) to the Secretary of State

Belgrade, August 4, 1949—9 p. m.

868.00/8–449: Telegram

[200] Memorandum of Conversations, by Mr. Leonard J. Cromie of the Division of Greek, Turkish, and Iranian Affairs

[Washington,] August 5, 1949.

7438.75/8–549

[201] The Chargé in Greece (Minor) to the Secretary of State

Athens, August 6, 1949—5 p. m.

768.75/8–649: Telegram

[202] Editorial Note

[203] The Secretary of State to the Embassy in Yugoslavia

Washington, August 11, 1949—5 p. m.

760H.68/8–1149: Telegram

[204] The Chargé in Greece (Minor) to the Secretary of State

Athens, August 16, 1949—10 a. m.

868.00/8–1649: Telegram

[205] Editorial Note

[206] Memorandum of Conversation, by the Deputy Under Secretary of State (Rusk)

[Washington,] August 29, 1949.

501.BB Balkan/8–3949

[207] The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom

Washington, August 29, 1949—6 p. m.

868.00/8–2449: Telegram

[208] The United States Representative on the United Nations Special Committee on the Balkans (Drew) to the Secretary of State

Athens, September 2, 1949—5 p. m.

501.BB Balkan/9–249: Telegram

[209] The United States Representative on the United Nations Special Committee on the Balkans (Drew) to the Secretary of State

Athens, September 2, 1949—4 p. m.

501.BB Balkan/9–249: Telegram

[210] The Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Kirk) to the Secretary of State

Moscow, September 3, 1949—1 p. m.

768.75/9–349: Telegram

[211] The Chargé in the United Kingdom (Holmes) to the Secretary of State

London, September 3, 1949—5 p. m.

868.00/9–349: Telegram

[212] The United States Representative at the United Nations (Austin) to the Secretary of State

New York, September 7, 1949—3:18 p. m.

501.BB Balkan/9–949: Telegram

[213] The Secretary of State to the Embassy in Greece

Washington, September 7, 1949—7 p. m.

501.BB Balkan/8–2949: Telegram

[214] Memorandum of Conversation, by the Chief of the Division of Greek, Turkish, and Iranian Affairs (Jernegan)

[Washington,] September 8, 1949.

501.BB Balkan/9–849

[215] Position Paper Prepared in the Department of State for the United States Delegation to the United Nations

[Washington,] September 9, 1949.

IO Files

[216] The Secretary of State to the Embassy in Greece

Washington, September 10, 1949—3 p. m.

501.BB Balkan/9–1049: Telegram

[217] Editorial Note

[218] Memorandum of Conversation, by Mr. Leonard J. Cromie of the Division of Greek, Turkish, and Iranian Affairs

[Washington,] September 13, 1949.

501.BB Balkan/9–1349

[219] Memorandum of Conversation, by the Secretary of State

[Washington,] September 14, 1949.

875.00/9–1449

[220] The Chargé in the United Kingdom (Holmes) to the Secretary of State

London, September 15, 1949—4 p. m.

501.BB Balkan/9–1549: Telegram

[221] The Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Kirk) to the Secretary of State

Moscow, September 15, 1949—6 p. m.

501.BB Balkan/9–4549: Telegram

[222] Editorial Note

[223] The Ambassador in Greece (Grady) to the Secretary of State

Athens, September 16, 1949—3 p. m.

868.00/9–1649: Telegram

[224] The Ambassador in France (Bruce) to the Secretary of State

Paris, September 17, 1949—3 p. m.

868.00/9–1749: Telegram

[225] The Acting Secretary of State to the Embassy in Greece

Washington, September 20, 1949—7 p. m.

868.00/9–2049: Telegram

[226] The Ambassador in Yugoslavia (Cannon) to the Secretary of State

Belgrade, September 21, 1949—4 p. m.

860H.00/9–2149: Telegram

[227] The Acting Secretary of State to the United States Mission to the United Nations, at New York

Washington, September 23, 1949—6 p. m.

868.00/9–2249: Telegram

[228] The Acting Secretary of State to the Embassy in Greece

Washington, September 23, 1949—7 p. m.

868.00/9–2349: Telegram

[229] The Ambassador in Yugoslavia (Cannon) to the Secretary of State

Belgrade, September 24, 1949—3 p. m.

501.BB Balkan/9–2449: Telegram

[230] Memorandum of Meeting With the President, Monday, September 26, by the Acting Secretary of State

[Washington,] October 1, 1949.

768.75/10–149

[231] The Ambassador in Greece (Grady) to the Secretary of State

Athens, September 28, 1949—11 a. m.

868.00/9–2849: Telegram

[232] The Acting Secretary of State to the Embassy in Greece

Washington, September 28, 1949—7 p. m.

868.20/9–2849: Telegram

[233] Editorial Note

[234] The Ambassador in Greece (Grady) to the Acting Secretary of State

Rome, October 3, 1949—noon.

868.20/10–349: Telegram

[235] Editorial Note

[236] Editorial Note

[237] Memorandum of Conversation, by Mr. Ben Franklin Dixon of the Office of Greek, Turkish, and Iranian Affairs

[Washington,] October 20, 1949.

841.2368/10–2049

[238] The Secretary of State to the Embassy in Greece

Washington, October 20, 1949—1 p. m.

868.20/10–2049: Telegram

[239] The Ambassador in Greece (Grady) to the Secretary of State

Athens, October 21, 1949—6 p. m.

841.2368/10–2149: Telegram

[240] The Secretary of State to Certain Diplomatic Offices

Washington, October 21, 1949—5 a. m.

800.00 Summaries/10–2049: Circular telegram

[241] Editorial Note

[242] The Chief of the American Mission for Aid to Greece (Grady) to the Greek Prime Minister (Diomedes)

[Athens,] October 23, 1949.

868.20/10–2349

[243] The Ambassador in Greece (Grady) to the Secretary of State

Athens, October 14 [24], 1949—6 p. m.

868.20/10–1449: Telegram

[244] Memorandum of Telephone Conversation, by the Director of the Office of Greek, Turkish, and Iranian Affairs (Jernegan)

[Washington,] October 27, 1949.

841.2368/10–2749

[245] Editorial Note

[246] Memorandum of Conversation, by the Secretary of State

[Washington,] October 28, 1949.

840.20/10–2849

[247] The Ambassador in Greece (Grady) to the Secretary of State

Athens, November 1, 1949—11 a. m.

501.BB/11–149: Telegram

[248] Editorial Note

[249] The Director of the Joint United States Military Advisory and Planning Group, Greece (Van Fleet) to the Department of the Army

Athens, November 7, 1949.

Department of Defense Files: Telegram

[250] Editorial Note

[251] Editorial Note

[252] The Secretary of State to the United States Mission to the United Nations, at New York

Washington, November 18, 1949—8 p. m.

501.BB/11–1849: Telegram

[253] Memorandum of Conversation, by the Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern, South Asian, and African Affairs (McGhee)

[Washington,] November 18, 1949.

868.00/11–1849

[254] The Secretary of State to the Embassy in Greece

Washington, November 21, 1949—5 p. m.

868.00/11–2149: Telegram

[255] The Acting Secretary of State to the Embassy in Greece

Washington, November 22, 1949—4 p. m.

868.20/11–749: Telegram

[256] Editorial Note

[257] The Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern, South Asian, and African Affairs (McGhee) to the Secretary of State

Istanbul, November 30, 1949—2 p. m.

868.20/11–3049: Telegram

[258] Editorial Note

[259] The Chargé in Greece (Minor) to the Secretary of State

Athens, December 16, 1949—11 a. m.

868.00/12–1649: Telegram

[260] The Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Kirk) to the Secretary of State

Moscow, December 18, 1949—1 p. m.

868.00/12–1849: Telegram

[261] The Department of State to the Greek Embassy

Washington, December 21, 1949.

501.BB Balkan/12–2149

Memorandum by the Director, Office of Near Eastern and African Affairs (Satterthwaite) to the Under Secretary of State (Lovett) 868.00/1–349

[Document 105]

Memorandum by the Director, Office of Near Eastern and African Affairs (Satterthwaite) to the Under Secretary of State (Lovett)2

secret [Washington,] January 3, 1949.

Subject: Suggested Topics for Conversation With Greek Ambassador

Problem

The Greek Ambassador,3 who is leaving the United States January 5 to return to Athens for consultation, is eager to have your views on general or specific problems connected with Greece as a basis for reporting to his Government.

Background

The Greek Ambassador has on several occasions made the suggestion to Departmental officers that his trip to Greece might offer an opportunity for you or the Secretary to send some direct messages to the King or the highest officials of the Greek Government. He has been particularly disturbed, as have we, by recent manoeuvers of minority party leaders in Greece to bring about the fall of the coalition Government. Such moves have had extremely adverse effects on the efficiency and performance of the present Government. Cabinet ministers have devoted more time to political jockeying in order to maintain the Government in existence than to the vital business of restoring internal order and effectively utilizing American assistance. The Ambassador evidently feels that, if he were authorized to transmit your personal views confidentially, influential Greek political figures might be persuaded to carry out whatever changes or policies you recommend. We have not encouraged the Ambassador in his idea of acting as a special emissary, considering it a less effective method of communicating with the Greek Government than through our Embassy. However, we have indicated the advisability of his having a general talk with you before his departure, so that he will be able to inform his Foreign Office of current thinking in the Department.

Recommendations

There are listed below for your convenience certain topics which you may wish to discuss with the Greek Ambassador.

1. In undertaking, nearly two years ago, a program of aid to Greece and Turkey the United States made a significant step in enunciating to the world a policy of helping peoples to maintain their democratic way of life against threats of direct or indirect aggression. This policy was intended, in the case of Greece to assist the Greeks to help themselves. It was meant to get the country back on its own feet again, politically, economically and militarily, after the abnormality of war and occupation. It is therefore distressing to us that Greek political leaders frequently seem more concerned with their own narrow party ambitions than with the urgent necessity of working together in a Government pledged to courageous policies for advancing the welfare of the Greek people as a whole. It is also disturbing to find a growing feeling in Greece that Greek recovery is more a problem of the United States or of Greece’s great allies than of Greece itself. The time is perhaps overdue for the Greek Government to face the reality of the situation: Greece cannot be saved from Communist aggression unless the Greek people and their leaders wish to be saved, and it must be recognized that Greek political independence can be retained only by the extraordinary efforts of the Greek people themselves, with what assistance we can make available.

2. We cannot view sympathetically a tendency of the Greek Government and Greek political leaders to expend all their energies on attempts to increase the amount of aid from the United States, instead of on concentrated efforts to make the most effective use of available resources. This attitude also has a very dangerous morale effect on the Greek people themselves, who are now so accustomed to hearing from Government sources about the insufficiency of American aid that they may develop a defeatist psychology, and be convinced that there is nothing which Greece can do for itself to bring about a better future. The Greek press reflects this official or semi-official attitude in its increasing criticism of American assistance.

3. It is the considered opinion of American officials concerned with Greece that the present size of the Greek military establishment and the present scale of American military assistance have given Greece the capability of meeting the guerrilla threat. A better effort cannot be bought by increased US aid, but only by better performance on the part of the Greeks. We gave very careful consideration to the question of increase in the size of the army before granting the recent increase of 15,000. We have no intention of reconsidering this decision unless there is a change in the basic situation in Greece, which there has not been up to the present. On more than one occasion in the past the Greek Government has allowed it to be publicly known that requests for large increases in military assistance have been submitted to the United States Government. This method has proved unsuccessful in two ways. It has lowered the morale of the Greek people to learn that such widely publicized requests have not been approved by the United States; and, at the same time, American officials have refused to approve unjustified requests merely because of the argument that it would be unwise to disappoint the exaggerated hopes of the Greek people. It is becoming increasingly difficult to defend Greece before the American public and Congress when the Greek Government keeps returning again and again with unrealistic requests for additional aid, without being able to show many positive results for assistance already extended. There are now two sources of assistance to Greece, the European Recovery Program and the Greek Turkish Aid Program. Together they are furnishing Greece at a current rate of about $1,000,000 a day. There is absolutely no possibility of the President’s recommending or the Congress acceding to any new special appropriation for Greece apart from these sources. It only makes the task of the Executive greater for the Greek Government to continue to ask for “special” appropriations. Aid to Greece is more generous, per capita, than aid to any other country.

4. In conclusion you may wish to indicate that, even though some of your observations appear harsh, they do not signify any lessening of American interest in Greece. We feel that we can speak more frankly to our friends than to mere nodding acquaintances, particularly when our hopes for their welfare are as strong as they are in the case of Greece. The Ambassador may assure his Government that we intend to request Congress for continuing aid to Greece on as large a scale as can be justified by the circumstances. In this attempt we hope we will not be embarrassed by Greek insistence that the United States is not being sufficiently generous. Our global responsibilities are very great indeed, and we must be able to show that our foreign assistance is appreciated and being used with maximum effectiveness.

On another score, we know that some members of the Greek Government fear that possible United States participation in a North Atlantic Pact signifies an intention of abandoning Greece. Such an interpretation of current negotiations with Western European countries is far from the truth with regard to our position. Our firm support of Greece in the United Nations, our program of military assistance, our economic contributions through ECA, and the reiterated statements of Government officials and of the President have made it amply clear to the world that Greece occupies a special place in our foreign policy. The maintenance of Greek political independence and territorial integrity is of importance to the security interests of the United States. However, we feel that it would be premature at this time to give consideration to a possible Mediterranean Pact, which has been mentioned at various times by Mr. Tsaldaris.4 For the United States to associate itself for reasons of defense with nations outside the Western Hemisphere constitutes a radical departure from traditional American foreign policy. We therefore feel that we must proceed with utmost deliberation to see exactly how an Atlantic Pact can be developed before giving any consideration to broadening such an arrangement or to association with any other regional grouping.5 At this time we wish neither to encourage nor to discourage the creation of any group in the Mediterranean which might seek the association of the United States.

5. In ending the conversation you may wish to emphasize to the Ambassador that your remarks do not constitute a special message for the Greek Government but are merely a summary of current Departmental thinking and a reiteration of views already expressed to the Greek Government by United States officials both here and in Athens.

6. On previous occasions the Greek Ambassador has requested Department views on the desirability of a visit to the United States by the Chief of Staff or the King and Queen. If he should mention this matter, it is recommended that, after pointing out that a visit by the Greek Chief of Staff would require discussion with the Military Establishment and consultation with the White House in respect to the King and Queen, you express the opinion that the present military situation in Greece is not auspicious for official visits to the United States at this time. If at a later date when conditions in Greece have improved, the King and Queen express a desire to come to this country, we will be glad to give friendly consideration to their wishes.

2 The source text was seen by Mr. Lovett. A copy of this memorandum was transmitted as an enclosure to instruction 5, January 10, to Athens, not printed (868.20/1–1049).

3 Vassili G. Dendramis, Greek Ambassador in the United States.

4 Constantine Tsaldaris, Greek Minister for Foreign Affairs; leader of the Greek Populist Party.

5 For documentation on the establishment of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization, including the possible inclusion of Greece in that organization, see vol. iv, pp. 1 ff.

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Acting Secretary of State 868.00/1–449

[Document 106]

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Acting Secretary of State

secret [Washington,] January 4, 1949.

Subject: Visit of Greek Ambassador To Discuss Greek Question

Participants: Vassili Dendramis, Ambassador of Greece

The Acting Secretary

Mr. Baxter1 —GTI

The Greek Ambassador called today to pay his respects before leaving for two weeks of consultation in Athens. He said that he would like to hear any views which I might wish to express on the present coalition Government and any available information on our plans for future aid to Greece.

I explained that I had no special message or recommendations concerning the Greek Government. It has always been our position, as has been made clear on many occasions in the past, that the composition of the Greek Government is a matter for decision by the Greeks themselves. Our concern is that Greece should have a Government which can and is willing to assume the responsibilities of a sovereign power, which can act vigorously and efficiently to improve conditions in Greece, both economically and militarily. We have, quite frankly, been disturbed by the continuing inability or refusal of Greek political leaders to put aside narrow party ambitions in favor of broad national interests. It should be obvious that the very best conceivable government would be none too good for the job at hand in Greece. However, on too many occasions the Greek Government has proved unable to perform the normal functions of a sovereign government in coping with purely internal problems, and has shown a discouraging tendency to consider that the only way to overcome any internal difficulty is to obtain increased American aid. Greece must accept its own legitimate responsibilities and be able to take care of itself when American assistance comes to an end. We have put a great deal of money into Greece during the past two years, particularly in relation to the size and population of the country. Current aid to Greece is being expended at the rate of approximately one million dollars a day, higher even than the rate for China. It must be admitted that the results have not been very encouraging. When we request appropriations from Congress for foreign assistance, we will need to be very frank about past performance, and therefore many of the discouraging factors in the Greek picture will be brought out in the open. It should be clear to the Greek Government that the United States cannot carry Greece indefinitely. Unless it can be shown that the Greeks are doing all in their power to solve their internal problems, the United States may have to decide whether the money allotted to Greece might not be used to better advantage elsewhere in the world.

When the Ambassador asked if I considered the present size of Greek armed forces sufficient to meet the guerrilla threat, I pointed out that, though I am no military expert, our officials in Greece are agreed that the present Greek Military Establishment, as now equipped, is adequate to the situation if it were well commanded and led. The failure to break the back of the guerrilla movement during the past year is mainly due, according to our reports, to a lack of leadership and morale. I referred to specific instances in the Grammos and Vitsi campaigns2 when several divisions had either refused to fight or had retreated without adequate cause. The present size of the Greek armed forces, including the increase of 15,000 approved after General Marshall’s visit to Greece,3 is very large indeed for a country the size of Greece. The Greek Army also possesses great superiority in numbers and equipment over the guerrillas, who have not increased in number during the past year. The solution would appear to lie in increasing the efficiency and determination of the present national forces, rather than by injudicious and economically crippling augmentation of the number of men under arms.

I told the Ambassador that we are also disturbed by the rapid increase in the number of refugees, which within a little over a year has grown from 300,000 to the present alarming total of 700,000, I cannot tell, of course, what has caused this, or whether it indicates a lack of confidence of the Greek people in the Government and the Government’s ability to meet the military situation. However, in view of the fact that the guerrillas control no larger areas of Greece than they did a year ago, this unexplained rise in the number of refugees suggests that something is wrong which calls for urgent correction.

As for the amount of aid for Greece and Turkey which the Department intends to request of Congress for the coming year, I told the Ambassador that I could not give him any specific figures at this time. This matter is now under consideration in the Bureau of the Budget, where the Greek-Turkish estimates are still lumped together in a contingency fund that includes assistance to other countries, such as China.

The Ambassador showed me a ticker story just received from London reporting that the signing of an Atlantic Pact is scheduled for early spring and will perhaps take place on a ship in mid-Atlantic; that Eire, Iceland, and Portugal are to be invited to join the Association; and that in all probability invitations will likewise be extended to Italy, Greece, and Turkey.4 I said that, as far as I knew, there is no truth to any of this press report. Such Mediterranean countries as Greece and Turkey could certainly not be considered a part of the North Atlantic family of nations. Furthermore, the preliminary nature of current discussions on this subject do not permit the scheduling of any meeting to “conclude a pact.” When the Ambassador mentioned the possibility of a separate Mediterranean Pact, as has been previously advocated by Mr. Tsaldaris, I said I had no views to express on such an eventuality. It is for the Mediterranean countries themselves to decide whether they wish to be associated in a regional grouping.

1 William O. Baxter, Assistant Chief, Division of Greek, Turkish, and Iranian Affairs.

2 The references here are presumably to the Greek National Army offensive against the guerrillas in the Grammos Mountains in June, July, and August 1948 and the subsequent guerrilla attack in the Vitsi Mountain area.

3 George C. Marshall, Secretary of State from January 1947 to January 1949, visited Athens from October 16 to 18, 1948. For records of the visit see Foreign Relations, 1948, vol. iv, pp. 161–168. The retirement of Secretary Marshall, who was ill, was announced on January 7, 1949. Dean G. Acheson took office as Secretary of State on January 20 and James E. Webb succeeded Robert Lovett as Under Secretary of State.

4 For documentation on the establishment of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization, see vol. iv, pp. 1 ff.

The Ambassador in Greece (Grady) to the Acting Secretary of State 868.00/1–549: Telegram

[Document 107]

The Ambassador in Greece (Grady) to the Acting Secretary of State

confidential Athens, January 5, 1949—5 p. m.

24. Embtel 2623, Dec. 28.1 Within past two days I have seen the King2 and Tsaldaris separately and discussed with both the political situation. Tsaldaris stated that he and Sophoulis3 wished to broaden govt preferably by the inclusion of Papandreou4 and perhaps Canellopoulos5 prior to reconvening of Parliament Feb. 1. No formal negotiations have yet been undertaken with Papandreou, who apparently now willing enter govt, since Tsaldaris and Sophoulis wished to have my views before taking any action. I informed Tsaldaris that US would raise no objections to broadening of govt. I pointed out to him the desirability strengthening certain ministries, if and when govt reorganized, and possible necessity subordinating party interest to secure suitable personalities for certain cabinet posts. Tsaldaris agreed with these suggestions and promised they would be put into effect in reorganized govt.

In my meeting last evening with the King I was surprised to learn his opinion that Papagos–Markezinis “solution”6 should be tried as soon as possible. King expressed belief that Grk people desired entirely new govt and situation demanded effective and efficient leadership which in King’s opinion could only be provided by Papagos–Markezinis Govt. King stated he understood Americans agreed with his opinion that it was essential to have energetic streamlined Govt by March (apparently referring by implication to period of congressional discussions Grk aid). I informed King that I did not agree with interpretation of American position. I further stated the US hoped that Greece would be able to retain parliamentary govt and democratic procedures and that we looked with favor upon the broadening of present govt by inclusion elements such as Papandreou. The King then said he would not interfere with such development.

After thorough discussion recent political events with my staff, I consider our policy should be to preserve as long as possible democratic and constitutional procedures in Greece and that we should above all avoid appearance of imposing govt of our choice on Greece except as last resort. For present therefore I believe that we should put no obstacles in way of broadening of govt as suggested by Tsaldaris but should at appropriate time and in discreet fashion suggest, but not necessarily insist upon, appropriate individuals for certain cabinet posts. We should also encourage improvement govt machinery by reduction in number of ministries (which I am informed by Tsaldaris is contemplated by Sophoulis and himself) and also by appointment of technically qualified and otherwise suitable men as permanent Directors General of various ministries. Latter will of course be gradual development but seems hold considerable promise for increased efficiency.

I should not wish these conclusions to be interpreted as closing door to other and possibly quite different developments in future. Situation may so change as to require our acceptance some extra-paraliamentary solution such as Papagos–Markezinis combination. It is my belief, however, that Grk political situation should be permitted to evolve step by step and that Papagos govt should not be precipitated into office with even tacit US encouragement in disregard normal parliamentary process. It should be recognized that no simple solution exists for Grk problem and that it is unlikely any Grk Govt can perform miracles. Order will be reestablished and reconstruction achieved here only by degrees and through hard work on part of Grks and with patience and understanding on part of Americans.

Meantime progress being made by present govt on ECA sponsored legislative program and cabinet passed decentralization law last night.

Grady

1 Not printed.

2 Paul I, King of the Hellenes.

3 Themistocles Sophoulis, Greek Prime Minister; leader of the Liberal Party.

4 George Papandreou, leader of the Socialist-Democratic Party.

5 Panayotis Kanellopoulos, leader of the National Political Union.

6 The reference here is to the possible resolution of the instability of the Greek Government by the appointment of an “extra-parliamentary” cabinet headed by retired General Alexander Papagos and including Spyridon Markezinis, leader of the New Party. It was anticipated that such a Papagos–Markezinis government would rule in the name of the King without necessarily obtaining the confirmation or support of the Parliament.

The Acting Secretary of State to the Embassy in Greece 868.00/1–549: Telegram

[Document 108]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Embassy in Greece

secret Washington, January 7, 1949—6 p. m.

27. Brit FonOff has withdrawn recent instructions to Brit Emb to discuss Grk situation on high level Wash (1) with JCS urging greatly expanded Grk army (2) with Dept to work out possible joint US–UK steps designed to strengthen Grk Govt, including early appointment Papagos1 as min defense.

Brit Emb has now approached Dept under instructions requesting that you consult with Brit Amb on “Grk political situation and question of General Papagos” with view to recommending to US and UK Govts what steps if any can be taken to improve Grk Govt and whether any joint or parallel approaches to Grk Govt or King by both Embs Athens advisable.2

If you perceive no objections, you are authorized consult with Brit Amb, referring any resultant observations or mutually agreed recommendations to Dept for comment. Suggest views outlined urtel 24 Jan 5, in which Dept concurs, might provide basis for initiating discussion.

Lovett

1 Gen. Alexander Papagos, Commander in Chief of the Greek Army, 1940–1941; in retirement.

2 The approach described here was made during a conversation on January 5 between William O. Baxter, Acting Chief of the Division of Greek, Turkish, and Iranian Affairs, and William Denis Allen, Counselor of the British Embassy in Washington. Baxter’s memorandum of the conversation is filed under 868.00/1–549.

Editorial Note [Document 109]

Editorial Note

In NSC Action 173 of January 10, 1949, the National Security Council approved the conclusions of Policy Planning Staff paper PPS 46, November 30, 1948, entitled “The Position of the United States with respect to the Use of United States Military Power in Greece.” PPS 46 concluded that the developments in the Greek situation had not been of sufficient consequence either to require the sending of United States armed forces to Greece as token forces or for military operations, or to require the reconsideration of an earlier decision that the problem of Greece did not itself necessitate the strengthening of United States forces in the Mediterranean area or the adoption of measures equivalent to the initiation of mobilization. For the text of PPS 46, circulated as a draft report to the National Security Council on November 30, 1948, see Foreign Relations, 1948, volume IV, page 205.

The Ambassador in Greece (Grady) to the Acting Secretary of State 868.00/1–1249: Telegram

[Document 110]

The Ambassador in Greece (Grady) to the Acting Secretary of State

secret Athens, January 12, 1949—7 p. m.

74. Deptel 27, January 7. We have been in almost daily contact with British whose views here and apparently in London are nearly identical with those expressed my telegram 24, January 5.1 British, however, view present Greek situation as extremely critical and wonder to what extent Americans actually share this view. In recent conversations with King and other Greek officials British Ambassador has supported broadening of present government, but he is inclined to view present political re-shuffle as Greece’s “last chance for a parliamentary government”. British impressed by statement contained Amag 1657, December 72 that Greeks must be shocked into sense of reality and believe that this might be partially accomplished by British-American démarche to Greek Government and King when present government changes completed. This would be in nature of warning as to overriding necessity sinking personal and political differences at this critical hour. It would be necessary, British feel, to make public statement at same time since otherwise grave warning would scarcely differ from many statements a similar nature we have made privately to Greek politicians. I feel there is merit in British suggestion, effort is being made to draft agreed statement setting forth position of US and British Embassies with its utilization to be discussed subsequently.

Discussions with British will be continued. Meanwhile, any views Department may have on British suggestion for joint or parallel approach to Greeks will be welcome.

Sent Department, repeated London as 4.

Grady

1  Ante, p. 233 [Pg. 233 includes portions of Doc. 106 and Doc. 107]. Telegram 221, January 18, from London, not printed, stated that the British Foreign Office had informed the British Ambassador in Greece, Sir Clifford Norton, that Foreign Secretary Ernest Bevin wanted to see a broadly based parliamentary government in Greece and the avoidance of dictatorship (868.00/1–1849).

2  Foreign Relations, 1948, vol. iv, p. 210.

The Special Representative in Europe for the Economic Cooperation Administration (Harriman) to the Ambassador in Greece (Grady) 868.00/1–1749: Telegram

[Document 111]

The Special Representative in Europe for the Economic Cooperation Administration (Harriman) to the Ambassador in Greece (Grady)1

secret   urgent Paris, January 13, 1949—8 p. m.

[Unnumbered.] Ref urtel 2 January 12th.2 Eyes only for Ambassador Grady from Harriman. In my talk with King at tea, at which no one was present but the Queen and Mrs. Harriman, both King and Queen discussed the political situation and many aspects of life in Greece, including the charitable activities of the Queen. Our talk covered a variety of personal matters such as the times we had met before, the proposed parachuting of the King in Greece during the war, the arrival of the Mountbattens,3 the proposed visit of the Queen to the US, etc.

On the political situation, I listened attentively as he expressed his ideas, with which you are familiar, for dealing with a crisis which he foresaw developing. I of course expressed no views except to urge him to take no steps without full discussion with you and to point out the obvious dangers of adverse reaction at home. There is no justification for his considering that I endorsed his proposals.

It may be revealing for you to know that Cyrus Sulzberger4 told me in conversation with the King the following day, the King told him that both you and I approved and would support his program. Sulzberger readily accepted my statement that this was not true as to either of us. I have just phoned Sulzberger to confirm the above which he did, asking me that it be kept confidential as far as the King is concerned.5

I have no memo of my talk with the King as nothing developed which had not been previously reported by you.

In my talk with Markezinis, Perkins [Nuveen?] was present and can give you full report. Markezinis’ English is so bad that I did not get a clear understanding of his ideas. Perkins carried on discussion in greater detail after I left.

Harriman

1 The source text was transmitted to the Department of State as an enclosure to despatch 44, January 17, from Athens, not printed.

2 Ambassador W. Averell Harriman, Special Representative in Europe for the Economic Cooperation Administration, accompanied by his wife and a small party, made an official visit to Athens from December 29, 1948, to January 3, 1949. The visit was centered on matters relating to the Economic Cooperation Administration. Despatch 131, February 14, from Athens, not printed, briefly reviewed Ambassador Harriman’s itinerary in Athens. Accompanied by Counselor of Embassy Karl Rankin, serving as Chargé during Ambassador Grady’s trip to Washington for consultation, and John Nuveen, Jr., the Chief of the ECA Mission in Greece, Ambassador Harriman called on Prime Minister Sophoulis on the afternoon of December 30. Harriman, Rankin, and Nuveen also participated in a conference with members of the Greek cabinet on the evening of December 30. On the afternoon of January 1, Ambassador and Mrs. Harriman were the guests of the Greek King and Queen at an intimate tea. At King Paul’s request. Harriman met and spoke briefly with Spyridon Markezinis. Ambassador Grady returned from Washington on January 2 and conferred at length with Ambassador Harriman that day. The Harriman party departed for Paris via Rome on January 3 (840.50 Recovery/2–1449). In the telegram under reference here, not printed, Ambassador Grady reported that King Paul had recently told him that he was thinking of a solution to the current political crisis in terms of the immediate formation of a Papagos–Markezinis government. The King indicated to Grady that he had discussed with Ambassador Harriman such a solution and that Harriman had endorsed it. Grady asked Harriman for a record of his political talks with the King: (868.00/1–1749).

3 Earl Mountbatten of Burma, former Supreme Allied Commander in Southeast Asia (1943–1946) and former Viceroy and Governor General of the Dominion of India (1947–4948).

4 Cyrus L. Sulzberger, chief foreign correspondent for the New York Times, flew to Athens with Ambassador and Mrs. Harriman on December 27 and returned with them on January 3. For his detailed account of his conversation with King Paul on January 2 and his talks with Harriman on the flight from Athens to Paris, see C. L. Sulzberger, A Long Row of Candles: Memoirs and Diaries [1934–1954] (n.p.: The Macmillan Company, 1969), pp. 428–431.

5 In his telegram 112, January 17, from Athens, not printed, Ambassador Grady observed that he was prepared to accept the statement made by Ambassador Harriman, but he added: “… I have seen minutes of conversation between Harriman and the King and Nuveen and the King (three days later) in which both are reported to have pressed their well known (to me) views. Both are reported to have insisted on drastic solution (along lines of their views) if aid to Greece was to continue. According to minutes of conversation Nuveen ended his remarks to King by stating he knew his and Harriman’s views were not those of the Ambassador and most people in State Department. Nuveen told me a week ago he did not discuss political matter with the King.” (868.00/1–1749)

The Acting Secretary of State to the Embassy in Greece 868.20/1–1449: Telegram

[Document 112]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Embassy in Greece

secret Washington, January 14, 1949—6 p. m.

Gama 7. Dept has received ltr from Sec Royall recommending Grk Govt be informed Tsaldaris request to Royall for temporary 15,000 increase GNA carefully considered, but does not appear justified this time.

Ltr expresses opinion GNA possesses means suppress guerrillas if given proper leadership and Govt support. Also notes each previous temp increase GNA has proved permanent. Letter states old ineffective GNA personnel can he eliminated by discharging immed many as possible without adverse effect on operations and by maximum utilization output existing training facilities to replace remaining ineffective personnel. Dept concurs Royall’s views.1

Request you advise Greek Govt US cannot approve request for temp increase, citing foregoing reasons. Also request you take this opportunity reiterate US position along general line penultimate and last substantive paras your ltr Nov 2 to Prim Min2 and line Lovett Dendramis conversation contained Dept Instr no. 5, Jan 10.3 Dept hopeful constant repetition US position by US officials Athens and Wash may bring Grk leaders appreciation realities Greece’s position vis-à-vis competing demands for US aid and our consequent diminishing returns Grk lobbying tactics.

Re recent 10,000 GNA call-up,4 Dept understands 5000 spaces presently available within authorized 147,000 [197,000?] ceiling and that Grk Govt has promised either assume full drachma responsibility for training remaining 5000 or make spaces available by immed release 5000 ineffectives (Van Fleet’s L 23685 ). Since support Grk economy depends entirely upon US assistance, any suggestion Grk Govt can independently assume drachma expense troop increase completely fatuous. Dept recommends you insist upon immediate release 5000 ineffectives in order create spaces for total call-up within authorized ceiling. Dept apprehensive Grk Govt may be encouraged attempt other similar maneuvers if such action allowed to pass unopposed.

Lovett

1 Secretary of the Army Kenneth C. Royall’s letter of January 11, 1949, to the Secretary of State under reference here is not printed (868.20/1–1149). Foreign Minister Tsaldaris’ request was made to Secretary Royall during the latter’s visit to Athens on his December 1948 European inspection trip.

2 See Foreign Relations, 1948, vol. iv, p. 179, footnote 6.

3 The instruction under reference is not printed; for the record of the Acting Secretary’s conversation of January 4 with Ambassador Dendramis, see p. 231 [Pg. 231 is part of Doc. 106].

4 Ten thousand men were scheduled to be called into Greek military service in early January 1949.

5 In the message under reference, dated December 29, 1948, not printed, Lt. Gen. James A. Van Fleet, Director, Joint U.S. Military Advisory and Planning Group in Greece, reported that Greek Minister of War Constantine Rendis had issued a press release to the effect that any overstrength in the Greek Army beyond the 197,000 approved by the American military advisory group would be supported by the Greek budget.

The Ambassador in Greece (Grady) to the Acting Secretary of State 868.01/1–1849: Telegram

[Document 113]

The Ambassador in Greece (Grady) to the Acting Secretary of State

restricted
urgent Athens, January 18, 1949—5 p. m.

118. Following memorandum in my name sent to King’s Political Adviser Metaxas January 18:1

“Referring to our conversation of this morning, I would like clarify the American position with regard to the present crisis in the Greek Government.

I have said on a number of occasions that the responsibility for the Greek Government lies with the Greek people. It has been and is my desire merely to be of such assistance as I can in giving advice when it is sought. Naturally, we are interested in a strong and efficient government as an essential to the success of our whole aid program, both the military and economic. It has been my conviction, and the Department of State fully concurs in this, that a strong and efficient government can be secured and maintained through democratic, parliamentary processes. It is my conviction that it is possible at this time to get a strong government by the normal constitutional process. Whatever may develop in the future that might call for emergency measures on the part of the King, it does not seem to me that that time has yet arrived.

I am clarifying these points to you because I want to be sure that the American position is understood by the King and the people of Greece.”

Grady

1 In his telegram 117, January 18, from Athens, not printed, Ambassador Grady explained the circumstances attending the delivery of this memorandum as follows: “Because I found that King and Queen still seem to feel that influential American governmental opinion was behind drastic solution of present crisis, I have after conversation with King’s political adviser Metaxas handed him memo. I will repeat this personally to the King after luncheon today. King seems to be moving toward non-parliamentary solution by imposing Papagos–Markezinis combination if other leaders fail comply literally with this demand for all-party government.” (868.00/1–1849)

In his telegram 121, January 19, from Athens, not printed, Ambassador Grady reported that British Ambassador Norton, Earl Mountbatten, and he lunched on January 18 with King Paul, and all three endeavored to impress the King with the necessity of proceeding within constitutional and parliamentary framework and to avoid any radical solution to the political question (868.00/1–1949). In his telegram 149, January 22, from Athens, not printed, Ambassador Grady attributed to Lord Mountbatten, who was then staying at the royal palace and had the full confidence of King Paul, the decisive role in persuading the King to avoid non-parliamentary courses of action (868.00/1–2249).

The Ambassador in Greece (Grady) to the Secretary of State 868.002/1–2149: Telegram

[Document 114]

The Ambassador in Greece (Grady) to the Secretary of State

confidential Athens, January 21, 1949—5 p. m.

138. Mytel 133, January 20. New Sophoulis government while on whole mere reshuffle predecessor governments contains new elements with inclusion Markezinis’ new party and recall of General Papagos to active duty as Commander-in-Chief.1 While some new appointments such as Tsatsos as Minister Education2 are commended, general level cabinet ability does not seem appreciably higher than previous government and criterion of appointment emphasizes party interest rather than outstanding qualifications. However, shock which political leaders received from King in recent crisis and fear that this may be last chance to work out parliamentary solution may cause political leaders to subordinate personal and party interests to common good. Also Sophoulis may now feel that he has stronger mandate and firmer grip on government and thus proceed with social program and more dynamic policy in general. It should be recognized that government is broad coalition including traditionally incompatible elements, hence unanimity will be difficult attain.

Populists have again yielded in relative position and although full control one or two Ministries these are generally speaking of minor importance and Tsaldaris is no longer deputy Prime Minister. Liberals, while not gaining in portfolios, control key positions and Diomedes although nominally independent was strong supporter of elder Venizelos. Sophocles Venizelos who has not placed his key men in government probably will continue uncertain and unreliable element.

In summary, while government is not outstanding in individual ability or of inspiring composition, it does offer some hope for improvement. Greek press and public welcome new government as indicating ending of political crisis and adopt rather cautious passive attitude of approval. I believe US should give government every encouragement in hope it will forget partisan interest and get on with task of saving and rehabilitating Greece. Next following telegram gives clear text of press statement I made today regarding government.3

Sent Department 138, pouched Salonika.

Grady

1 On January 15, Prime Minister Sophoulis submitted his resignation to King Paul. Following 4 days of intensive negotiations among Greek political leaders, agreement was reached on the formation of a cabinet under Prime Minister Sophoulis including representatives from four of the major Greek political parties. In this new Sophoulis cabinet, Alexander Diomedes (no party affiliation) was Deputy Prime Minister, Tsaldaris continued as Foreign Minister, Sophocles Venizelos (leader of one wing of the Liberal Party) and Spyridon Markezinis were Ministers Without Portfolio, and Panayotis Kanellopoulos was Minister of War. At the same time, General Alexander Papagos was recalled from retirement and named Commander in Chief of the Greek Army. The telegram under reference here transmitted the names of the new cabinet sworn in on January 20 (868.01/1–2049). On February 4 the Greek Parliament gave the new cabinet an overwhelming vote of confidence.

2 Constantinos Tsatos, member of the National Union Party.

3 The Embassy press statement under reference here, the text of which was transmitted in telegram 139, January 21, from Athens, not printed, expressed approval of the solution of the governmental crisis along parliamentary lines. The statement also emphasized that there had been no intervention by the Embassy to exclude any of the parliamentary parties or their leaders from the new cabinet (868.00/1–2149).

Memorandum Prepared by the Embassy in Greece Athens Embassy Files: 350 Greece

[Document 115]

Memorandum Prepared by the Embassy in Greece 1

secret Athens, January 27, 1949.

Appraisal of the Greek Situation and Recommendations for Future Action

The formation of the new Sophoulis Government provides an opportunity for a fresh appraisal of the Greek situation and for a reconsideration of our policy in the various fields of activity.

appraisal of the situation

The Greek situation during the past year or more has degenerated. We have hardly held the line. A continuation of the present trend may bring defeat. In a military sense, failure to eliminate the organized bandits in 1948, the setback at Vitsi and the violent large scale attacks on isolated towns, such as Karditsa and Naoussa, have resulted in lower morale and lessened already poor aggressive spirit. Economically, while there has been some accomplishment, the line has hardly been held. Funds have been diverted to military purposes and the refugee problem has grown to fantastic proportions. Politically, the situation has deteriorated with politicians engrossed in personal and party matters and progressively losing the confidence of the people. The politicians have tended to discredit themselves, the traditional political parties, and to a considerable degree the parliamentary system by continuing to play partisan politics at a time of national emergency. Psychologically, the position is dangerous, with lowered morale of the military and civilian elements and with a growing feeling of hopelessness and despair.

causes of situation

The causes of the situation are of two varieties, one of basic character which it is difficult to eliminate and one less fundamental which is more susceptible of improvement. Among the former are war weariness from eight years of travail, feeling that Greece has been let down on the international level, a belief that this is in any event a war between the powers, and a growing cynical attitude that war is coming and the Greeks should think of the future. In the second category, defeatism has been spread not only by military failure and political degeneration, but also by what might be called “the unconscious will to failure”. This last has been built up partly unconsciously by Greek officials who preached that Greece must fail unless the frontiers are closed, unless additional aid is given by the United States and unless the Greek Army is increased in size and equipment. The Greek Army can hardly be expected to fight aggressively when its own military and political leaders advance a dangerous defeatist doctrine.

remedies for the situation

While we are committed to a policy of no further increase in the size of the Greek Army we should bear in mind the possibility that the Greeks simply will not respond to our shock treatment. If we meet Greek obstinancy on this score with an intransigent attitude of our own, we may be faced with choosing between the alternatives of acceeding to the request or facing defeat. We should therefore remain flexible on this point.

It is doubtful that a mere increase in the size of the army will save the situation. Further remedy must lie on the international plane through a stronger attitude on the part of the United Nations. But even with a larger army and with United Nations assistance the real solution for the Greek problem is to bring about increased morale on the part of the population and a more aggressive spirit on the part of the army.

In the political field the Greek Government must respond to the will of the people and have the confidence of the masses. Politicians must stop politicking and begin to sacrifice personal interest for the common good. The Government must carry out a program of social and economic reform, decentralization, suppression of excesses, and as soon as possible hold municipal elections. The Greek Government must make a serious attempt to win the confidence and trust of the masses of the people. The politicians must subordinate party interests and give an example of sacrifice. The social and economic reforms inherent in ERP must be publicized in concrete terms—social insurance is a good example. Moves tending toward equality of sacrifice must be adopted and fully explained—the beginnings of equable taxation measures and their necessary concomitants such as the keeping of books are illustrative. Indications should be provided that the people will have their say in choosing their own kind of government—immediate resumption of the yearly revision of the electoral lists, local elections in the Dodecanese, et cetera, are possibilities. Only through top political leadership will the masses abandon their feeling of hopelessness which is leading more and more to neutrality in the civil war. The refugee situation must be tackled more energetically. Scandals such as the Bacopoulos affair2 must be mercilessly put down to show the people that the Government is not an instrument of the privileged class. Since the war cannot be won by military means alone, reconstruction and rehabilitation must to the extent possible, go forward at once. Militarily there must be more inspired leadership. The Government must cease its disruptive interferences in military matters. Failures such as Karditsa and Naoussa and Karpenisi should be investigated and the responsible persons punished.

We should, in a full dress meeting with the Greeks, insist that they stop forthwith endeavoring to solve all their difficulties by asking for additional American aid. The Greeks must adopt a realistic attitude of carrying on the fight with what we have provided and can provide under existing appropriations and then preach to the armed forces a dynamic doctrine of victory. We should insist that leaders who are tainted with the doctrine of defeatism be removed.

The new Sophoulis Government, while little more than a recasting of previous governments, differs in two fundamental respects from what has gone before. In the first place, Sophoulis has a more clear mandate for action than he had under the other coalition Governments. Second, the Greek politicians have received in the last week severe shock treatment which it is hoped will bring them to their senses. There is hope therefore that the Government will be vitalized. Politicians realize that the eyes of the people are on them and that another failure on their part will almost surely bring about a solution outside the parliamentary framework. We should therefore give the present Government not only encouragement but guidance and leadership to insure the carrying out of its tasks. If Sophoulis proves physically and mentally incapable of carrying out his tasks, we should encourage his resignation and in any case insist on a responsible executive who will make decisions and see that they are carried out.

While we should continue to encourage democratic and parliamentary solutions of the Greek political situation, we should not oppose an extra-parliamentary solution as a last resort and as a natural evolution. We should, in this case, endeavor to prevent such a Government from developing into a dictatorship and from taking actions which will weaken or discredit Greece.

1 This memorandum, which was drafted by Counselor of Embassy Harold B. Minor and Embassy Second Secretary Robert G. Miner, was directed to Ambassador Grady.

2 The reference here is to the case of the former treasurer of a Greek shipping firm who absconded to Argentina after having been accused of embezzling a large amount of company funds in the course of alleged smuggling activities.

Editorial Note [Document 116]

Editorial Note

In an informal action taken on February 4, 1949, the State–Army–Navy–Air Force Coordinating Committee (SANACC) concurred in the redefinition by the Joint Chiefs of Staff of United States long-range strategic interests in the military establishments of Greece and Turkey as a basis for planning with respect to the extent and type of future United States military aid to Greece and Turkey. For the text of the redefinition by the Joint Chiefs of Staff, as originally circulated in document SANACC 358/8, November 24, 1948, see paragraph 8 of document NSC 42/1, March 22, 1949, page 271 [Pg. 271 is part of Doc. 133].

The Ambassador in Greece (Grady) to the Secretary of State 868.00(W)/2–749: Telegram

[Document 117]

The Ambassador in Greece (Grady) to the Secretary of State

secret Athens, February 7, 1949—5 p. m.

228. Joint Weeka No. 12, Part III Military, January 29.1 Saturday, February 5 at 5 o’clock there was a full meeting of the War Council with the King presiding. All members were present. Purpose of meeting was “announcements by the Commander-in-Chief”.

The War Council met irregularly during the remainder of 1949. The composition of the Council was later modified in response to subsequent changes in the composition of the Greek cabinet.

I have been having great deal of renewed pressure from members of Government recently for increase in army requested in Sophoulis letter September 30.2 I know that definite drive along this line both by the Government and press was in offing. Saturday’s meeting was raising of the curtain. The meeting and report by General Papagos were obviously almost entirely for MA benefit. His presentation took an hour and a half. He reviewed status of the Greek Army, its power and morale and those of guerrilla forces. He was addressing himself throughout to thesis that size of Greek Army was inadequate to do job which Greece’s “allies” are expecting of Greece. He made it appear that his acceptance of position of Commander-in-Chief was based on understanding that he would be given the size army he considers that he requires. In his statement he overlooked fact that I had by letter to Prime Minister completely disassociated ourselves from any such understanding or agreement in connection with his appointment. He attributed disasters of Vitsi, Naoussa, Karditsa and Karpenision entirely to lack of adequate forces, although he is in process of disciplining the generals in command of these areas for failure to perform their duty. High point of his statement was to effect that 250,000 man army had been requested officially of me, of General Marshall, and of Secretary Royall and nothing had happened. Again he ignored fact that on November 2, I had given Greek Government our Government’s reply to Mr. Sophoulis’ request and have sent copies of my reply very recently to members of the present government, including Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of War. This position has been reiterated on a number of occasions in other letters to Greek Government.

After finishing statement, he read letters from General Van Fleet and General Down written in reply to request from him for comments on military situation. In neither of these letters was it stated that fault was lack of adequate forces. Both generals had commented on necessity of improving command, organization and training and will to fight.

Not only what Papagos said, but tone in which he said it deeply disturbed me. In the vernacular, he was telling us off. He did not threaten directly to resign, but quoted his letter to the Prime Minister of last fall in which he said that if he did not get army of 250,000 within 4 months after assuming command, he would resign.

My views were not requested at meeting, but I commented informally to several of the ministers after meeting ended that I had never heard or read any statement, even by most cynical critics of Greece, which was more discouraging in outlook than that of General Papagos, and that it was fortunate that members of Appropriations Committee of Congress were not present to hear the statement because it would have dramatically brought to their minds the query as to whether our present aid is not completely wasted. I made a point of saying this particularly to Markezinis who, I believe, arranged whole affair, including presiding by the King. Papagos statement was in script, apparently in his own handwriting, and no copies were made available to those who attended meeting. Papagos is forcing the Government to go ahead with the calling up of conscripts without reference to authorized ceiling. Canellopoulos, Minister of War, had previously announced, and Papagos repeated it in his statement, that officers’ salaries will be raised, special funds made available for families of officers and soldiers and a number of other things done which represent, in the aggregate, large drachma expenditures. These items have been put in the proposed budget which our Finance people are studying. Several of the items will alone cost drachma equivalent of $15,000,000. Not only have these items been put in the proposed budget, but legislation has been drafted which is shortly to be submitted with reference to increased allowances for families of soldiers. Papagos said that if the “allies” (I do not know why he used the plural) did not provide the funds necessary for what he regards as an adequate army, the Government itself must do so by some forms of confiscatory taxes. He apparently has no conception of the financial or economic side of the Greek problem. I could not help but think as I listened to him with the King on my left, that this is the man the King wants for Prime Minister.

I am having prepared a memorandum reviewing whole question of requests by Government (in the case of Papagos, it is more of a demand than request) as well as a statement of the budgetary situation. I shall again call the Government’s attention to fact that if there are any proper sources of taxation not yet tapped, these must be tapped to help balance the budget now burdened with heavy deficit. Moreover, I shall point out that in going ahead with an unauthorized expansion of the army, under pressure from Papagos, the Government is violating its agreement upon which our aid program is based.

War Council intends to have another meeting shortly to consider Papagos statement. Assumption on our side appears to be that Council members, including myself, must accept Papagos position and find ways and means of satisfying his demands.

I shall state to Government, after sending my memorandum, that I shall not attend next meeting of the War Council but that I will be represented by Van Fleet, since I will assume that meeting will concern itself entirely with technical military questions within scope of an army not greater than that which we have repeatedly stated we would finance.

I shall send highlights of my memorandum by cable and full memorandum by air pouch.

Grady

1 Telegram MID–41, February 1, from Athens, transmitting Joint Weeka (the weekly review of major military and related political events prepared by military and political officers of the American missions in Greece) No. 12, not printed, reported that a law defining the powers and composition of the “War Council” had been promulgated on January 28. The War Council included the following members: Prime Minister Sophoulis, Deputy Prime Minister Diomedes, Minister of War Kanellopoulos, Minister of Navy Gerasimos Vassiliadis, Minister of the Air Force Aristides Protopapadakis, Minister of Foreign Affairs Tsaldaris, Minister of Public Order Constantine Rendis, Commander in Chief General Papagos, Ambassador Grady (in his capacity as Chief of the American Mission for Aid to Greece), Lt. Gen. James Van Fleet (in his capacity as Director, Joint U.S. Military Advisory and Planning Group in Greece), and Maj. Gen. Ernest E. Down, Commander of the British Military Mission in Greece. The Council was authorized to decide general questions relating to the defense of the country, appoint major military officers after competent ministerial proposals, and to submit emergency laws and decrees to competent ministries. (868.00 (W)/2–149)

2 For documentation on the Sophoulis letter under reference and the subsequent American reply thereto, see Foreign Relations, 1948, vol. iv, pp. 1 ff.

The Chief of the American Mission for Aid to Greece (Grady) to the Greek Minister of Foreign Affair’s (Tsaldaris) Athens Embassy Files: 420 Greek Army

[Document 118]

The Chief of the American Mission for Aid to Greece (Grady) to the Greek Minister of Foreign Affair’s (Tsaldaris)1

[Athens,] February 15, 1949.

Excellency: I have been instructed by my Government to convey to Your Excellency as Minister of Foreign Affairs of Greece the following communication from the Secretary of State of the United States.

“I have been greatly disturbed at the reports I have received of the announcement read by General Papagos at the session of the War Council held Saturday February 5, in Athens.2

The position of the U.S. Government with respect to any further substantial increase in the Greek armed forces was made abundantly clear in Ambassador Grady’s letter of November 2, 1948 to the Prime Minister.3 It has been reiterated on several occasions. It was also made clear to His Majesty King Paul and to the Greek Government that the United States saw ‘no objection to the appointment of General Papagos (as Commander-in-Chief), if that was desire of the Greek Government, but that two of the General’s conditions, namely limiting the authority of the Allied Military Missions and increasing the Greek Army to at least 250,000 men, were not acceptable.’ These important reservations, set forth in Ambassador Grady’s letter of December 6, 1948 to the Prime Minister,4 must have been known to General Papagos when he accepted the position of Commander-in-Chief January 10.

Under these circumstances you will appreciate the unfortunate impression that has been created here by reports that the Greek Government is proceeding to call up conscripts without reference to the authorized ceiling or the availability of funds and by the fact that General Papagos has again raised the question of a substantial increase in Greek Army and has implied that the granting of such an increase was a condition of his acceptance of his present post.

It remains the opinion of the United States Government that the Greek National Forces now have sufficient manpower and equipment, given adequate leadership, training and offensive spirit, to reduce the guerrilla menace to police proportions. It remains our opinion that any increase in the Greek National Army of scale proposed by General Papagos, even if it appeared to be warranted militarily, would impose an intolerable burden on the Greek economy, and would involve expenditures of money and material by the United States which would be incompatible with a balanced program of foreign military aid.

It is the firm policy of the United States to assist the Greek people by all reasonable means in their resistance to Communist aggression. I propose to exert my best efforts to ensure the successful continuation and implementation of that policy. In this, however, I must ask you for your cooperation and for the cooperation of the Greek Government and of General Papagos, in whose military qualities and capacity for leadership we have great confidence. The essential basis for such cooperation must be the understanding that the United States Government cannot be coerced into extending aid to Greece in an amount contrary to its own best judgment and beyond its capacity.

I have recently been considerably heartened by the new spirit which has apparently taken hold in the Greek Army since General Papagos assumed command, by progress being made in the Peloponnesus, by the valiant exploits of your Commando units, and by the signs of dissension within the enemy camp. It is my earnest hope that this promising outlook will not be compromised by the perpetuation of a fruitless debate between the Greek Government and its foreign friends or by lack of confidence on the part of Greek leadership in its ability to win through to victory with the means at hand.”

I wish to request Your Excellency to provide copies of this communication to His Majesty King Paul, to the Prime Minister, and to the Deputy Prime Minister.

Please accept [etc.]

Henry F. Grady

1 Instructions regarding the delivery of this letter were contained in telegram 182, February 11, to Athens, not printed (868.20/2–849). In despatch 25, March 12, from the American Mission for Aid to Greece, not printed, Ambassador Grady explained that in view of certain local considerations, particularly the necessity of maintaining the authority and prestige of General Papagos, a few minor changes had been made in the draft text of the letter transmitted in telegram 182, but no alteration was effected in the meaning or general tone of the communication. Ambassador Grady further explained that no formal response to the communication had been received. The Ambassador was certain, however, that the communication had been most beneficial in making clear to the Greek Government the firm policy of the United States in regard to the size of the Greek Army (868.20/3–1249). Ambassador Grady addressed this letter to Foreign Minister Tsaldaris in his concurrent capacity as Chief of the American Mission for Aid to Greece. The American Mission administered, in cooperation with the Greek Government, the economic, technical, and material assistance given to Greece by the United States.

2 Regarding the War Council meeting referred to here, see telegram 228, supra.

3 Regarding the letter under reference here, see Foreign Relations, 1948, vol. iv, p. 179, footnote 6.

4 Not printed.

The Ambassador in Yugoslavia (Cannon) to the Secretary of State 868.00/2–1649: Telegram

[Document 119]

The Ambassador in Yugoslavia (Cannon) to the Secretary of State

secret Belgrade, February 16, 1949—6 p. m.

161. Recent political events in Greek CP 1 seems to us not only part peace drive lately revived by Zachariades but also external indications of an altered Communist strategy in Greece which seeks turn guerrilla movement into eventual agency of Cominform’s anti-Tito2 program.

Our analysis is handicapped by paucity information available here. Yugoslav press has maintained strict silence past two weeks on guerrilla developments except to note party session held January 30–31 and Markos’ resignation for ill health. Assuming correctness press reports and information sent other mission here that Zachariades has been confirmed as party leader, Joannides given civil and military posts of Markos, Chryssa Hadjivassiliou purged with Markos, and that “right opportunist deviation in CPG” were main subject recent session we think pieces form picture suggestive possibilities for profound changes in Balkan relations.

Starting point of analysis is construction “right opportunist deviations”. While conceding lack of precision in Cominform’s current lateral definitions of Yugoslav deviationism we think this term one that would naturally be used indicate either incipient independence by Markos or excessive reliance on Tito. We would note here we have never seen unequivocal denunciation of Tito by Markos on Cominform issue nor does guerrilla radio appear have participated in Cominform’s anti-CPY clamor. Markos’ reticence or attempt maintain neutrality doubtless became especially reprehensible to Soviets in recent period when Macedonian question has again come to fore. Rankovic disclosure at Serbian CP Congress of Stalin’s 1945 endorsement Yugoslavs Southern Slav Federation formula (Embtel 70, January 203 ) just ten days before announcement Markos purge seemed curious as to time and place and may be related schismatic development in CPG. There is also negative evidence that if Markos dismissed in disciplinary or tactical dispute he could have been described as casualty with no mention deviationism in CPG. Finally fact Yugoslav press has omitted any reference to CPG agenda item on right opportunism seems significant. We think therefore, assumptions reasonable that “right opportunist deviations” means pro-Titoism and that Markos was dismissed at least in part on this issue.

Cominform strategy then had face dilemma (1) Markos could not be sustained except by use some Yugoslav facilities and certainly he could not push much further without full Yugoslav logistical cooperation but (2) links between Markos and Tito would thereby be strengthened thus reinforcing latter within his most sensitive area. Situation could perhaps have been tolerated if prospects were good for early guerrilla triumph but as no signs have developed of US withdrawal Communist military victory must appear remote.

Kremlin strategy may thus have shifted to new peace drive of Zachariades launched only two days before Greek CP met. Note that in latest guerrilla offer specific terms are set forth (Embtel 93 January 284 ). We think this drive intended to be taken very seriously and while its original terms doubtless represent initial bargaining position we may be faced with highly aggressive conciliatoriness on Greece by Cominform states at next GA. Purge of Hadjivassiliou, who last summer was reported as leading guerrilla activist in addition her relationship with Markos, would appear consistent. New Florina offensive may be designed strengthen peace drive while demonstrating guerrillas not affected by leadership change.

If Kremlin can achieve period of peace in Greece respite from shooting would give it chance try again its coalition tactic of subversion and infiltration and would give Greek CP time purge its ranks of Titoists and regroup for closer coordination with Bulgaria and Albania. I seem to remember that Joannides was precisely the Greek Communist who about 1942 made agreement with Bulgarian comrades for settlement Macedonian question along Bulgarian lines. Cominform may indeed have decided Yugoslavia and not Greece is its immediate Balkan objective.

Such shift would greatly embarrass Tito since Yugoslav Government could not publicly oppose conciliation although aware truce period would be used to undermine its Macedonian position. Cominform may well expect Yugoslavs respond by making their own arrangements with Athens in order prevent southern encirclement. Aim would be, of course, cause Tito loss in party solidarity in Macedonia as well as give proof to Cominform thesis of imperialist subjugation.

How clearly Yugoslav Government senses these possibilities we do not know. Bebler5 last week told me he was perplexed by recent events. Agit-prop sections have been remarkably quiet. In unofficial conversations Yugoslav officials have taken position they know nothing about recent guerrilla events and are hoping receive copy Zachariades political report. They have given almost categorical assurances Markos is not in Yugoslavia and yesterday volunteered they had heard he was in Moscow under arrest.

We feel Yugoslav Government will continue move with caution and deliberateness and that no sudden reversals their policy on Greece are to be expected. Tide of events may be slowly moving toward some form Yugoslav-Greek accommodation but situation still does not seem have clarified in thinking of CPY or its Politburo as to Yugoslavia’s real defensive needs in this new period.

If we are right Greece and US both in short and long run can only benefit by Soviets attempts turn guerrillas against Tito. We think any precipitate action on our part in present highly delicate juncture can only retard change in Yugoslavia’s Greek policy. It is only when events have convinced them of their own strategic vulnerability that genuine and stable basis will have been established for Yugoslav-Greek understanding.6

Sent Department 161; repeated Athens 5, Moscow 27, pouched London, Paris, Rome, Sofia.

Cannon

1 At the Fifth Session of the Central Committee of the Greek Communist Party, held somewhere in the Grammos Mountains, January 29–30, 1949, there was a change in the leadership of the Communist-led guerrilla movement. Markos Vafiades (“General Markos”), Premier and Minister of War of the so-called Provisional Greek Democratic Government and Commander of the so-called Democratic Army of Greece, the military establishment of the guerrillas, was removed from these posts and was also dropped as a member of the Politburo of the Greek Communist Party. Khrysa Hatzivasileiou (Chryssa Hadzivassiliou), a prominent functionary in the guerrilla movement, was also dropped from the Politburo of the Greek Communist Party. Some days later the guerrillas announced that Vafiades and Hatzivasileiou had relinquished their positions for reasons of ill health. It was further announced that Yiannis Ioannides, Vice Premier in the Provisional Greek Democratic Government and member of the Politburo of the Greek Communist Party had become Acting Premier. Nikos Zachariades, Secretary General of the Greek Communist Party, assumed the military command of the guerrilla forces.

2 Marshal Tito (Josip Broz), Yugoslav Prime Minister and Minister of Defense; Secretary General of the Yugoslav Communist Party. For documentation on the attitude of the United States in the conflict between Yugoslavia and the Soviet Union and other members of the Communist Information Bureau, see vol. v, pp. 854 ff.

3 Not printed. On January 18, 1949, Alexander Ranković, Yugoslav Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of Interior, member of the Politburo of the Yugoslav Communist Party as well as member of the Central Committee of the Serbian Communist Party, addressed a session of the Second Congress of the Serbian Communist Party and made several revelations regarding the early negotiations between Yugoslavia and Bulgaria on the subject of a South Slav Federation. Ranković indicated that Marshal Stalin agreed in 1945 to the entry of Bulgaria into such a union on the basis of equality with Serbia and Croatia. Telegram 70 under reference here analyzed Ranković’s speech in some detail (760H.74/1–2149).

4 Not printed; it commented on an offer recently made known by the guerrillas to halt the civil war. A halt in the war would be contingent upon the Greek Government’s meeting several special conditions. (760H.68/1–2849)

5 Aleš Bebler, Yugoslav Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs.

6 In his telegram 347, February 24, from Athens, not printed, Ambassador Grady reported that the generally accepted Greek interpretation of the Markos ouster was similar to that set forth here. Grady minimized, however, the possibility that Markos was either pro-Bulgarian or linked in some way with Tito. Grady also argued that it would be both desirable and possible to convince Yugoslav leaders of the dangers inherent in the pro-Cominform guerrilla movement on Yugoslavia’s southern frontier and the stupidity of aiding forces which if successful would constitute a further threat to Yugoslav interests. (868.00/2–2449)

Editorial Note [Document 120]

Editorial Note

Document NSC 18/2, February 17, 1949, which was approved by President Truman, set forth a revised policy on economic relations between the United States and Yugoslavia. Telegrams 92, February 25, to Belgrade, repeated to Athens as 256, and 288, March 2, to Athens, repeated to Belgrade as 99, explained the anticipated result of this revised policy on Yugoslav relations with Greece and the Greek guerrillas. Officers of the Department of State also discussed the matter with Greek Ambassador Vassili Dendramis on March 1. The documents identified here are included in volume V, pages 854 ff.

The Acting United States Representative on the United Nations Special Committee on the Balkans (Drew) to the Secretary of State 501.BB Balkans/2–1949: Telegram

[Document 121]

The Acting United States Representative on the United Nations Special Committee on the Balkans (Drew) to the Secretary of State 1

secret Athens, February 19, 1949—noon.

308. Combal 368. From Drew. During last fortnight have had several exploratory talks with Pipinelis2 regarding conciliatory role of Special Committee. Largely as outcome he has given me and British representatives tentative draft of communication which Greek Government would be disposed to address to committee in reply to projected communication asking Greek Government for its suggestions on possible conciliatory move.

This draft document, a copy of which going forward by air mail3 is premised on hope that recent hints of Yugoslav rapprochement with West and Markos’ purge presage reversal of Yugoslav policy towards Greek guerrillas. Document expresses comprehension of probable Yugoslav hesitation to move too far and too fast for fear of Soviet and Cominform reprisals. It suggests confidential démarche to Yugoslav Government prior to resumption of conversations in Lake Success in April4 designed to prevail on Yugoslavs to undertake on own initiative and unilaterally such steps as sealing of Greek border closing of Greek refugee camps along border return of Greek children and informal meetings in neutral territory with Greek representatives to discuss conclusion of commercial agreement which would be accompanied on Greek side by necessary steps to restore railway traffic through Yugoslav free zone in Salonika. Document goes on to suggest démarche in Sofia for renewal of diplomatic relations and conclusion of commercial agreement and in Tirana for exchange of detained military personnel and renewal of diplomatic relations. The draft Greek communication suggests that these démarches be conducted in secrecy through unspecified diplomatic channels or, alternatively, by Evatt or UNSCOB. It expresses hope that implementation of such proposals would prepare terrain for April conversations.

Following comments concern procedural aspects of problem only without attempting for moment to enter into consideration of substantive considerations.

Greek suggestions are extremely interesting but pose very delicate problems. Within framework of Greek proposal they presuppose absolute secrecy which it would be difficult to achieve through Evatt if for no other reason than absence of Australian representation in capitals of northern neighbors. Request by UNSCOB to outsider to exercise good offices under article 10 C of November 27 resolution5 would immediately raise issue of inherent conflict with proposed Evatt effort in April aside from great difficulty of preserving secrecy. There is no indication that UNSCOB member would be received as an emissary in any one of the three capitals.

Another procedure would be to utilize services of diplomatic representatives of one of UNSCOB member states, namely, Greece or France. Such a course, undertaken without reference to UNSCOB, would have the advantage of simplicity, but would this be consistent with our support of and reliance on the special committee? The answer can only be found in our evaluation of prospect of success against implied threat to effectiveness and prestige of the committee.

The only remaining alternative occurring to me would be to place entire problem before the committee in executive session with a view to requesting US, UK or French representatives to ask government selected to instruct its representatives in northern capitals to undertake démarche at highest possible level; precedent for such procedure found in committee’s action in utilizing services French Minister Sofia last summer in effort to arrange resumption diplomatic relations with Greece.

The effort, incidentally, was kept confidential until disclosed by the Bulgarian Government. The most serious difficulty would probably come from Evatt, who would naturally be kept informed by his representative and might resent competition with his own efforts. It might be, however, that the committee would have to act with full awareness of risk involved from this quarter. Risk might be reduced if Evatt could be persuaded any such move would be complementary to rather than competitive with his efforts.

Decision of committee to act under any one of alternative procedures outlined does not necessarily preclude concurrent or subsequent overt conciliatory effort, such as invitations to neighbors to implement emasculated Soviet resolution or renewed invitations to participate in work of committee.

Decision, however, must be made soon as only six weeks remain before second part of GA when renewal of Evatt talks would logically preclude any action by committee holding threat of conflict. Chances of success are slight and risks from such source as denunciatory disclosure by northern governments are great. If, however, Department feels Tito–Cominform–Markos developments make the moment propitious, effort might be worthwhile.

Inasmuch as decision exceeds my competence as US representative, I shall await Department’s comments on instructions before acting.6

Sent Department 308; repeated Belgrade 4, Sofia 4.

[ Drew ]

1 On March 1, 1949, the Senate confirmed the appointment of Gerald A. Drew as U.S. Representative, United Nations Special Committee on the Balkans. The Special Committee, which was established by the United Nations General Assembly in October 1947, was composed of the active representation of Australia, Brazil, China, France, Mexico, the Netherlands, Pakistan, the United Kingdom, and the United States. From July 1948, the Special Committee met in Athens. The U.S. Representative used the telegraphic facilities of the Embassy in Athens for his messages.

2 Panayotis Pipinelis, Greek Permanent Under Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs.

3 The draft memoraindum from the Greek Foreign Ministry under reference here was transmitted to the Department as an enclosure to despatch 25, February 23, from the U.S. Delegation to the U.N. Special Committee on the Balkans at Athens, neither printed (501.BB Balkans/2–2349).

4 During the Third Session, First Part, of the United Nations General Assembly held in Paris, the First Committee (Political and Security) of the General Assembly on November 10, 1948, established a “Conciliation Committee” under the chairmanship of Dr. Herbert V. Evatt, Australian Minister of External Affairs and President of the General Assembly, to explore methods and procedure with the representatives of Albania, Bulgaria, Yugoslavia, and Greece, looking toward a settlement of their difficulties (U.N. Doc. A/728; A/C.1/380). By the close of the General Assembly meetings in Paris in December 1948, the Conciliation Committee had achieved some progress, and Dr. Evatt announced his intention to reconvene the Committee and resume the discussions when the General Assembly met for its Third Session. Second Part, at Lake Success, New York, in April 1949. For authoritative accounts of the work of the Conciliation Committee during November and December 1948, see Harry N. Howard, “Greece and Its Balkan Neighbors (1948–1949): The United Nations Attempts at Conciliation,” Balkan Studies, 1966, vol. 7, pp. 1–26 and Harry N. Howard, “The Problem of Greece in the Third Session of the General Assembly,” Documents and State Papers, January 1949, vol. i, no. 10 (Department of State Publication 3438), pp. 545–614.

5 On November 27, 1948, during its Third Session, First Part, the United Nations General Assembly adopted a Resolution (193 (III) A) continuing the United Nations Special Committee on the Balkans with clarified terms of reference concerning its work of observation and conciliation. Article 10, C of the resolution directed the Special Committee to continue to be available to assist the Governments of Albania, Bulgaria, Yugoslavia, and Greece in the implementation of General Assembly resolutions regarding the conflicts between the Governments. The General Assembly adopted two other resolutions on November 27, 1948 relating to Greece. Resolution 193 (III) B was concerned with the renewal of diplomatic relations, renewal or conclusion of frontier conventions, and the settlement of the refugee problem. (Resolution 193 (III) C recommended the repatriation of Greek refugee children to Greece. For the texts of these resolutions, see United Nations, Official Records of the General Assembly, Third Session, Part I, Resolutions, 21 September–12 December 1948, pp. 18–21.

6 In his telegram 189, February 24, from Belgrade, not printed, Ambassador Cannon concurred unreservedly with Drew’s analysis of the procedural impediments to the Greek conciliation proposal. Cannon further did not believe that Yugoslavia would commit itself publicly to a rapprochement with Greece before Bulgaria and Albania did likewise. While acknowledging the desirability of developing a durable solution to the Greek problem, Cannon urged caution in moving toward some form of accommodation between Yugoslavia and Greece. Gannon wondered whether a conciliation move might have the adverse effect of enspiriting the Greek guerrillas at a time when they faced disorganization and of discouraging the Greek National Army at a time when its élan was on the rise (501.BB Balkan/2–2449).

The Ambassador in Greece (Grady) to the Secretary of State 868.00/2–2149: Telegram

[Document 122]

The Ambassador in Greece (Grady) to the Secretary of State

secret Athens, February 21, 1949—6 p. m.

319. Bevin has conveyed to me through Norton his personal satisfaction at British-American cooperation in Greece especially during recent government crisis. He stated that had there been a definite departure from Parliamentary government here, he would have had a storm in Commons which would, in all likelihood, have forced him to withdraw all British troops from Greece. While our course was determined independent of British views and not influenced by them, agreement with them on fundamentals is clearly of vital importance. Norton and I presented a completely united front in dealing with the Greek leaders and the King. We kept officially in the background but our force was fully felt.

New government has turned out by common consent to be the best we have had since the elections three years ago. There has been noticeable improvement in government efficiency and public morale which has justified our action. This is due in large part to fact that new government came into being as result normal parliamentary methods and received overwhelming vote of confidence in Chamber. Greek public appreciates fact that new government is not American creation except insofar as our support was given to their own democratic process rather than to influences favoring artificial solutions which almost inevitably would have led to dictatorship in absence broad popular support. Papagos is becoming an excellent C-in-C and aside entirely from the proposed method of making him Prime Minister, there is no assurance that he would have made a good one. Only those late of business and new to diplomacy were sure of that.

One cannot be too confident regarding the political future of Greece anymore than one can be of its military or economic future. But definite progress is being made on all three fronts and I think outlook is brighter today in Greece than it has been for some time. The men in ECA are getting the fullest cooperation from the key ministries and our military personnel from Papagos and his staff. Even decentralization law about which there has been so much criticism of the Greek Government by some of our people would have been passed some time ago except that suddenly last fall we found that law, drafted in session, passage of which we had been demanding since last summer, was inadequate. We have been working on its revision for several months with Greek Government now pressing us for action instead of our pressing them.

I have referred to the problems of Greece on three fronts: military, political, and economic. There is a fourth. Anne O’Hare McCormick1 has referred to it in her column. It is the “impatient American businessmen in Greece”. I can add to her comment that there is, in many cases, cocksureness that in this delicate situation has definite elements of danger. Execution of the Marshall Plan is going to require a degree of wisdom and statesmanship which America has never before been called on to display. There are those here in Greece who would vindicate the criticism of our enemies. Because grants of money give us great power, they would impose the American will on a people we are striving to make free. Greece more than any other country is a test of the American capacity for leadership of the new free world.

Please provide Hoffman with copy this message.

Sent Department 319; repeated London 13; Paris 11 for Harriman.

Grady

1 Foreign correspondent for the New York Times.

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in Greece 501.BB Balkans/2–1949: Telegram

[Document 123]

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in Greece 1

secret Washington, February 25, 1949—7 p. m.

258. Balcom 245. While we agree possibility Yugo-Grk rapprochement enhanced by Markos ouster and intensified Cominform pressure against Tito (Combal 368 Feb 19), we feel end Yugo aid to guerrillas more likely occur spontaneously if at all. If Tito decides stop aid (and it would seem only logical he must eventually reach this decision), he will do so on basis self-interest and self-protection and not because of prompting by UNSCOB or Big Powers. Such intervention might, in fact, retard or prevent desired reversal Yugo policy by irritating Tito and exposing him, thru strong possibility disclosure, to further embarrassment vis-à-vis Cominform and own followers in Yugo.

We therefore believe Grk reply UNSCOB communication (Dept’s A–123 Feb 212 ) should be straightforward and for record. (Presumably some public reply necessary any case.) This would not, of course, preclude quiet, direct soundings of Yugos by Grks along lines proposed by Pipinellis, which direct approach would not be open same objections as UNSCOB or Big-Power intervention. According Tsaldaris, Yugos have already made “very real” overtures to Grks (Embtel 302 Feb 183 ). Fruitful outcome such direct contacts, concerning which Grks might so far as practicable consult UNSCOB confidentially, or spontaneous end Yugo aid to guerrillas would provide solid basis for effective conciliatory role UNSCOB thru provision technical assistance on frontier conventions, refugee exchange, etc. Meanwhile, pending real Yugo change of heart, we believe conciliatory gestures by UNSCOB, Evatt or anyone else will probably remain fruitless though UNSCOB conciliation moves must of course continue for record. (Foregoing subject to further comment when full text Pipinellis draft recd.)

Acheson

1 Sent to Belgrade as 93; repeated by air to London, Moscow, and Sofia.

2 Not printed; it stated that the Department of State favored the idea of having the United Nations Special Committee on the Balkans address a communication to the Albanian, Bulgarian, Greek, and Yugoslav Governments calling attention to U.N. General Assembly resolutions on diplomatic relations, frontier conventions, and refugee questions (501.BB Balkans/2–2149).

3 Not printed; Ambassador Grady added that Foreign Minister Tsaldaris was vague as to the form the alleged Yugoslavia overtures had taken (868.00/2–1840).

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Assistant Chief, Division of Greek, Turkish, and Iranian Affairs (Baxter) 501.BB Balkan/3–149

[Document 124]

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Assistant Chief, Division of Greek, Turkish, and Iranian Affairs (Baxter)

confidential [Washington,] March 1, 1949.

When the Greek Ambassador called at my office today I took the occasion to mention a recent telegram from Mr. Drew, U.S. Representative on UNSCOB, reporting that Mr. Dalietos, on behalf of Mr. Pipinelis, had raised the question of the advisability of reopening the Greek case at the forthcoming session of the General Assembly in April.1 I told the Greek Ambassador that the Department did not favor such a move for a variety of reasons. We all felt that a very satisfactory resolution resulted from the consideration of the Greek case in Paris and that many national delegations who were sympathetic to Greece would not be happy at the prospect of further protracted debates on this subject which would inevitably entail the customary endless harangues of the Soviet bloc. A reintroduction of the case would imply a new resolution and we see no necessity for any further substantive action by the General Assembly at this time. Presumably the reports of UNSCOB some months hence will contain much more evidence in support of Greece than could be assembled at the present time, considering the fact that the observers had had very little opportunity during the winter to conduct investigations near the frontier.

The Ambassador said he could not agree more fully and would immediately express his disapproval of any move of this sort to Mr. Kyrou2 in New York and to the Foreign Office in Athens. I told the Ambassador that we were also transmitting our views to Sew York and Athens.

Contrary to the information contained in Mr. Drew’s telegram, the Ambassador said he had not been consulted as yet on this matter by his Foreign Office and that if he had known that this matter was being given any consideration, even of a superficial nature, he would have recommended against any such move.

1 Under reference here is telegram 362, Combal 371, February 26, from Athens, not printed (501.BB Balkan/2–2649). Alexander Dalietos was the Director of the Balkans Committee Department of the Greek Ministry of Foreign Affairs.

2 Alexis Kyrou, Greek Permanent Representative to the United Nations.

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in Greece 868.00/2–2449: Telegram

[Document 125]

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in Greece

confidential Washington, March 2, 1949—6 p. m.

285. In discussing Tsourkaris case with Canellopoulos,1 you may say Dept frankly shocked at execution, apparently solely for conscientious scruples and not, so far as can be judged urtel 337 Feb 24,2 on proven grounds intent harm Grk State or aid rebellion.

Tsourkaris case and loose phrasing War Ministry circular provide further indication indifference human life in imposition death sentences, disregard principles justice (necessity for proof), lack of sense proportion in domestic politics and of appreciation foreign political repercussions such attitude Grk courts martial.

Dept assumes Grk law, unlike that of Anglosaxon countries, makes no allowance conscientious objection and Dept could comprehend prison sentences for objectors (though substitute work programs certainly more humane). We might also comprehend death sentences where willful complicity with KKE proved. We are familiar peculiar activities US and abroad of pacifist sect to which Tsourkaris allegedly belonged, but we aware no evidence sect inspired or allied with communism (except incidentally where pacifism parallels local communist purposes). Jehovah’s Witnesses reportedly adhere same pacifist principles in Iron Curtain area and suffer consequent persecution by communist authorities. It is difficult believe Jehovah’s Witnesses Greece so numerous as seriously to threaten Grk state or to present problem with which precautionary application security laws could not cope. Finally it seems illogical execute pacifists when communist conscripts, who likely turn arms against State, merely subject segregation Category C.

Dept continues receive inquiries re Tsourkaris case from reputable religious and political sources, including Quakers who recently donated 5 tons clothing Grk children, and public anxiety likely turn to legitimate indignation when facts indicated reftel become known.

Recommend you acquaint Canellopoulos with foregoing in friendly but forceful manner and relate to more genl démarche suggested Dept’s A–93, Feb 8.3

Acheson

1 Greek Minister of War Panayotis Kanellopoulos.

2 Not printed. It reported that John Tsourkaris was sentenced to death by a special court-martial in Larissa, Greece, for refusal, as a member of Jehovah’s Witnesses, to bear arms. Tsourkaris was executed on February 9. The Embassy considered that the imposition and execution of the sentence was based on a Greek War Ministry circular to courts-martial in Greece which claimed that the Jehovah’s Witnesses had become an offshoot of the Greek Communist Party as a result of its proselytizing efforts among Greek soldiers. (868.00/2–2449)

3 Not printed. It observed that the perfunctory Greek Government reply to an American inquiry initiated in June 1948 in connection with the sentencing to life imprisonment for alleged subversive activities of the brother-in-law of an American citizen was hardly satisfactory to American public opinion. The failure of the Greek Government to respond effectively to inquiries of this sort would, it was further observed, have unfortunate political consequences. The Embassy was requested to work out a more systematic method of processing similar inquiries of the Greek Government. (868.00/2–849)

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Chief of the Division of Greek, Turkish, and Iranian Affairs (Jernegan) 868.014/3–1049

[Document 126]

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Chief of the Division of Greek, Turkish, and Iranian Affairs (Jernegan)

secret [Washington,] March 10, 1949.

The Ambassador1 left with me, on a purely informal basis, the attached memorandum setting forth certain views which he had been instructed to present to the Department.2 He asked that we study the questions raised and endeavor to let him know our attitude, especially with respect to the question of what action we might take to prevent the recognition of a Macedonian state and what further action we might take if such recognition should be extended despite our efforts.

He recalled that in 1947 the U.S. had made diplomatic representations to certain of the Soviet satellite states to prevent their recognition of the Greek guerrilla “government” under Markos, and he suggested we might consider similar action if a Macedonian group were to proclaim independence. He remarked that recognition of such a “state” would certainly be an infringement of the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Greece.

I observed that any recognition of a Macedonian state allegedly including Greek Macedonia could under present circumstances come only from Bulgaria, since it seemed most improbable that Tito would recognize a group under Cominform domination. The Ambassador agreed.

I went on to say that I wondered whether Bulgarian recognition would really have any serious effect on the situation in Greece, since Bulgaria was already assisting the Greek guerrillas. The Ambassador said his government feared that recognition would open the way to greater political and military assistance by Bulgaria to the guerrillas.

I said that I could not tell him offhand what our reaction might be to the contingencies mentioned in the memorandum. However, it went without saying that the U.S. would never recognize or acquiesce in the formation of a Macedonian state incorporating Greek Macedonia.3

1 Vassili G. Dendramis, Greek Ambassador in the United States.

2 The memorandum under reference, not printed, commented upon the possible proclamation of a “Macedonian state”. The memorandum argued that such a proclamation should, if possible, be prevented. It suggested that it might be advisable to consider whether diplomatic action in the countries of eastern Europe could prevent such a proclamation. In late February 1949 the Macedonian National Liberation Front (the NOF: the organization of Slav-Macedonians cooperating with the Greek guerrilla movement) Central Committee held its Second Plenary session. It was decided, inter alia, to convene a general congress of the National Liberation Front with the purpose of proclaiming a “Macedonian state” within some sort of Balkan federation. The Greek guerrilla radio station announced the results of the NOF meeting, and the Greek Communist Party appeared for a time to have given its support to the establishment of an independent Macedonia. The Second Congress of the National Liberation Front held in late March 1949 did not proclaim an independent Macedonian state, but a separate Communist organization for Macedonia does appear to have been established.

3 In his Sixth (Report to Congress on Assistance to Greece and Turkey, issued March 17, 1949, President Truman denounced the idea of an autonomous Macedonia. The report stated that Greece was achieving more effective mobilization, but military action against guerrilla concentrations was inconclusive. United States military aid of about $60 million and economic aid of about $2 million were delivered to Greece during the last quarter of 1948. (Sixth Report to Congress on Assistance to Greece and Turkey For the Period Ended December 31, 1948 (Washington, Government Printing Office, 1949))

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State 868.014/3–1149: Telegram

[Document 127]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State

top secret London, March 11, 1949—6 p. m.

920. Wallinger,1 who indicated he thought Macedonian development of great importance gave us following comments on subject.

Wallinger referred to various reports: concentration of Greek guerrillas in southern Yugoslavia; border incidents along Yugoslav-Hungarian and Yugoslav-Albanian borders; troop movements; concentration in Bulgaria above Greek border. He stressed that these are only reports but said he was attending meeting today at which they would be considered by joint intelligence services.

Wallinger thought Macedonian development primary part of Soviet action against Tito but may also contemplate a “swipe” at Greece as well. On other hand, he thought it possible that Soviet determination to finish Tito might be over-riding consideration even though repercussions of Macedonian project on Greek question might be disadvantageous from Communist viewpoint. He also speculated that increased rebel push in northern Greece might be intended to insure passage through Greek territory from Bulgaria to Albania.

Wallinger thought that Macedonian development, above mentioned reports, and Molotov release from Soviet Foreign Office2 are all linked together forming part of war of nerves and increased tension possibly to be followed by major Soviet “peace offensive”. In latter connection he remarked Soviet reaching limits of expansion and can go no further without coming up against western consolidation as represented by Marshall Plan, Atlantic Pact, etc.

Sent Department 920, repeated Moscow 22, Athens 14, Belgrade 31, Sofia 7, Budapest 6.

Douglas

1 Geoffrey A. Wallinger, Head of the Southern Department, British Foreign Office.

2 On March 5, 1949, the Soviet Government announced that Vyacheslav Mikhai-lovich Molotov bad been released from his post as Minister for Foreign Affairs and had been replaced in that position by Andrey Yanuaryevich Vyshinsky. Molotov retained his post as Soviet First Deputy Prime Minister.

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in Yugoslavia 868.014/3–1149: Telegram

[Document 128]

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in Yugoslavia

secret Washington, March 11, 1949—8 p. m.

122. Ur 237 Mar 8.1 We share ur appraisal situation on basis info available and assessment probabilities. Concur likelihood Sov effort would take form fomenting trouble Macedonia, sequence probably to include announcement independent Macedonian state and emphasis to be placed on ostensibly spontaneous indigenous nature rising. Feel overt Sov or satellite support or sponsorship would be avoided at least initial stages. Balance of intelligence here does not indicate appreciable increase level mobilization neighbors.

Dept carefully studying whole matter in consultation with other interested agencies US Govt.

Acheson

1 In this telegram Ambassador Cannon reviewed the evidence of steadily mounting tension along Yugoslavia’s frontiers with Cominform countries which inclined him to the theory that the major Cominform political effort against Yugoslavia would come through Macedonia and that Greek guerrillas and Slavo-Macedonians would serve as primary agents. For the text of this telegram, see vol. v, p. 877.

The Ambassador in Yugoslavia (Cannon) to the Secretary of State 868.00/3–1649: Telegram

[Document 129]

The Ambassador in Yugoslavia (Cannon) to the Secretary of State

secret Belgrade, March 16, 1949—5 p. m.

272. Athens 471 March 11.1 As seen from Belgrade, we inclined regard proposal US–UK démarche to Bulgaria as premature. If Macedonian situation develops as Greeks think probable we feel early stages will be presented as self-contained autonomous movement toward secession and independence and Bulgarians would have no difficulty in officially disassociating themselves. It would only be later that issue, analogous to 1948 Markos recognition, might serve as basis US–UK representations. Démarche re unofficial support Macedonian revolutionaries by Bulgarian Government might not deter Kremlin more than similar representations re Greek guerrillas and unless we indicated our determination to follow through with vigorous and effective action, it might not achieve result desired.

We agree Macedonian developments threaten integrity of Greece and Greek Government must recognize that whether Yugoslavia or Bulgaria wins out in present Macedonian rivalry, pressure will steadily mount in years to come to absorb Aegean Macedonia. It is this eventuality that has made this Mission somewhat impatient with persistence Greek assertion their Epiran claim. Question of south Albania will surely come to fore again when Evatt exertions resumed and we feel that if Communists are again permitted to present to world opinion breakdown of negotiations as arising from Greek intransigeance toward Albania, grave harm will be done to Greek cause.

Working on idea that constructive disposition for Greeks is needed along following lines. Let Greeks, either before or at GA, take lead in realistic Balkan conciliation attempt by proposing recognition finality all present Balkan borders, both its northern [frontier?] and at least YugoslaviA–Albania and YugoslaviA–Bulgaria as well, with guarantee of that recognition by Big Four or UN. Special border commissions might or might not be proposed for border control. Greece could then express willingness forego Albanian claims in general settlement which would guarantee all its borders but such guarantee would be realistic only if Yugoslavia, Albania, and Bulgaria agree among themselves as to finality own borders. Otherwise conflicts between any of those states, on their own competing claims, would surely involve Greece.

Inasmuch as other border areas in East Europe also menace peace, proposal might be broadened include additional areas of border tension but we are thinking here primarily of Macedonia and Greece.

We do not know with what bait Soviets are tempting Yugoslavia’s neighbors, whether Albanians are being promised Kosmet region of Yugoslavia or whether Bulgarians are being assured Soviet Union will back incorporation parts Macedonia into Bulgaria or merely autonomous Macedonia under Sofia control. These possibilities arouse much concern here and we like idea compelling USSR to agree or decline to guarantee present Yugoslav borders in act which would assure Greece’s territorial integrity.

Seems to us little can be lost by such proposal and much might be gained. At very least, Greece would succeed in gaining diplomatic initiative and placing Cominform on difficult defensive.2

Cannon

1 Not printed; it reported on the contents of a draft aide-mémoire under consideration in the Greek Foreign Ministry. The draft aide-mémoire analyzed recent Cominform actions in Macedonia in terms of Communist intention of wresting Macedonian territories from both Greece and Yugoslavia. The draft aide-mémoire would ask the Western Powers to undertake energetic démarches to the Balkan satellite states. Ambassador Grady recommended that the Department of State give serious consideration to the Greek proposals if they were made. (868.00/3–1149)

2 In his telegram 772, March 28, From Moscow, not printed, Chargé Foy D. Kohler observed that the generalized approach suggested by Ambassador Cannon appeared to be the most promising measure to expose Soviets’ designs publicly and to aggravate to eventual American advantage the tensions existing among Soviet satellites in the Balkans (868.00/3–2849).

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Deputy Director, Office of European Affairs (Thompson) 760H.68/3–1749

[Document 130]

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Deputy Director, Office of European Affairs (Thompson)

secret [Washington,] March 17, 1949.

Mr. Allen1 referred to a previous conversation which we had had and said he wished to inform me of the conversation which Bebler had had in London.2 In his conversation with Bevin, Bebler had dwelt chiefly on Yugoslavia claims against Austria.3 Bevin did, however, take occasion to state that he wished Yugoslavia would leave Greece alone and that that country could be allowed to work out its own destiny without outside interference. Bebler had vaguely attempted to minimize the extent of Yugoslav support of the Greek guerrillas.

In a conversation with Hector McNeil,4 Bebler had himself adverted to the question of Greece several times, and McNeil had underscored this point.

Again in a conversation with Wallinger and Fitzroy Maclean,5 Bebler had endeavored to give impression that he had come to the realization that Yugoslavia would have to do something to mollify the west on the Greek question.

In both of the latter conversations Bebler had denied any positive Yugoslav information on Markos dismissal but had expressed the Yugoslav belief that it was another case of “Titoism”. He had denied reports to the effect that Markos was in Yugoslavia.

1 William Denis Allen, Counselor of the British Embassy in the United States.

2 In late February 1949, Yugoslav Deputy Foreign Minister Aleš Bebler visited London in connection with the sessions there of the Deputies for Austria of the Council of Foreign Ministers. Bebler made the case to American, British, French, and Soviet officials for Yugoslav desires for territorial readjustments and reparations from Austria. For documentation on work of the Deputies for Austria in preparing a draft Austrian State Treaty, see vol. iii, pp. 1066 ff.

3 Bebler apparently conferred with Foreign Secretary Bevin on February 18.

4 Minister of State of the British Foreign Office.

5 Member of Parliament; Chief of the British Military Mission to the Yugoslav Partisans, 1942–1945.

Informal Memorandum by the British Embassy to the Department of State 868.00/3–2249

[Document 131]

Informal Memorandum by the British Embassy to the Department of State 1

secret [Washington, undated.]

The British Government have recently received reports of Russian troops movements and other military activities in South-East Europe, of which the following are typical: a) The arrival of fresh Soviet troops from the Soviet Union at Constanza, which has been “evacuated” by Roumanian troops;

b) The southward movement of Soviet occupation forces in Roumania, towards Bulgaria;

c) The introduction of partial mobilisation measures (blackout precautions, etc.) in Roumania;

d) The arrival of Soviet troops at Szombathely near the Austro-Hungarian frontier;

e) The massing of guerillas, said to number from 10,000 to 15,000, on the Greco-Bulgarian frontier;

f) The movement of Soviet men and arms by sea to Albania.

2. The British military authorities are not disposed to consider the reported Soviet movements abnormal. They suggest that formations in Austria and Hungary (and in Germany) are now being reinforced for the purposes of Spring manoeuvres. They do not consider that these reports connote anything in the nature of military action. On the contrary there are indications that such reports are being deliberately disseminated with a psychological motive.

3. The reports tend to focus on Yugoslavia and their primary objective may be to increase the war of nerves against Tito, who is already under heavy economic pressure from the Soviet bloc. Moreover, the increase of incidents with Hungary and Albania (with consequent vituperative diplomatic exchanges) and the publicity given to the project for an autonomous Macedonia under the aegis of Dimitrov2 confirm the Foreign Office’s view that the Soviet Government intend to turn more heat upon Yugoslavia. On the other hand the British Ambassador at Belgrade3 has seen no sign of serious apprehension at high levels in that city, and the Foreign Office do not believe that Soviet or satellite military action against Yugoslavia is likely.

4. The Greek Government, are naturally apprensive about these developments and especially about the Communist threat of, an independent Macedonian State. They appear to fear an operation to establish direct Russian contacts with Albania as part of a Kremlin-inspired movement to encircle Yugoslavia. They have suggested that the British Government should take some action to forestall any declaration by the Macedonian Communists at rebel headquarters. The Foreign Office do not think that representations at Sofia (as in December 1947) would do any good but they are considering the advisability of making some such statement as that made by Mr. Lovett on December 30th, 1947, on the occasion of the establishment of the Markos Junta.4

1 The Department of State’s informal reply to this communication (p. 279 [Pg. 279 includes portions of Doc. 133 and Doc. 134]) indicates that British Embassy Counselor Allen delivered it to the Department on March 17.

2 Georgi Dimitrov, Bulgarian Prime Minister and Secretary General of the Bulgarian Workers’ (Communist) Party.

3 Sir Charles Peake.

4 For the text of Acting Secretary of State Lovett’s statement under reference, see Department of State Bulletin, January 11, 1948, p. 59.

The Ambassador in Greece (Grady) to the Secretary of State 668.0024/3–1849: Telegram

[Document 132]

The Ambassador in Greece (Grady) to the Secretary of State

top secret Athens, March 18, 1949—5 p. m.

516. Embtel 511 March 17.1 Pipinelis in discussing US economic policy toward Yugoslavia ventured suggestion that our hope of bringing about gradual and lasting change in Yugoslav policy toward Greece might be realized more rapidly than anticipated. He had in mind particularly two developments which he regarded as significant. First, Yugoslav Consul Salonika has had further conversation with Greek official re Salonika free port (Embtel 345 February 242 ). Meeting of two officials took place by accident and they walked together through free port area. When asked by Greeks why Yugoslavs do not repair their part of free port, Yugoslav Consul replied to effect that this does not worry them since it can be easily and quickly done. What gives Yugoslavs concern, he said, is few kilometers of railway in Greece just out of Yugoslav border which partly destroyed by and under constant threat of guerrillas. Yugoslavs would have to bring about change in this situation if goods to be shipped through Salonika. He added that minerals from Trepca mines now going to Czechoslovakia may soon be deprived of that last foreign outlet and could then be exported profitably only through Salonika. Consul indicated that more formal Yugoslav approach to Greeks on free port might be forthcoming shortly.

Second and more important occurrence is Yugoslav feeler to Greeks on possible “entente” between two countries. Yugoslav Communist agent (Pipinelis states Communist intelligence organizations here are now definitely split into pro-Tito and pro-Cominform groups) approached intelligence officer to inquire whether Greeks would be interested in discussing with Yugoslavs general question improvement relations two countries. Greek officer (whom Yugoslavs regard as person of confidence and do not know as Greek intelligence officer) after receiving instructions from Pipinelis replied in affirmative after which he was received at Yugoslav Legation by Chargé and one Martinovitch recently arrived from Belgrade. He was handed typewritten paper written in French which now in possession Pipinelis who read it to two Embassy officers. The document proposes that Greeks and Yugoslavs appoint representatives to meet on neutral soil to discuss possibility of “entente” between two countries. No conditions or agenda been suggested. Document emphasized necessity of keeping matter highly secret. Pipinelis intends bring matter attention Tsaldaris, Papagos and British Ambassador only, after which he expects give affirmative reply through same channel and endeavor expedite proposed meeting. He intends appoint Greek representative who will not be known as official.3

Pipinelis related further incident which he felt indicates imminence Cominform action against Tito. He said Greek representative in Berlin approached by person who desired put member Bulgarian cabinet in touch with Greek representative. Greek representative designated unofficial Greek to meet with Bulgarian official who held forth on imminent destruction Tito and suggested that Greeks and Bulgarians get together for mutual advantage. At end conversation he handed [apparent omission] map suggesting partition of southern Yugoslavia by giving Bulgars wide corridor to Adriatic including Durrzzo. Part of Yugoslavia and Albania below this corridor would be given to Greece while Greek Thrace would be left intact. This map has been forwarded to Athens and Pipinelis will show it to Embassy Officer when it comes back into his possession. He has, of course, no intention making reply of any kind to Bulgaria.

Sent Department 516, repeated Belgrade 26.

Grady

1 Not printed; it reported that Ambassador Grady had conveyed to Permanent Under Secretary Pipinelis the salient features of American economic policy toward Yugoslavia as instructed in telegram 288, March 2, to Athens (660H.119/3–1749). For text of the latter message, see vol. v, p. 876.

2 Not printed. It reported that the Yugoslav Consul in Salonika had approached a Greek official regarding the possibility of opening the Yugoslav section of the Salonika free port (668.0024/2–2449).

3 In his telegram 646, April 4, from Athens, not printed, Ambassador Grady reported that the Yugoslav authorities had responded favorably to the Greek proposal and had empowered Veselin Martinović, Secretary of the Yugoslav Legation in Athens, to meet with a high-ranking officer to be designated by the Greek Government for the purpose of determining the place, conditions, and personalities for a meeting of the governments (668.0024/4–449). Subsequent messages from Athens and from Belgrade reported on Yugoslav press denials of rumors of Greek-Yugoslav negotiations and the continued delay in the scheduled meeting of Greek and Yugoslav representatives. In telegram 799, April 21, from Athens, not printed, Pipinelis informed Grady that contact was still being maintained between Greek and Yugoslav agents but that no progress had been made. Pipinelis asserted that the Yugoslavs claimed to find it difficult to carry on negotiations as a result of statements by Foreign Minister Tsaldaris on the possible improvement in Greek-Yugoslav relations (668.0024/4–2149).

Report by the National Security Council to the President S/S–NSC Files, Lot 63 D 351, NSC 42/1 Series

1 [Document 133]

Report by the National Security Council to the President 2

top secret Washington, March 22, 1949.

NSC 42/1

U.S. Objectives With Respect to Greece and Turkey To Counter Soviet Threats to U.S. Security

the problem

1. To assess and appraise the threat to our national security manifested in Greece and Turkey and our efforts to counter this threat; and to formulate our objectives and aims as a guide to future security efforts in Greece and Turkey.

analysis of the threats

2. The USSR is endeavoring to dominate Greece through the use of Greek guerrilla forces and propaganda. The guerrilla forces, which are supported by three satellite states as Well as the USSR, constitute a direct and serious threat to Greece by virtue of their military and political operations on Greek territory. These operations also are designed to have disruptive effects, direct and indirect, upon the economic life of Greece.

3. The USSR has endeavored to dominate Turkey by the following means: (a) efforts to obtain joint USSR-Turkish control of the Straits; (b) attempts to secure bases on Turkish territory in conjunction with joint control of the Straits or otherwise; (c) demands for territory in northeastern Turkey, including the provinces of Kars and Ardahan; (d) political and propaganda efforts to isolate Turkey from the west; (e) propaganda for the purpose of undermining the Turkish Government; (f) an unsympathetic and at times a threatening attitude toward Turkey.

4. Due to (a) the length of the Greco-satellite frontier, (b) the mountainous character of the frontier and most of the Greek interior which favors guerrilla operations, (c) the substantial assistance which the guerrillas have received from the USSR and satellites, (d) exhaustion, discouragement and bitterness in Greece arising from the long period of hostilities, the Greek civil war and the conditions of the German occupation, and (e) economic weakness resulting from overpopulation, meagre natural resources, wartime destruction and continuing insecurity of the frontiers and interior, it became impossible for Greece to oppose unassisted the threat to her existence as a free, democratic nation. Moreover, Greece was unable to make progress in administrative, economic and social rehabilitation and reform. Accordingly, when the British announced in the spring of 1947 that they could no longer furnish assistance, Greece appealed to the United States and the United Nations as the two principal sources of available aid.

5. Turkey has been obliged to maintain her defense establishment close to a war footing, with consequent severe strain on the Turkish economy. In the absence of outside assistance, this strain would soon result in weakening Turkish morale and ability to withstand Soviet pressure. When it became known, therefore, that projected British assistance would not be received, Turkey requested U.S. aid and support.3

6. Both Greece and Turkey have endeavored to safeguard their position by seeking a defensive alliance or alliances with other nations. The success of these efforts, which are in an exploratory stage, depends primarily upon the willingness of the United States to participate either directly or as a guarantor.4 (Turkey, which already has a limited alliance with Great Britain signed in 1939, has requested membership in the projected North Atlantic Pact, a request which has been denied.)5

7. In his message to Congress of March 12, 1947, the President stated:6

“It is necessary only to glance at a map to realize that the survival and integrity of the Greek nation are of grave importance in a much wider situation. If Greece should fall under the control of an armed minority, the effect upon its neighbor, Turkey, would be immediate and serious. Confusion and disorder might well spread throughout the entire Middle East.

Moreover, the disappearance of Greece as an independent state would have a profound effect upon those countries in Europe whose peoples are struggling against great difficulties to maintain their freedom and their independence while they repair the damages of war.

…7 Collapse of free institutions and loss of independence would be disastrous not only for [Greece and Turkey]8 but for the world. Discouragement and possible failure would quickly be the lot of neighboring peoples striving to maintain their freedom and independence.

Should we fail to aid Greece and Turkey in this fateful hour, the effect will be far-reaching to the West as well as to the East.”

In the preamble to Public Law 75 approved May 22, 1947, authorizing assistance to Greece and Turkey, the Congress declared: “… the national integrity and survival of [Greece and Turkey] are of importance to the security of the United States and of all freedom-loving peoples …”.

8. The National Security Council considers that “the security of the Eastern Mediterranean and of the Middle East is vital to the security of the United States.” The Joint Chiefs of Staff on November 24, 1948, developed this view with particular reference to Greece and Turkey, as follows:9

“From the military point of view … as long as the USSR pursues its expansionist policies, the security of the Eastern Mediterranean and the Middle East is of critical importance to the future security of the United States. Greece and Turkey stand in the way of Soviet expansion in this area and thus it is highly important to our national security interest that neither falls under the control or domination of the USSR.

Both countries offer bases from which the USSR could launch operations against the islands of Crete, Rhodes, and Cyprus and against communications in the Eastern Mediterranean and to the Middle East. Turkey is strategically more important than Greece since in addition it dominates major air, land, and sea routes from the USSR to the Cairo–Suez area and to the Middle East oil fields.”

The following definition of U.S. long-range strategic interests, in existing circumstances, in the military establishments of Greece and Turkey has been prepared by the Joint Chiefs of Staff and concurred in by the State–Army–Navy–Air Force Coordinating Committee:

“a. Greece: A Greek military establishment capable of maintaining internal security in order to avoid the communist domination of Greece.

b. Turkey: A Turkish military establishment of sufficient size and effectiveness to insure Turkey’s continued resistance to Soviet pressure; the development of combat effectiveness to the extent that any overt Soviet aggression can be delayed long enough to permit the commitment of U.S. and allied forces in Turkey in order to deny certain portions of Turkey to the USSR.”

9. Turkey is an important source of certain strategic raw materials, chief of which is metallurgical chromite ore.

countermeasures taken and in progress

10. Congress, by Public Law 75 of the 80th Congress, authorized U.S. assistance to Greece and Turkey to the amount of $400 million, which amount was appropriated for fiscal 1948 by Public Law 271 approved July 30, 1947. $300 million of this amount was allocated to Greece, $100 million to Turkey. 57.5% of the funds allocated to Greece were expended for military aid, 41% for economic aid. The entire amount allocated to Turkey was expended for military procurement and construction of military importance. This program, notably in the case of highway construction, has been of economic as well as military benefit to Turkey.

11. The Greek-Turkish Assistance Act of 1948, approved April 3, 1948, authorized continued military aid during fiscal 1949. By Public Law 793 approved June 28, 1948, $225 million was appropriated for military assistance to Greece and Turkey combined, of which, subject to reallocation in case of emergencies, $150 million has been allocated to Greece and $75 million to Turkey. Since July 1, 1948, economic aid to Greece has been handled by ECA. The ECA allocation to Greece up to April 1, 1949, will probably amount to $146 million. In addition, Greece’s intra-European drawing rights amount to an additional $66.8 million.

12. U.S. armed service personnel totaled, as of June 30, 1948, 410 in Greece, 349 in Turkey.

13. Direct British assistance to Greece since the liberation in 1944, excluding UNRRA and civil affairs expenditures and the expenditure of over $138 million for the maintenance of British troops in Greece, is estimated at $250 million.

14. In December 1944, British troops in and near Athens became involved in the suppression of a communist-inspired uprising. At that time and in 1945 the very presence of British troops in other areas of Greece was of assistance to the Greek gendarmerie and police in the maintenance of order. Otherwise British troops have not engaged in military operations.

15. U.S. military assistance to Greece consists of furnishing advice, training, equipment and supplies, including food and clothing, to the Greek military establishment. Despite this assistance, the Greek national forces have been unable to establish a satisfactory security situation on the frontier or in the interior. U.S. economic aid to Greece includes reconstruction of transportation and communication facilities; restoration of irrigation and reclamation works; supply of housing materials; assistance in increasing industrial and mineral production; supply of deficit foodstuffs and increasing local grain production by distribution of seed, fertilizer, pesticides and agricultural machinery, reforestation; improvement of food processing, livestock, fisheries, public health, labor legislation, and governmental administration in general. Improvements in the Greek financial situation and system and the restoration of Greek foreign trade are slowly being effected with U.S. advice and assistance.

Military assistance to Turkey consists of training, highway construction, and the supplying of equipment, including naval vessels and aircraft. Force is not now being employed against Turkey. Turkey in the fiscal year 1949 was allocated funds on a loan basis under the ECA program to be utilized largely for agricultural machinery and coal mining equipment.

16. Greece, in a letter to the UN Secretary General dated December 3, 1946, charged that Greek guerrillas were receiving support from Albania, Bulgaria and Yugoslavia. On December 19, the Security Council voted unanimously to establish a Commission of Investigation, composed of representatives of all eleven members. The Commission conducted an on-the-spot investigation in all four countries. It reported to the Security Council on May 23, 1947, France abstaining and the USSR and Poland dissenting, “that Yugoslavia and to a lesser extent, Albania and Bulgaria, had supported the guerrilla warfare in Greece”, and made appropriate recommendations in which all members concurred except the USSR and Poland. In the ensuing consideration of the matter by the Security Council, the USSR by three successive vetoes prevented action based on the report and by a fourth veto blocked formal transfer of the question to the General Assembly. The USSR was unable to block a U.S. procedural resolution to drop the problem from the agenda of the Security Council On September 23 the General Assembly voted to discuss the Greek problem. On October 21, it voted to establish a UN Special Committee on the Balkans (UNSCOB) which established headquarters in Salonica. The USSR and Poland refused to be represented and Albania, Bulgaria and Yugoslavia refused all cooperation with the Committee; consequently it was obliged to restrict its activities to Greek soil. UNSCOB has been active from November 21, 1947 to the present, having been specifically continued by the General Assembly resolution of November 27, 1948. This latter resolution found, on the basis of UNSCOB’s unanimous report, “that the continued aid given by Albania, Bulgaria and Yugoslavia to the Greek guerrillas endangers peace in the Balkans, and is inconsistent with the purposes and principles of the UN.” The General Assembly called upon Albania, Bulgaria and Yugoslavia “to cease forthwith rendering any assistance or support in any form to the guerrillas in fighting against the Greek Government, including the use of their territories as a base for the preparation or launching of armed action,” and recommended “to all members of the UN and to all other states that their governments refrain from any action designed to assist directly or through any other government any armed group fighting against the Greek Government”.10

17. Efforts of the USSR and satellites in the UN to place the blame on Greece and to bring about the withdrawal of British troops have been opposed by the United States and defeated. United Nations proceedings and actions with respect to Greece have resulted in informing the non-communist world of the problem and in mobilizing to an appreciable extent world opinion in support of Greece. It has not succeeded in terminating the communist threat to Greece.

18. Conciliation efforts by the President of the General Assembly during November and December, 1948, between Greece on the one hand and Albania, Bulgaria and Yugoslavia on the other, broke down on the insistence of Albania that a clause be included in the Albano-Greek agreement stipulating, first, that Greece recognize not only that a state of war with Albania no longer exists but had never existed in the past, and second, that the present border between the two countries is irrevocable. Greece maintained that the only possible basis for agreement was to put off major issues for peaceful settlement at a later time. The Bulgarian and Yugoslav representatives took the position that they could not sign agreements with Greece until the Albanian terms had been met. However, it is possible that the talks will be resumed when the General Assembly meets again in April 1949.

results of countermeasures

19. U.S. military and economic aid to Greece has been successful to the extent that it has prevented communist domination and control of Greece. The presence of British armed forces in Greece, even in small numbers, acts as a deterrent to the invasion of Greece by regular satellite or USSR forces. On the other hand, the Greek forces have been unable to establish a satisfactory security situation in the Greek interior. As the result, although economic deterioration has been arrested, adequate progress cannot be made in the program of economic rehabilitation. In existing circumstances, if U.S. aid were to cease, the basic Greek economic situation would again deteriorate rapidly.

20. Turkish defense capabilities and political stability have been strengthened by U.S. aid, but Turkish military capabilities are still insufficient, without additional assistance, to permit alteration in existing plans pertaining to the Middle East.

additional countermeasures contemplated or possible

21. On the consideration that the Greek Army needs greater efficiency rather than numbers, steps are being taken to re-train and rejuvenate it.

22. A comprehensive program to increase the administrative efficiency of the Greek Government is being pushed.

23. Our Ambassador is encouraging a political evolution in Greece which would result in curtailing petty political maneuvering and improper political interference in military affairs, and consequently in more efficient handling of Greek civil and military affairs. At the same time he is being careful to keep the responsibility for the conduct of Greek national life on Greek shoulders, and to discourage any step which would not be supported by the Greek people.

24. Consultations are taking place between U.S. and Greek officials with a view to enlarging and strengthening the Greek information service. The United States is constructing a broadcasting station at Salonica which will cover the Balkans. Nominally this station will be Greek-owned and operated.

25. The Department of State is pursuing its study of the question of the applicability of Article 51 of the UN Charter, (right of individual or collective self-defense) to the Greek situation. This is a legal study without prejudice to the question of the desirability or feasibility of taking action under this article.

26. On the consideration that the Greek security situation would be comparatively simple and manageable if aid to the guerrillas from Albania, Bulgaria and Yugoslavia could be terminated and the use of the territory of these countries denied to the guerrillas, the Department of State has under continuous review the question of what developments or action could bring about this result. a. The possibility of widening the Tito-Cominform split by events which might follow a reduction or proposed reduction in U.S. aid to Greece has been examined. The conclusion was reached that on balance the overall results might well be adverse rather than beneficial.

b. Albania has become isolated territorially from the Cominform countries as the result of the Tito-Cominform divergence, but successive purges of the Albania Government have kept Albania firmly in the Cominform camp. The USSR has recently reduced Albania’s isolation by means of sea transportation. Other elements in the Albanian situation offering possibilities for bringing about cessation of aid to guerrillas are inherent economic weakness, claims of both Greece and Yugoslavia to portions of Albanian territory, maintenance by Greece of a legal state of war with Albania, and disaffected elements within Albania. However, the failure of the recent negotiations in Paris show that a Greco-Albanian arrangement on guerrillas is probably not now possible.

c. Immediately following the Tito-Cominform rift there were signs of a diminution in Yugoslav aid to guerrillas. But at the present time the amount of this aid appears to be on a par with that accorded prior to the break, although guerrilla freedom of action within Yugoslavia is probably more closely supervised. Tito, moreover, has taken pains to maintain the identity of his foreign policy with that of the USSR and satellites. He has recently made vague economic gestures toward the west. He has so far maintained, however, that he will not make political concessions to the west in order to further economic relations therewith. Nevertheless, the United States intends to enter into closer economic relations with Yugoslavia in an endeavor to keep Tito strong enough to continue his resistance to the Cominform as well as to employ U.S. economic bargaining power to the end that Tito will abandon his assistance to the Greek guerrillas.

d. The Bulgarian situation is unpromising, because of the complete Soviet domination of the country.

e. Mediation possibilities continue to exist in the General Assembly and the conciliation functions of UNSCOB, although in the absence of at least partial resolution of the basic issues it is improbable that such efforts can obtain any real results.

27. a. SANACC 360/11 (Second Corrigendum, November 22, 194811 ) gave Priority 1 to U.S. military aid on an area basis to Europe, the Near and Middle East. On a country basis, Priority 1 was accorded to Benelux, Canada, France, and the United Kingdom, and the granting of substantial aid was considered permissible to those countries. Priority 2 was accorded to Greece, Italy and Turkey (order is alphabetical in both lists), and limited aid was considered permissible to them. The JCS have expressed the opinion (SANACC 360/1212 ) that SANACC 360/11 is generally sound and will form a basis for decision and action with respect to military aid priorities in peacetime. The JCS commented that substantial military aid for six countries, limited aid for sixteen others, and token aid for thirty-seven more, can result in tremendous commitments. Therefore, it is necessary, before decisions are made, to consider with the utmost care the over-all scope of such commitments in relation to our financial and industrial situation and our own military requirements. Aid programs should be reviewed periodically to ensure that they are continued only so long as our national security interests require.

b. The Foreign Assistance Correlation Committee is preparing papers on basic policies underlying military assistance programs, and on the application thereof to programming, and designation and grouping of recipients, for submission to the members of the Foreign Assistance Steering Committee.

c. The Greek Aid Program was recently reviewed as of November 23, 1948, and certain conclusions and recommendations were approved by the Secretary of State and the Economic Cooperation Administrator. Apart from and in addition to the periodical review arising from the obligation to submit quarterly reports on Greek-Turkish aid to the Congress and the necessity to obtain appropriations annually, the program is under continuous scrutiny and review in both policy and administrative aspects.

28. NSC 5/4, confirmed by NSC Action No. 173,13 stipulates that U.S. aid to Greece and Turkey must be proportioned in the light of over-all demands against U.S. availabilities and resources and that the United States should not now send armed forces to Greece as token forces or for military operations.

conclusions

29. It is in the interest of U.S. national security that neither Greece nor Turkey fall under communist domination. In existing circumstances U.S. aid and support are essential if this is to be prevented.

30. Because Turkey is strategically more important than Greece and because the present situation in Greece is precarious, whereas in Turkey it is relatively sound, the United States has greater long-range strategic interests in the military establishments of Turkey than in those of Greece. Nevertheless, highly adverse psychological and political results would occur at this time if the communist political warfare being conducted against Greece should be permitted to succeed. Should Turkey come under communist domination, U.S. security interests in the Middle East and Eastern Mediterranean areas would be critically affected.

31. The United States should continue by appropriate political, military and economic aid and support, determined on the basis of the consideration set forth in NSC 5/4, to assist Greece in its efforts to oppose communist pressure and aggression, so long as the Greek Government continues to evidence determination to oppose such pressure and aggression. A previous examination of alternatives has led to the conclusion that U.S. security interests require the continuation of our Greek program.14

32. Military decisions with respect to Greece and Turkey should be made in the light of the over-all world situation and the defense needs and potentialities of the Middle East and Eastern Mediterranean areas as determined on the basis of U.S. strategic interests, and not primarily as a contribution to the solution of the problem in those countries.

33. Owing to the precariousness of the Greek situation, the National Security Council should keep developments in Greece under continuing review.15

34. U.S. policy on military aid to Turkey, or other military programs with respect to Turkey, should be based on the necessity of supporting and strengthening Turkish efforts to oppose communist pressure, and on possible utilization of Turkey for US. strategic purposes in the event of conflict with the USSR.

1 Lot 63 D 351 is a serial master file of the National Security Council documents and correspondence and related Department of State memoranda for the years 1947–1961, as maintained by the Executive Secretariat of the Department of State.

2 This report was prepared by the staff of the National Security Council with the advice and assistance of representatives of the Departments of State, the Army, the Navy, and the Air Force and of the Central Intelligence Agency and the National Security Resources Board. Its preparation was undertaken in accordance with a decision taken by the Council at its meeting on December 16, 1948 (NSC Action 157b: S/S–NSC (Miscellaneous) Files: NSC Records of Action). This report was originally circulated to the National Security Council as a draft report, NSC 42, March 4, 1949. A summary of NSC 42 was circulated to the Under Secretary of State’s Meeting as document UM D–15, March 10. (The principal officers of the Department of State met several times each week under the chairmanship of Under Secretary of State Webb as the Under Secretary of State’s Meeting. The purpose of these meetings was to provide a closer relationship between the Under Secretary and the other officers, to permit the exploration of problems at an early stage, to make certain that lines of responsibility were understood, and to reach agreement on policies under which each officer could effectively carry out his responsibilities.) At its meeting on March 11, the Under Secretary’s Meeting recommended the approval of NSC 42 subject to several revisions. These revisions, which were subsequently perfected by officers of the Department of State and were submitted to the National Security Council by the Secretary of State on March 22, involved the deletion of all paragraphs dealing with the question of the acquisition of airfields in Turkey, the deletion of the paragraph indicated in footnote 15, p. 279 [Pg. 279 includes portions of Doc. 133 and Doc. 134], and the additional language indicated in footnote 14, p. 278 [Pg. 278 is part of Doc. 133]. At its 36th Meeting on March 22, the National Security Council adopted the text of the Report printed here, agreeing to the deletions and amendments proposed by the Department of State. The Department of State was requested to submit its views to the Council on the desirability of seeking arrangements which would permit the construction of airfields in Turkey adequate for the operations envisaged in United States strategic plans. On March 23 President Truman approved this report and directed its implementation under the coordination of the Secretary of State. Copies of the report were transmitted to the appropriate United States diplomatic missions abroad on May 11 (868.20/5–1149). Regarding the subsequent action on the question of the construction of airfields in Turkey, see the editorial note, p. 1644 [Pg. 1644 includes portions of Doc. 1143 and Doc. 1144], and document NSC 36/1, April 15, p. 1654 [Pg. 1654 includes portions of Doc. 1147 and Doc. 1148].

Lot 66 D 95 is a collection of administrative and miscellaneous National Security Council documentation for the years 1947–1963, maintained by the Executive Secretariat of the Department of State.

3 For additional documentation regarding United States military assistance to Turkey, see pp. 1638 [Pg. 1638 includes portions of Doc. 1139 and Doc. 1140] ff.

4 For additional documentation regarding the attitude of the United States toward a proposed Greek-Turkish Mediterranean Defense Pact, see pp. 1638 [Pg. 1638 includes portions of Doc. 1139 and Doc. 1140] ff.

5 For documentation on the establishment of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization, see vol. iv, pp. 1 ff.

6 For the full text of the Presidential message quoted here, see Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: Harry S. Truman, 1947 (Washington: U.S. Government Printing Office, 1963), pp. 176–180. For documentation on the origin of the “Truman Doctrine,” see Foreign Relations, 1947, vol. v, pp. 1 ff.

7 Omissions in this document appear in the source text.

8 Brackets in this document appear in the source text.

9 The Joint Chiefs of Staff memorandum quoted here was circulated as document SANACC 358/8, November 24, 1948; for text, see Foreign Relations, 1948, vol. iv, p. 191.

10 For documentation on the consideration of the Greek frontier question at the United Nations in 1947 and 1948, see Foreign Relations, 1947, vol. v, pp. 1 ff and ibid., 1948, vol. iv, pp. 222 ff.

11 Document SANACC 360/11 was a Report by the State–Army–Navy–Air Force Coordinating Committee’s Subcommittee for Rearmament. The Report, which dealt with military aid priorities, was originally prepared August 18, 1948 and subsequently underwent a series of minor revisions. A later version of the Report, revised as of March 15, 1949, is included as an enclosure to a memorandum of March 16, 1949 from SANACC to the Secretary of State, document SANA–6333; for text, see vol. i, p. 257.

12 The reference here is to memorandum of November 1, 1948, from the Joint Chiefs of Staff to the Secretary of Defense commenting upon SANACC 360/11. See ibid.

13 Document NSC 5/4, June 4, 1948, “The Position of the U.S. with Respect to the Use of U.S. Military Power in Greece”, not printed, was a revision of NSC 5/3, May 25, 1948, approved, by president Truman. The text of NSC 5/3, and the amendment constituting NSC 5/4 are printed in Foreign Relations, 1948, vol. iv, p. 93 and editorial note, p. 101 [Pg. 101 is part of Doc. 18].

14 The final sentence of this paragraph was not included in NSC 42, but it was added at the request of the Department of State.

15 In the earlier draft of this report, NSC 42, this paragraph was followed by an additional paragraph subsequently deleted at the suggestion of the Department of State. The deleted paragraph read as follows: “If the measures taken now or in the future fail to bring about a substantially more effective and successful effort on the part of Greece to overcome the guerrilla menace, alternative means of safeguarding U.S. security in the area should be examined.”

Responsible officers in the Department of State feared that such a statement might lead some people to believe that the loss of Greece would not toe unduly serious, whereas in fact it appeared that such a loss would seriously weaken the American position in the Eastern Mediterranean and Near East despite any compensating steps that might be taken (memorandum from Joseph Satterthwaite to Under Secretary Webb, March 16, 1949: S/S–NSC Files, Lot 63 D 351, NSC 42 Series).

Informal Memorandum by the Department of State to the British Embassy 868.00/3–2249

[Document 134]

Informal Memorandum by the Department of State to the British Embassy 1

secret [Washington, undated.]

1. With reference to the paper handed to Mr. Thompson by Mr. Dennis [Denis] Allen on March 17, 1949, the Department of State has likewise received reports of alleged Russian troop movements and other military activities in the Balkans, which have been accompanied in some instances by similar rumors of satellite military movements near the frontiers of Yugoslavia. These reports are so far preponderantly unconfirmed.

2. The Department of State concurs in the views expressed in Paragraphs 2 and 3 of the paper referred to above.

3. The Department also concurs in the view of the British Government, expressed in Paragraph 4, that representations at Sofia at this time would serve no useful purpose.

4. The Department also doubts the advisability of acting on the suggestion, mentioned in Paragraph 4 of the Embassy’s paper as being under consideration by the Foreign Office, that some public statement on the Macedonian situation be made. It believes that such a move at this stage would only abet the Soviet war of nerves without bringing compensating advantages.

5. The Greek Government has advised the American Ambassador in Athens that it will shortly present a memorandum setting forth the Greek Government’s views on the Macedonian question and requesting the comments of the United States Government. It is understood that a similar memorandum will also be presented to the British Government.

1 According to a memorandum by William O. Baxter, Assistant Chief of the Division of Greek, Turkish, and Iranian Affairs, not printed, the Department views contained in this paper were first transmitted orally to British Embassy Counselor Allen. Subsequently Office of European Affairs Deputy Director Thompson decided to commit those views to paper in the same informal manner in which the British Embassy had committed its views. This paper appears to have been prepared on March 22 (868.00/3–2249).

The Chargé in Bulgaria (O’Donoghue) to the Secretary of State 868.00/3–2449: Telegram

[Document 135]

The Chargé in Bulgaria (O’Donoghue) to the Secretary of State

secret Sofia, March 24, 1949—9 p. m.

253. We agree with both reasoning and specific proposal contained Belgrade’s 272, March 16 to Department repeated Athens 19, Moscow 40.

As Department aware, we have maintained and still maintain that effort “conciliate” what is basically not international dispute but foreign-supported internal revolution is from practical point view waste of time.1 Nevertheless the conciliation attempt has been started and assuming it can have no permanent results, it is our job to see that its failures are made clear and responsibility is clearly placed where it belongs. At GA meeting last fall we took bad propaganda beating because skillful maneuvering of satellites, Greek intransigence on Epirus and especially press misinterpretation Evatt statement. At this GA we (meaning also Greek) must regain lost ground and take the initiative.

For this purpose Belgrade’s suggestion appears best vehicle. In view constantly repeated stand present Bulgarian Government re western Thrace, would be virtually impossible Bulgarians accept suggested renunciation this claim on that region; that possible strong pressure by Albanians to renounce it for latter’s benefit would place further strain on inter-satellite relations which in any case appear somewhat tense; and extension guarantee to all Balkan borders will as Belgrade says, possibly smoke out future Cominform intentions re Macedonia, etc. Through all the fracas Greeks would come pristine pure, having at same time protected national integrity and made magnanimous conciliatory gesture, and not being involved in possible inter-Slav disagreements. Furthermore probable failure negotiations could be clearly blamed on Bulgarians and other satellites and moral justification provided for such border-sealing operations as Department may choose support.

Also concur Belgrade’s opinion that direct representations either Moscow or satellite capitals at least premature. While this expedient may have worked in Markos’s recognition case, it is of questionable general usefulness, and should be saved for occasions when has good chance success.

Sent Department; repeated Athens 9, Belgrade 15, Moscow 12.

O’Donoghue

1 In his telegram 217, March 15, from Sofia, not printed, Chargé O’Donoghue reaffirmed the opinion, first expressed in December 1948, that counciliation without the actual stopping of aid to the Greek guerrillas and without enforcement of Greece’s northern border would be a mistake. Not only could O’Donoghue see no change of Bulgarian policy or attitude, but evidence indicated that Bulgaria bad possibly increased aid to the guerrillas. (501.BB Balkans/3–1549)

The Ambassador in Greece (Grady) to the Secretary of State 868.20/3–3049: Telegram

[Document 136]

The Ambassador in Greece (Grady) to the Secretary of State

secret Athens, March 30, 1949—4 p. m.

Amag 36. Request for extension military aid to Greece comes at moment when outlook for successful conclusion campaign against guerrillas most optimistic since inception of program. We have solid basis—built on effective military establishment, promising civilian govt highest morale since liberation—for hope that with continued American aid the guerrilla warfare can be reduced to police proportions within forseeable future. Continued success, however, depends upon continuation of adequate American aid. We are now getting good returns for money invested, and in order to move forward steadily it will be necessary that Congress show its confidence by appropriating sum requested. Failure to do so would have not only serious material effect but the instantaneous psychological effect might well nullify the successes which with great difficulty have been achieved thus far.

In following paragraphs I include some facts on present situation that may be useful in preparing presentation to Congress (ReDeptel 436, March 261 ).

1. The military.

In early January military situation reached low ebb in series of sudden and successful bandit attacks against urban centers. In this black moment govt on January 21 gave General Papagos complete control over all armed forces. He informed Military Council of his plans to concentrate aggressive action in Peloponnesus in order to eliminate bandit bands from the area transferring bulk of his troops to central and northern Greece. At same time he said he planned to protect vital points throughout the rest of country. In such areas he ordered army to abandon their static defense concept. He relieved inefficient commanders. He took immediate and drastic action against all officers who failed to act aggressively. His strategy showed first results in highly successful defense of Florina in mid-February and recapture of Karpenisi. It proved itself in carrying through to successful conclusion operation to eliminate organized banditry from Peloponnesus. As a result Peloponnesus are today substantially cleared and reconstruction is going on with renewed vigor. At same time in central and northern Greece the army pursued bandit forces that had been responsible for January raids.

The General pushed vigorously army program of tactical training with result that Greek commanders generally began to appreciate value of this training, observing it made possible successful pursuit operations with minor losses. He listened carefully to advice from American and British officers. As a result of all this bandits have been badly beaten wherever they have shown fight. Bandit casualties for February were 3900 which is more than for any month of major operations during 1948, and in March 4700. Bandit effective strength today is about 19,000. With arrest of informers and civilian sympathizers, with splendid progress having been made in past 2 winter months, GNA at opening of spring is prepared to start its principal operations, which should carry the National Army to the northern frontiers, earlier and in a sounder position than was thought possible 3 months ago.

Any reduction in American support of Greek operation at this time would have disastrous effect upon spirit of army. The resulting loss of momentum of present military effort would neutralize all gains made this winter and necessarily prolong the struggle. This would mean a continuing demand for financial and military aid over a longer period of time. On the other hand, support now to amount requested is our best assurance that investment already made will be safeguarded. It will provide continuity of present offensive efforts and secure utilization of maximum benefits from American military aid.

2. The government.

Effectiveness of conduct of military affairs by General Papagos has been enhanced by support accorded him and general military effort by broadened coalition govt, which took office January 20. This govt, which includes the New and Unionist Parties in addition to Liberals and Populists, was formed through normal parliamentary processes and received an overwhelming vote of confidence from Parliament. With vote of confidence Parliament adjourned for 4 months, leaving legislative power for vital questions in hands of Cabinet and its directing Greek force, Coordinating Council. The latter, which consists of Prime Minister, Deputy Prime Minister, and leaders of 4 participating political parties, has proved to be effective instrument in insuring coordinated governmental policy. While to a degree handicapped by certain defects common to its predecessors and its continuance potentially jeopardized by partisan pressures, present govt appears clearly to be best since inception American aid. Several of Ministries are headed by persons of technical ability and initiative and govt throughout has manifested spirit of enthusiastic cooperation with American mission.

In addition to notable successes on military front, progress is being made in implementation various economic programs to which govt has committed itself in 4-year recovery plan. It has in general cooperated with ECA mission in measures to maintain effective control govt expenditures and to devise additional means of revenues including new taxation of wealthy classes. Decentralization program, which is considered of highest priority in improving govt administration on national and local levels, is moving forward and first concrete steps have been taken. These include dismissal politically appointed monarchs and pending appointment of replacements on basis of merit; establishment of machinery for local elections which it is planned will be held in secure areas this summer; and amendment of suffrage provisions to broaden franchise of women. While possibility national elections remains questionable until further progress achieved in establishing security, prerequisite measures of revision of electoral rolls, suspended for past 2 years, has been renewed. But, most important, government success in military field and its earnest endeavors in economic and political matters have instilled increasing feeling of confidence among Greek people of all classes. In absence of adverse developments, this growing confidence should lead to increased effectiveness of government to deal with critical problems still facing Greece in economic, military and political fields.

3. National morale.

The morale of Greeks has been mounting steadily in past 3 months because of number of factors: change in government in early January; appointment of Papagos as Commander-in-Chief; GNA military successes, particularly those in Peloponnese and at Florina; shifts in bandit leadership and confusion in Communist policy, and finally realization that bandit menace must be eliminated this year, as it may be last possibility to do so.

The national state of mind created from these factors provided the proper atmosphere for a national rally from March 20 to 25 which was intended to reflect the confidence of Greek people in ultimate success of their struggle and give a united popular support to the national efforts necessary to finish the task. The rally was a Greek affair, enthusiastically staged and competently executed by Greeks with participation of foreign allies. The pattern of celebration cut for Athens was followed in all important provincial towns and cities. Virtually all Greeks participated in the 5 day celebration. The final event of week came in a great rally in ancient stadium in Athens which was packed with an estimated crowd of 60,000 with an equally large number of people in adjoining streets and on nearby hills. According to government officials only once before in modern history has there been such an attendance at Athens stadium.2

The Greeks are a volatile people with a sharp sense of reality. They cannot be sustained for long on propaganda alone. Their morale can be sustained if military successes continue and if they are made to realize that needed social, political and economic reforms will come with restoration of security. They realize keenly the vulnerable geographic location of their country and, as a consequence, they feel strongly the need for American support at this critical hour. The financial support made available by Congress will indicate to them our belief in their faith in their own future. This support is vital for maintaining that high Greek national morale which is necessary to finish task of eliminating bandit menace and thereby giving Greece chance to recover economically from effects of World War II.

Grady

1 Not printed; it explained that the Department was in the final stages of preparing the proposed Military Assistance Program, which included Greece, for presentation to Congress. Ambassador Grady was asked to cable four or five pages of commentary on the current Greek situation which might be included in the presentation to Congress. (868.20/3–2640)

2 The “Work and Victory” manifestations in Greece, which concluded with the celebration of the 128th anniversary of the independence of Greece on March 25, appear to have been originally inspired and planned by Ambassador and particularly Mrs. Grady. President Truman, who was unable to accept King Paul’s invitation to visit Greece and attend these celebrations, named Ambassador Grady as his personal representative. On March 25, President Truman issued a statement to the Greek people reaffirming American support to Greece. For the text of the President’s statement, see Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: Harry S. Truman, 1949 (Washington, Government Printing Office, 1964), p. 186. For the text of a statement issued to the press on March 23 by Secretary of State Acheson commending the “Work and Victory” celebrations, see Department of State Bulletin, April 3, 1949, p. 433.

Editorial Note [Document 137]

Editorial Note

On March 31 British Foreign Secretary Ernest Bevin arrived in Washington to participate in the final phase of the negotiations culminating in the signing of the North Atlantic Treaty on April 4. Bevin had also come to Washington for meetings with Secretary of State Acheson and French Foreign Minister Robert Schuman on various German problems. On March 31 Bevin, accompanied by a number of advisers, held a meeting with Secretary Acheson given over almost exclusively to German matters. According to Secretary Acheson’s memorandum of conversation, the following remarks regarding Greece were exchanged toward the conclusion of the meeting:

“Mr. Bevin suggested the advisability of bringing the Greek question to an issue within the next year, if no settlement is achieved with Russia in the meantime. He handed me a copy of a report from General Slim [see the note of March 31 from Bevin to Acheson, infra]. The British would try to do more by furnishing additional Spitfires and by increasing Greece’s drawing rights on the UK from 10 to another 14 [24?] million dollars in sterling. He had advised the Greek King to take more forceful action and he thought the present Greek Government was doing much better. Mr. Bevin said there had been a certain rapprochement between Tito and the Greeks, who were now companions in trouble.

With reference to Mr. Bevin’s remark that the US might become weary of the Greek problem, I mentioned in this specific connection, as well as with reference to other problems, that the US Government was finding it increasingly difficult to get appropriations for foreign programs and that we had to be careful in what we decided to do from now on.” (CFM Files: Lot M–88: Box 140: File—Minutes of Tripartite Meetings, Washington, April 1949)

Following the meeting Secretary Acheson and Foreign Secretary Bevin issued a brief joint statement explaining that they had had a general exchange of views on Germany and Greece but that no decisions were taken. For the text of the statement, see Department of State Bulletin, April 10, 1949, page 459.

For documentation on the Washington Tripartite Meetings on Germany of April 1949, see volume III, pages 156 ff.

The British Foreign Secretary (Bevin) to the Secretary of State 868.20/3–3149

[Document 138]

The British Foreign Secretary (Bevin) to the Secretary of State 1

top secret

The British Chief of the Imperial General Staff visited Greece on March 9th and 10th and has furnished His Majesty’s Government with an appreciation of the situation there.2 In this report Field-Marshal Sir William Slim has drawn the conclusion, with which His Majesty’s Government concurs, that military success against the Communist rebels in the near future is a necessity if Greece is not to become a satellite of Russia and that to achieve an early military success it is necessary for aid to the Greek forces to take priority, for the present, over all but the most essential economic aid.

Although there have been signs of improvement in the Greek situation in the past two months, in particular the clearance of the Peloponnese, the leadership and discipline of General Papagos and the dissensions in the rebel ranks, it would be rash to judge from these few encouraging signs that the end of the civil war is in sight or that the northern neighbours of Greece (with the possible exception, in certain circumstances, of Yugoslavia) will cease their aid to the rebels, in accordance with the resolutions of the United Nations Assembly and of U.N.S.C.O.B. Nevertheless the present favourable combination of circumstances does offer a far-reaching opportunity, of which advantage can and must be taken, to assist Greece to achieve by 1950 such marked military success that she can assure the security of her people and thereafter draw that real profit from economic aid (hitherto denied her by rebel sabotage and disruption) which would enable her to achieve economic recovery, increasingly by her own efforts.

The Chief of the Imperial General Staff considers that a relatively small increase in the size of the Greek forces at the present moment would be an investment which, taken in conjunction with the present favourable circumstances, would provide that additional central reserve necessary to clinch the military success which has so far eluded the grasp of the Greek army. His estimate of the increases in the forces required is:—

Army:

One Division (9,000 men)

Two Pursuit Groups (4,000 men)

Air Force:

Two Fighter Bomber Squadrons

One reconnaissance squadron.

He estimates the cost of the additional army formations at 6,000,000 pounds sterling and of the air units at 8,000,000 pounds sterling.

A copy of the report of the Chief of the Imperial General Staff is being communicated to the United States Chiefs of Staff through the Joint Services Mission.

31st March, 1949.

1 The source text, which is unsigned and bears no heading, was handed by Foreign Secretary Bevin to Secretary Acheson in the course of their meeting on March 31 (see editorial note, supra).

2 A copy of Field Marshal Slim’s six-page report accompanied the source text. For a synopsis of the report, see telegram Gama 22, April 5, to Athens, p. 290 [Pg. 290 includes portions of Doc. 140 and Doc. 141]. Also attached to the source text is a note by the British Chiefs of Staff Committee which indicated that Field Marshal Slim’s report had been requested in February 1949 by the British Defence Committee in order to serve as the basis for a further British approach to American authorities to give financial and economic support to the necessary expansion of the Greek armed forces so that they would be capable of finally defeating the Greek guerrillas in 1949. The British Chiefs of Staff endorsed Field Marshal Slim’s recommendations and urged that Foreign Secretary Bevin be authorized to press for American support for the proposed expansion of the Greek armed forces.

Memorandum of Conversation, by Mr. Leonard J. Cromie of the Division of Greek, Turkish, and Iranian Affairs Moscow Embassy Files: Lot F–132

[Document 139]

Memorandum of Conversation, by Mr. Leonard J. Cromie of the Division of Greek, Turkish, and Iranian Affairs

top secret [Washington,] April 1, 1949.

Subject: Greek Proposal for Western Military Action against Albania in the Event of a Cominform Move against Tito in Macedonia

Participants: H. E. Vassili Dendramis, the Greek Ambassador

Mr. Joseph C. Satterthwaite1 —NEA

John D. Jernegan2 —GTI

Leonard J. Cromie—GTI

The Greek Ambassador called at 4:00 p. m. by appointment at his request to present a memorandum,3 prepared by the Greek Foreign Office, dealing with current Macedonian developments in their relationship to Cominform pressure against Tito4 and possibilities of western counteraction.5 (Copy attached.)

The memorandum outlines the “extremely dangerous” consequences for Greece, Yugoslavia, Turkey, Italy and the Western Democracies in general should the Cominform succeed in overthrowing Tito either by force or by subversive activities in Macedonia. In the event of a Cominform move in this direction, statements of protest by the Western Powers or appeals to the United Nations would be of no avail, for the former would merely demonstrate “the inability of the West to face the new thrusts of world communism” while the latter would become “bogged down” by procedural delays. Decisions should rather be made at once which will prove “the determination of the Western Democracies to face developments not merely by righteous indignation and recourse to the legal procedures of international law, but by strong and decisive action.” Preferably this should take the form of “a naval operation of the Western Powers …6 to storm Albania,” which would “bring about with certainty the rapid collapse of the Hoxha7 regime” and Western occupation of Albania. This action, which could be justified on defensive grounds coupled with a promise of eventual withdrawal conditional upon improved Soviet behavior in the Balkans, would cover Tito’s western flank and an important sector of Greece’s northern flank and “would provide the Western Powers with a valuable pawn.” Turkish participation in this operation would be desirable, since the realization of Cominform objectives in Macedonia “would unavoidably be followed by … a move for the seizure of the Straits.” The memorandum proposes that the Western Powers make preliminary contact with the Turks on this matter without Greek participation. It foresees, however, that the Greek role in the contemplated Balkan military operations would be “most important” and that aid to Greece “should be accordingly adjusted.”

The Ambassador read, under instructions, some accompanying “verbal remarks” (copy attached8 ), explaining that the Greek Government does not regard Cominform aggression against Yugoslavia as inevitable nor does it contemplate immediate action in Albania but merely proposes that the Western Powers give joint consideration to this matter to lay the groundwork for eventual action should events require it.

Mr. Satterthwaite told the Ambassador that the Greek memorandum would be taken under advisement.

1 Director, Office of Near Eastern and African Affairs.

2 Chief, Division of Greek, Turkish, and Iranian Affairs.

3 The Greek Embassy memorandum, dated April 1, 1949, is not printed.

4 Marshal Tito (Josip Broz), Yugoslav Prime Minister and Minister of Defense; Secretary General of the Communist Party of Yugoslavia.

5 For documentation, see vol. v, pp. 854 ff.

6 Omission appears in the source text.

7 General Enver Hoxha, Albanian Prime Minister, Minister of Foreign Affairs, Minister of Defense, and Commander in Chief; Secretary General of the Albanian Workers’ Party (the Communist party of Albania).

8 Not printed.

The Ambassador in Greece (Grady) to the Secretary of State 868.00/4–149: Telegram

[Document 140]

The Ambassador in Greece (Grady) to the Secretary of State

secret Athens, April 1, 1949—5 p. m.

626. While aware possible propaganda advantages resulting Greek renunciation Northern Epirus claim prior resumption so-called conciliation talks at Lake Success (Belgrade telegram 272, March 16 and Sofia telegram 9, March 241 ) it appears politically impossible for Greeks to take such action at present and inadvisable that we press them to do so.

Subject recently broached with Pipinelis, permanent Undersecretary Foreign Office, who, as experienced diplomat and member Greek GA delegation, well aware UN and world public opinion angles of Balkan conciliation talks and unfortunate interpretation placed on breakdown these conversations in Paris last winter. He declared categorically that no non-Communist Greek government could make such renunciation. It seems unreasonable expect Greeks to make such gesture in favor of openly hostile Albania which is furnishing chief support to Greek guerrillas largely from bases located in Northern Epirus itself.

Furthermore, considerations should be given Albania’s strategic location on Otranto Straits and as traditional gateway between Balkans and West. In our view, US should not take any step which could be represented as indicating even tacit approval complete absorption Albania into Eastern satellite system and as corollary, should not press Greece formally renounce at this time its territorial claims on Albania. These are at least far better justified than claims of any third country against Albania. If peaceful and equitable solution for Albanian question were in prospect, which is not case at present, Greece could at such time, be asked to assist by denouncing Northern Epirus claims and probably would be willing do so if genuine resumption of normal friendly relations with northern neighbors could be assured. Only on basis of such quid pro quo could gesture be justified by Greek Government to its own people.

At same time, we have repeatedly urged Greeks avoid agitation on Northern Epirus and Foreign Office has usually done so. During forthcoming Lake Success talks, Greeks can be expected to take reasonable position that their Northern Epirus claims are before CFM and that relations can be established with Albania pending territorial decision by that body.

Even on propaganda side, value renunciation of Northern Epirus by Greeks is open to question. It will be remembered that Greeks last July proposed to Bulgars resumption of diplomatic relations with mutual renunciation territorial claims and that Bulgars refused. This refusal did not, however, prevent Kolarov,2 in recent speech, from alleging that Greek territorial pretentions prevent establishment normal relations between Bulgaria and this country. Also seems unlikely that conciliation talks at Lake Success will lead to any clarification (if such is needed) of Communist territorial designs in Balkans.

In sum, Greek renunciation of Northern Epirus might well occasion internal government crisis and appears most unlikely either promote establishment better relations with northern neighbors or provide useful ammunition in present war of words between East and West. Continued aid by northern neighbors and other Russian satellites to Greek guerrillas in open defiance overwhelming GA condemnation such action, like repeated and deliberate violation Satellite peace treaties and continuance religious persecution in Satellite countries in contemptuous disregard protests of civilized world, seems to provide clear indication baselessness any expectation that policy of international communism will be significantly affected at this time by expressions UN or Western public opinion.

Sent Department 626; repeated Belgrade 35, Sofia 27.

Grady

1 Same as telegram 253, March 24, from Sofia, p. 280 [Pg. 280 includes portions of Doc. 134 and Doc. 135].

2 Vasil Kolarov, Bulgarian Foreign Minister and member of the Bulgarian Communist Party Politburo.

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in Greece 868.00/4–549: Telegram

[Document 141]

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in Greece

top secret Washington, April 5, 1949—6 p. m.

Gama 22. In conversation March 31 Bevin handed Secretary copy report by Sir William Slim CIGS in connection his recent visit to Greece.1 Copy also received by JCS through service channels.

Synopsis report as follows: 1. Lack success 1948 result poor morale, poor leadership, lack central army reserve, failure exploit air superiority. Troops now better trained, leadership improving but morale fluctuates quickly and wrong to assume capabilities UK or US division as yard stick for Greek performance.

2. Although significant progress can be made unlikely guerrilla war can be won this year regardless measures taken now. If Macedonian developments result in increased movement from Bulgaria, problem confronting GNA would become acute. Present political and military situation in Greece and Yugoslavia presents Western Powers with far reaching opportunity in cold war. Military success against communism in near future essential if Greece not to become a satellite.

3. Comparatively small increase military assistance should tilt scales in favor Greek armed forces. Report recommends: (a) One infantry division (9,000 men)

(b) Two infantry pursuit groups (2,000 men each). Equipped only with man-carried weapons and supplies from air.

(c) Two fighter bomber squadrons

(d) One reconnaissance squadron

Your comments requested on foregoing recommendations in light, general Balkan developments and possible Greek position in event Cominform triumph in Yugoslavia.

Acheson

1 Regarding the Slim report under reference here, see Bevin’s communication of March 31 to Acheson, p. 286 [Pg. 286 is part of Doc. 138].

The Ambassador in Greece (Grady) to the Secretary of State 868.20/4–749: Telegram

[Document 142]

The Ambassador in Greece (Grady) to the Secretary of State

top secret
urgent Athens, April 7, 1949—3 p. m.

Amag 39. Copy of Sir William Slim’s Greek report was handed me by British Ambassador and transmitted by me to Department by my top secret despatch of April 2.1 Reference Gama 22, April 6 [5].2

Slim’s report was prepared in advance of his arrival in Greece in line with Down’s well-known thoughts and then endorsed by Slim personally after his visit. Being British it is cast in terms of Empire defense and being a British soldier’s report it makes its recommendations without giving consideration to cost either to US taxpayer or Greek recovery program.

The problem that Slim is trying to solve by his recommendations has been given careful and continuing study by us during many months. We know the reasons for lack of success in the past and because of this knowledge we are building a better trained, better led Greek Army. We are striving to maintain the morale high. We believe the present Greek armed forces are adequate, from the military viewpoint, to clear Greece this year of organized banditry up to border areas. From the economic viewpoint army even too large if reconstruction program is to make appreciable progress. This, of course, assumes that nature and extent of present aid to guerrillas from northern countries will not appreciably be augmented. In latter case, which might be result of Cominform victory in Yugoslavia, a new situation might be presented which could not be dealt with by Greek Army in its present size, size recommended by Slim, or its maximum size represented by total mobilization.

We have learned that certain way to slow punch in Greek Army’s drive is to watch passively circulation of story that army is too small and soon will be increased in size. Since November we have been able to squelch such stories near source with excellent results. Bearing in mind speed with which rumors of recommended increases travel by grape-vine and their disastrous effect in Greece Purge that Department immediately inform British that it will not increase present ceiling of Greek armed forces. The special training, equipment and use of units within ceiling is constant concern of JUSMAPG and GGS.

During my stay in Washington3 I will wish elaborate on this general subject as pointed up in Slim’s report.

Grady

1 Despatch 32, April 2, from Athens, not printed.

2  Supra.

3 Ambassador Grady, accompanied by William M. Rountree, his Special Assistant, left Athens for Washington on April 9, leaving Counselor of Embassy Karl Rankin as Chargé. Ambassador Grady had been asked to return to Washington in connection with the forthcoming submission to Congress of legislation for the Military Aid Program. He also wished to discuss several matters with officers of the Department.

The Ambassador in Yugoslavia (Cannon) to the Secretary of State 868.014/4–849: Telegram

[Document 143]

The Ambassador in Yugoslavia (Cannon) to the Secretary of State

secret Belgrade, April 8, 1949—3 p. m.

390. Moscow’s excellent 829, April 41 poses what well may be central issue in current Macedonian situation, namely your own ability and willingness follow through on implications of support for first successful rebellion in Soviet Empire. If Soviets are left to believe we regard Macedonian question as squabble over disposition remote territory by three Communist states all within Soviet orbit, they may feel free proceed with military plans of one sort or another (Legtel 389, April 82 ) as ruthlessly as they did in past within their own borders. Basis UN or other intervention can readily be obscured by casting their Macedonian exertions in form of ostensibly indigenous guerrilla actions, so-called civil war or free Macedonian Republic secession right to which both Communist theory and Yugoslav Constitution acknowledge.

It was precisely this possibility we had in mind when proposing multilateral Balkan border pact (Embtel 272, March 16) though Athens sees problem from other viewpoint (Athens 626 April 1). We would not of course recommend renunciation Epiran claim in vague hope of exemplary influence. What we were concerned with was development approach which would compel Yugoslavia, Bulgaria and Albania to give to Greece and each other border guarantees or make it impossible for them to mask their territorial designs behind so-called guerrilla movements. We hoped our project would be thought to provide that quid fro quo which Ave entirely agree with Athens is owed to Greece.

We also thought we saw advantages in proposing that Greek Government should take lead as genuine conciliator in Balkans along these fundamental lines thus correcting popular misinterpretation its stand on Epiran territories. Value Greek claim will sooner or later have to be assessed realistically and we wonder if Greeks can count on CFM to put through question to Greece. Very bluntly present utility of claim might thus be its greatest.

If, however, Greek Government finds itself obliged hold to Pipenellis position we would suggest further study of proposal our 272 using some other sponsor. We think Bulgarians and Albanians will be wholly unable offer guarantees requested without disclosure of or serious embarrassment to Moscow’s plans for Macedonia and liquidation of Tito. Above all, proposal presented to UN would have merit focussing world attention on threat to peace inherent present Macedonian situation and thus might well impress Soviets with fact they cannot carry out overt or camouflaged aggression in Macedonia area behind curtain their own security apparatus and world indifference.

Sent Department, repeated Sofia 25, Athens 25, Moscow 52.

Cannon

1 The telegram under reference here expressed the belief of the Embassy in the Soviet Union that the Soviet Government was committed to the liquidation of the Tito regime in Yugoslavia and that Soviet efforts to that end would continue at an accelerating pace. The Embassy felt that the Soviet efforts would be indirect and that Yugoslavia was likely to face widespread guerrilla activity on the Greek pattern. The complete text of this telegram is printed in vol. v, p. 808.

2 Not printed; in it Ambassador Cannon observed that the removal of Markos Vafiades taken together with recent purges in Albania and Bulgaria could possibly be seen as a prelude to hostilities in the Macedonian area, but Cannon could find no local evidence to establish the probability of early armed action. Among the consequences of the Balkan purges was the surrounding of Yugoslavia by leadership groups thoroughly subservient to the Soviet Union and the possible exploitation of the idea of a united Macedonia against Yugoslavia. (860H.002/4–849)

The Secretary of State to the United States Representative at the United Nations (Austin) 501.BB Balkan/4–1249: Telegram

[Document 144]

The Secretary of State to the United States Representative at the United Nations (Austin)1

secret
urgent Washington, April 12, 1949—7 p. m.

216. N.Y.’s 480, Apr 11.2 For Ambassador Austin.3 Dept seriously concerned that intended resumption by Evatt of conciliation talks with Grk, Alb, Bulg and Yugo reps cld result in complicating and worsening entire Balkan situation unless most carefully handled.4

Requested that you find earliest occasion to approach Evatt informally and explain U.S. view in spirit of helpfulness as follows: 1. Present Balkan situation in delicate state, particularly as regards position of Yugos. We feel it important nothing be done via Evatt talks which wld either force Yugos to reconfirm course of solidiarity with Alb and Bulg pursued at Paris or, alternatively, of dangerously highlighting Yugo isolation from Cominform group. Also prospects of eventual rapprochement between Greece and Yugos cld be badly damaged unless sharper points at issue between them are kept in background.

2. Dept feels that in light of apparent Cominform and therefore Soviet intent to use Bulg and Grk guerrillas to detach Macedonia from Greece, and in light of continued large-scale aid to Grk guerrillas in Grammos from Albania, chances of even limited success renewed conciliation talks negligible.

Pls also advise Evatt we feel he cld well begin by first inquiring of various Balkan reps whether they think there is adequate basis on which conciliation efforts cld proceed. If talks go forward, it is our best judgment that there is little chance of appreciable results and publicity failure might furnish Soviets with propaganda success and also be disservice to prestige both of UN and of GA Pres himself.

Dr. Howard5 of Dept will be in N.Y. by noon Apr 13 to provide any assistance or background info re history of conciliation talks that you may require.

Acheson

1 This message was repeated as telegram 542, Combal 263, April 13, to Athens.

2 Not printed; it transmitted Daily Classified Summary No. 69 from the United States Mission to the United Nations reviewing events at the United Nations on April 11. The summary reported, inter alia, that U.N. General Assembly President Evatt planned to resume his Greek conciliation efforts. Evatt had asked Greece, Bulgaria, and Yugoslavia to be represented at a meeting on April 14 and had sent a wire to Tirana requesting the Albanian Government to assign a representative for the talks. (501.A Summaries/4–1149)

3 Warren R. Austin, United States Representative to the United Nations, held the rank of Ambassador.

4 In his telegram 706, Combal 411, April 9, from Athens, not printed, U.S. Representative on the U.N. Special Committee on the Balkans Drew commented in part as follows on the prospect of renewed conciliation efforts: “Believe that renewal of Evatt conciliatory effort at this crucial turning in Balkan situation frought with danger of either forcing Yugoslavia to resume course of solidarity with Albania and Bulgaria pursued at Paris or, on contrary, of dangerously hastening and highlighting Yugoslavia isolation from Cominform group.” (501.BB Balkan/4–949)

5 Harry N. Howard, Adviser, Division of Greek, Turkish, and Iranian Affairs.

The Chargé in Greece (Rankin) to the Secretary of State 868.00/4–1649: Telegram

[Document 145]

The Chargé in Greece (Rankin) to the Secretary of State

confidential Athens, April 16, 1949—6 p. m.

774. Embtels 580, March 26; 651, April 5; 702, April 8. Contrary to assurances given Ambassador Grady by King, Sophoulis and Tsaldaris, Markezinis affair culminated in open government crisis, fortunately of short duration.1 This development appears to have been inevitable in view of King’s position, obstinacy Markezinis and pressure from parties, press and public opinion.

Markezinis refused to resign until court inquiry results published. However, according Greek political tradition Markezinis should have placed himself at Prime Minister’s disposal when question first raised unless government were prepared take unequivocal position his defense assuming collective responsibility for this action. Coalition government refused to do this. Populist, most powerful party in government, bitterly hostile to Markezinis and determined to get rid of him. Other participating parties not entirely certain Markezinis’ innocence and not inclined consider him indispensable. Government therefore procrastinated and finally yielded to Populist and opposition pressure to crush Markezinis.

In consequence Markezinis affair, government policy-making functions practically at standstill for nearly one month. Although principal papers (Kathimerini, Vima, Nea, Estia) consistently backed Markezinis, their support relatively mild in contrast virulent attacks by remainder of press including Populist organs and left-center Eleftheria. So far as can be determined, public to whom Markezinis little more than a name considered his stubbornness and government inactivity intolerable, particularly during last week when country considered suffering invasion from abroad, civil servants striking and economic difficulties mounting.

Under circumstances Prime Minister and other government leaders relatively objective in Markezinis matter considered it impossible maintain previously declared position of awaiting court inquiry results, particularly as no certainty re ultimate date publication of court findings. According very reliable source, April 12 even Papagos, one of Markezinis’ strongest supporters, felt latter should resign as only way of terminating impasse.

Question complicated by position of King who in view his assurances to Ambassador as well as his personal desires opposed both Markezinis’ resignation and moves by other government parties to force this action. Confronted with this situation Sophoulis, rather than join other parties in attempting force King to demand Markezinis resignation, submitted government resignation. Appears also that Sophoulis Liberals had some hope capitalizing on situation by forming new government under Sophoulis, either excluding other party leaders which would reduce influence Tsaldaris and Venizelos as well as Markezinis (Embtel 741, April 132 ), or as it turned out by acquiring two additional cabinet posts.

In reforming government Sophoulis asked New Party Ministers Capsalis (National Economic) and Gonis (Labor) retain their posts but did not follow customary procedure and deal directly with their party chief Markezinis on this matter. Perhaps for this reason and according Markezinis because he felt his two ministers would be subject continued attack by Populists and opposition, Markezinis refused permit his ministers participate although he was aware of American desire Capsalis and Gonis remain. Markezinis decision generally welcomed by other government parties for various reasons including belief nonparticipation new party would ease parliamentary position reformed government.

Although government as sworn in identical with predecessor except for omission New Party (Embtel 749, April 142 ) some minor shifts particularly among Liberal ministries expected shortly. Leading candidates presently vacant National Economy and Labor posts are Sophoulis Liberal Mavros3 (Minister Justice in last pre-election government) and Venizelist Marinakis (ex-Minister Merchant Marine) neither of whom have any special qualifications for these key posts which were capably filled in preceding government by New Party members. In addition government as whole has suffered considerable loss public prestige from Markezinis affair but expects get adequate vote of confidence from Parliament scheduled to meet for this purpose May 2.4

Rankin

1 In mid-March it became known that Spyridon Markezinis, Greek Minister Without Portfolio and leader of the New Party, had business relations with a broker currently on trial for the violation of currency regulations. A controversy erupted in the Greek press regarding Markezinis’ possible wrongdoing. Rivalries among competing Greek political factions became a factor in the accusations against Markezinis. In conversations with King Paul, Prime Minister Sophoulis, and Foreign Minister Tsaldaris (reported upon in the telegrams under reference, none of which is printed), Ambassador Grady expressed his interest in seeing that the Markezinis affair was not irresponsibly utilized for a governmental crisis (868.00/3–2649, 868.00/4–549, 868.00/4–849). In the second week of April, however, the Sophoulis government sought to obtain the resignation of Markezinis, a measure for a time strenuously opposed by the King. On April 12 the Sophoulis government resigned. At the King’s request, Sophoulis formed a new government on April 14 identical in composition with the previous one, except for elimination of Markezinis and two other ministers who were members of the New Party. On May 2 the Greek Supreme Court announced that it had found no evidence of wrongdoing on the part of Markezinis.

2 Not printed.

2 Not printed.

3 George Mavros was subsequently sworn in as Greek Minister of National Economy.

4 The Greek Parliament gave the newly constituted Sophoulis Government a vote of confidence on May 2.

Memorandum of the Secretary of State’s Press and Radio News Conference ON Files, Lot 60 D 641

1 [Document 146]

Memorandum of the Secretary of State’s Press and Radio News Conference 2

[Extract]

[Washington,] April 20, 1949.

No. 16

Greek Army

At his press and radio news conference this morning, Secretary Acheson said that he thought that his reply to a question last Wednesday3 might have created a wrong impression and might have been unfair to somebody. He continued that the answer was correct and complete to the best of his knowledge at that time but was not altogether complete in view of what he now knew. The Secretary explained that he was asked whether Mr. Bevin talked with him when he was here about increasing the size of the Greek Army and he replied that he had no memory of any such discussion at all. Secretary Acheson declared that Mr. Bevin did not discuss with him increasing the size of the Greek Army but left at the State Department, among several other memoranda, a memorandum by some division or group in the British Army on the general subject of the organization of the Greek Army. He said that this memorandum was turned over by him without study to experts in that field. He continued that he had been told that the memorandum recommended an increase in some branches, and a decrease in others, and overall a slight net increase but that the matter had not yet come back to him. He went on to say that, as the correpondents knew, the view of this Government was against increasing the size of the Greek Army. He concluded that he thought that the matter was of no importance and said that he only mentioned it so that no one might think that he had attempted to be sharp in answering or to mislead anybody.

Asked about the present status of this memorandum, the Secretary replied that it gave the view of some of Mr. Bevin’s experts, which he thought might be helpful to our experts. He added that there was no conversation between the British Government and this one on it and that it was not an intergovernmental matter. He stated that there was nothing proposed or rejected at all.4

. . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1 Lot 60 D 641 is a collection of memoranda of the Press Conferences of the Secretary of State (1935–1955), Department of State Radio (Wireless) Bulletins (1935–1946), News Digests (1945–1952), and other unclassified press materials for the years 1906–1954, as maintained by the Office of News, Bureau of Public Affairs.

2 The memorandum was prepared by Michael J. McDermott, Special Assistant to the Secretary of State (Press Relations).

3 April 13.

4 On April 21, Lord Jellicoe, Second Secretary of the British Embassy, called at the Department of State to discuss the implications of Secretary Acheson’s press conference remarks. Jellicoe reported that the British Embassy had received a message from Foreign Secretary Bevin requesting that an immediate answer be sought to his communication of March 31 (see p. 286 [Pg. 286 is part of Doc. 138]) as he regarded the matter as urgent and wanted the question cleared up immediately (memorandum of conversation by Baxter, April 21, 868.20/4–2149).

Memorandum of Conversation, by Messrs. Harry N. Howard and Leonard J. Cromie of the Division of Greek, Turkish, and Iranian Affairs 501.BB Balkan/4–2049

[Document 147]

Memorandum of Conversation, by Messrs. Harry N. Howard and Leonard J. Cromie of the Division of Greek, Turkish, and Iranian Affairs

confidential [Washington,] April 20, 1949.

Participants: Mr. Paul Economou-Gouras, Counselor, Greek Embassy

Mr. William O. Baxter, GTI

Mr. Leonard Cromie, GTI

Mr. Harry N. Howard, GTI

Mr. Philip A. Mangano,1 UNP

Mr. Gouras called to discuss the Evatt “conciliatory” talks in New York since, he indicated, his Government was somewhat concerned as to possible developments. He had understood that at a meeting yesterday, Ambassador Sarper and Mr. van Langenhove, members of the Evatt “conciliatory” committee,2 had expressed their view that, in view of the delicate and complicated issues involved, the time was not suitable for a renewal of the effort to “conciliate” between Greece and its northern neighbors. Dr. Evatt, however, had insisted on his “mandate” from the General Assembly last November, and it was finally agreed that he should see the Representatives of Albania, Bulgaria, Greece and Yugoslavia individually concerning the problems at issue. Mr. Gouras indicated that an Albanian representative3 had now arrived in New York, the Bulgarian representative, Professor Vladiguerov,4 having arrived somewhat earlier, and wondered whether it might not be desirable to have Mr. Pipinelis, Under-Secretary in the Greek Foreign Ministry, come to New York, since he had taken part in the discussions in Paris. It was agreed, however, that, with Mr. Kyrou and Ambassador Dendramis in New York, it did not seem necessary to have Mr. Pipinelis there. His presence might, indeed, have the undesirable effect of appearing to lend added importance to the talks. Were Mr. Pipinelis to remain at home, moreover, it would put the Greek delegates in a better position to cope with surprise developments since they could argue the need for referring them to Athens.

Since Mr. Gouras desired some guidance as to our attitude in the matter of the talks, it was suggested that the Greek Representative should listen to any proposals Dr. Evatt might have to make and indicate that the Greek Government had always sought normal relations with the northern neighbors of Greece, that it had no territorial claims with respect to Bulgaria or Yugoslavia, and that its well-known claim to Northern Epirus had been placed before the appropriate international tribunal, the Council of Foreign Ministers. It was also suggested that Dr. Evatt’s attention might be called to the delicate Yugoslav situation, to the newly reemphasized Bulgarian and Yugoslav aspirations toward Greek Macedonia and to the persistent Bulgarian claim to Western Thrace. Nevertheless, the favorable Greek attitude toward the establishment of “frontier commissions” and toward the renewal of, or revision of, frontier conventions might be indicated. Finally, it was thought that Dr. Evatt’s attention might be called to the “conciliatory” functions of UNSCOB, a continuing organ of the General Assembly, and to the fact that these functions had been strengthened by the acceptance of Australian amendments to the original joint four-Power proposal. In case Dr. Evatt decided, as the current session of the General Assembly drew to a close, to make a “report” to the Political Committee on the conciliation talks, it would be desirable that the Committee should confine itself to referring this report to UNSCOB for the background guidance of this competent UN body in connection with future conciliation efforts at a more propitious moment.

1 Assistant on International Organization Affairs, Division of United Nations Political Affairs.

2 The Conciliation Committee was composed of Dr. Evatt, United Nations Secretary-General Trygve Lie, Ambassador Fernand van Langenhove (Belgian Permanent Representative to the United Nations), and Ambassador Selim Sarper (Turkish Permanent Representative to the United Nations). The Conciliation Committee held its first meeting in New York on April 19. The Committee met with the Greek, Yugoslav, Bulgarian, and Albanian representatives for the first time on April 21. Other meetings followed.

3 Behar Shtylla, Albanian Minister in France.

4 Dr. Todor Vladiguerov, Bulgarian Minister in France.

The Secretary of State to the British Ambassador (Franks) 868.20/3–3149

[Document 148]

The Secretary of State to the British Ambassador (Franks)1

top secret [Washington,] April 25, 1949.

Excellency: I have the honor to refer to the analysis of the Greek situation prepared by the Chief of the Imperial General Staff and presented to me by the British Foreign Minister during our conversation on March 31, 1949.2 This report has received careful consideration both in the Department of State and in the National Military Establishment and by their representatives in Greece.

The problems raised in this report have been given continuous study for many months. The Government of the United States recognizes that military success in Greece in the near future is important and that it is a prerequisite to economic recovery. The Government of the United States notes with gratification the recent action of the United Kingdom in donating twenty-two Spitfire airplanes to the Greek Air Force and in extending additional economic assistance to Greece in the form of a further grant of drawing rights under the Intra-European Payments Plan.

The Government of the United States continues to believe, however, that the present Greek Armed Forces are adequate, from a military point of view, substantially to clear Greece this year of organized banditry up to the border areas, assuming foreign aid to the guerrillas is not augmented appreciably. It is felt that replacement of older men and other noneffectives included in the present ceiling strength of the Greek Armed Forces, which it is hoped can be accomplished, will contribute materially to current efforts to increase the combat effectiveness of the Greek Army.

Although thorough examination of the propositions contained in the report of the Chief of the Imperial General Staff has resulted in no change in the estimate of the military requirements of the Greek situation by the Government of the United States, the mutual interests of the United Kingdom and the United States in Greece make a periodic exchange of views on these topics extremely valuable and welcome. A more detailed military commentary on the report of the Chief of the Imperial General Staff will be transmitted by the United States Chiefs of Staff to the British Chiefs of Staff.

Accept [etc.]

Dean Acheson

1 This note was handed to British Minister Sir Frederick Hoyer Millar by Joseph C. Satterthwaite, Director, Office of Near Eastern and African Affairs, during a call at the Department of State on April 28. Satterthwaite explained that the inability of the United States Government to give a favorable reply to British suggestion for some immediate increase in American military aid to Greece, a suggestion which had been given very careful consideration by all competent government officials, was not to be interpreted to mean that the United States did not welcome British comments and recommendations with respect to Greece. Satterthwaite also asked Hoyer Millar to assure Foreign Secretary Bevin of American regret that press stories regarding the British suggestions attempted to draw the inference that there was an unfriendly difference of opinion between the United States and United Kingdom Governments with regard to Greece. Satterthwaite expressed the confidence that the very fine cooperation between American and British officials in Greece would continue in the future. (memorandum of conversation by Baxter, April 28, 1949: 868.20/4–2849) A brief summary of this note was transmitted in telegram Gama 28, April 28, to Athens, not printed, with the suggestion the position of the United States as therein stated be made known to the Greek Government (868.20/4–2849). Lieutenant General Van Fleet, in his capacity as Acting Chief of the American Mission for Aid to Greece, transmitted the main points of the note in a letter of May 2 to Greek Prime Minister Sophoulis, not printed (868.20/5–249).

2 Regarding Secretary Acheson’s conversation with Foreign Secretary Bevin on March 31, see the editorial note, p. 285 [Pg. 285 includes portions of Doc. 136 and Doc. 137]. A synopsis of Field Marshal Slim’s report under reference here was contained in telegram Gama 22, April 5, to Athens, p. 290 [Pg. 290 includes portions of Doc. 140 and Doc. 141].

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Assistant Secretary of State for United Nations Affairs (Rusk) 501.BB Balkan/4–2749

[Document 149]

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Assistant Secretary of State for United Nations Affairs (Rusk)

top secret [New York,] April 27, 1949.

Subject: Greek Situation

Participants: Mr. Andrei Gromyko, Soviet Delegation to the General Assembly1

Mr. Hector McNeil, British Delegation to the General Assembly2

Mr. Dean Rusk, Assistant Secretary of State3

At the end of dinner at Secretary-General Lie’s house in New York last evening, Mr. Gromyko, Mr. NcNeil and I had a talk about matters before the United Nations. Mr. Lie, in leaving the three of us together, made some remark obviously pointing to the Berlin discussions. I suggested that the three of us leave the subject of Berlin to Mr. Malik and Ambassador Jessup and expressed the hope that the rumors, leaks and public statements which had thus far been made would not complicate their talks on the following day.4 Gromyko and McNeil agreed.

Mr. Gromyko asked when we thought the Assembly would be able to close. I indicated my own personal view that it would probably not be able to adjourn before about the 15th of May.

Mr. McNeil then asked Gromyko whether Gromyko thought there was any basis on which we could get together on Italian Colonies.5 McNeil stated that although the British position was quite definitely opposed to a United Nations trusteeship of the sort proposed by Gromyko, McNeil would be glad to have from Gromyko any amendments to the British proposals which he would like the British to consider. McNeil and Gromyko then discussed some differences in figures about costs which had arisen between them in Committee 1 debate.6 My only participation in this part of the conversation was to comment on the difficulty of providing substantial budget and security forces by the United Nations itself.

I recalled that Mr. Malik and Ambassador Jessup had wondered whether there were other subjects which we might discuss. I wondered whether Mr. Malik would be going to the Council of Foreign Ministers or whether he would remain in New York and might wish to talk about other points. I wondered, for example, whether the three of us could in any way use our influence to normalize the Greek situation in order that the Greek people could get on with their task of economic reconstruction. Mr. Gromyko said there was no problem. The only thing that is required is (turning to McNeil) that you withdraw your troops. He said the Soviet Union had always taken the position that if the troops were withdrawn, the Greeks could deal with this question themselves. Mr. McNeil then pointed out that free elections had been held, that these elections were held under international supervision in which the Soviets failed to take part, and that the principal difficulty had consisted in military assistance across the northern border. Mr. Gromyko interjected the comment that that never had been proved. Mr. McNeil replied that in private conversations we would have to work on the assumption that such assistance was in fact being offered, and he indicated that his personal view was that the main problem was to bring about a cessation of military assistance from all sides in order that the Greeks could concentrate on their difficult economic problems. I interjected that our own military assistance to Greece had been made necessary by conditions created in Greece by armed resistance on the part of guerrillas directly assisted by Greece’s three northern neighbors.

After a brief desultory exchange along the same lines, chiefly between Mr. Gromyko and Mr. McNeil, I stated that I did not believe we could talk about the merits of the Greek situation on that evening, but I merely wondered whether there was any basis for supposing that we could use our influence on the parties to pacify the situation. At this point we rejoined the rest of the party.

1 Deputy Minister of Foreign Affairs Andrey Andreyevich Gromyko served as Chairman of the Soviet Delegation to the General Assembly’s Third Session, Second Part.

2 Minister of State Hector McNeil served as Chairman of the British Delegation to the General Assembly.

3 Assistant Secretary of State Rusk served as Alternate United States Representative to the General Assembly.

4 For documentation on the conversations between Ambassador at Large Philip C. Jessup and Soviet Deputy Minister of Foreign Affairs Yakov Aleksandrovich Malik regarding the Berlin situation, see vol. iii, pp. 694 ff.

5 For documentation on the question of the disposition of the former Italian colonies, see vol. iv, pp. 526 ff.

6 Presumably the reference here is to the debate in the Ad Hoc Political Committee of a proposal by the Secretary-General of the United Nations for the establishment of a U.N. Security Guard.

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Assistant Secretary of State for United Nations Affairs (Rusk) 868.00/5–549

[Document 150]

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Assistant Secretary of State for United Nations Affairs (Rusk)1

top secret [Washington,] May 5, 1949.

Subject: Greece

Participants: Mr. Andrei Gromyko, Soviet Delegation to the General Assembly

Mr. Hector McNeil, British Delegation to the General Assembly

Mr. Dean Rusk, Assistant Secretary of State

Preliminary Note: I called on Mr. Hector McNeil in his office in the Empire State Building at 12:15 yesterday to discuss with him how we should respond to Mr. Gromyko’s request for a further conversation. I told Mr. McNeil that I could not enter into any official conversations with Mr. Gromyko but that if Mr. Gromyko wanted to present his views on an informal and personal basis that I would be willing to listen. I then raised with him the question as to whether it might not be desirable to arrange a luncheon or a dinner with other people present, during which the three of us might exchange a few thoughts, and thus maintain the social and unofficial character of any conversations. Mr. McNeil appeared quite surprised and stated that he had already made an appointment for the two of us to see Gromyko yesterday afternoon and that he had been informed by his Washington Embassy that the appointment was agreeable with me. I told him that I had not heard of the suggestion but under the circumstances thought that we might as well go ahead in order not to complicate the matter further.

Mr. Gromyko, Mr. McNeil and I met in Gromyko’s office at 3:45 yesterday afternoon. After a few amenities, Mr. Gromyko recalled that during the course of our conversation at Mr. Trygve Lie’s dinner on April 26,2 I had inquired whether our three governments might not use our influence to bring about a settlement of the Greek question. He said that our earlier discussion had been very vague, that he had reported the matter to Moscow, and that his government was ready to discuss the matter further. Mr. Gromyko then said that he hoped we could discuss the matter in somewhat more concrete terms.

Mr. McNeil stated that he had no instructions which would permit him to go into the merits of the question but that he was very glad to listen to what Gromyko had to say. He assumed from what Gromyko had already said that Gromyko had some concrete proposals in mind. Mr. McNeil stated he assumed the three of us agreed that the conversation was personal and informal and should not under any circumstances be disclosed to the press.

I then reminded Mr. Gromyko that I had raised the question as to whether we could not use our influence to help the Greek matter toward a settlement in order that the Greek people might be able to concentrate upon their problems of reconstruction. I stated that I had not intended to imply that we either should or would be willing to change the forum of discussion from existing channels, such as UNSCOB and diplomatic channels, to the great powers. I then stated that I was unable to do more than listen and that I wished to emphasize Mr. McNeil’s point that our conversation was personal and unofficial and should not be disclosed.

Mr. Gromyko stated his agreement that our talks were informal and confidential. He then said he wondered what we thought about the proposals made on April 20 by Mr. Porphyrogenis, the head of the “Northern Interim Government” in Greece. (This is the guerrilla regime of which Markos was formerly the head. A copy of the April 20 proposals is attached.)3 I told Mr. Gromyko that I had not been following the Greek question closely and that I had not in fact seen the proposals. I had noticed in the morning New York Times some reference to such proposals but that I assumed the news account was incomplete and asked Mr. Gromyko what the April 20 proposal in fact was.

Mr. Gromyko then took from his desk a Russian text and said that he had not prepared an English text because he did not wish to alter the meaning in the course of translation. He said, however, that the proposal was that there be a cease-fire in Greece, that there be a general amnesty, and that arrangements be made for a new election. He stated that the northern forces wished to “participate in the arrangements for the election”. Mr. Gromyko then said that he thought a cease-fire and arrangements for an election would be only the first step, that there were other questions which might be taken up and resolved later.

Mr. McNeil then stated that he wished to make it clear that his government could not conceive that the rebel forces in northern Greece could be dealt with as a government. He reminded Gromyko that the Greek Government was a well-established, recognized independent government, and that the northern forces had no such status. Mr. McNeil then stated that he wished to ask a few questions merely in order to understand what it was Gromyko had in mind. For example, he said he had been interested in how Gromyko supposed a termination of hostilities could be brought about. Mr. Gromyko replied that such arrangements could be the subject of further discussion but that he “does not exclude a request by the great powers on both sides in Greece” with respect to such matters.

I then told Mr. Gromyko that a question or two had occurred to me which might help me to understand what he was saying. I inquired what role he would assign to the United Nations Commission on the Balkans which has the matter before it and on which the Soviet seat is still vacant. Mr. Gromyko stated that he did not believe that UNSCOB could serve any useful purpose, that the USSR considered it an illegal and improper body.

I then asked Mr. Gromyko to clarify what he meant by an election. Did he mean a parliamentary election of a government in Greece under the existing constitution, or did he mean a plebiscite on other issues? He stated that “a parliamentary election is a parliamentary election”. He specified that he had in mind the election of a government and not a plebiscite on other issues, although he reminded me that he had already said that other issues might be settled later.

Mr. McNeil then asked whether in Mr. Gromyko’s view the election would involve any boundary question; Mr. McNeil reminded Gromyko of public discussion and speculation on the issue of Macedonia. Mr. Gromyko said that “Greece has its boundaries and we are talking about the boundaries of Greece”.

I then said to Mr. Gromyko that I was not sure that he was thinking about the Greek problem which was before the United Nations. I asked how he thought his suggestions affected the problem as between Greece and its three northern neighbors. I reminded him that the aid and assistance to rebel forces in Greece from across the northern frontiers had always been the essence of the problem before the United Nations. Mr. Gromyko replied that if there is a termination of hostilities and a parliamentary election in Greece, the relations between Greece and its northern neighbors was one of the other subjects which would have to be worked out. “Obviously,” he said, “a cease-fire in Greece would open the way for a normalization of other relations.”

I asked Mr. Gromyko what he meant by “participation in arrangements” for the elections by the northern forces. I reminded him that the guerrilla forces were in scattered enclaves. I wondered whether he had in mind that the northern forces would make the arrangements in a particular geographic area and that the Greek Government would make arrangements in another area, or whether he meant that the participation of the northern forces would be similar to that of political parties in other parliamentary elections where joint observers were present at polling booths, on elective boards, et cetera. Mr. Gromyko stated that he did not have in mind a division of responsibility along territorial lines. He had in mind that there might be constituted a “higher body” which would have responsibility for the conduct of the elections.

In response to a question from Mr. McNeil, Mr. Gromyko stated that such a body would not have any purpose or authority other than in connection with the election, that it would be “ad hoc”.

I then said to Mr. Gromyko that since he was talking about a matter which is of concern to the Greek Government in its relations with Greek citizens, I wondered whether he knew of any conversations among the Greeks themselves on these proposals. He stated that he did not know of any.

In response to a question from Mr. McNeil, Mr. Gromyko said that he did not think Mr. Evatt’s attempted conciliation was making any headway. He said that Mr. Evatt had been talking to the parties about “old proposals” which had been made in Paris. He said that Albania, for example, could offer “nothing new on old proposals”. In answer to a question from McNeil, Mr. Gromyko said that a Paris frontier question was one of the problems to be resolved.

Mr. Gromyko then summarized his proposal as constituting an end to the war, and the holding of parliamentary elections. He stated that he thought it might be useful for our three governments to agree on the methods by which this could be brought about. He did not exclude Soviet participation in such arrangements.

Mr. McNeil then asked him whether he was suggesting that if a new body be constituted by the United Nations that the Soviet Union would be willing to take part. Mr. Gromyko replied that that is subject to discussion, but that he did not exclude the possibility.

Mr. Gromyko asked Mr. McNeil whether he might have a reply from the British Government. Mr. McNeil stated that he had been glad to have Mr. Gromyko’s views, that he himself was unable to make any comments on the merits, that he wished to repeat that the UK could not treat the northern forces as if they constituted a government of any sort, that the UK could not tell the independent government of Greece how to run its internal affairs, and that we must be careful not to infringe upon United Nations responsibilities on questions directly before that body. He stated, however, that he would let Mr. Gromyko know at an early date what his reaction was.

When Mr. Gromyko turned to me with the same question, I told him that I assumed that we were talking quite informally and unofficially, that we could not change the forum for discussing the Greek question, and that I had originally merely raised the question of the desirability of using our respective influence to assist a settlement within existing forums. Mr. Gromyko then asked me whether he understood he could expect a reply from me or “not necessarily so”. I told him that I could not indicate definitely that I could make a reply, but that I would discuss his conversation with my colleagues in Washington.

In considering the views expressed by Mr. Gromyko in the above conversation, the following points should be noted: a) Mr. Gromyko did not raise the question of the withdrawal of British forces or the withdrawal of American military assistance, both of which he had discussed at Mr. Trygve Lie’s dinner.

b) Mr. Gromyko did not criticize the character of the present Greek Government, although he had made remarks on that subject at Mr. Lie’s dinner.

c) Mr. Gromyko seemed specifically to deny that they have in mind a “free Macedonia”.

The combination of what was said and what was not said raises the question as to whether the Russians are not seeking for reasons of their own to reduce their commitments in the West if they can extricate themselves without excessive political costs. Their attitude in the above conversation was marked with an unusual degree of courtesy and affability. He was disappointed that neither Mr. McNeil nor I responded more concretely to his suggestions. With the easing of the Berlin situation in mind,4 Mr. Gromyko’s attitude on Greece suggests once again that the Russians may have made recently a major strategic decision which we have not yet fully uncovered. For example, they may have decided to exploit their favorable operation in Asia and, in order to be able to do so with maximum effect, to stabilize their position in Europe. Again, it is not inconceivable that they may have decided that a period of “cooperation” would lead to a weakening of the Western World and the creation of conditions in which a renewal of their political offensive toward the West at a later date might have greater chances of success. In any event, I feel that we have not penetrated to the hard-core of their present policy position. To use a military term, we have not “developed” their position.

I believe the Greek matter should be given very careful study, both because of our desire to be relieved of a $200 million a year military assistance program for Greece and because it might be possible, through the Greek question, to get a better understanding of Russia’s present intentions. The main point is not so much a breathing space in Western Europe as to disclose as soon as possible the next direction and objective of Russian policy in order that we may have as much advance warning as possible and begin to prepare such counter-measures as we consider may be required.

1 The Greek question was one of several questions which Secretary of State Acheson discussed with President Truman at their meeting on May 5. Secretary Acheson’s record of this discussion read as follows: “I reported to the President what transpired at the meeting in New York between Mr. Rusk, Mr. McNeil, and Mr. Gromyko, at which Mr. Gromyko made certain statements about Greece. The President was deeply interested in this, was quite clear that we should not engage in any talks on the future of Greece without Greek participation. He also felt that we should not close the door to listening to any comments which Mr. Gromyko might wish to make.” (868.00/5–549)

2 For Rusk’s memorandum of the conversation under reference, see supra.

3 The attachment under reference here, the text of a radio broadcast from Bucharest on April 29 repeating a broadcast made on the radio transmitter of the so-called Greek Provisional Democratic Government (the Greek guerrilla organization) on April 21, is not printed. The Greek guerrilla organization appealed to the United Nations General Assembly and the so-called World Peace Congress, then meeting in Paris, for a peace initiative to halt the civil war and indicated guerrilla willingness to make concessions in that direction. This appeal, which the Department of State officers regarded as the 21st guerrilla peace offer since 1946, was dismissed on April 21 by a Greek Government spokesman. On April 30 Czechoslovak Foreign Minister Vladimir Clementis sent a cable to United Nations General Assembly President Evatt forwarding a request by Miltiades Porphyroghenis, Minister of Justice in the so-called Greek Provisional Democratic Government. Porphyroghenis, then in Praha, asked Evatt to specify the conditions that could bring hostilities in Greece to an end. Clementis also requested a visa for Porphyroghenis to visit the United Nations in New York. On May 2 Porphyroghenis applied at the United States Embassy in Praha for a visa in order to go to the United Nations to discuss a possible settlement of the Greek problem. Porphyroghenis elaborated his peace proposals to various American newsmen during an interview in Praha on May 3. On May 6 the Department of State instructed the Embassy in Praha to explain that Porphyroghenis would be inadmissible to the United States in the absence of an official invitation from the United Nations. On that same day Evatt cabled Foreign Minister Clementis that Porphyroghenis should submit his views on the Greek problem in writing. On the following day, May 7, the Greek guerrilla radio transmitter carried a broadcast which in effect disavowed the Porphyroghenis initiative.

4 For documentation on the negotiations in the spring of 1949 eventuating in the lifting of the Berlin blockade, see vol. iii, pp. 643 ff.

The Chargé in Greece (Minor) to the Secretary of State 868.00/5–549: Telegram

[Document 151]

The Chargé in Greece (Minor) to the Secretary of State

secret
urgent Athens, May 5, 1949—6 p. m.

897. For Department and Ambassador Grady. Metaxas1 called yesterday on behalf of King to request that he proceed urgently to US to present King’s views on Greek political situation to Ambassador. I replied I felt such procedure definitely unwise since (1) such views should be presented here to Embassy for transmission to Department and Ambassador; (2) political crisis might be induced and King open himself to strong criticism for indulging in unwarranted political maneuver; and (3) ourselves would become involved in such manner as to suggest that any ensuing political solution was imposed by us. Metaxas expressed complete willingness be guided by our views but wished Embassy to know he is ready to make such trip on King’s instructions if and when we think advisable.

Metaxas then went on to give me following views for consideration by Embassy and transmission to Department and Ambassador. King is concerned almost to point of alarm over drift of events in Greece. Unedifying spectacle of political bickering as typified by Markezinis affair has caused revulsion of feeling among people and has lowered morale of army at critical time. He feels that if action is not taken to lift Greek Government out of political morass military effort will be jeopardized. He is afraid that unwarranted accusations such as brought against Markezinis will be made against other leaders notably General Papagos. He alleges that Greek Government cooperation with ECA has been hindered and that action in whole governmental field dangerously slowed down. He does not hide his belief that Tsaldaris is to great extent responsible for this atmosphere.

Specifically he proposes to accept Sophoulis’ resignation “within next two weeks” and immediately request Sophoulis form new government without Tsaldaris, Venizelos and Markezinis. Papagos would continue as C-in-C but be confined strictly to military problems. Government would be broad and able parliamentary coalition and, while slate not yet drawn up, would include many best men already in government such as Stephanopoulos, Melas, Helmis, Rodopoulos, Averof, Tsatsos,2 if these could be induced continue. Deputy PriMins might be Rendis and Canellopoulos, former possibly as MinFonAff and latter Minister Interior. Stress would be on ability and progressive orientation. Government would of course be parliamentary and not at inception what is known as service government. However in case chamber refuses a show confidence it would be dissolved and new elections held when possible (undoubtedly not within 45 day limit prescribed by constitution). King feels strongly his obligation to Ambassador to prevent political crisis during his absence and therefore wishes to have Ambassador’s views before going ahead with plan.

My comments and recommendations follow. There is no doubt that government solidarity has been broken by Markezinis affair and that political jockeying which we had hoped had been eliminated in Sophoulis Government formed in January has again returned to scene. It is probable that efforts will be made to besmirch character other persons. If guns are turned on General Papagos effect on army morale may be serious. There seems little doubt that political bickering in Athens has had distressing effect on civilian and military morale. While ECA officials have had rather good impression ability and integrity individual Greek cabinet ministers they report it increasingly difficult to obtain action, get Greek politicians live up to commitments made and to persuade Diomedes to channel action through steering committee. Berry3 reports situation politico-military field unsatisfactory.4

Under circumstances it seems entirely natural King should desire homogeneous government and elimination harmful political jockeying. Accusation that he is resorting to dictatorship which might have been valid had he proceeded with earlier Papagos-Markezinis combination could cause case lose much of its force in view of parliamentary character of government and its democratic complexion. On other hand elimination of leader of majority party and dissolution of chamber when it is obvious elections cannot be held within prescribed time are serious steps which should be taken only as last resort. On balance, my recommendation is that we inform King we will not stand in way if he wishes to carry out his plan as purely Greek solution in natural evolution of political situation but that at same time we urge him take action only as last resort and after giving present government fullest opportunity to make good. It would seem that King’s plan under such circumstances would be strictly within spirit policy laid down in Policy Planning Staff paper “Report of US Aid to Greece” November 24, 1948.5

I have not consulted British Ambassador and will not do so until learn views of Department and Ambassador.

[ Minor ]

1 King Paul’s political adviser Aristides Metaxas.

2 Under reference here are the fallowing: Minister of Coordination Stephanos Stephanopoulos of the Populist Party, Minister of Justice George Melas of the liberal Party, Minister of Finance Dimitrios Helmis of the Populist Party, Minister of Health Konstantinos Rodopoulos of the Populist Party, Minister of Supply Evangelos Averof-Tossitsas of the Liberal Party, and Minister of Education Konstantinos Tsatsos of the National Union Party.

3 Burton Y. Berry, Special Assistant to Ambassador Grady.

4 In his telegram 945, May 13, from Athens, not printed, Chargé Minor explained that this statement regarding the politico-military situation was not intended to suggest that the military situation had deteriorated or to give cause for alarm but rather to indicate that political factors continued to play an important role in the military field. Minor cited a number of examples including the strained relationship between General Papagos and Minister of War Kanellopoulos and the emotional involvement of Papagos in the Markezinis affair (868.00/5–1349).

5 For text, see Foreign Relations, 1948, vol. iv, p. 195.

The Chargé in Greece (Minor) to the Secretary of State 868.00/5–749: Telegram

[Document 152]

The Chargé in Greece (Minor) to the Secretary of State

secret
urgent Athens, May 7, 1949—noon.

902. Embtel 897, May 5. In considering reply to King we should be mindful of danger that our advice may be taken as license to carry out suggested plan without delay. It is regrettable that King has around him not single mature adviser especially now that Tsaldaris–Pipinelis–Levides1 group has been eclipsed by new combination consisting of impatient Papagos, egocentric and controversial Markezinis and young, untried Metaxas whose flip and shallow approaches are hardly reassuring. While I believe advice recommended mytel 897 is sound, one cannot be sure how it will be interpreted by King.

I cannot disagree strongly with view that Tsaldaris has played politics in reprehensible manner and that Chamber is source never-ending friction and disunity. Under certain conditions disappearance both may be necessary but one wonders whether this could at present be justified. Prevailing situation when there are many hopeful signs on horizon would seem to call for patience and restraint rather than for radical change involving possible charges of dictatorship, which are already being bruited about by Greek public. Radical solution now may be likened to man who has come successfully through long and critical illness only to take overdose of aspirin. I personally do not find local situation as alarming as King appears to consider it. Although there are certainly numerous elements of danger in present situation my principal concern is that elements near King may take action prematurely and in capricious manner unconscious of far reaching effects.

I suggest therefore that in replying to King we place emphasis on need for restraint and patience and suggest that present hopeful time when termination Greek travail may be brought about through force of arms or even by international agreement would hardly seem time for radical solution.2

Minor

1 Dimitrios Levidis, Court Grand Chamberlain to King Paul.

2 In his telegram 903, May 7, from Athens, not printed, Chargé Minor reported that British Ambassador Norton was in complete agreement with the views expressed in this telegram. Norton expressed the view to Minor that King Paul was badly informed both as to the necessity of drastic action and the state of public morale. Norton felt strongly that the King’s contemplated drastic course of action would be wholly unacceptable to British opinion. (868.00/5–749)

The United States Representative on the United Nations Special Committee on the Balkans (Drew) to the Secretary of State 501.BB Balkan/5–749: Telegram

[Document 153]

The United States Representative on the United Nations Special Committee on the Balkans (Drew) to the Secretary of State

confidential Athens, May 7, 1949—4 p. m.

906. Combal 419 from Drew. In my airgram No. 3 of March 10, 1949,1 I advanced certain tentative suggestions regarding future organization of UNSCOB including replacement of non-Big Five members by other countries maintaining diplomatic missions in Athens, chief of mission acting as ex officio representative to committee.

In addition, I desire renew suggestion that serious study should be given to complete internationalization of observer groups under UN, including personnel, equipment and supplies. This would admittedly be expensive, especially if UN had to buy at open market prices the valuable equipment, including radios, trucks and jeeps now on loan from US. If we could continue to lend such items and make planes available at less than commercial rates, budget could be held within reasonable limits and would be chiefly for salaries and per diem of personnel. Plan to place observers under SYG aside from eliminating present charge on NME, would incontrovertibly establish impartial character of observation function of committee which in practice has been and presumably will continue to be sole active role of committee. Our secretariat is beginning study of budgetary implications of this plan which I will pass on to Department when ready.

Following represents my preliminary thinking on substantive aspects of upcoming report and hypothetical Greek resolution at fourth GA.

Conclusions in this year’s report will apparently follow general lines of last year’s but regarding material aid will be based in large part on witness testimony due lack opportunity make direct observation for reasons previously pointed out to Department. Our conclusions will consequently be more vulnerable to attack in event of repetition of last year’s full-scale debate.

It follows that recommendations by committee as strong or stronger than last year’s will rest on less solid ground and conceivably command less universal support at next GA. Less categorical recommendations, however, could not be advanced without representing retreat from our present position not only unjustified by situation but holding dangerous implications for Greek morale and American congressional and public support of Greek aid program.

Even if our conclusions found to justify tougher recommendations than last fall we have already considered and rejected all such extreme proposals as political or economic sanctions against Albania, Bulgaria and Yugoslavia, invocation of Article 51, etc. This leaves us with repetition of last year’s recommendations and renewal of condemnatory and operative clauses of current resolutions as highest goal to which we can raise our sights.

What, however, is to be gained by mere repetition threatening to become monotonous, of previous admonitions, warnings and recommendations? Their practical effect on Albania, Bulgaria and Yugoslavia has admittedly been nil. On other hand, renewed presentation in GA will inevitably touch off full-scale debate of last year with all of propaganda aspects and further mutual recriminations between East and West.

Even more serious, they will force Yugoslavia to adopt same line as in past tending to nudge her over to Cominform propaganda line and adopt at least in eyes of world attitude of solidarity with Soviet bloc hardly consistent with developments since last June. I further wonder whether by next fall general international situation may not have eased to point where we ourselves would prefer to avoid provoking all out debate on controversial issues such as Greece.

Foregoing considerations induce me to advance tentative suggestion that committee should avoid specific recommendations in this year’s annual report to GA indicating merely that Assembly itself should be left free to formulate own recommendations on basis of facts and conclusions submitted in report. This procedure would leave us full freedom of movement at GA. If we then welcome new wide open contest on Greece, we can come forward with resolution embodying strongest possible recommendations and in effect thrown down gauntlet to Soviets. If on other hand, for reasons hinted at herein, we prefer avoid forcing issue, we could consider resolution which would reaffirm in general terms two previous resolutions and continue UNSCOB in being with addition of organizational modifications suggested. Furthermore, if item on Greece were placed fairly well down on agenda debate could presumably be confined to reasonable duration and content.

I fully realize such course would not be welcome to Greeks. If it should be decided on in concert with our associates in sponsoring last resolution it would be necessary and should be possible to convince Greeks that their own best interests were being served. Adequate measures could be found to convince Greek public that we were not retreating and they were not being let down.

I repeat these ideas are preliminary and being advanced only tentatively. We must hasten our decision, though, as committee begins drafting in 6 weeks and preparatory conversations among members should begin soon if our report is to include type of recommendations desired by US.

I would appreciate Department’s earliest comments on this telegram and A–3 of March 10.

Sent Department 906; pouched Sofia, London, Paris, Belgrade.

[ Drew ]

1 Not printed.

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in Greece 868.00/5–549: Telegram

[Document 154]

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in Greece

secret Washington, May 7, 1949—1 p. m.

682. Embtel 897 May 5. On basis info available here, it wld seem King takes unnecessarily alarmist view polit and mil situation which may arise partly from feeling he personally involved in ill-founded charges directed against Palace favorites Papagos and Markezinis. This connection, however, wld appreciate elucidation ur statement re Berry report on “unsatisfactory situation in polit mil field”.

Changes in Grk Govt indicated reftel prior termination Congressional mil aid hearings, which begin May 23, wld have most undesirable effect and we earnestly hope all concerned will cooperate to avoid such change. It wld be particularly difficult explain crisis provoked by King rather than by Parliament and leading to solution which wld eliminate major and powerful Populist Party, place Populists in opposition, and possibly lead to unconstitutional developments.

Rountree1 arriving May 10 with verbal message from Grady along foregoing lines. Meanwhile suggest you discuss situation with Brit Amb who may wish see King.

Acheson

1 William M. Rountree, Special Assistant to Ambassador Grady.

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in Greece 501.BB Balkan/5–1049: Telegram

[Document 155]

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in Greece

secret
niact Washington, May 10, 1949—7 p. m.

us urgent

696. Dept deeply concerned at probability that Grk insistence on changing phraseology para four Evatt’s latest proposal1 will permit Evatt and northern neighbors to blame Greece with breakdown in conciliation talks. Considered opinion legal div Dept that there is no legal or linguistic distinction between “territory belonging to” and “its territory”. In English possessive can be expressed either by “its” or “belonging to it” and therefore Grks translation of either phrase shld be the same.

If Greece quibbles over this phraseology, reps Alb, Bulg and Yugo may well grow suspicious and wonder why Greece attaches such importance to substituting for phrase in question one which is identical. It would be tragic if negots break down merely because certain Grk legal advisors or members Grk Govt differ in interpretation English words involved when in fact there exists no legal or linguistic distinction between two phrases in question. Upshot might well be complete breakdown talks blame placed squarely on Greece and with some justification, in our opinion, since it would appear Greece was sticking on point with no substance. Such outcome would give credence to accusation that Greece eager seize any pretext to refuse agreement.

Foregoing already transmitted through the USDel NY to Dendramis with hope he will urgently commnunicate with Tsaldaris and secure authority accept Evatt proposal its entirety before next mtg with Evatt sched Wed May 11.2

Acheson

1 On May 5–6, U.N. General Assembly President Evatt, in his capacity as Chairman of the Conciliation Committee for the Balkans, presented a revised draft Albanian-Greek frontier agreement to the Albanian, Greek, Bulgarian, and Yugoslav Representatives. Evatt also informally gave copies of the draft agreement to American, British, French and, presumably, Soviet representatives. Regarding the text of the draft agreement, see the editorial note, p. 321 [Pg. 321 includes portions of Doc. 160 and Doc. 161].

2 An earlier version of these instructions was transmitted to the Embassy in Greece in telegram 684, May 9, noon, to Athens, not printed (501.BB Balkan/5–649). In his telegram 934, May 11, from Athens, not printed, Chargé Minor reported he discussed the Evatt conciliation proposal with Greek Permanent Under Secretary of State Pipinelis. Pipinelis stated that the Greek representatives in New York had been instructed to waive all Greek amendments to the Evatt draft agreement except that concerning the phrase “belonging to either state” which, from the Greek point of view, carried the connotation that the territories in question belonged by right and law and that such claim was recognized. (868.00/5–1149)

The United States Representative at the United Nations (Austin) to the Secretary of State 501.A Summaries/5–1449: Telegram

[Document 156]

The United States Representative at the United Nations (Austin) to the Secretary of State

secret New York, May 12, 1949—1:49 a. m.

586. Daily Classified Summary No. 94.1 Evatt conciliation talks. Confirming remarks made earlier by Sarper (Turkey), Atyeo (Australia)2 told USUN that at meeting with Alba, Bulg, and Yugo Reps May 6 GA President Evatt had been very severe with Alb. When Evatt had presented his new proposals3 to Reps of these three countries according to Atyeo Alb raised question of formal renunciation by Greece of Northern Epirus. Evatt stated Alb Rep was being very “silly” and “foolish” in making this suggestion. Again he indicated he would not be tool in forcing Grk Del to give such formal renunciation.

Evatt stated further Atyeo continued that Alb Rep cld hardly expect more than what was being offered since Evatt declared that phrase “territory belonging to” covered point at issue. Atyeo confirmed that Yugo Member was stronger even than Alb Rep in insisting that Greece was entirely at fault and that Grk Del shld give firm renunciation of Grk claim to Northern Epirus. Atyeo quoted Evatt to effect that he had told Yugo he did not care hear anymore of this kind of propaganda and did not expect to be instrument working against Grks in this matter.

Atyeo said Evatt planned make statement on matter to May 13 Plenary and if Grks replied in affirmative Evatt would pin responsibility where it belonged namely on Albania.4 Atyeo thought it would be very effective if Grks would pay appropriate tribute to Evatt’s work when they present their affirmative reply; Atyeo commented he intended return Greece about June 1.

After conversation with USUN May 11 Sarper said he was convinced Alb alleged that there was no distinction between phrase “territory belonging to” and phrase “its territory” as preferred by Grk Govt and Del. Sarper said he would see Dendramis (Greece) and urge him to accept fully Evatt formula in view of problem. Sarper agreed it would be tragedy for Grks to lay themselves open to any charge about possible failure in Evatt talks.

Earlier same day Dendramis said he had talked by telephone with Tsaldaris and latter as yet had been unable make any further change in Grk reply on this subject since Tsaldaris felt he had to take matter up with Council of Ministers. Dendramis said he was still under instructions therefore to present Greek reply as it stood although here might be some possibility of change in view Department’s cable to Athens.5 If there were no change Dendramis would proceed as planned and present to Evatt draft written communication already prepared which is complimentary to Evatt and very conciliatory.6

Austin

1 These daily summaries, prepared by the United States Mission at the United Nations in New York, reviewed the most significant events of the previous day in the various organs and agencies of the United Nations as well as other important information reaching the United States Mission.

2 Sam L. Atyeo of the Australian Department of External Affairs was serving as Alternate Australian Representative to the United Nations General Assembly and also as Secretary of the Conciliation Committee of which Evatt was Chairman. Atyeo was also Australian Representative on the United Nations Special Committee on the Balkans.

3 Regarding the draft Albanian-Greek agreement proposed by Evatt and referred to here, see footnote 1 to telegram 696, May 11 to Athens, supra.

4 Evatt eventually issued a statement on the work of the Conciliation Committee on May 19; see the editorial note, p. 321 [Pg. 321 includes portions of Doc. 160 and Doc. 161].

5 Presumably the reference here is to telegram 696, May 10 to Athens, supra.

6 On May 12 Greek Ambassador Dendramis called upon Evatt and presented a note of May 11 from the Greek Government to the Conciliation Committee expressing Greek acceptance of the draft Albanian-Greek agreement proposed earlier by Evatt. The Greek Government asked for a minor drafting change in one paragraph of the draft agreement involving the substitution of the phrase “its territory” for the phrase “territory belonging to it”. Telegram 589, May 13, from New York, not printed, reported that Ambassador Dendramis informed the United States Mission that Evatt had been clearly pleased with the Greek note and was not at all unhappy about the proposed drafting change (501.A Summaries/5–1349). Greek Embassy Counselor Economou-Gouras called at the Department of State on May 13 to present a copy of the May 11 Greek note to Evatt and to report on the friendly nature of the Evatt-Dendramis meeting of May 12 (501.BB Balkan/5–1249). For further information on the Greek note of May 11, see the editorial note, p. 321 [Pg. 321 includes portions of Doc. 160 and Doc. 161].

The Chargé in Greece (Minor) to the Secretary of State 868.00/5–1349: Telegram

[Document 157]

The Chargé in Greece (Minor) to the Secretary of State

secret Athens, May 13, 1949—1 p. m.

950. Embtel 923, May 11.1 Rountree and I were received by King last evening. I began conversation by referring to King’s commitment to Ambassador before departure to endeavor to avoid Cabinet crisis and said how much we had appreciated his endeavor to hold line and communicate with us before taking any action. Question has now been raised, I said, as to whether the present government is capable of carrying on under circumstances or whether change in personnel or nature of government is advisable. Matter has been carefully considered by Department and Ambassador in light prevailing circumstances both here and in US. We are strongly of the opinion that Cabinet crisis or radical change in nature Greek Government prior to or during Congressional hearings would have most undesirable effect. We could see, I declared, no circumstances which would make such change at present necessary. I added that any step taken in Greece which would be, rightly or wrongly, interpreted by world public opinion as being unconstitutional or leading in direction dictatorship would inevitably have harmful effect on Greece’s reputation abroad and would frustrate our effort show internal Greek situation in true light. I then suggested that King might wish to receive message directly from Ambassador Grady through Rountree who just returned from US. Rountree then went over much same ground and expressed Ambassador’s strong wish that Cabinet crisis be avoided at present time.

King expressed appreciation of our views and stated in clear terms that he has no intention of suggesting Cabinet changes in immediate future. He declared that there is at present no alarming circumstance which would require radical change and that it would appear present government is capable confronting situation. He inquired whether I agreed with this statement to which I replied in affirmative. He made rather pointed inquiry as to when Congressional hearings will be held and when they might reasonably be expected terminate. He made clear in rather stern language that in case Papagos is attacked he will step in personally at least with a statement to stop such “nonsense”.

I feel we may consider subject closed and will take no further action. It would do considerably more harm than good to bring other political leaders into discussion since question has apparently not gone beyond King.

Minor

1 Not printed.

The United States Representative at the United Nations (Austin) to the Secretary of State 501.A Summaries/5–1449: Telegram

[Extract]

[Document 158]

The United States Representative at the United Nations (Austin) to the Secretary of State 1

secret New York, May 14, 1949—1:40 a. m.

598.

. . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Evatt’s conciliation talks. Replying to USUN’s query, Shtylla (Albania) indicated May 13 that Evatt’s conciliation talks were developing slowly, but added that the atmosphere in which Evatt and SYG Lie were working on the matter was a pleasant one and not unhopeful.

Shtylla said that there were difficulties, and he indicated that while Albania was well disposed, in his view, Albania could not sign anything unless Greece gave formal renunciation of the Greek claim to Northern Epirus and thereupon agreed to consider the existing frontier—which really dated from 1913 and was formalized ultimately in 1926—as quite definitive.

According to Atyeo (Australia), Evatt received the Representatives of Albania, Bulgaria and Yugoslavia on May 13. Shtylla told Evatt that there was no further word as to acceptance of the latter’s formula, and the other two Representatives reported no replies had been received from their Governments. Vladiguerov (Bulgaria) read a statement charging new Greek violations of the Bulgarian frontier. There were some statements as to Greek claims on Bulgaria, and Evatt asked whether there were not also Bulgarian claims on Greek territory, Vladiguerov said Bulgaria had no claims, that this was all newspaper propaganda, but he did not give a direct reply when Evatt asked whether he would be willing to say as much in a formal statement.

Evatt told the group that in case of a favorable reply, he felt he could assure the three that the Greek Government would probably accept the formula, at least in principle. But, he told them, he felt he was just wasting his time if they had no further positive communication to make.2

Atyeo indicated that in the event Evatt felt his efforts had been successful, he would certainly make a statement in the GA at the end of the Session. Otherwise, he would release something to the press. Atyeo agreed that whatever the nature of this statement, UNSCOB must now resume its conciliatory role. He also confirmed Dendramis’ (Greece) statement that the May 12 discussions between Dendramis and Evatt had gone very well.3

Austin

1 This telegram transmitted the text of Daily Classified Summary No. 96, prepared by the United States Mission at the United Nations in New York.

2 Telegram 603, May 16, from New York, not printed, transmitting Daily Classified Summary No. 98 of the United States Mission at the United Nations, reported that the representatives of Albania, Bulgaria, and Yugoslavia had informed Evatt that they had received no further instructions from their governments with respect to Evatt’s new conciliation plan (501.A Summaries/5–1649).

3 Greek Embassy Counselor Economou-Gouras called at the Department of State on May 13 to present a copy of a note which Ambassador Dendramis had given Evatt the previous day and to report on the friendly nature of the Evatt–Dendramis meeting. The Greek Government had accepted the Evatt conciliation plan with a few minor changes in language. Telegram 589, May 13, from New York, not printed, reported that following his meeting with Evatt on May 12, Ambassador Dendramis told officers of the United States Mission to the United Nations that Evatt had been clearly pleased with the Greek note and not at all unhappy about the Greek preference for the phrase “its territory” rather than “territory belonging to it” (501.A Summaries/5–1349).

Editorial Note [Document 159]

Editorial Note

The United Nations General Assembly concluded its Third Session, Second Part, on May 18. The conclusion of the Assembly session also terminated the mandate of the Conciliation Committee established as a result of the November 10, 1948, resolution of the First Committee of the Assembly. On May 19, Australian External Affairs Minister Evatt, in his final action as Chairman of the Conciliation Committee, issued a statement to the press reviewing the work and accomplishments of the Committee. He found that substantial progress had been achieved although no agreement had been reached. As part of his statement, Evatt made public the text of the draft Albanian-Greek agreement which he had earlier presented to the Albanian, Greek, Bulgarian, and Yugoslav representatives (see footnote 1 to telegram 696, May 10 to Athens, page 315 [Pg. 315 includes portions of Doc. 154 and Doc. 155]). Evatt’s statement, including the text of the draft Albanian-Green agreement, was circulated as U.N. Press Release BAL/480. The texts of the statement and draft agreement were subsequently included in Annex 5 to the Report of the United Nations Special Committee on the Balkans, August 2, 1949; regarding that Report, see the second editorial note, page 379 [Pg. 379 includes portions of Doc. 198 and Doc. 199]. The text of the draft Albanian-Greek agreement proposed by Evatt and the substance of Evatt’s May 19 statement also appear in Harry N. Howard, “Greece and Its Balkan Neighbors (1948–1949)”, Balkan Studies, Volume 7, No. 1, 1966, page 14.

Telegram 618, May 19 from New York, not printed, reported that Evatt’s May 19 statement to the press, which had been prepared just prior to Evatt’s departure from New York by air to London, had been intended as a joint statement by all members of the Conciliation Committee. The other members of the Committee (United Nations Secretary-General Trygve Lie, Ambassador Selim Sarper, and Ambassador Fernand van Langenhove) found the statement unacceptable. Evatt refused a proposal to meet with the Committee and redraft the statement. Instead, it was agreed that Evatt himself would issue the statement. The other members of the Conciliation Committee in particular felt that there was no factual basis for Evatt’s assertion that Albania had not actually rejected the draft Albanian-Greek agreement and that Yugoslavia and Bulgaria would approve the proposal if Albania did so. (501.BB Balkan/5–1949)

On May 19 Greek Ambassador Dendramis also met with the press and released the text of his May 11 communication to Evatt (see footnote 6 to telegram 586, May 12 from New York, page 317 [Pg. 317 is part of Doc. 156]) together with the text of the draft Albanian-Greek agreement as slightly amended by the Greek Government. The minor drafting change proposed by the Greek Government is included in Annex 5 to the Report of the Special Committee on the Balkans, August 2, 1949, cited above.

Editorial Note [Document 160]

Editorial Note

On May 14 Assistant Secretary of State Dean Rusk and British Minister of State Hector McNeil met to discuss the United States and United Kingdom positions on the Greek dispute. McNeil explained that Foreign Secretary Bevin wished to discuss the entire Balkan situation with the Secretary of State in Paris (where the Council of Foreign Ministers was shortly scheduled to convene) before any definite proposals were made in conversations with Soviet Deputy Foreign Minister Gromyko. Rusk and McNeil agreed to meet with Gromyko again before the Tatter’s departure for Moscow in order to clear up any misapprehensions Gromyko may have had on the early discussions of the Greek situation and to avoid a possible Unfavorable propaganda position which might arise from leaving Gromyko without a reply to his earlier proposals.

Later on May 14 Rusk and McNeil met for a few minutes with Gromyko. McNeil emphasized to Gromyko that the United Kingdom and the United States could not presume to dispose of the Greek problem without the participation of the Greek Government, nor did they wish to interfere with or change existing United Nations action on the Greek question in which the northern frontier was the main issue. Rusk agreed with McNeil’s presentation and repeated that he could not in any way speak for the Greek Government. Rusk stated that he was personally convinced that the real issue was the aid and assistance illegally furnished to the Greek insurgents across the northern Greek frontier, and that if this situation were restored to normal, the internal situation in Greece would improve rapidly. Gromyko then made three points: (1) the USSR would be willing to participate in a commission of “great powers” to supervise a new Greek parliamentary election; (2) the USSR would participate in a commission of “great powers” to “control the border between Greece and its northern neighbors”; and (3) all foreign military assistance, including material and personnel, should be withdrawn from Greece. Neither McNeil nor Rusk commented on Gromyko’s points. The three men agreed that their talks had been informal and personal. Rusk reiterated that the United States could not enter into negotiations on Greek questions except in an appropriate forum in which the Greeks themselves were present.

Formal memoranda of these two conversations have not been found. The information set forth above is derived from various papers in the files of the Department of State. Secretary of State Acheson reported upon this Rusk–McNeil–Gromyko conversation during his meeting with President Truman on May 16.

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in Greece 868.00/5–1849: Telegram

[Extracts]

[Document 161]

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in Greece

top secret Washington, May 19, 1949—1 p. m.

749. Eyes only for Chargé. Re urtels 954, May 131 and 982, May 18,2 fol info provided for your eyes only pending agreement with Brit on transmitting it to Sophoulis and Tsaldaris on top secret basis. On basis fol info, you can of course deny reports such as urtel 982 and in other respects give gen assurance to Grks that we are not negotiating on Grk matters without Grk participation and that subject has not at any point been mentioned for CFM consideration. Hope to clear with Brit shortly authorization to inform Grk Govt.

[Here follows a summary record of the Rusk–McNeil–Gromyko conversations of April 26, May 4, and May 14. For the record of the first two conversations and the available information on the third, see pages 301 [Pg. 301 includes portions of Doc. 148 and Doc. 149], 303 [Pg. 303 includes portions of Doc. 149 and Doc. 150], and 320 [Pg. 320 includes portions of Doc. 158 and Doc. 159].]

We hope Grk question will not arise during Paris CFM mtg.3 If nevertheless brought up we will listen to whatever is said avoiding direct rebuff to Russians but we will keep Grks informed of developments land we will not engage in any substantive talks on future of Greece without Grk participation.

US is adhering to policy laid down at some length by Pres Truman in Berkeley speech Jun 11 1948 in which he stated that “situation in Greece requires no special negotiation or discussion or conference” and that “if Soviet genuinely desires make contribution to peace and recovery in world it can prove it in Greece”.4 Important to avoid publicity which cld undermine morale Grk forces and compromise whatever hope for peace may lie in delicate contacts with Soviets. Although Drew Pearson has somehow been able broadcast distorted version of talks their details and fact they have really taken place are known here to only a few essential individuals on top secret basis. When cleared, we will give substance this tel personally to Dendramis in order obviate need for cables on subject between Grk Fonoff and Grk Emb here.

Grady returns Athens next week and will discuss development with Grk officials.

McNeil’s remarks during Gromyko talks generally paralleled Rusk’s and will presumably be communicated to Grks by Brit Amb when clearance obtained.

Acheson

1 Not printed; it reported that both Greek Deputy Prime Minister Diomedes and Permanent Under Secretary Pipinelis had told Chargé Minor of their concern lest Greek interests be sacrificed to the Communists as part of a general European settlement. Of particular concern to the Greeks was the possibility of a Great Power settlement of the Greek problem which would allow the Soviet Union to interfere in Greek internal affairs (868.00/5–1349).

2 Not printed; it reported that the Athens newspaper Eleftheria carried an article regarding an alleged American compromise Greek settlement which had been discussed by Rusk and Gromyko (868.00/5–1849).

3 Reference here is to the forthcoming Sixth Session of the Council of Foreign Ministers, held at Paris, May 23 to June 20. For documentation on the session, see vol. iii, pp. 856 ff.

4 The quotations are from President Truman’s Commencement Address at the University of California, June 12, 1948; for the text, see Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States S. Truman, 1948 (Washington: United States Government Printing Office, 1964), pp. 336–340.

The Chargé in Greece (Minor) to the Secretary of State 868.00/5–1949: Telegram

[Document 162]

The Chargé in Greece (Minor) to the Secretary of State

secret Athens, May 19, 1949—1 p. m.

989. Grivas1 , new Chief Foreign Ministry’s Division American Affairs, today confided that Dendramis reports Gromyko has made proposal re settlement Greek question to McNeil at Lake Success and that McNeil agreed pass proposals to British Government. Dendramis confident Gromyko also submitted same scheme to Rusk (reEmbtel 982, May 182 ).

Grivas further revealed that Greek Government after full cabinet discussion has sent circular telegram to representatives in Washington, London, Paris, New York and Belgrade urging that everything possible be done to keep Greek question out of CFM. Greeks feel strongly that their problems with Commies must be kept in UN where they are represented and Greek interests must not be sacrificed to general conciliation behind locked doors of CFM (reEmbtel 954, May 133 ). Greek Government declares that Russia will never make concessions to Greece without some quid pro quo: that current Russian interest is obvious sign of weakness; and that Greece should be left as is (with support of US–UK and her position in UN) at least until her swiftly improving military power enables her to settle disputes with northern neighbors on best possible terms.

Embassy would be in much stronger position in discussing questions of this nature if Department could take us into its confidence.

Minor

1 Theodoros Grivas-Gardikiotis.

2 Not printed, but see footnote 2 to telegram 749 to Athens, p. 322 [Pg. 322 includes portions of Doc. 159 and Doc. 160].

3 Not printed, but see footnote 1 to telegram 749 to Athens, ibid [Pg. 322 includes portions of Doc. 159 and Doc. 160].

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Assistant Secretary of State for United Nations Affairs (Rusk) 868.00/5–1949

[Document 163]

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Assistant Secretary of State for United Nations Affairs (Rusk)1

top secret [Washington,] May 19, 1949.

Sir Hoyer Millar2 came in at my request for a discussion of the Balkan situation pursuant to suggestions made by Mr. Bevin to the Secretary through Sir Oliver Franks on Tuesday, May 17.3

Sir Hoyer Millar handed me an informal paper (Annex A) containing Mr. Bevin’s reply to the Secretary regarding possible Anglo-American talks on the Balkan situation. Mr. Bevin fully agrees that the matter should not be discussed with the Soviets in Paris nor become connected in any way with the Council of Foreign Ministers. Mr. Bevin suggests that staff talks occur in London or Paris and welcomes the possibility of discussing the matter with the Secretary at some point during the CFM.

I suggested to Sir Hoyer Millar that we have one or two further staff exchanges on the subject before attempting to reach any conclusion as to the nature of any further talks we should have and the place and timing of such talks. Sir Hoyer agreed.

I then handed to Sir Hoyer a staff paper prepared in the Department of State (Annex B) as an informal staff reaction to Mr. Gromyko’s proposals. I stated that this paper did not necessarily represent the Secretary’s views but that we thought it would be useful to let the Foreign Office know the lines along which we were thinking in the Department and that we would be glad to have any comments or additional suggestions from the Foreign Office. I drew his attention particularly to the desirability of informing Sophoulis, Tsaldaris and Dendramis on a top secret basis of the Gromyko conversations at an early date. He said that he would inquire specifically on that point and added that the Embassy had thus far had almost nothing from London on this subject as a whole.

I told Sir Hoyer that we were not entirely clear as to just what Mr. Bevin had in mind in his reference to “the Balkan situation as a whole”. Although we had tried to indicate certain points in our paper which had a bearing on the general situation in the Balkans, we would be glad to have any suggestions from them on the broader aspects of the matter. Sir Hoyer said that the Embassy did not have any idea what Mr. Bevin had in mind and had specifically asked that the reference to the Balkan situation as a whole be clarified.

Annex A [London, May 19?, 1949.]4

The British Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs (Bevin) to the British Embassy in the United States

top secret

Please inform Mr. Acheson that I entirely share his opinion that any further meetings with the Russians on Greece should be held elsewhere than in Paris, and that we must not allow the question of Greece to become connected, or even appear to become connected, with the Council of Foreign Ministers. I am much looking forward to discussing the situation with Mr. Acheson himself in Paris, and am grateful to him for accepting my proposal.

The advantage of having in Paris the preliminary discussions between officials is that they would be near at hand. Their presence in Paris need not attract undue attention, and even if it became known that Mr. Acheson and I were discussing the Balkans, the consequences need not necessarily be serious provided that all the discussions are unobtrusively managed.

I am, however, quite prepared to defer to Mr. Acheson’s judgment if he thinks that the risk of undesirable publicity is not worth taking. In that case I would suggest that the preliminary talks should take place in London. Please put this to Mr. Acheson and let me know what he thinks.

Annex B [Washington, undated.]

Paper Prepared in the Department of State 5

top secret

Preliminary US Reactions to the Gromyko Balkan Proposals on the international aspect

(1) The basic issue in the Greek situation is the aid extended to the guerrilla movement across Greece’s northern border. If the Russians were to exercise their influence to terminate this aid, the Greek guerrilla problem in its present serious proportions would disappear.

(2) This is the aspect of the Greek problem with which the United Nations is seized and which the General Assembly has declared as endangering peace in the Balkans and as inconsistent with the purposes and principles of the Charter. The United Nations is the proper forum for international discussion of an issue of this character and that forum should not be changed.

(3) While we should listen to whatever the Russians may wish to Bay regarding Greece, we should not engage in any negotiations on this matter without the participation of the Greek Government. We suggest that Sophoulis, Tsaldaris and Dendramis be informed immediately on a top secret basis of the Gromyko conversations.6

(4) We cannot recognize that the guerrillas have any status under international law. The extent of negotiation, if any, with the guerrillas by the Greek Government is for the latter to determine.

(5) We will not relax our determination to support the independence and territorial integrity of Greece.

(6) We do not subscribe to the sphere-of-influence concept and we do not regard the northern frontier of Greece as a dividing line between two such spheres.

on the internal greek aspect

(7) Internal arrangements in Greece for the cessation of hostilities—such as a cease-fire, amnesty, setting up of a “neutral” Government, and parliamentary elections—are fundamentally matters for determination by the Greek Government. International discussion of these subjects would require the participation and consent of the Greek Government.

(8) We might, however, suggest to the Greek Government that it clarify its own position on these matters, pointing out the advisability of avoiding the appearance of intransigence and vindictiveness and of adopting as generous policies as would be compatible with the safety of the Greek State.

(9) We must resist the temptation to buy an illusory peace in Greece by pressing the Greeks to accept formulae which would be politically unrealistic or morally unjustified and which would not restore the tranquility in Greece essential for Greek economic rehabilitation and Balkan stability. We feel, for example, that the Greeks should not be expected to relegalize the EAM Parties, although they might work out some formula whereby the parliamentary elections would record views other than those represented by the legal, participating parties.

(10) The Russians refused to participate in observing the Greek 1946 elections. Fair elections were nevertheless held under international observation and resulted in the resumption of normal parliamentary government in Greece. To provide for further formal foreign observation of the new elections would be retrogressive and unwarranted, unless the Greek Government, for politico-propaganda reasons, should make such a request.

on the balkan aspect

(11) While concrete confirmation is virtually lacking, it is our impression that Western policy toward the Balkan satellites is progressing somewhat more favorably than heretofore. The development of the Yugoslav situation in opposition to the USSR gives promise of appreciably accelerating the attainment of Western objectives.

(12) We have been exploring the possibilities of projecting Western policy in the area through the intensification of psychological warfare, utilization of economic leverage and political activity. Although we fire not yet prepared to recommend specific additional courses in regard to any of those three aspects of policy, our present thinking is that increasing possibilities for exploitation of those instruments are developing.

(13) As indicated in paragraph 17 below, a realistic solution of the Greek issue would appreciably advance the possibilities for the expansion of Western effort in the satellites to the North. Although the Russians may feel that the liquidation of their commitment in Greece would facilitate the concentration of their efforts against Tito, it could also be argued that tranquillisation of Greece’s northern frontier would tend to alleviate the threat to Tito from Macedonia and enable him better to meet Eastern pressure.

(14) We are convinced that our interests dictate our keeping a maximum pressure on the minority Communist regimes in the satellites through such means as are at our disposal such as the human rights treaty procedures. Likewise we should continue to make clear that> under present circumstances, Bulgaria, Albania, Rumania and Hungary do not qualify for UN membership.

on bargaining points and the possibilities of accord

(15) Appraisal of the Greek military outlook indicates that the Russians are leading from weakness in advancing the Gromyko proposals. Undoubtedly they have other motives. They also have the capability of exacerbating the Greek situation in many ways, and notably by introducing non-Greek elements into the guerrilla ranks.

(16) On balance, it appears that we are in a strong bargaining position and that some face-saving formulae might be acceptable to the Russians. This possibility should be explored, since we would welcome a solution of the Greek problem, which now requires a diversion of our military resources from more profitable areas.

(17) We might, therefore, stress to the Russians that we seek no special advantages in Greece which would constitute a threat to the security or legitimate interests of the USSR or of any other country.

(18) We might also agree that Greek pacification would open the way to the normalization and improvement of other Balkan relationships. For example, correct behavior of Albania and Bulgaria toward Greece could be an important factor in bringing about a revision of our own attitude towards those countries. It would likewise facilitate the solution of many other problems of mutual interest between Greece on the one hand and Albania, Bulgaria and other eastern European countries on the other—such as diplomatic relations, transit and communications facilities, trade relations, exchange of minorities.

(19) We might tactfully point out to the Russians that their own interest would seem to call for a solution through the United Nations rather than through Big-Power negotiations. The Greek Government would participate by right in any discussions within the UN framework, whereas it would have to be specially invited to participate in any other discussions. Moreover, for the Russians to negotiate directly concerning the Greek situation would constitute an admission that they control it.

(20) While adhering and referring to our basic position and observations outlined above, we might comment as follows on the Russians’ three specific conditions: a) The Greek Government has already declared its intention to hold free and democratic elections, which, in the absence of peacetime censorship or travel restrictions in Greece, will be open to the scrutiny of world opinion.

b) The USSR and Polish seats on UNSCOB remain open and may be taken at any time. Alternatively, we would consider any Russian proposals for the creation of a sub-committee of UNSCOB on which the Russians could participate or of some other UN organ to follow developments on Greece’s northern frontier. However, if foreign aid to the guerrillas ceased, such international control would probably be superfluous. In that circumstance, moreover, UNSCOB’s report to the Fourth GA, instead of again castigating Greece’s northern neighbors, would probably merely record the favorable turn of events.

c) The United States cannot relinquish its right to provide military assistance to the Greek Government. However, the American military assistance program in Greece was made necessary by a situation in Greece created by foreign aid to the guerrilla movement. If the guerrilla warfare in Greece were terminated, the size of United States military aid and of American service establishments in Greece would naturally reflect the improved situation. (We assume that the British would likewise wish to reconsider their own military commitments in Greece in this circumstance.)

1 Assistant Secretary Rusk sent a copy of this memorandum of conversation together with copies of the two annexed documents to Secretary of State Acheson under cover of a brief transmittal memorandum of May 19, not printed.

2 Sir Frederick Robert Hoyer Millar, British Minister in the United States.

3 No record has been found of a discussion on May 17 between Secretary of State Acheson and British Ambassador Franks.

4 The source text is dated May 19, but Foreign Secretary Bevin’s communication may have, of course, been sent earlier.

5 The verbatim text of this paper was subsequently transmitted in telegram 760, May 20 to Athens, not printed, repeated as telegram 1757 to London, 1727 to Paris, and 359 to Moscow (501.BB Balkan/5–2049).

6 Underscoring in the source text.

Editorial Note [Document 164]

Editorial Note

A statement by the official Soviet news agency Tass, published in the Soviet newspapers Pravda and Izvestia on May 20, reviewed the proposals on Greece made by Soviet Deputy Foreign Minister Gromyko in his recent conversations with Assistant Secretary of State Rusk and British Minister of State McNeil. For the text of the Tass statement, see Vneshnyaya politika Sovetskogo Soyuza, 1949 god (Moscow: Gosizpolit, 1953), pages 99–100. For an English translation of the statement, see Current Digest of the Soviet Press. June 21, 1949, Volume I, No. 21, pages 37–38.

In response to the Tass statement, the Department of State on May 20 issued a statement to the press presenting a substantial summary record of the Rusk–McNeil–Gromyko informal conversations of April 26, May 4, and May 14 together with an analysis of the conversations. The British Government also issued a somewhat briefer statement to the press on May 20 on the substance and meaning of the Rusk–McNeil–Gromyko conversations. Both the American and the British statements emphasized that the basic issue in the Greek question was the violation of Greece’s northern border. The statements also reaffirmed the view that the United Nations was the proper forum for the discussion of the Greek problem and that negotiations on the problem could not be entered into without the participation of the Greek Government. For the text of the Department of State statement, issued as Department of State Press Release No. 378, see Department of State Bulletin, May 29, 1949, pages 696–697; or A Decade of American Foreign Policy: Basic Documents, 1941–49, prepared at the request of the Senate Committee on Foreign Relations by the Staff of the Committee and the Department of State, 81st Congress, 1st Session, Document No. 123 (Washington, Government Printing Office, 1950), pages 769–771; or Raymond Dennett and Robert K. Turner, editors, Documents on American Foreign Relations, Volume XI, January 1–December 31, 1949 (Princeton University Press for the World Peace Foundation, 1950), pages 660–662. For the British statement, see the New York Times, May 21, 1949, page 2.

Memorandum of Conversation, by Mr. Leonard J. Cromie of the Division of Greek, Turkish, and Iranian Affairs 868.00/5–2049

[Document 165]

Memorandum of Conversation, by Mr. Leonard J. Cromie of the Division of Greek, Turkish, and Iranian Affairs

secret [Washington,] May 20, 1949.

Participants: Vassili Dendramis, Greek Ambassador

Mr. Rusk

Mr. Economou-Gouras, Greek Minister

Mr. Cromie (GTI)

The Greek Ambassador, accompanied by the Greek Minister-Counselor, called at 4:30 p. m. at Mr. Rusk’s request.

Ambassador Dendramis opened the conversation by saying, with implied annoyance, that he had first learned of Mr. Rusk’s conversations on Greece with Messrs. McNeil and Gromyko when he had questioned Mr. Cadogan1 about current rumors. Mr. Cadogan had told him that Mr. Gromyko had made some suggestions about Greece but had received no answer from Mr. McNeil. Mr. Cadogan told Ambassador Dendramis that he was not at liberty to reveal the substance of Mr. Gromyko’s suggestions.

Mr. Rusk referred to today’s Department press release2 and explained that he had first brought up the subject of Greece at Trygve Lie’s dinner during the course of an ordinary, normal conversation covering the Italian Colonies and other agenda items.3 He thought the Russians might exercise a helpful influence, for example, on. Albania and Bulgaria in connection with the Evatt conciliation talks. Mr. Gromyko’s reaction, however, was unchanged. The conversation was regarded, therefore, as more or less routine, the type of diplomatic exchange that we and presumably the Greeks are always carrying on, and it was felt that there was nothing new to report to the Greeks.

At the May 4 conversation,4 Mr. Rusk continued, Gromyko just pulled out of his pocket the Porphyroghenis proposals. The Greeks already knew of these proposals and thus nothing new had been added to the situation. This impression appeared to be confirmed by the May 7 guerrilla radio broadcast, which seemed to wipe even the Porphyroghenis proposals off the record.

It was thus not until last Saturday, May 14, that Gromyko came up with something that was not part of the general public record.5 These were his proposals for “Great-Power” commissions to control the Greek border and supervise Greek elections and for the withdrawal of all foreign military aid, including materiel and personnel. Mr. Rusk thereupon reiterated to Gromyko that we would not negotiate without the Greeks and, in fact, we immediately set up the machinery to inform the Greeks of the conversations to date. However, first we wanted to check with London to see what the British thought.

Mr. Rusk assured Ambassador Dendramis that in his conversations with Gromyko he had adopted a very simple and direct position—the same as we have always taken. This was, namely, that the issue in the Greek situation is the aid to the guerrillas across Greece’s northern frontier and not any domestic situation inside Greece, that UNSCOB or some other UN channel is the proper forum for discussion of this issue, and that we could do nothing that would give any status whatever to the “northern forces.” Mr. Rusk concluded by emphasizing that he had never undertaken to speak on behalf of the Greeks, that he had not made any proposals, and that he had merely listened to Gromyko and spoken with regard to procedural problems.

Ambassador Dendramis stated that the Greek Government’s concern was that the fellow-travellers would make capital out of these conversations with Gromyko and considered that that was part of the Russian intention in making the talks public. The Russians also wanted to influence the American Congress and the morale of the Greek Army. Ambassador Dendramis then inquired whether the Secretary had seen the British Ambassador about this matter.

Mr. Rusk answered that he had. However, Mr. Rusk assured Ambassador Dendramis that the British took the same attitude as we toward the Greek situation. In fact, there were no suggestions made by anyone during the talks with Gromyko differing in substance from the positions taken during United Nations discussions of the Greek case. The Russians continued to emphasize an internal Greek problem. We and the British continued to emphasize the external Greek problem. The British were interested in exploring whether the Gromyko proposals might be of some interest in connection with the general Balkan situation, but there was nothing for the Greeks to worry about. Mr. Rusk said also that he was not worried about the reaction of our Congress. As in the case of Berlin, Congress understood very well that these Russian developments were the fruit of our foreign policy and that there was accordingly every reason not to change that policy. The Greek assistance program was reported out of Congressional committee yesterday, and there would be no relaxation of our determination to support Greece.

Ambassador Dendramis said his Government felt it would be better not to discuss these matters with the Russians at all. The Greek position is that the guerrillas must first lay down their arms. “Amnesty and all that could come after.” The Greek Government was especially concerned with the appeal the Russian proposals might have for fellow-travelling elements—like the Athens newspaper Eleftheria. The New York correspondent of this paper is a communist named Kyriazides. At New York, and with his own eyes, Ambassador Dendramis had seen Kyriazides talking every day and exchanging papers with Katz-Suchy6 and Malik.7 Such papers as Eleftheria maintain that peace would be possible if Leftists were admitted to the Government and that Britain and the United States might try to force this on the Greeks. Ambassador Dendramis then said it was his impression that the Russians are changing their strategy.

Mr. Rusk commented that the Russian basic objectives always remain the same. Their tactics change sometimes and their strategy, maybe, once in a generation. Ambassador Dendramis interjected that the Russians were now appealing, for example, to the desire of the German people for national unity and the evacuation of the Allied troops. Mr. Rusk said he was “not so sure” the German people wanted these things.

Mr. Rusk then said that Gromyko had made two points of some interest which were not covered in the Department’s press release. Asked what he meant by “elections,” Gromyko had explained that he was talking about parliamentary elections and not a plebiscite on Macedonia or some other issue. Similarly, when asked about the border control, Mr. Gromyko had said “Greece has its borders and we are talking about the borders of Greece.”

Mr. Gouras inquired how Mr. Rusk interpreted this dropping by Gromyko of the Macedonian question. Had this something to do with Tito?

Mr. Rusk said that it was his impression that, through the medium of Great Power talks, the Russians were trying to get the Communists back into Greek political life and reestablish the communist influence which had been destroyed in two years of fighting. The Russians may, of course, be looking for some face-saving formula for withdrawing from Greece, but we see no definite signs that this is the case. Mr. Rusk concluded the conversation by saying that we have no plans for further discussions with the Russians on Greece. There is nothing more on the program, at least until we have a joint understanding with the Greeks and the British on the matter. He advised Ambassador Dendramis to confine his remarks to the press to saying that he had been given an explanation of the Gromyko talks. Ambassador Dendramis said he would do so, but would add that the Greeks require that the guerrillas lay down their arms.

1 Sir Alexander Cadogan, Permanent United Kingdom Representative to the United Nations.

2 Regarding the press release under reference, see the editorial note, supra.

3 For the record of the April 26 conversation referred to here, see p. 301 [Pg. 301 includes portions of Doc. 148 and Doc. 149].

4 For the record of this conversation, see p. 303 [Pg. 303 includes portions of Doc. 149 and Doc. 150].

5 Regarding the conversation referred to here, see the editorial note, p. 320 [Pg. 320 includes portions of Doc. 158 and Doc. 159].

6 Julius Katz-Suchy, Permanent Polish Representative to the United Nations and Chairman of the Polish Delegation to the United Nations General Assembly.

7 Yakov Aleksandrovich Malik, Soviet Deputy Foreign Minister and Vice Chairman of the Soviet Delegation to the United Nations General Assembly.

The Australian Minister of State for External Affairs (Evatt) to the Secretary of State, at Paris 501.BB Balkan/5–2149

[Document 166]

The Australian Minister of State for External Affairs (Evatt) to the Secretary of State, at Paris 1

personal London, 21st May, 1949.

Dear Mr. Acheson: A special group of conciliators for the Balkans was appointed at the Paris General Assembly, and, as President of the General Assembly, I acted as chairman of the group.

We were given the mandate of devising methods and procedures of conciliation between Greece on the one hand and Albania, Bulgaria and Yugoslavia on the other.

I issued our report at New York on Thursday evening on the completion of the General Assembly, and a copy of it can be made available to the Council of Foreign Ministers.2

You will note from the contents of the report that very substantial progress was made and that, even in the end, the delegate of Albania did not reject the draft agreement as amended by us and accepted in substance by Greece.

The particular matter seems, therefore, to me to be capable of settlement even now.

But the broader questions are of urgent and fundamental importance and I address you as follows:—

First, it is clear there is a far greater willingness among the four powers to complete an agreement than there was during the Paris General Assembly.

Second, while the conciliators were not vested with authority to negotiate in connection with the internal war in Greece, this matter tended to obtrude itself at many stages of the negotiations.

Third, in my opinion, the time has come to take steps to mediate between the Greek Government on the one hand and those Greeks who are disputing the authority of the Greek Government by levying war against it or attempting to overthrow it by force.

The paradoxical position is that the fighting in Greece continues, to some extent at least, because the border situation and relationships, especially between Greece and Albania, remain unsatisfactory, while, at the same time, the border situation and relationships between Greece, on the one hand, and Albania continue to be unsatisfactory largely because internal war continues within Greece.

I also desire to inform you that, towards the end of the meeting of the Assembly, the Foreign Minister of Czechoslovakia approached me as President of the General Assembly with a suggestion that a representative of the Greeks who are engaged in fighting the Greek Government desired to visit New York to make certain suggestions with a view to conciliation with the Greek Government. It was, however, not possible to proceed with this suggestion, mainly because the specified functions of the conciliators did not extend to the settlement of the fighting in Greece.

I believe it would now be possible to take a further step forward with a view to solving the two questions which are interwoven, first, the establishment of better relations between Greece, Albania, Bulgaria and Yugoslavia, second, the ending of the fighting in Greece. For this purpose, I am of opinion that a new approach could now be made by a mediating authority and it should be supported by the four powers now meeting in the Council of Foreign Ministers in Paris.

No question of jurisdiction need be raised so long as there is a sincere desire to obtain a final settlement. Clearly, the United Nations Commission on the Balkans has no jurisdiction in relation to the internal war in Greece. On the other hand, its jurisdiction in relation to the border relationships between Greece and the northern neighbours is strenuously denied by such northern neighbours. All these technical points are of minor importance, because, in order to save further bloodshed, immediate action must be taken.

The people of Greece have suffered terrible privations, first, in resisting the onslaughts of Mussolini and Hitler, and their life is still convulsed by internal fighting when all the efforts of the Greek people should be devoted to the task of reconstruction.

The soldiers of Australia fought side by side with the soldiers of Greece against Hitler during the darkest months of 1940 and it fills me with the deepest sadness to find the present tragic state of affairs continuing.

From all over the world, I, as chairman of the conciliation group, have received protests against the action of the Greek Government in carrying out punitive action against those aiding the guerrillas, but, at the same time, I have also received authentic information that the rebels have perpetrated actions of great atrocity against the forces of the Greek Government.

The recent history of Greece is a most distressing one, rending the heart of all who desire peace and harmony to be restored in the Balkans area.

Believing that the continuance of the present situation is so tragic, I believe that it can be brought to an end on just and honourable terms to all concerned.

I therefore bring it to the attention of each of the four members of the Council of Foreign Ministers, suggesting that the whole situation of Greece, both internal and external, can now be treated as one which can and should be handled speedily and on a basis of justice and fair play to all concerned.

I shall be glad to furnish any further information or assistance.

This communication is being delivered to you and to your three colleagues on the Council of Foreign Ministers at Paris by S. L. Atyeo, who acted as Secretary of the conciliation group over which I presided at Paris and Lake Success.

Yours sincerely,

H. Evatt

1 Following the conclusion of the Third Session of the United Nations General Assembly on May 18, Evatt departed from New York for London the following day. This letter was delivered to Secretary Acheson at Paris where he was attending the Sixth Session of the Council of Foreign Ministers. In a memorandum of May 24 to the Secretary of State, not printed, John Foster Dulles, an advisor to the United States Delegation to the Council of Foreign Ministers, reported having been visited by Atyeo at the request of Evatt. Atyeo stated that he had discussed this letter with Soviet Foreign Minister Andrey Yanuaryevich Vyshinsky, British Foreign Secretary Bevin, and French Foreign Minister Schuman and that Vyshinsky had remarked that he thought the proposals merited further development (501.BB Balkan/5–2449). In a memorandum of May 25 to Secretary Acheson, not printed, Dulles reported having received a message from Evatt who felt that the Greek issue ought not to be on the agenda of the Council of Foreign Ministers but hoped that something could be done on the matter outside the Council. Evatt expressed a willingness to keep himself available to the Council for several weeks. (501.BB Balkan/5–2549) In a reply dated May 26, not printed, Secretary of State Acheson expressed appreciation for Evatt’s conciliation efforts and sympathy with all efforts to find a just and honorable settlement to the Greek situation. The Secretary reaffirmed the view of the United States that the United Nations was the proper forum for any discussion of the Greek question. (868.00/5–2149)

2 Regarding Evatt’s statement of May 19, see the editorial note, p. 321 [Pg. 321 includes portions of Doc. 160 and Doc. 161].

The Minister in Bulgaria (Heath) to the Acting Secretary of State 868.00/5–2349: Telegram

[Document 167]

The Minister in Bulgaria (Heath) to the Acting Secretary of State

confidential Sofia, May 23, 1949—3 p. m.

429. Legation thoroughly agrees with Rusk statement quoted Department’s bulletin May 201 that main issue is the illegal activities of Greece’s northern neighbors in furnishing assistance to rebels in Greece.

Gromyko’s suggestions of supervised elections, international border control and withdrawal military assistance all seem to constitute new departure in Soviet policy. Hitherto Soviet representatives have argued that international supervision of internal, political and military developments constitutes unjustified invasion of national sovereignty. Gromyko’s suggestions therefore might be exploited with good propaganda effect. His suggestions would be acceptable on one condition that they be applied equally to Bulgaria and Albania.

Suggestion of new elections is presumably based on correct theory that peoples’ will is for peace and that in free (necessarily supervised) campaigns and free elections people would select governments that would implement this will. All three governments are involved whether defensively or offensively in covert international war. It is appropriate and indeed necessary that Bulgaria and Albania as well as Greece elect new governments to insure implementation of policy of peace.

An international commission for border controls is also a necessary measure but since there are accusations—and evidence—that both parties have violated frontiers the control area must also include frontier regions of Bulgaria and Albania. Such inspection would also meet requirements of Bulgarian peace treaty (Article 12) that no fortifications or installations capable conducting or directing fire into Greek territory shall exist.

If in interest of peace, military assistance both material and personnel should withdraw from Greece it is equally necessary to assure there is no foreign military material or personnel in Bulgaria and Albania which might be made available to Greek guerrillas whose cause is not only openly sympathized in but admittedly aided (declaration of Greek Communist Party on January 30–312 ) by the “popular democracies.” There should be therefore an international commission with full powers and freedom to verify the absence or withdrawal of foreign military assistance in Bulgaria and Albania as well.

Sent Department 429; repeated Athens 19, London 8; pouched Belgrade, Paris.

Heath

1 The reference here is to the statement issued to the press by the Department of State on May 20, identified in the editorial note, p. 329 [Pg. 329 includes portions of Doc. 163 and Doc. 164].

2 The reference here is to the Fifth Session of the Central Committee of the Greek Communist Party which is discussed in footnote 1 to telegram 161, February 16, from Belgrade, p. 250 [Pg. 250 is part of Doc. 119].

The Acting Secretary of State to the Embassy in Greece 501.BB Balkan/5–2049: Telegram

[Document 168]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Embassy in Greece

secret Washington, May 24, 1949—7 p. m.

779. Moscow 1303 May 20 rptd Athens as 27.1 Desire confidential Grk reactions to points B thru E of Soviet proposals, and ur estimate of how far Grks wld really be willing go in matters of amnesty and conduct and possible foreign observation of elections. Assuming that gen amnesty is out of question, wld Grks be willing, for example, in event rebellion terminated to commute and abolish death sentences for acts committed prior date cessation of hostilities? Similarly, excluding possibility of guerrilla participation in conduct of elections, wld Grks nevertheless be disposed work out some formula whereby EAM sympathizers might record their views? Do Grks feel any form of fon observation desirable for politico-psychological or other reasons?

If these matters discussed with Grks, pls make clear that US is not suggesting that Grk Govt take any specific action or adopt any firm position this time. We merely seeking clarification for our own guidance of Grk thinking behind such broad statements as that of Sophoulis Nov 20: “will continue maintain democratic liberties and equal civil rights for all, past will be forgotten and country’s affection offered to all those who return into arms of Grk family”. Grks may be assured we will not communicate their comments these matters to Russians without their consent.

Webb

1 Not printed; it transmitted the text of the Tass statement of May 20 identified in the editorial note, p. 329 [Pg. 329 includes portions of Doc. 163 and Doc. 164].

The Chargé in the Soviet Union (Kohler) to the Acting Secretary of State 740.00119 Council/5–2549: Telegram

[Document 169]

The Chargé in the Soviet Union (Kohler) to the Acting Secretary of State

secret Moscow, May 25, 1949—10 a. m.

1361. Mytel 1154 May 6.1

1. As we see it from Moscow, further developments on Greek issue will depend on outcome CFM. Purpose Soviet publication Rusk–McNeil–Gromyko talks clearly intended table question publicly as great power issue, rather than correct erroneous press reports, as alleged, since Soviets previously demonstrated able face with strong disregard apparently inevitable leaks confidential exchanges to American press. Inclusion conditions clearly unacceptable to west, as well as Soviet initiative in publishing indicates to us Kremlin deliberately sought forestall present continuation negotiations.

2. If Soviet policy develops propaganda-wise at CFM, Kremlin will have Greek (and now Japanese) issues to include in campaign showing Soviet struggle for peaceful solution main problems against west unwillingness agree.

3. If CFM reaches agreement on Germany, indicating Kremlin really shifting line and seeking détente in Europe, then believe they would be prepared alter Gromyko conditions, accept face-saving formulae. In this event, Soviet essentials would probably be: (a) Preservation “leading cadres” KKE through broad amnesty;

(b) Retention legal position party enabling it pursue militant internal political program (as in France, Italy);

(c) Withdrawal British troops.

4. Thus Department’s press release (Deptel 357 May 202 ) and British statements probably on lines expected by Moscow and further initiative both unexpected and undesirable pending CFM developments.

5. While we agree generally Department’s reactions Gromyko proposals (Deptel 359 May 203 ), we believe if events develop on lines suggested Paragraph 3 above, some modifications may become desirable, especially in nature face-saving formulae. For example, Soviet Government could hardly accept role in “illegal” UNSCOB, but could agree to other ad hoc organ including full participation Greek Government as well perhaps as Bulgaria and Albania, and some lesser representations, at least as observers, of a rebel junta. We do not think however Soviets would be much impressed in this connection by line argumentation suggested Paragraph 19 reference telegram.

6. Any settlement would be temporary détente, as Soviet objective ultimate control Greece would remain unchanged. Present open hostilities in mountains would simply be transformed into classic internal political struggle. Essential decision for us would be whether Greek Government with reduced foreign aid and no foreign troops would be able maintain sufficient political stability and economic health to win this struggle.

Repeated Athens 30, London 127, Paris 210 for USDel.

Kohler

1 In telegram 1154, Chargé Kohler attempted to forecast Soviet strategy at the Sixth Session of the Council of Foreign Ministers. For text of the telegram, see vol. iii, p. 864.

2 Not printed; it transmitted the text of the statement issued to the press by the Department of State on May 20 (see the editorial note, p. 329 [Pg. 329 includes portions of Doc. 163 and Doc. 164]).

3 Not printed; it transmitted the text of the paper prepared by the Department of State, included as Annex B to Rusk’s May 19 memorandum of his conversation with British Minister Hoyer Millar (p. 326 [Pg. 326 is part of Doc. 163]).

The United States Representative on the United Nations Special Committee on the Balkans (Drew) to the Acting Secretary of State 501.BB Balkan/5–2549: Telegram

[Document 170]

The United States Representative on the United Nations Special Committee on the Balkans (Drew) to the Acting Secretary of State

secret Athens, May 25, 1949—7 p. m.

1026. Combal 431. From Drew. Re 760, May 20.1 Following comments on reference telegram are submitted solely from UNSCOB point of view and without consultation with any American agency Greece and any discrepancies with reports from such sources, particularly military, should be evaluated accordingly.

I concur fully points 1 to 9 except No. 4. Greeks are becoming increasingly bemused by their own insistence on “unconditional surrender” policy toward repeated guerrilla peace proposals. While obviously no one could question full legal and moral justification for such stand it is hardly realistic especially when one considers that hard Communist core of guerrilla forces never estimated over 25 per cent. Such adamant stand tends force remaining 75 per cent of conscriptees, waivers or adventurers to join ranks of last ditchers. By accepting US military support and international political intervention—read UNSCOB—Greece has to that extent accepted derogation of full sovereignty. Protracted intransigent harping on unconditional surrender theme must eventually tend to discourage war weary Greek public opinion and jeopardize continued support of US public and congressional opinion not to mention US sympathy.

There can, of course, be no question of Greece negotiating with the so-called democratic government or leaders of guerrilla movement but obviously any agreement for laying down of arms will require certain conditions. It is believed that these conditions should ostensibly be fixed by the Greeks but the fulfillment of the conditions supervised on an international basis.

On point 10, we should reserve freedom to urge on Greek Government holding of internationally supervised elections as this might well prove to be essential key to eventual solution of Greek problem. At Paris Tsaldaris repeatedly told me his government would welcome elections and he did not seem to exclude possibility of international supervision.

On points 15 and 16 agree that current situation northern Greece justifies restrained optimism re military situation.

I returned May 23 from one week tour Yugoslav frontier region (see Combal 428 of May 252 ). While even minor military reverse, not to be discounted, such as bandit seizure of one or more recently re-occupied villages would seriously deflate prevalent optimism, I am convinced military civilian morale now at highest tide since start of 1948 Grammos campaign. Situation in Thrace and eastern Macedonia relatively rosy but liquidation of Vitsi Grammos bastion appears almost insurmountable task given continued all out supply and territorial backing from Albania. Similar support from Yugoslav while channelized definitely not ended.3 Therefore, military successes remote from border must not blind us to simple fact that border areas will remain focus of infection until international developments induce northern neighbors to cease aid and perhaps even more important cause Soviets and satellites to withdraw moral support to guerrillas.

I heartily applaud line suggested in point 20–b. To my knowledge neither Soviets nor Poland have ever stated in so many words that they would not take seats on UNSCOB, which I have always considered highly significant.

Easiest face-saving formula for them would be to do so. From such front seat position they could easily encourage neighbors and Soviet bloc to recede gradually from current attitude, even send observers, gain their acceptance across northern border and reach through UN channels goal of appeasement they seemingly suggest through three power device. I recommend we seize earliest opportunity try out this formula.

Following fade-out of Evatt effort UNSCOB remains sole duly constituted UN agency for formal conciliation effort. If outright UNSCOB participation unpalatable to Russians they might be sounded out on possible acquiescence in designation by UNSCOB of non-member mediatory group under Article 10–c of November 27 resolution, which might comprise two “westerners” and one “neutral” palatable to Soviets.

Assuming Greek acquiescence and full participation we might yet develop with Soviets formula for preconcerted resolution at next GA to replace UNSCOB by new body in which they would participate charged essentially with conciliatory function and subsidiary observation role. Unilateral Greek decision on such internal problems as amnesty elections etc., could well constitute essential concomitant.

From this distance my personal interpretation that aside from international factors, such as Atlantic Pact, European recovery, etc., Gromyko feelers prompted by: (1) success in Greece of Truman Doctrine in both military and economic spheres; (2) successful Tito diversion; (3) boomerang of the Macedonian venture, we should endeavor to capitalize on our present position of strength.

Sent Department 1026, repeated Paris 48.

[ Drew ]

1 Not printed; it transmitted the text of the paper prepared by the Department of State, included as Annex B to Rusk’s May 19 memorandum of his conversation with British Minister Hoyer Millar (p. 326 [Pg. 326 is part of Doc. 163]).

2 Telegram 1021, Combal 428, May 25, from Athens, not printed. Drew was accompanied on his tour by the Acting Australian and Brazilian Representatives on the U.N. Special Committee (501.BB Balkan/5–2549).

3 In asserting his view in his message Combal 428 (cited in the previous footnote), Drew disagreed with the opinion attributed to the British Foreign Office in telegram 1987, May 20 from London, not printed, that Yugoslav aid to Greek guerrillas had practically stopped (868.00/5–2049).

The British Minister (Hoyer Millar) to the Assistant Secretary of State for United Nations Affairs (Rusk) 501.BB Balkan/5–2549

[Document 171]

The British Minister (Hoyer Millar) to the Assistant Secretary of State for United Nations Affairs (Rusk)

top secret Washington, 25th May, 1949.

(G.10/ /49)

Dear Rusk: When we discussed Greece on the 19th May you very kindly gave me, for communication to the Foreign Office for their comments, a copy of a paper which had been drawn up in the State Department for submission to Mr. Acheson for his use, if he approved it, as a brief in his discussions in Paris with Mr. Bevin on the Greek and Balkan situation.1

2. I now send you two papers which we have just received from the Foreign Office containing

A) their general comments on the Russian overture including their suggestions regarding the line which our counter-proposals might take (paragraph 20 in the State Department document); and

B) their detailed comments on paragraphs 1 to 19 of the State Department document.

3. The Foreign Office have asked us to explain in sending you these papers that, while they have been sent to Mr. Bevin in Paris, they have not yet been approved by him and, like your own paper at the time when you gave it to me, should be regarded as no more than an expression of the Departmental view.

4. The Foreign Office assume that the next step will depend upon the outcome of any discussion between the two Secretaries of State in Paris.

Yours sincerely,

F. R. Hoyer Millar

Enclosure A [London, undated.]

Paper Prepared in the British Foreign Office 2

top secret

The Russian overture is made from weakness only to the extent that developments in Greece itself have not been in their favour. There is no evidence whatever that the Kremlin is anxious to bring about settled conditions in the Balkan area as a whole. The Hungarian, Roumanian and Bulgarian Governments are still hostile and intransigent, the Soviet radio war on Turkey has not relaxed and pressure on Tito continues.

2. If and when we do reply, our counter-proposals should be designed not only to guarantee the end of all interference in Greece but also to bring us advantages in other fields. They should include our maximum requirements so as to leave room for bargaining.

3. In so far as they directly concern Greece, Greek support must be assured. To that end we might first ask the Greek Government to state their conditions for declaring a fresh amnesty and new elections following upon the surrender of the rebels. They should, however, not be asked to agree to any form of international supervision either of the surrender or of the amnesty and the elections, or to re-legalise the Greek Communist Party. We should stick to the principle that these are matters of internal Greek concern.

4. On the purely Greek aspect, our counter-proposals might be limited to a re-statement of the two requirements that all assistance given by the Northern neighbours to the rebels should cease and that the rebels should surrender with all their arms. We might however add that if U.N.S.C.O.B. were allowed access to Bulgaria, Yugoslavia and Albania in order to establish that aid to the rebels had really ceased, this might make it easier for the Greek Government to order new elections.

5. We could then go on to mention other points in neighbouring territories on which in our opinion a Soviet initiative could contribute towards the establishment of peaceful conditions. Our requirements could be stated as follows:—

a) in Albania, a cessation of interference in Greece and (for the United Kingdom) a settlement of the damages due from the Corfu incident.

b) in Bulgaria, a cessation of interference in Greece and fulfilment of obligations towards Greece in the matter of reparations, etc.

c) repatriation of Greek children.

d) a cessation of the war of nerves against Turkey.

e) a firm guarantee that the Soviet Government will refrain from intervening in the domestic affairs of Cyprus.

6. Counter-proposals of this kind would no doubt be rejected by the Russians but they may lead them to make fresh suggestions rather less remote from what might be acceptable to us than those recently put forward by Gromyko. Meanwhile the Greeks will have derived further encouragement from our continued support and the disintegration of the rebels would continue.

Enclosure B [London, undated.]

Paper Prepared in the British Foreign Office 3

top secret

The following are the detailed comments of the Foreign Office on the State Department document:—4

We agree with paragraphs 1, 3, 4, 5, 7, 8, 9, 13, 14, 15, 17 and 18.

2. Paragraphs 2 and 19. The Greeks have no confidence in Dr. Evatt’s ability to negotiate a settlement with their Northern neighbours and according to our latest information Dr. Evatt has himself admitted the failure of his efforts. U.N.S.C.O.B. has also proved ineffective as a conciliator. The Greeks would probably not object to a solution brought about by the intervention of the Great Powers provided it was effective.

3. Paragraph 6. We agree, but see no useful purpose in explicitly stating this principle in our reply to the Russians.

4. Paragraph 10. If the Greek Government ever agreed that there should be international supervision of elections they might be advised to consider entrusting the task to powers which had not hitherto been involved in Greece, e.g. the Scandinavian.

5. Paragraphs 11 and 12. We believe that Tito’s internal political opposition is fairly strong and that he has almost ceased helping the Greek rebels. We also believe the situation of the Albanian Government to be precarious. On the other hand, there have been no favourable developments in the other satellites where propaganda is still the only weapon available to us.

6. Paragraph 16. One of the purposes of the Soviet approach is to make us withdraw material support from the Greeks. On the analogy of the Berlin airlift we must be quite certain that a final and effective solution has already been reached before contemplating any diversion of resources.

1 For Rusk’s memorandum of his May 19 conversation with Hoyer Millar, see p. 324 [Pg. 324 includes portions of Doc. 162 and Doc. 163]; the Department paper under reference here was included as Annex B thereto, p. 326 [Pg. 326 is part of Doc. 163].

2 The text of this paper was transmitted to Secretary of State Acheson in Paris in telegram Telac 14, May 25 to Paris, not printed (501.BB Balkan/5–2549). In telegram 2164, May 26, from Paris, Secretary of State Acheson reported that Foreign Secretary Bevin had discussed this paper during a private conversation in Paris on the morning of May 26:

“Bevin then raised Greek question basing talk on telegram of twenty-fourth from Foreign Office to British Embassy Washington which you undoubtedly have. He stressed desire to keep in step with US. I noted Soviet public offer was merely in Tass release and our press release was reply in same form. Bevin at first apparently thinking of our joining them in written communication to Soviet but concluded suggesting oral approach to Gromyko in Moscow. While I merely told Bevin we would communicate with him later on this, I fear there is danger of going back to Gromyko with counter proposals along Bevin’s lines.” (865C.01/5–2649)

3 The text of this paper was transmitted to Secretary of State Acheson at Paris in telegram Telac 14, May 25 to Paris, not printed (501.BB Balkan/5–2549).

4 The Department of State paper under reference was included as Annex B to Rusk’s memorandum of his May 19 conversation with Hoyer Millar, p. 326 [Pg. 326 is part of Doc. 163].

The Acting Secretary of State to the Secretary of State, at Paris 868.00/5–2549: Telegram

[Document 172]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Secretary of State, at Paris

secret
niact Washington, May 25, 1949—8 p. m.

Telac 13. This is summary reply to Actel 12.1

1. Gromyko proposal on Greece. See Telac 14.2 Only other development not covered in Secretary’s book3 and in telegrams this subject repeated AmEmbassy Paris is 779 May 24 to Athens which is being repeated now. Our first reactions to Brit observations (Telac 14) are the following: (1) Brit proposal to embark on direct big power negotiations over Greece outside UN framework would seem contrary our respective press releases May 20 and would undercut fundamental position we have taken on negotiations with Soviets in forums where parties directly affected are not represented. Secretary will recall emphasis placed by us on this point at time of Soviet agitation for Stalin–Truman talk. We still believe, therefore, UN should somehow remain in picture but are willing to discuss with Brit ways and means of finding UN method for further discussions with Soviets and Greeks. (2) We question desirability of expanding talks to include relatively unrelated questions such as Corfu, Turkey, Cyprus, as implying propriety great power forum for such problems. (3) Dept believes discussion on Greece should not be rushed and that for time being coordination with Greek Govt might best be handled through Washington. Greek Govt’s attitude understood to depend somewhat on Russian attitude displayed in CFM re Germany. Hence, present discussions with Bevin might be kept on tentative basis. See also 779 May 24 to Athens being repeated now.4

[Here follows the portion of this telegram dealing with Middle Eastern questions.]

Webb

1 Dated May 25, not printed; in it Secretary Acheson reported that he expected soon to discuss with Bevin several issues including the recent Soviet proposals on Greece, and he asked for additional materials on the problem (868.00/5–2549).

2 Dated May 25, not printed; it transmitted the texts of the two papers prepared by the British Foreign Office included as Enclosures A and B to Hoyer Millar’s letter of May 25 to Rusk, supra.

3 The reference here is to the collection of papers on Greece prepared by the Department of State for Secretary Acheson for his use in connection with possible discussions in Paris on Greece. The “briefing book” included a five-page chronology of recent peace proposals and conciliation activities, the text of the Greek guerrilla peace appeal of April 20 (see footnote 3 to Rusk’s memorandum of conversation, May 5, p. 305 [Pg. 305 is part of Doc. 150]), Foreign Secretary Bevin’s telegram to the British Embassy, and the papers on Greece prepared by the Department of State and included as Annexes A and B to Rusk’s memorandum of his May 19 conversation with Hoyer Millar, pp. 325 [Pg. 325 is part of Doc. 163] and 326 [Pg. 326 is part of Doc. 163].

4 During his meeting with President Truman on May 26, Acting Secretary of State Webb read this message. The President felt the Department’s approach was sound, but he understood that he was not giving final approval to any specific action with regard to the matters discussed (memorandum by Webb of Meeting with the President, May 26, Secretary’s Memoranda, Dot 53 D 444, Secretary’s Meetings with the President). Lot 53 D 444 is a comprehensive chronological collection of the Secretary of State’s memoranda and memoranda of conversations for the years 1947–1953, as maintained by the Executive Secretariat of the Department of State.

The Ambassador in Greece (Grady) to the Acting Secretary of State 501.BB Balkan/5–2649: Telegram

[Document 173]

The Ambassador in Greece (Grady) to the Acting Secretary of State 1

secret Athens, May 26, 1949—3 p. m.

1032. Deptel 779, May 24. Following estimate Greek opinion based on appraisal press and public reaction and on conversations with Tsaldaris and Pipinelis. It is of course tentative and informal. Greek officials given assurances suggested reftel although unnecessary as they appear well satisfied we will not take action detrimental to Greece or without consultation.

1. Pipinelis states that he and Greek Cabinet lay considerable stress on timing. They believe time plays on our side and suggest postponement any conversations for following reasons: (a) Morale of army is adversely affected by conversations. Papagos confirmed this at Cabinet meeting and said if conversations continue he will not assume responsibility for consequences.

(b) Time increasingly on our side due present favorable military trend and decline bandit position.

(c) There is hope of working out better relations with Yugoslavia which would have favorable influence on Greek question.

(d) Time will reveal reasons for altered Russian tactics. By hastening conversations now we may fall into Russian trap.

2. When discussions take place they should by all means be channeled through UN and its agencies. They should not take place at CFM or through any special agency. They should not be carried on secretly by Allies.

3. Greek officials believe whole Russian policy turns on desire to have foreign troops leave Greece. Premature action to withdraw them would spell disaster. If Russians press this point Pipinelis suggests that prudence [presence?] foreign troops in Greece be linked with Russian control satellite powers. Foreign troops, advisers and influence can be withdrawn from Greece when Soviet domination satellite powers terminates, so that with return democracy to those countries Greek relation with them may be normalized.

4. Greeks will be adamant in resisting Russian involvement in Greek internal affairs. They believe that these internal matters are for Greek resolution although they have every intention of consulting us fully. Thus they will not agree to Russian supervision of Greek elections, but if this point is raised might counter with suggestion UN supervision elections in satellite countries. They would have no objection to Russia and Poland taking their places on UNSCOB and thus participating in UN consideration of question and even in border control.

5. Greeks in general feel that KKE cannot be legalized. To do so would place Communists in position to begin preparations for fourth round.

6. Amnesty cannot, of course, again be offered prior to laying down of arms by rebels. Almost all Greeks feel that at such time Greek attitude should be lenient and fatherly, not vindictive. Rebels should be given every guarantee of safety. Those inducted by force and not guilty of crimes should be quickly screened and returned to normal life. Small minority guilty of crimes will have to be tried. It is anticipated most of this category as well as hard-core Communists will seek refuge abroad, which exile Greeks probably would not wish disturb. While no commitment can be given that death and other sentences could be commuted, it seems that tendency would be in that direction. Pipinelis warns that Slavophile minority on northern border numbering about 100,000 (of whom only about one-tenth active) will require special attention. While they will not be persecuted or moved en masse, ways will have to be found to settle them elsewhere in Greece.

7. Elections are desired by almost everyone in Greece and will be held as soon as possible. Greeks do not desire foreign supervision and would strongly resist Russian inclusion in any supervisory group. They have no intention asking for foreign supervision but might consent if we insisted. Guerrillas would not participate in elections but officials assure Embassy full and free opportunity would be given all Greeks express opinions.

8. My views on these and related subjects will follow in later telegram.

Sent Department 1032; repeated Belgrade 46; London 42; Moscow 22; Sofia 34.

Grady

1 Ambassador Grady returned to Athens on May 22 and resumed charge of the Embassy on May 23.

Editorial Note [Document 174]

Editorial Note

Ambassador Dendramis called on Assistant Secretary of State Rusk at the Department of State on May 26 to deliver a memorandum by the Greek Embassy (868.00/5–2649). The memorandum stated the position of the Coordinating Council of the Greek Government on recent developments in the Greek situation and on communiqués of May 20 by the Department of State and the British Foreign Ofiice. (Regarding the American and British statements of May 20, see the editorial note, page 329 [Pg. 329 includes portions of Doc. 163 and Doc. 164].) The Coordinating Council felt that the Greek Government should be informed at the time of any international conversations on the Greek situation and that such discussions should be kept to a minimum before conclusion of military operations. The Council, also known as the “inner Cabinet,” consisted of the Prime Minister, the Deputy Prime Minister, the Army Commander in Chief, the Ministers of Foreign Affairs, War, Navy, and Air, and the leaders of the political parties participating in the Greek Government. (A memorandum on the conversation with Dendramis by Rusk on May 26, is in Department of State file 501.BB Balkan/5–2649.) Telegram Telac 21, May 26, to Paris, transmitted the text of the Greek Embassy’s memorandum to Secretary of State Acheson and advised him that forthcoming conversations with Greek authorities probably would obviate the need of responding directly to the memorandum (868.00/5–2649).

The Ambassador in Greece (Grady) to the Acting Secretary of State 501.BB Balkan/5–2849: Telegram

[Document 175]

The Ambassador in Greece (Grady) to the Acting Secretary of State

secret Athens, May 28, 1949—1 p. m.

1046. I find myself in almost complete accord with constructive and far sighted views expressed Deptel 760, May 20.1 I am also in general sympathy with what I believe to be Greek views on subject which I ventured to assess in Embtel 1032, May 26.

Department has placed finger on heart of problem in paragraph one Deptel 760. President has placed question in true perspective by saying that no special negotiations or discussions are required and that Russians can prove in Greece their desire to make contribution to peace. In my opinion we are well along way to winning battle of Greece and to temporize at this point may place victory in jeopardy.

It seems Department and Greeks are in agreement as to how conversations, if held, are to be conducted. Question is rather whether any conversations should be held at this time. In absence more concrete evidence of Russian good faith on this issue it seems to me that Greek view that conversations should be postponed is entirely sound.

Greeks it seems to me are on strong ground in desiring to prevent Russian involvement in Greek internal affairs. They are also correct to believe in their determination not give legal status to KKE which would only be used for further subversive activities looking toward round four. They go as far as they reasonably can in welcoming Russia and Poland to UNSCOB which could be utilized as Department and Drew suggest in whole field of pacification of Greece.

I am in full accord with Department’s point 4. Department’s view in point 7 is entirely sound and constructive. However, the point re a “neutral” government requires some clarification. We should be careful to avoid pitfall developed by skillful Soviet propaganda to effect that Greece is monarch-fascist state which requires shift to democratic element. In point of fact, Greek Government is more democratic and representative than at least half UN members. Elections will speak on this score but in the meantime I recommend we resist any idea that a change to some kind of “neutral” government is required.

I believe that Greeks are entirely justified in refusing to make an amnesty call prior to laying down of arms by rebels. Sophoulis tried this without success but at least his effort had advantage of showing Greek good will. To repeat it would merely show weakness. Greeks seem generally in mood to carry out rebel surrender in dignified and just manner. I believe we can accept their assurances that they will proceed in this fashion. I quite realize that there will be abuses and excesses which are inevitable in country which has suffered as sorely as Greece. We ourselves should be vigilant in watching this situation and in giving guidance to Greece.

Department’s point ten on foreign supervision of elections meets with my full approval. Greeks are desirous of holding elections as soon as possible after restoration of order. I believe they are capable of conducting elections which would be reasonably representative and fair. We should be alert in advising and guiding them so that no criticism can be made that any Greeks do not have opportunity to express their views freely and without intimidation.

It seems to me there is merit in idea of Pipinelis of countering Russian suggestions for supervision of elections and Greek border by UN or other agency with recommendation that similar action be taken in satellite countries. This theme was also developed in Sofia’s telegram No. 19 May 23.3 It was also proposed by Tsaldaris (Embtel 1003, May 214 ) in suggesting that spotlight be turned on Albania.

Department’s point 5 is cornerstone our policy in Greece. There should be no relaxation until Greece is safe. Our success in Greece I believe has been one of basic factors in our improved situation vis-à-vis Communism. Our military mission should be withdrawn when the guerrilla warfare has ceased either through effective military or political action. After the withdrawal of our military mission, our military aid through supply should continue as part of our overall general policy of military aid to European countries. Even after guerrilla warfare has ceased, Greece will continue to be particularly vulnerable to attack and will require special concern and vigilance on our part.

Sent Department 1046, repeated London 43, Belgrade 47, Sofia 36, Moscow 23.

Grady

1 Not printed; it transmitted the text of the paper prepared by the Department of State, included as Annex B to Rusk’s May 19 memorandum of his conversation with British Minister Hoyer Millar, p. 326 [Pg. 326 is part of Doc. 163].

3 Same as telegram 429, May 23, from Sofia, p. 336 [Pg. 336 is part of Doc. 167].

4 Not printed; it reported that the contents of telegram 749, May 19, to Athens (p. 322 [Pg. 322 includes portions of Doc. 159 and Doc. 160]) had been conveyed to Greek Prime Minister Sophoulis and Foreign Minister Tsaldaris. Tsaldaris suggested that it might be a useful tactic for the United Nations to consider the future of Albania and the role of the Soviet Union in Albania. (868.00/5–2149)

The Secretary of State to the Acting Secretary of State 501.BB Balkan/5–3149: Telegram

[Document 176]

The Secretary of State to the Acting Secretary of State

top secret Paris, May 31, 1949—6 p. m.

2204. Webb from Acheson. Bevin conv two.1 Bevin again discussed Greek situation with me this morning.2 He said Hector McNeil believes Greek Government cannot ever settle it, but Noel-Baker3 thinks differently. UK desires ascertain Greek views on possible steps. Are Greeks prepared to grant amnesty and would they let UN supervise amnesty? If so, task should be entrusted smaller powers such as Denmark. Would Greeks agree to UN supervision elections after rebel surrender? This would be helpful in West opinion. Should Greeks be urged to outlaw Communist Party? In Bevin’s opinion we should not press them to do so since Greek electors would sufficiently dispose of Communist candidates.

Bevin stressed above questions did not represent positive proposals, but he felt we should not let Greek situation drift. I told him that we had indications that UN supervision of elections would not be acceptable to Greeks; that I was not sure on the question of supervision of amnesty and that I thought we ought to leave it to the Greeks to decide whether or not they wish to outlaw Communist Party. Bevin further suggested if Greeks would abandon propaganda for Northern Epirus this would tone down Russian agitation. He recalled discussing this with Byrnes and with Tsaldaris. I told him I had taken similar line previously with Tsaldaris and agreed with Bevin’s general view.

I said we would get further Departmental views on specific points he raised.

Bevin has apparently dropped the idea of any reply to the Russians re Gromyko approaches.

[ Acheson ]

1 In his telegram 2203, May 31, from Paris, not printed, Secretary of State Acheson reported on the first part of his conversation with Foreign Secretary Bevin when Hong Kong was the topic of discussion (740.00119 Council/5–3149). This private conversation was not regarded as a part of the Council of Foreign Ministers session. For documentation on those formal meetings, see vol. iii, pp. 913 ff. Greece was not on the Council’s agenda and was not taken up at any of the Council’s meetings.

2 Regarding Secretary Acheson’s previous conversation with Foreign Secretary Bevin on Greece on May 26, see footnote 2 to the paper prepared by the British Foreign Office, printed as Enclosure A to Hoyer Millar’s note of May 25 to Rusk, p. 342 [Pg. 342 is part of Doc. 171].

3 Philip Noel-Baker, British Secretary of State for Commonwealth Relations.

The Acting Secretary of State to the Secretary of State, at Paris 501.BB Balkan/6–349: Telegram

[Document 177]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Secretary of State, at Paris 1

secret Washington, June 3, 1949—7 p. m.

Telac 51. Embtel 2204 May 31. Answers to questions raised by Bevin in conversation with Secy May 31 have been made clear by reports from Grady in Athens, based on conversations with Grks, and by Grk public statements.

1) Grks intend grant amnesty on large scale following cessation of rebellion to all who renounce communism and who did not occupy key positions or commit serious crimes in connection with rebellion. Question of internatl supervision of amnesty has not been broached, but believe Grks wld strenuously resist any USSR involvement in such supervision and wld regard any other type of supervision, such as Danish, as unwarranted intervention Grk internal affairs and serious reflection on Grk justice. Possibly they wld be willing themselves invite some informal observation or advice, for example by member ICJ or by reps national bar assocs, if US and UK strongly urged this as desirable from propaganda viewpoint or as necessary bargaining concession to Russians. More immediate problem is present substantive Grk position which appears somewhat ill-defined and intransigent in public statements. We feel therefore that Grks shld clarify at once exactly what leniency measures they propose apply after rebellion, and that these shld be as generous as compatible with safety of Grk State.

2) Elections desired by almost everyone in Greece and will be held soon as possible. Grks do not desire fon supervision and wld strongly resist Russ participation any observer body. They do not intend request fon supervision but might consent if we insisted. If question of UN supervision of elections raised, Grks will counter with suggestion for similar supervision satellite countries. Guerrillas wld not participate as group in elections, but Grady has been assured full and free opportunity wld be given all Grks express their opinions. Believe Grk position basically sound this issue and that absence peacetime travel or censorship restrictions in Greece shld provide adequate check on irregularities and assure world opinion of essential honesty of elections.

3) Communist and associated parties were outlawed Greece Dec. 1947 fol their open espousal of rebellion and Grks are adamantly opposed their relegalization in any form, believing this wld merely provide opportunity for Communists to prepare another uprising when conditions more propitious. We agree and understood Brit did likewise. Overt activities of even small legalized Communist minority wld be constantly disturbing factor Grk polit life. More serious, re-legalization wld provide cover for rebuilding communist underground which now disrupted by police measures. On other hand we believe Grks shld devise formula whereby votes of communist sympathizers cld be recorded in elections in order comply democratic principles and clearly demonstrate small percentage of electorate involved.

In general, primary Grk concern is timing of any peace talks with Russians. They feel mil tide now running their favor and that Russ objective is to undermine Grk Army morale by pressing for immediate “peace talks” and obtaining promise of premature withdrawal fon troops from Greece. On this point we feel Grks are overconfident and unduly intransigent, since Sovs have capability of maintaining disturbances indefinitely in border region even if rest of country substantially cleared”, as hoped, of organized guerrilla forces. They also have capability of exacerbating situation by introducing fon elements or new weapons into guerrilla ranks. Any demoralizing influence of peace discussions cld be corrected by appropriate public info program and morale wld probably be more seriously affected in any case if Grk soldiers felt we were neglecting real opportunity for peace and that they faced only endless fighting. We accordingly agree with Bevin, particularly in light Pravda editorial May 30,2 that Grk situation shld not be allowed to drift and that we shld further explore, together with Grks and without premature commitments our part, whether Russians may be genuinely seeking face-saving formula for withdrawal from Greece.

As to procedure, we are now thinking of having UNSCOB request SYG to urge Russians and Poles to take their seats on UNSCOB in view renewed public expression of Russ interest in Grk pacification and fact that UNSCOB has again resumed responsibility for conciliation function undertaken temporarily by Evatt. Shld Russians and Poles persist in refusal take seats, SYG might be asked to call upon four major powers and the four other interested govts to designate reps to discuss means of conciliating differences between Greece and her northern neighbors in order to promote restoration peace in Greece. Such request cld be addressed to SYG by UNSCOB itself under authority para 10(c) of main GA Res on Greece of Nov 27, 1948.3

We propose to discuss this procedure with Drew, US Rep UNSCOB, who arrives Washington next week. Meanwhile wld appreciate any indication prelim Brit reactions.4

Webb

1 This telegram was repeated to London as 1930, to Athens as 831, and to Moscow as 400.

2 On May 30 the Soviet newspaper Pravda carried a lead editorial entitled “The Greek Problem Can and Must be Solved” which indicated that a solution of the Greek problem ought to be based upon the proposals made earlier by Deputy Foreign Minister Gromyko. A condensation of the editorial appears in Current Digest of the Soviet Press, vol. i, No. 22, June 28, 1949, p. 51. In his telegram 1443, June 3, from Moscow, not printed, Chargé Kohler observed that the majority of his diplomatic colleagues in Moscow, with whom he agreed, regarded the editorial as simply an answer to the American and British statements to the press of May 20 (see the editorial note, p. 329 [Pg. 329 includes portions of Doc. 163 and Doc. 164]). Kohler pointed out that some diplomats in Moscow felt, however, that the editorial indicated Soviet eagerness to reach an early settlement of the Greek problem entirely independent of the Council of Foreign Ministers (740.00119 Council/6–349).

3 Regarding the U.N. General Assembly resolution under reference here, see footnote 5 to telegram 308, February 19, from Athens, p. 254 [Pg. 254 is part of Doc. 121].

4 A memorandum, closely following the text of this telegram, but attributing the views and proposals contained here to Secretary of State Acheson, was conveyed to Roderick E. Barclay, Private Secretary to Foreign Secretary Bevin, in Paris on June 7. Telegram 2371, June 20, from London, not printed, reported that Bevin had decided not to discuss with Secretary Acheson the British Foreign Office comments in the June 7 memorandum. Bevin had instead instructed the Foreign Office to take up the matter with the Department of State through the usual diplomatic channels (501.BB Balkan/6–2049). Regarding those British comments, see Cromie’s memorandum of conversation of June 17, p. 356 [Pg. 356 is part of Doc. 180].

The Ambassador in Greece (Grady) to the Acting Secretary of State 501.BB Balkan/6–849: Telegram

[Document 178]

The Ambassador in Greece (Grady) to the Acting Secretary of State

secret
priority Athens, June 8, 1949—1 p. m.

1121. Telac 51 Paris, repeated Athens 831, June 3. In any attempt to explore whether USSR genuinely seeking face-saving formula regarding Greece US should exercise utmost vigilance in maintaining sharpest distinction between external and internal aspects Greek problem. Cessation material and moral aid by USSR and Satellites to Greek guerrillas and related matters such as return Greek children, establishment normal diplomatic relations between Greece and northern neighbors and conclusion frontier agreements are proper subjects international discussion and matters appropriate for action by UNSCOB or some other body under UN auspices. On other hand, questions such as elections, amnesty and status KKE are internal Greek affairs and by Charter definition, outside competence UN. It would appear negation our entire post-war policy in Greece and Balkans to participate at this date in any discussion such internal Greek matters with USSR, let alone with Albania and Bulgaria whose mockery of democratic processes through single list elections, treatment of non-Communist parties and personalities and flagrant flaunting of elementary human rights have been subject our repeated official protests and severe censure.

Under extreme provocation, Greece has maintained essentials of democratic state deserving our continued moral as well as material support. In the event of any further démarches by USSR on the subject of Greece, we should hammer home the point that we find it utterly inconceivable that Greeks should be expected to accord treacherous and brutal rebels degree of leniency and freedom that USSR and Satellites refuse as a matter of principle and doctrine to even their mildest critics.

There follows comment re several specific points Deptel 831, June 3: (1) Avowed Greek resolve to keep Russians and Satellites out of Greek internal affairs, and to force rebellious Communists to lay down arms is in our opinion neither well defined nor intransigent. If Greeks are overconfident, we have contributed to this. Alternative to confidence, which in these emotional people is pessimism approaching despair, we have found by bitter experience results in defeatism;

(2) While it is difficult for Greeks to cope with imponderables involved in leniency measures to be applied after rebellion, I have pressed and will continue to press on appropriate Greek officials the need of developing comprehensive plans for all phases connected with surrender of rebels;

(3) My preliminary view is that adoption any device permitting votes of Communist sympathizers to be recorded in elections en bloc would be impractical and more totalitarian than democratic. However, suggestion will be given further study;

(4) I agree in principle with Department and Bevin that Greek situation should not be allowed to “drift,” but do not see that this can be said to be the case. We are making decided progress on the military front, peace offensives can only retard that progress;

(5) While we agree that Russians have capability of exacerbating situation, to take this as guiding principle would be to adopt doctrine of despair. We should rather pin our hopes on probability that Greek National Army victory will bring change in Russian tactics and cause them to abandon their venture in Greece. In this connection, the generally unexpected Soviet abandonment of Azerbaijan might well serve as a guiding precedent;

(6) Clearly neither we nor Greeks should refuse to meet Russians half way if they should show real desire to find formula to justify abandonment Greek guerrillas. However, it would be unmistakable sign of weakness for US to appear too eager to assist them in seeking face-saver. I repeat that President put matter in clear perspective when he said that if Russians really desire peace, they can most readily demonstrate it in Greece.

British Ambassador here has advised London that in his opinion, further talks with Russians on Greece—no matter how informal—would have ill effect on Greek Army morale and might well cause fall of Greek Government. Hence opposes such talks and I fully subscribe this view. Incidentally, British are much more optimistic than heretofore over military situation.

Last night, Papagos showed me disturbing telegram from General Tsakalotos regarding harm already done by recent reports of Big Four efforts to settle Greek question. Papagos then expressed fervent hope that we would not let Greece down.1 As one prominent Greek politician expressed it, Greeks still believe that at least one of Big Four will see them through their hour of peril. They have no confidence in Russians, little in French and are afraid that Bevin may be influenced by Left-wing in Commons.

In my opinion, we will be courting disaster if we give impression that we are temporizing or weakening, which could have far-reaching disastrous effects here in Greece.

Sent Department 1121, repeated Paris 55 for Telac.

Grady

1 A copy of Ambassador Grady’s conversation with General Papagos was transmitted to the Department as an enclosure to despatch 430, June 13, from Athens, neither printed (501.BB Balkan/6–1349).

The Ambassador in Yugoslavia (Cannon) to the Secretary of State 860H.00/6–949: Telegram

[Extracts]

1 [Document 179]

The Ambassador in Yugoslavia (Cannon) to the Secretary of State

secret Belgrade, June 9, 1949—11 p. m.

577. Had more than two hours with Kardelj2 and Bebler3 yesterday reviewing internal and external affairs. Kardelj’s chief points:

. . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Greece: With rebels now hostile to Yugoslavia material aid is not going over. I pressed him hard for more details. What about logistical advantages? Harboring, re-outfitting and returning escaped rebels? Perhaps individual frontier authorities are still doing more than Belgrade intends? He did not deny aid in past but “now it’s all different.” I found this part not very forthright. He seemed unhappy and sick of Greek involvement and rather lamely said “perhaps something ‘will come of Gromyko’s proposal.” He did not refer to last week’s charge that GNA had air strafed Yugoslav village even though in order to prod him I led close to it. I made a little speech about contradiction in our disposition to aid Yugoslavia when Yugoslavia works against Greek independence. He said “but we have no friends there any more” and started talking about Hungary again. He made no mention whatever of Macedonia (which as already reported Yugoslavia thinks it has in hand).4 …

. . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Cannon

1 For full text of this telegram, see vol. v, p. 896.

2 Edvard Kardelj, Yugoslav Minister for Foreign Affairs; member of the Politburo of the Yugoslav Communist Party.

3 Aleš Bebler, Yugoslav Assistant Minister for Foreign Affairs.

4 According to a June 14, 1949, entry in his diary, New York Times chief foreign correspondent Cyrus L. Sulzberger was shown a copy of this telegram by Ambassador Cannon in Paris (Cyrus L. Sulzberger, A Long Row of handles: Memoirs and Diaries 1934–1954 (The Macmillan Company, 1969), p. 448.) During a call at the Department of State on June 16, Greek Ambassador Dendramis was apprised of the substance of the Greek portion of this telegram. On June 22 Greek Minister Counselor Economou-Gouras called at the Department of State to express the great appreciation of the Greek Foreign Ministry for Ambassador Cannon’s action in speaking with Kardelj and Bebler of the question of Yugoslav aid to the Greek guerrillas (memorandum of conversation by Cromie, June 22: 868.00/6–2249).

Memorandum of Conversation, by Mr. Leonard J. Cromie of the Division of Greek, Turkish, and Iranian Affairs 501.BB Balkan/6–1749

[Document 180]

Memorandum of Conversation, by Mr. Leonard J. Cromie of the Division of Greek, Turkish, and Iranian Affairs

secret [Washington,] June 17, 1949.

Participants: Sir Derick Hoyer Millar, British Minister

Lord Jellicoe, Second Secretary, British Embassy

Mr. Jean-Claude Winckler, Second Secretary, French Embassy

Mr. Gerald A. Drew, United States Representative, UNSCOB

Mr. Leonard J. Cromie, GTI

The meeting was held at 10:30 a. m. in Mr. Cromie’s office to discuss the forthcoming UNSCOB report to the Fourth General Assembly and related matters.1

Mr. Drew outlined the Department’s preliminary thinking as it had emerged during his consultations in Washington since June 7 and as set forth in the Department’s draft memorandum2 to him, which was still subject to the approval of Messrs. Rusk and McGhee.3 Mr. Cromie promised that he would transmit copies of this memorandum to the British and French Embassies as soon as final clearance was obtained.

The conversation then turned to a memorandum on Greek matters prepared by the British Foreign Office to be handed to Secretary Acheson in Paris by Mr. Bevin subject to the latter’s concurrence. (The memorandum constitutes a British commentary on Mr. Acheson’s memorandum to Mr. Bevin on June 7, based on Telac 51, June 3, to Paris. Copies of both memoranda are attached.4 ) The substantial concurrence of British and American views with regard to Greek internal matters, especially the undesirability of pressing the Greeks to accept international supervision of amnesty and elections and the re-legalization of the Communist Party, was noted. Commenting on the main British proposal that UNSCOB should recommend that its conciliation functions be turned over to an individual conciliator and that it continue its observations functions on a reduced basis, Mr. Drew pointed out that this was a proposal which had been under consideration for some time—the principal personalities suggested for conciliator being Mr. MacKenzie King,5 Mr. Herriot,6 or Marshal Smuts.7 He felt that while the idea had merit, UNSCOB should beware of divesting itself entirely of the conciliation function though it might suspend this function at any time, as it had during the period of the Evatt talks, if the General Assembly, on its own initiative, were to appoint an individual conciliator. If UNSCOB were to abandon the conciliation function indefinitely, however, it would be inviting its own demise, for administration of the observation function alone would not require the continued existence of UNSCOB. He also thought that any reduction in UNSCOB membership would be impractical. The Big Four would certainly wish to continue their membership, and yet it was desirable that small Powers constitute the majority of members. This required at least nine participating members, which was the present number. On balance, he thought that this proposed British recommendation should not be made by UNSCOB in its report to the GA, but might well be borne in mind as a possible useful course of action to be initiated by the GA itself depending on the atmosphere and developments at the Fall session.

The British and French representatives said that they would report these views to their respective Foreign Offices. Sir Derick suggested that to avoid the present confusion, where Greek matters are being discussed between the Big Three Powers more or less simultaneously at Washington, Paris, London and Athens, future discussions have as their focal point, so far as feasible, the respective UNSCOB delegations in Athens. This was generally agreed. Mr. Winckler emphasized, throughout the conversation, Mr. Schuman’s view that there should be no discussion with the Russians of Greek internal affairs.

[Here follows a discussion of the suggestion by the Greek Government that the problem of Greek refugees be inscribed on the agenda of the United Nations Economic and Social Council at its July meeting. The United States, the United Kingdom, and France were agreed that such an agenda item would be ill-advised. At the beginning of July the Greek Government withdrew its proposal.]

1 A regular report by the U.N. Special Committee on the Balkans was supposed to be placed in the hands of United Nations members at least 30 days before the Fourth Regular Session of the U.N. General Assembly scheduled to convene on September 20.

2 The memorandum under reference here is not printed.

3 In late May 1949 Dean Rusk became Deputy Under Secretary of State, and in early June George C. McGhee became Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern and African Affairs.

4 Neither of the memoranda under reference here is printed. For the text of Telac 51, see p. 351 [Pg. 351 is part of Doc. 177].

5 William Lyon Mackenzie King, former Canadian Prime Minister.

6 Edouard Herriot, former French Prime Minister.

7 Field Marshal Jan Christiaan Smuts, former Prime Minister of the Union of South Africa.

The Acting Secretary of State to the Embassy in Greece 501.BB Balkan/6–849: Airgram

[Document 181]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Embassy in Greece

secret Washington, June 18, 1949.

A–404. Department is appreciative of factors and viewpoints set forth Embtel 1121, June 8, and believes no essential substantive difference has so far emerged between Greek and US policies with respect to Russian proposals.

Mild criticism of Greek “intransigence” expressed in Deptel 831, June 3,1 was not directed at basic Greek position but rather at attitude as expressed in certain public statements and confidential communications. We fear such attitude reflects dangerous overconfidence, born of recent military successes, in military outlook and in indefinite flow of US military and economic aid. It overlooks fact that public in friendly foreign nations which are expending large sums of money in supporting Greece and whose own security is threatened by Greek developments will insist that no reasonable opportunity be rejected for settlement in Greece consistent with vital Greek interests and UN principles. US public in particular will require constant reassurance that Greek Government is not trying to prolong appearance of crisis for ulterior motives.

Refusal of Greek Government to define, in advance of guerrilla surrender, what amnesty measures it would apply if surrender occurs, is open to criticism on grounds individual guerrilla cannot know whether he qualifies for “generous treatment” promised certain categories or even what this expression means. Several recent Greek pronouncements, presumably designed to counteract morale effect of communist peace offensive, unfortunately sound somewhat bloodthirsty to foreign ears and are likely to be quoted to Greece’s disadvantage at future UN debates. Some examples as reported by Athens Agency press service follow:

Canellopoulos in Kozani, May 12: “In the Greek question any solution is impossible other than that which will be imposed by the total victory of the national arms.”

Canellopoulos in Siderokastron, May 15: “No other solution in our struggle than that which will be given by armed force, that of the obliteration of the bandits or their unconditional surrender.”

Canellopoulos in Athens, May 24: “Negotiations are plots and intrigue. By arms and arms alone the Greek problem will be solved.”

Rendis in Acropolis interview, May 27: “We believe only in restoring internal order through the armed campaign against the bandits, relying on the fighting spirit of our people and our armed forces and on aid furnished us by the US and Great Britain.”

Rendis in Salonika, May 28: “The bandits have only one alternative: to lay down their arms and repudiate communism or to commit suicide or take refuge in other countries without any hope of returning to Greece.”

Canellopoulos in Salonika, May 30: “The only possible discussion with communist bandits is that effected by arms.”

In sum, Department appreciates exigencies of Greek internal morale, but feels that Greek moral and diplomatic position would be strengthened by emphasizing and clarifying constructive Greek intentions rather than by sabre-rattling and expressing outrage at any foreign comment on internal Greek affairs.

Re communist participation elections, suggestion has been made here that elections might be accompanied by simultaneous plebiscite on relegalization Communist and associated parties. Strongly negative outcome, which foregone conclusion, would provide striking demonstration lack of popular communist support. At same time it might mitigate impression of non-adherence to democratic principles. Your comments this point appreciated.

Webb

1 Same as telegram Telac 51, June 3, to Paris, p. 351 [Pg. 351 is part of Doc. 177].

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in Greece 868.24/6–2349: Telegram

[Document 182]

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in Greece

secret Washington, June 23, 1949—7 p. m.

941. Eyes only for Amb. Van Fleet1 states he has concluded wld be unwise demobilize National Defense Corps at end calendar 1949 and that Grk forces shld be maintained approx present strength thru whole of fiscal 1950 even if security situation greatly improved. Believes reduction wld damage Grk morale and open way resumption guerrilla activity. Says restudy of mil assistance needs has shown way to economies which wld permit maintenance present strength throughout yr without increase total dol mil aid.

Important we clarify this question before Congressional mil aid hearings since Congressmen likely ask plans for Grk forces after security re-established. As you know orig Grk aid request as presented Bureau Budget based on 50,000 reduction Grk Army beginning late 1949 to be achieved by elimination NDC. If this to be changed we must be prepared testify before Comites on new basis.

Apart from amt mil aid involved we of course interested effect continued maintenance full strength Grk forces on Grk budget and availability ECA counterpart funds for econ reconstruction.

Request your comments urgently together with statement Nuveen’s views if known to you.

Acheson

1 Lieutenant General Van Fleet returned to Washington on June 20 for consultation.

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in Yugoslavia 868.00/6–2749: Telegram

[Document 183]

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in Yugoslavia

secret Washington, June 27, 1949—4 p. m.

327. Shld appropriate occasion arise in conversation with Yugo officials, assume you will mention our continuing interest in question of assistance to Greek guerillas. Specifically shld you be questioned re what unfavorable developments we envisage might cause revocation of license for shipment blooming mill, you might state that while you have no specific instrs on subj it is of course clear that one such development would be evidence Yugos were again assisting Greek guerillas.1

Acheson

1 In mid-June 1949 the Department of State learned that the British Government was considering the possibility of extending sterling credits to Yugoslavia for the purchase of capital goods. Following discussions between officers of the Department and the British Embassy in Washington, the British Foreign Office suggested to British representatives in Belgrade that advantage be taken of the credit offer to reiterate to Yugoslav authorities the British concern over Yugoslav policy toward Greece and the Greek rebels. The American Embassy in Belgrade offered no objection to such a British démarche, but it stated the view that most qualified observers did not believe that Yugoslavia was currently assisting the Greek rebels. For documentation on this matter, see vol. v, pp. 854 ff.

The Ambassador in Greece (Grady) to the Secretary of State 868.20/6–2849: Telegram

[Document 184]

The Ambassador in Greece (Grady) to the Secretary of State

secret Athens, June 28, 1949—11 a. m.

Amag 62. Van Fleet’s statement as reported in Deptel 941 June 23 is perplexing. Our general planning for FY 1950 always has been based upon reduction in GNA strength during FY. Moreover one of final actions of Van Fleet before leaving for America was to send me memo as condensed below providing for substantial reduction in GNA in FY 1950.

On May 26 I requested Van Fleet to initiate JUSMAPG study to determine approximate size and cost of maintaining Greek armed forces that would be required (1) on assumption that guerrilla warfare in Greece will by October 1, 1949, have been reduced to police proportions and confined solely to border areas with continuing threat of support from three northern border countries and (2) on assumption that guerrilla warfare will by October 1, 1949 have been satisfactorily concluded with withdrawal of all aid from Communist countries and with complete cessation of hostilities.

On June 18, Van Fleet handed me comprehensive JUSMAPG study recommending that under first assumption GNA be reduced from 197,000 to 147,000, Navy be reduced from 14,300 to 13,000, that RHAF be reduced from 7,200 to 5,700 all by June 30, 1950, making a saving in military budget for FY 1950 of about $66,000,000. And, under assumption two, Army be reduced from 197,000 to 125,000, Navy from 14,300 to 10,300 and RHAF from 7,200 to 5,000 all by June 30, 1950 with total savings in military budget for FY 1950 of nearly $67,000,000.1

It is of course possible that Greek situation will develop in way that neither of aforementioned assumptions will provide basis for our actions after first quarter of FY 1950. Every present indication however is that end of summer campaign will see Greece free of organized bandit military operations with bulk of GNA in border areas where it should be able quickly to suppress excursions from across frontiers.

While we believe and expect this to be situation in autumn, prudence demands that at present stage of developments we must continue to plan to meet a more serious situation. Therefore we should seek to maintain present appropriation figures and not consider making reduction in Greek armed forces before summer campaign is completed. Then if campaign goes as we anticipate, personnel reduction should start immediately; otherwise adjustments should be made in light of actual circumstances prevailing at time, but in no event do I think decision should be made in advance that no reduction is possible or advisable during next FY. Substantial GNA reduction is essential for advancement of Greek economic program, for as long as GNA spends drachmae at near present rate there remains little for reconstruction. Dollar savings alone are not nearly so important as the internal problems which would be created by failure to reduce military establishment and consequently drachmae costs as rapidly as campaign warrants. I may add that responsible Greek leaders understand that decisive psychological, political and economic factors are becoming increasingly insistent upon the shift of emphasis of Greek needs from the military to reconstruction. Nuveen’s position has been consistent with this line of thinking.

Grady

1 A copy of Van Fleet’s memorandum to Ambassador Grady, summarized here, subsequently given to the Department by the Ambassador in August, is included in file 868.20/6–2149.

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in Greece 868.002/6–2849: Telegram

[Document 185]

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in Greece

secret
priority Washington, June 29, 1949—7 p. m.

976. Embtel 1255 June 28.1 Dept sympathetic with ur own and King’s line of thinking re desirable solution crisis and approves position you have taken this connection.

We continue believe that in period of grave threat to Grk independence and integrity major polit groups shld be willing patriotically to submerge partisan differences, to share responsibility of govt and, above all, to ensure participation in Govt of best men available regardless polit color. Tsaldaris’ claim to Premiership based on his position as leader principal party is understandable. At same time formation of purely Populist Cabinet wld expose Govt to damaging criticism in Grk Parliament and abroad (with Congressional hearings in offing) and wld, as you say, exclude many of most efficient men from admin. It wld probably also spell finish of decentralization program. Earnestly hope, therefore, that Venizelos will withdraw opposition, which possibly founded on exaggerated notion of US support, to serving as Deputy under Tsaldaris or other reasonable solution. In ur discretion you may tell Venizelos Dept officials greatly disappointed his attitude this critical juncture and consider continued refusal cooperate will place on him personally full responsibility for consequences prolongation of crisis.

Urtel 1264 June 292 just reed. Question workability solution one on grounds divided responsibility and probability that each Premier wld attempt postpone unpopular measures during his incumbency and take credit for popular ones. However we leave this matter ur judgment.3

Acheson

1 Prime Minister Sophoulis died on June 24, and discussions ensued among Greek political leaders regarding the composition of a new cabinet. The telegram under reference here, not printed, reported Tsaldaris was seeking to form a cabinet composed exclusively of members of his own Populist Party. Liberal Party leader Sophocles Venizelos refused to participate in any new government that included Tsaldaris. Ambassador Grady had held conversations with both Tsaldaris and Venizelos and impressed upon them the necessity of cooperating in a new government. The King for his part favored the continuation of the Sophoulis cabinet with Tsaldaris as Prime Minister (868.002/6–2849).

2 Not printed. In it Ambassador Grady reported that after a series of meetings at his house, British Ambassador Norton and he had agreed to present to Tsaldaris and Venizelos two alternative solutions to the current political crisis: (1) continuation of the old Sophoulis cabinet with Tsaldaris as Prime Minister and Venizelos as Deputy Prime Minister for a 3-month period followed by an equal period with Venizelos as Prime Minister and Tsaldaris as Deputy Prime Minister; (2) agreement to a neutral Prime Minister suggested by Tsaldaris (868.00/6–2949).

3 In his telegram 1275, July 1, from Athens, not printed, Ambassador Grady reported that Alexander Diomedes had been sworn in as Greek Prime Minister on June 30 with a cabinet largely the same as that of the deceased Sophoulis. Tsaldaris continued as Foreign Minister and also became Deputy Prime Minister. Venizelos became Second Deputy Prime Minister.

The British Embassy to the Department of State 760H.68/6–3049

[Document 186]

The British Embassy to the Department of State 1

top secret

Substance of telegram received by the British Embassy from the Foreign Office on the subject of Yugoslavia.

In reaching their decision to offer the Yugoslavs a credit,2 the British authorities were considerably influenced by a conversation which Mr. Fitzroy MacLean3 recently had with Tito. Tito told MacLean that he could give him an undertaking that the Yugoslav Government would not in future allow rebels who crossed the frontier to return to Greece to fight, and that no other help would be given to the rebels. He also told MacLean that while he was convinced that Yugoslavia would emerge successfully from her present difficult position, it was essential that she should receive some credit from the West. The impression of the Foreign Office is that Tito’s undertaking to MacLean about Greece (which was not accompanied by any reservations such as those mentioned in the recent conversation between Mr. Gannon and Kardelj and Bebler) was sincere. Nor do they feel it would be advisable to try to establish too close a link between political questions and the current trade negotiations. Nevertheless, they are anxious to try to clear up the position about Yugoslav aid to the Greek rebels and to obtain an unequivocal assurance on the subject from Tito. Sir Charles Peake4 has therefore been instructed to remind Tito of what the latter said to MacLean and to ask him squarely whether he is or is not now helping the rebels—though without necessarily suggesting to him that the grant of credits will depend on the answer he gives to this question.

The Foreign Office wish to emphasise the importance which they attach to the conversation between Tito and MacLean being kept very secret. Apart from anything else, MacLean has pointed out that if the statements made to him about Greece became public property, this might ruin the chance of him having such an outspoken conversation with Tito again.5

30th June 1949.

1 This communication was left at the Department of State on June 30 by British Minister Hoyer Millar.

2 Regarding the credit under reference, see footnote 1 to telegram 327, June 27 to Belgrade, p. 360 [Pg. 360 includes portions of Doc. 182, Doc. 183, and Doc. 184].

3 Member of Parliament; chief of the British Military Mission in Yugoslavia, 1943–1945.

4 British Ambassador in Yugoslavia.

5 According to a diary account in A Long Row of Candles, pp. 447–448, chief New York Times foreign correspondent Sulzberger discussed the May conversation between Tito and MacLean with Ambassador Cannon in Paris on June 14. Tito informed MacLean categorically that Yugoslavia was sending no more aid to the Greek rebels. All copies of Ambassador Peake’s telegraphic report to the Foreign Office on the conversation were destroyed. Ambassador Cannon did not report on the Tito–MacLean conversation to the Department of State because he had been enjoined to complete secrecy.

Editorial Note [Document 187]

Editorial Note

Yugoslav Ambassador Sava N. Kosanović paid a courtesy call on Secretary of State Acheson on July 1 just prior to returning to Belgrade for consultation. The memorandum of the conversation, by John C. Campbell, Acting Chief of the Division of Southeast European Affairs, dated July 1, indicates that Ambassador Kosanović took the opportunity to express his appreciation for what the United States had done to improve economic relations with Yugoslavia. For his part, the Secretary of State suggested that Ambassador Kosanović talk with Ambassador Cannon in Belgrade on any matter of American-Yugoslav relations which might warrant discussion, particularly the question of Yugoslav aid to the Greek guerrillas. Ambassador Kosanović stated that he did not believe that Yugoslavia was currently doing any more than to receive refugees from the guerrilla side and maintain them in camps, and he thought that no material aid such as arms was being sent from Yugoslavia into Greece. The Secretary of State pointed out to Ambassador Kosanović that the cessation of Yugoslav aid to the Greek guerrillas would be very helpful to the United States. (711.60H/7–149)

Following his brief visit to Belgrade, Ambassador Kosanović called on the Secretary of State on August 16. Much of that conversation was devoted to American-Yugoslav economic relations, but Ambassador Kosanović did mention the previous discussion of the Yugoslav-Greek frontier, and he referred to Marshal Tito’s speech at Pola on July 10 announcing the closing of the frontier. For text of the memorandum of this August 16 conversation, see volume V, page 924.

The Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Kirk) to the Secretary of State 868.00/7–849: Telegram

[Document 188]

The Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Kirk)1 to the Secretary of State

secret Moscow, July 8, 1949—noon.

1701. Reference Sofia’s 473, June 102 to Dept and telegrams recently exchanged Athens and Dept on Greek question: 1. It is view this Embassy we should be prepared to stand our ground on basic principles which have hitherto governed US policy on Greek question and to treat any further informal Soviet overtures with caution and with knowledge such overtures probably designed to gain propaganda victories for Kremlin. At same time Embassy agrees fully with Sofia that any such Soviet proposals should be countered publicly with particular emphasis on contrast between what Soviets say should be done in Greece and actual political situation in satellite states.

2. Sofia’s suggestion regarding use of Greece as base for counter-offensive measures in Bulgaria and Albania falls within scope paragraph 12 Dept’s 359 May 20 to Moscow3 in which Dept mentions possibility projecting Western policy into Balkan area by psychological warfare, economic leverage and political activity.

3. “Fighting fire with fire” approach obviously would involve risk of weakening the clear cut moral and legal basis on which we have constructed Greek case in UN and of contributing to outbreak of full scale hostilities in Balkans and consequently elsewhere. This Embassy believes Sofia over sanguine regarding good prospects such action within satellite area under present circumstances and completely unconvinced “chain reaction” would infiltrate “within borders Soviet Russia.” Furthermore, evidence preparation by us of contemplated counter measures could rather than having a deterrent effect lead to intensification Soviet inspired aid to Greek guerrillas.

4. Foregoing considerations do not in Embassy view eliminate possibility exploiting domestic discontent Albania which taken together Tito situation may provide early opportunity for limited counter measures from Greek territory (Embtel 1031 June 274 ).

5. Would suggest exploitation any such Albanian possibilities should be predicated appropriate Greek statement indicating Greece not seeking territorial aggrandizement especially in Epirus and should not be utilized until after Greek question has again been debated UNGA this fall so that Greece and her friends can rightly justify counter measures before world opinion on basis that all UN efforts for peaceful settlement have been fruitless. Thus believe any planning Balkan counter measures should be clearly coordinated with our approach to Greek question in forthcoming GA.

6. We note Paris CFM meeting avoided Grecian question.

Sent Dept 1701, repeated Athens 49, Belgrade 54, Sofia 31.

Kirk

1 Ambassador Alan G. Kirk arrived in Moscow on June 28 and presented his credentials as the new Ambassador in the Soviet Union on July 2.

2 Not printed.

3 Not printed; it transmitted the text of the paper prepared by the Department of State, included as Annex B to Rusk’s May 19 memorandum of his conversation with British Minister Hoyer Millar, p. 326 [Pg. 326 is part of Doc. 163].

4 Not printed. It reported that Yves Chataigneau, the French Ambassador in the Soviet Union, had been informed by the Yugoslav Ambassador that Marshal Tito was eager to end support of the Greek guerrillas but had been deterred by the outcry from his Macedonian Communist supporters. Chataigneau, an expert in Yugoslav matters, held the view that the West should render active support to the mounting feeling against the Hoxha regime in Albania and aim at a gradual Yugoslav-Greek-Albanian rapprochement. (760H.61/6–2749)

The United States Representative on the United Nations Special Committee on the Balkans (Drew) to the Secretary of State 501.BB Balkan/7–1249: Telegram

[Document 189]

The United States Representative on the United Nations Special Committee on the Balkans (Drew) to the Secretary of State

confidential Athens, July 12, 1949—4 p. m.

1335. Combal 450. From Drew. While this delegation would be first to welcome solid evidence that Yugoslavia had in fact ceased aid to guerrillas, we feel that this has not yet happened. We are consequently at loss to understand statement in infotel of 29 June1 attributed to Belgrade that “most UN observers do not believe that Yugoslavia is now assisting Greek guerrillas.” Increasingly frequent press statements from American and other sources along same lines suggests danger that element of wishful thinking may be influencing our evaluation of situation.

In first place I doubt we will ever be able to state that aid ceased on any given date. Rather will a twilight zone develop, in which central Yugoslav authorities have ordered aid stopped, but border police unwilling or unable give effect to such orders. We may well have already entered such period. However, until I report otherwise, stand by my statement based on first-hand observation and inquiry on spot in Combal 428 May 252 that we had formed definite conclusion that Yugoslav aid has not stopped, but only been channeled and placed under strict control. See also UN press release of 29 June Bal 513 summarizing Greek letter to UNSCOB of 16 June—A/AC.16/746 on subject.3 The report of OG.3 for period May 15 to 31 (A/AC.16/SC.1/OG.3/324 ) gives on page 11 group’s opinion that “the large group of guerrillas located in the western belles [Pella?] could not exist in that area without supplies from Yugoslavia or from Bulgaria through Yugoslavia.” Further “increased mining mentioned in the body of the report could not be carried out without a steady supply of mines from Yugoslavia or through Yugoslavia” and finally that “it is the group’s opinion the attitude of Yugoslavia is still unknown. However, if Yugoslav assistance to guerrillas has not increased since 27 November, 1948, it has not decreased materially either, and it is now furnished in a less open fashion.”

While it is true that recent decrease in volume of reports of Yugoslav aid constitutes negative evidence that material aid has fallen off as far as aware no UNSCOB observer has reported that Yugoslav aid has ceased. UK delegation informs me it has never so reported to London.

Regarding political relations between Yugoslavia and guerrillas, attention invited to guerrilla radio broadcast of July 7 containing blast by “Communist Organization of Aegean Macedonia” against Tito clique and broadcast of 6 July alleging that following meeting between Greek and Yugoslav military attended by British and American Monarcho-Fascists officers and GNA is using Yugoslav territory against guerrillas.5 These statements may be of great significance and presage final break between Yugoslavia and guerrillas.

While realizing that we may not know all facts involved, we are of course aware of great importance of information on status of Yugoslav aid to guerrillas and will not fail to keep Department fully and promptly informed of all developments coming to our knowledge.

Sent Department 1335, repeated Belgrade 55.

[ Drew ]

1 The circular information telegram under reference and quoted here repeated the substance of telegram 618, June 24, from Belgrade, which had commented upon the implications of the United Kingdom decision to extend credits to Yugoslavia. For text of telegram 618, see vol. v, p. 903.

2 Not printed; Drew commented upon the results of his late-May tour of the Yugoslav-Greek frontier in telegram 1026, Combal 431, May 25, from Athens, p. 339 [Pg. 339 includes portions of Doc. 169 and Doc. 170].

3 The Greek communication under reference denied that the Yugoslav attitude toward Greece had changed or that Yugoslav aid to the Greek guerrillas had decreased.

4 The document cited here is one of the reports of an observation group of the U.N. Special Committee on the Balkans.

5 Telegram 1364, July 14, from Athens, not printed, reported that Greek and Yugoslav military officers held a scheduled meeting on the Greek-Yugoslav frontier on July 11 to discuss a Yugoslav complaint that a Greek military aircraft had attacked the Yugoslav village of Skočivir. The meeting, while friendly, had no concrete result. No American or British officers were present. (760H.68/7–1449)

The Ambassador in Yugoslavia (Cannon) to the Secretary of State 760H.00/7–1349: Telegram

[Document 190]

The Ambassador in Yugoslavia (Cannon) to the Secretary of State

secret Belgrade, July 13, 1949—8 p. m.

663. Embassy offers following comment re section Tito’s speech July 10 re Yugoslav problems international politics.1

[Here follow three paragraphs dealing briefly with the Carinthian question, Trieste, Yugoslav difficulties with its Cominform neighbors, and trade problems.]

Most significant passage concerned Greece. As matter of record Tito repeated allegations frontier provocations by Royal Greek forces but used harsher language re charge by Free Greek radio of alleged Yugoslav support to Greek monarcho-Fascist. He assailed obvious source of report, declaring “they are slandering us to prove justification their resolution and in order blame us for defeat Democratic Greek army, if it comes to this”. Following this significant passage, Tito announced closing of Yugoslav-Greek border.2

Closing of border may mean much or little. Since border already reported to be under strictest control except for points Yugoslavs wanted left open for channeling communications, this move indicates small material advance. I take declaration to mean something quite different. All spring we have been pressing Yugoslavs for change in Greek policy and I personally believe we have achieved it. There remained, however, need of some preparation for letting this become manifest. In this speech Tito with Kosanovich at his elbow may have wanted us to know that he will henceforth give his direct attention to Greek affairs. His appeal to US and UK to end “Greek provocations” couched in friendly terms as contrasted with bitter language employed against Moscow looks almost like an overture.

I recall that British Embassy Washington reported back that Department did not find Kardelj’s statements to me (Embtel 577, June 9) overly reassuring. On rereading that telegram I can see that I did not convey my belief that Kardelj had in fact gone farther than we had reason to expect at that stage, taking into account the workings of his devious and mistrustful mind. On Greece I naturally expected him to have his guard up.

Reverting to Trieste question (see third part his telegram) I think we should not exclude possibility that Tito in showing disposition to move our way in Greek question may be bidding for sympathetic treatment in Trieste settlement.

Sent Department, repeated Moscow 75, Athens 40, Trieste 51, Paris 79, Rome 57, London 36.

Cannon

1 On July 10 Marshal Tito delivered a major speech at Pula (Pola), Croatia, in which he reviewed all of Yugoslavia’s principal foreign policy problems including Carinthia, Trieste, Greece, relations with the U.S.S.R. and the satellites, and relations with the West. For extracts from that speech, see Carlyle, Documents on International Affairs, 1948–1949, pp. 459–460.

2 Telegram 693, July 24, from Belgrade, not printed, reported that the newspaper Borba, the organ of the Communist Party of Yugoslavia, had that day carried a major statement on the Greek problem by Foreign Minister Kardelj. While expressing sympathy for the Greek guerrilla movement, Kardelj condemned the Greek Communist Party for joining the anti-Yugoslav compaign of the Cominform. Kardelj explained that Yugoslavia had responded to accusations and vilifications by the Greek Communists by closing the Yugoslav-Greek frontier (760H.68/7–2449). Telegram 712, July 27, from Belgrade, not printed, reported that the Yugoslav Foreign Ministry had informed the Embassy that the Kardelj statement was intended to reinforce the Tito speech and to make certain that no doubt remained regarding the Yugoslav position on the Greek question (760H.68/7–2749).

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in Yugoslavia 868.00/7–1449: Telegram

[Document 191]

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in Yugoslavia 1

secret Washington, July 14, 1949—2 p. m.

372. At ur discretion suggest you take early appropriate opportunity express to Yugo officials satisfaction at Tito Pola declaration on Greece.2 You might on this occasion voice hope that announced policy of closing frontier will in fact be implemented immed and that, though stated as defensive measure from Yugo viewpoint, it will lay basis for complete compliance by Yugo with GA Resolutions, including repatriation Grk children and reestablishment good neighborly relations with traditionally friendly State (both of which Resolutions were supported by Yugo as well as Cominform members).3

Believe you shld also endeavor place on Yugos burden of proving good faith their repeated declarations re cessation aid to guerrillas. For example, while polit difficulty of accepting UNSCOB observers recognized, if assertion re end guerrilla aid are true cld not Yugos agree to unpublicized tour frontier area by western reps? To minimize polit effects Yugo, such inspection might be made by US or Brit Mil Attachés Belgrade under guise routine trip.

It is not proposed you make special démarche this particular moment on Yugo-Grk relations unless you consider desirable. (We understand from Brit that Peake thinks immed démarche inopportune.) On other hand we do feel essential, without confronting Tito with abrupt take-it-or-leave-it proposition, that continuous pressure be exerted for modification Yugo-Grk policy, whenever occasion arises for discussion relationship between that policy and further western aid to Yugo. Also believe desirable stress advantages to Yugo of positive Yugo-Grk rapprochement. Immed steps might include resumption normal commercial relations, reopening Yugo Free Zone Salonika, and restoration Salonika-Belgrade rail communications.4

Grk Emb here states Grk Govt willing undertake immed negot these matters with Yugos and desires we indicate to Yugos our hope they will accept. We believe formal proposal for such negots shld be made by Grks, either Athens or Belgrade, but see no objection ur sounding out Yugos on subject or supporting Grk démarche if and when made.

Athens authorized give FonOff substance this tel.5

Acheson

1 This telegram was also sent to Athens as 1074, to London as 2440, and to Moscow as 513.

2 See telegram 663, July 13, from Belgrade, supra.

3 The resolutions referred to here were unanimously adopted by the United Nations General Assembly on November 27, 1948. For the texts of these resolutions, see United Nations, Official Records of the General Assembly, Third Session, Part I, Resolutions, 21 September–12 December 1948, pp. 19–21 or Department of State Bulletin, December 12, 1948, p. 722.

4 During a call at the Department of State on June 22, Greek Minister Counselor Economou-Gouras (see footnote 4 to telegram 577, June 9, from Belgrade, p. 355 [Pg. 355 includes portions of Doc. 178 and Doc. 179]) asked on behalf of the Greek Foreign Ministry whether it would not be appropriate for Ambassador Cannon to approach Yugoslav authorities regarding the three issues referred to here (Memorandum of conversation by Cromie, June 22: 868.00/6–2249). Greek Ambassador Dendramis was assured by the Department on June 30 that favorable consideration was being given to the Greek suggestion by competent Departmental officers (memorandum of conversation by Cromie, June 30: 868.00/6–3049).

5 In his telegram 1401, July 19, from Athens, not printed, Ambassador Grady reported that the contents of this telegram had been conveyed to the Greek Foreign Ministry which expressed complete agreement and extreme satisfaction with the American policy as outlined (868.00/7–1949).

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State 868.00/7–1549: Telegram

[Document 192]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State

secret London, July 15, 1949—7 p. m.

2789. Rumbold1 informed us Foreign Office instructed British Ambassador Athens to urge upon Greek Government that it endeavor to avoid further Yugoslav frontier incidents. He indicated that this was result of Bevin’s concern this regard and British desire that “in long run Greek and Yugoslav Government get on.” According Rumbold Pipinelis assured British Ambassador Greeks would endeavor prevent further incidents.

Rumbold said Foreign Office has now also instructed British Ambassador Belgrade to urge Yugoslavs on appropriate occasion not to exaggerate Greek-Yugoslav frontier incidents but to discuss such matters with Greeks along lines of meeting re Skočiver incident.2

Sent Department 2789, repeated Athens 41, Belgrade 59.

Douglas

1 Sir Horace Anthony Rumbold, Head of the Southern Department, British Foreign Office.

2 Regarding the meeting on the Skočivir incident, see footnote 5 to telegram 1335, July 12, from Athens, p. 367 [Pg. 367 is part of Doc. 189].

The Ambassador in Greece (Grady) to the Secretary of State 102.1/7–1849: Telegram

[Document 193]

The Ambassador in Greece (Grady) to the Secretary of State

secret Athens, July 18, 1949—2 p. m.

1393. Deptel 1097, July 16.1 Arrangements have now been made and all plans going forward for Snyder and party visit Athens from Friday noon, July 22 to Sunday morning, July 24.

Decision Secretary Snyder to skip Athens was based on following telegram which I sent him July 11:

“I thought you would like to know that Greeks are planning to use your visit as means of agitating for devaluation of drachma and for increased United States aid. They have used similar tactic on occasion visits other important Americans which has served to confuse our operations and excite Greek public. In view this situation which may cause you embarrassment and since I will be in US at time your contemplated visit, you may wish reconsider usefulness your visit here at this time. Please be assured if you decide to come that you will be most welcome and that interesting programs will be arranged. If there is any change however would appreciate early notice in order that arrangements now in process may be cancelled.” The Secretary replied that in view of what I said he would not stop here. I announced to the press that because of the tightness of his schedule, the Secretary could not stop at Athens.

Mytel was sent after careful consideration. It was based on fact that our operations have been confused and delayed by tactic which Greek Government follows of using occasion visits important Americans to by-pass Embassy and ECA mission and lobby with these officials in controversial matters which they have difficulty putting over in Athens. Thus, ‘Secretaries Marshall and Royall were embarrassed by frontal attack of Greeks on matters of increased aid and size of Greek Army.

Greeks have been preparing veritable campaign for Snyder (and in meantime doing little else) including such questions as additional aid for Greece, Diomedes pet project of devaluating currency, salaries of civil servants, tax on imports, and refugee situation. As example, newspaper Eleftheria July 15 stated: “The general impression prevailing last night was that decision on all the pending economic issues will be made after the talks to be held with the American Secretary for the Treasury, Mr. Snyder.”

Result of this situation has been to bring about practically a stalemate in government economic operation and give scope to Greek tendency to play one American against another and by-pass local American officials. This reached such proportion that I was forced to speak to Prime Minister about it. I was of course entirely aware that Greeks would be annoyed with Secretary’s decision not to stop in Athens and I intended that this would be [garble]. I felt it was time they received an object lesson in proper cooperation. I cannot agree with Department that there would be serious repercussions indicating a change in policy regarding Greece or that it would decrease to any appreciable degree the prestige of the new government. Such criticism as they would receive would be offset by the advantage of transferring their energies from preparation for lobbying to the business of getting things done.

Athens press today bears out my views. Vima states “the inept handling of our case by the government is at least partly responsible for the calling off of Snyder’s trip to Athens; thanks to the understanding of US mission officials, however, solution to our problems will be sought as energetically as if the Secretary had come.” Akropolis comments “now that Snyder is not expected, the government has no excuse in postponing action on the salary question”.

I believe that an Ambassador on the spot is in better position to judge need for such actions and to assess their possible repercussions. But an appeal on behalf of Snyder’s visit has been made to the White House and the appeal has been successful. I will now have even more difficulty in keeping the Greeks in a more realistic and cooperative line of action.2

Grady

1 In his telegram 1533, July 16, to Secretary of the Treasury John W. Snyder in Rome, not printed, repeated to Athens as 1097, Secretary of State Acheson explained that President Truman had sought his advice concerning the possibility that Secretary Snyder might skip his prearranged visit to Athens. Although he felt he was not in full possession of the facts influencing Secretary Snyder in his decision to cancel the visit, Secretary Acheson pointed out that the cancellation could have serious repercussions in United States relations with Greece by possibly indicating some change in policy at a critical time in the Greek civil war. Secretary Acheson also felt that the cancellation would also unquestionably serve to decrease the prestige of the new Diomedes government, give rise to much speculation among the Greeks, and would produce a variety of erroneous but possibly damaging reasons in explanation. (102.1/7–1649)

2 In telegram 1111, July 19, to Athens, not printed, Assistant Secretary of State McGhee expressed regret over the misunderstanding that had arisen over the visit of Secretary Snyder to Athens. Complete confidence in Ambassador Grady’s judgments was assured. The telegram also expressed the conviction that Secretary Snyder would back up the Ambassador’s position in his conversations with Greeks and would thereby strengthen the Ambassador’s position by emphasizing his authority and making American policy crystal clear (102.1/7–1849).

Memorandum of Conversation, by Mr. Leonard J. Cromie of the Division of Greek, Turkish, and Iranian Affairs 501.BB Balkan/7–2749

[Document 194]

Memorandum of Conversation, by Mr. Leonard J. Cromie of the Division of Greek, Turkish, and Iranian Affairs

secret [Washington,] July 27, 1949.

Participants: H. E. Vassili Dendramis, Greek Ambassador

Mr. McGhee, NEA 1

Ambassador Grady2

Mr. Cromie, GTI

(a) Problem: Greek Relations with Albania and Yugoslavia, etc.

(b) Action Required: Discussion in Departmental Working Group preparing U.S. Position on Greek Case

(c) Action Assigned to: GTI

Ambassador Dendramis called at 4:30 p. m. by appointment at his request.

The Ambassador inquired whether the Department had as yet formulated any specific instructions for Mr. Drew with regard to the UNSCOB recommendations. He recalled that the Greeks had urged that the UNSCOB report emphasize the special role of Albania in the aggression against Greece and establish the basis for a GA recommendation which would specifically condemn Albania as the principal “troublemaker” in the Balkans and recommend that the members of the UN concert as to ways and means of eliminating the threat to the peace created by Albania. It was the Greek feeling that such a recommendation would provide a basis for possible “further action” by the US and the UK against Albania.

Ambassador Grady interjected that he had discussed the problem of controlling future Albanian aid to the guerrillas with Generals Van Fleet and Jenkins3 and also, with Mr. Tsaldaris in the presence of Admiral Sherman.4 It was our feeling that Yugoslavia was now out of the picture and that Bulgarian aid to the guerrillas had never mattered much on account of the terrain. That left Albania, and it was the opinion of the top American military men in Greece that if the Greeks made a slashing attack in the Vitsi area and achieved a smashing victory there, the Greek Army would subsequently be able to seal the Albanian border. Ambassador Grady said that we have provided the Greeks with new and very powerful weapons for their Vitsi offensive, and that Admiral Sherman had pointed out that if the guerrillas were cut to pieces in the Vitsi they would have little heart to return to Greece even if some did manage to escape to Albania.

Ambassador Grady agreed that UNSCOB and the GA should take a strong position on Albania and felt that the Albanian role would be underlined in the factual part of the UNSCOB report. However, he failed to see what practical effect UN condemnation of Albania would have there. Russia and the Albanians pay no attention to condemnations. We can’t land troops in Albania or blockade its coasts. The Greeks cannot expect us to take overt or positive steps which would lead to World War III.

Mr. McGhee concurred. Mr. Cromie commented that there would be considerable reluctance in the Department to sponsor or endorse an UNSCOB or GA recommendation which would be vague in character or constitute an empty threat. If we sponsored an UNSCOB or GA recommendation asking UN members to concert on measures for removing the Albanian threat, we might properly be asked what measures we envisaged. There were, practically speaking, none.

Ambassador Dendramis commented that State Department legal experts would always be able to find legal justification for such measures as we might wish to take in Albania.

Ambassador Dendramis then inquired whether Ambassador Cannon in Belgrade had carried out or commented on the Department’s recent telegraphic instruction5 authorizing him to sound out the Yugoslavs on the reestablishment of commercial relations with Greece and reopening of the Yugoslav Free Zone at Salonika and Belgrade-Salonika rail communications. Mr. Cromie replied that there had been no reaction as yet from Belgrade on this instruction.

Ambassador Grady commented that Mr. Pipinelis was optimistic on the outlook for Greco-Yugoslav rapprochement. Ambassador Grady shared this view, finding the recent Yugoslav-Greek meeting on the Skočivir bombing incident to be a good sign even though it led to no tangible results. If the Greeks would just be a little patient, Yugoslavia and Greece would, in the nature of things, be bound to become closer.

Mr. McGhee said that the Greek policy of patience was paying off and he earnestly hoped that any rash actions would be avoided. We are doing all we can to improve Greek relations with both Yugoslavia and Albania. We thought, for example, that Tito’s political and strategic position was reasonably sound, but that he needed economic help and we were providing that help. Mr. McGhee recalled that no formal reply had ever been made by the Department to the Greek note of April 16 proposing certain plans for action in Albania in the event that Tito’s survival should be seriously threatened by the Cominform. Commenting on these proposals, Mr. McGhee continued by saying that both the United States and Greece recognize Albania as a sovereign and independent State. As members of the United Nations, both countries must also refrain from any action with respect to Albania which would be a violation of the Charter. Because of the Greek North Epirus claim, any military action which Greece might take in Albania would be misinterpreted and provide a field day for Russian propaganda. The proper way to handle this claim is through the CFM and not by sending troops into Albania.

Ambassador Dendramis interjected that the Greeks did not propose to use force in connection with Albania. There had merely been some irresponsible articles along this line by a retired General. The Greeks, he said, would take no action whatever in this connection without American approval. What they were really thinking of, he continued, was eventual action by the US and the UK looking towards the establishment of “international control” over Northern Epirus.

Ambassador Grady commented that many middle-ranking officers in the Greek Army, and not only a retired General, were tempted by the advantages of entering Albania in connection with the forthcoming Vitsi campaign.7 The newspaper Acropolis had also been sponsoring the idea. General Papagos, however, has no such plans, for he understands that, in entering Albania, the Greek Army might well be entering a trap and become involved with the Albanian Army.

Returning to the subject of the Greek memorandum of April 1, which implied the Greek need of a larger Army, Mr. McGhee said it must be understood that the present basis of our military aid to Greece was to enable Greece to maintain an Army adequate to restore internal order. At a time when we are having difficulties obtaining appropriations for this purpose, it would be out of the question to change the basis of our military aid to Greece and ask for more funds for a larger Greek Army for some other pupose. Our policy aims only at quelling the guerrilla movement.

Ambassador Dendramis suggested that this was the policy only “for the moment.”

Mr. McGhee stated that it would be a hard policy to change. Any precautionary military moves in Greece, such as a seemingly unwarranted increase in the Greek Army, might precipitate the war which we are trying to avoid.

Ambassador Grady concurred and again emphasized that our whole policy in Greece aims at getting rid of the guerrillas and not at making Greece part of a cordon sanitaire around Russia.

Ambassador Dendramis [said] that this would be a subject for later discussions, perhaps in connection with a Mediterranean Pact.

Mr. McGhee terminated the discussion by remarking that it would be necessary to go slowly on a Mediterranean Pact. The Senate had just ratified the Atlantic Pact and MAP was now up for congressional debate. All these things take time. There is a limit to the rapidity with which the American Congress and public can assimilate these new departures in American policy.

1 Assistant Secretary of State for Near East and African Affairs.

2 Ambassador Grady returned to Washington on July 25 for consultation.

3 Maj. Gen. Reuben A. Jenkins, Deputy Chief, Joint United States Military Advisory and Planning Group.

4 Vice Adm. Forrest P. Sherman, Commander of the Sixth Task Fleet, U.S. Navy, operating in the Mediterranean area, visited Athens, July 21–25, during which time he made several official visits.

5 Telegram 372, July 14, to Belgrade, p. 369 [Pg. 369 includes portions of Doc. 190 and Doc. 191].

6 The memorandum under reference is not printed, but see the memorandum of conversation by Cromie, April 1, p. 287 [Pg. 287 includes portions of Doc. 138 and Doc. 139].

7 Telegram 1321, Combal 447, July 8, from Athens, not printed, reported that during a conversation with Drew on July 7, Pipinelis recalled that a proposal advanced by Greek military authorities to move into Albania to crush the Greek guerrillas had been hotly debated in the Greek Council of State in late 1948. Pipinelis had opposed such an invasion in 1948, but he wondered what he would decide if again faced by such a proposal (501.BB Balkan/7–849). In his telegram 1445, Combal 458, July 25, from Athens, not printed, Drew reported that the agitation in the press and in official Greek quarters to neutralize Albania by direct action was assuming serious proportions (501.BB Balkan/7–2549).

The Chargé in Greece (Minor) to the Secretary of State 102.1/9–2949

[Document 195]

The Chargé in Greece (Minor) to the Secretary of State

[Extracts]

confidential Athens, July 29, 1949.

No. 542

Sir: With reference to the Embassy’s telegram No. 1421 of July 22, 1949,1 I have the honor to report that the Secretary of the United States Treasury Department, The Honorable John W. Snyder, visited Athens from July 22 to July 24, 1949. The Secretary was accompanied by Messrs. Martin, Saxon, Willis, and Glendenning of the Treasury.

Despite the flagrant over-optimism of the Greek press and the wishful dreams of local politicians that Mr. Snyder would bring with him a magic to cure all the country’s economic ills, the Secretary’s visit was a pronounced success. This, I think was due to Mr. Snyder’s personality, poise, understanding, and, above all, to his complete candor. The Secretary made it crystal clear to all Greeks with whom he came in contact that he was not here to study or discuss American aid to Greece—a subject which, he consistently pointed out, was properly in the competent hands of Ambassador Grady and his assistants and that while he appreciated the pressing problems of this country, it was up to the Greeks themselves to save Greece with the help they were now receiving from the American “taxpayer”. This candid approach by the Secretary brought almost all of the local politicians and newspapers down to solid earth, and it appears considerably less likely that the announcement of visits by distinguished Americans will be so quickly and generally seized upon as an easy opportunity for increased Marshall Plan aid and more inter-party recriminations.

[Here follows a brief account of Secretary Snyder’s arrival at Athens on July 22, the social functions held in the Secretary’s honor that day, and the briefing for the Secretary held at the headquarters of the Economic Cooperation Administration Mission to Greece on the morning of July 23.]

Following this 1¾ hour meeting, the Secretary, in the company of the Ambassador, called on the President of the Bank of Greece, and from there proceeded with the Ambassador to a one-hour meeting with the heads of the Greek Government, presided over by the Prime Minister.

Following the discussions in this meeting, at which the Ambassador was the only Embassy representative present, two memoranda were presented to the Ambassador by the Prime Minister, one “On Foreign Assistance and the Reconstruction Program”, and the other “On Pending Economic Problems in Greece”. Three copies of each of these memoranda are submitted as enclosures 1 and 2.2

The first memorandum, “On Foreign Assistance and the Reconstruction Program”, is a concise exposition of the financial considerations governing the 1948–49 recovery program and the Greek Government financial proposals for the 1949–50 program. The primary design of the memorandum seems to be to focus attention on the alleged need for increased funds to carry out a more sizeable reconstruction program. It is pointed out that at the present projected rate of expenditure for the first two years of the four-year program the deficit at the end of the four years will be larger than the 95 million originally contemplated.

The second memorandum, “On Pending Economic Problems of Greece”, purports briefly to analyze the existing monetary problem of the country and then to propose ameliorative changes involving a sanction for the Bank of Greece to purchase foreign exchange “according to its own judgment”, apparently with the primary purpose of fixing such exchange rates on incoming capital from abroad and restoring to the Greek economy a greater volume of income from invisibles. Another proposal in the brief involves an arrangement whereby both bank deposits and bank loans would be calculated on the basis of “an accounting currency unit”. It is argued that the adoption of such a plan which would require a “dollar equivalent of the drachmae deposited written down side by side with the drachmae figure” would tend to put the brakes on exchange speculation, encourage drachmae deposits and reduce, to an extent, the demand for gold.

On the afternoon of July 23, the Greek Government gave a luncheon for forty persons in Secretary Snyder’s honor. In addition to the members of the cabinet, the guests included prominent deputies, leading directors of the Bank of Greece, the Chief of the Currency Control Commission, the Director of the Greek Recovery Program, the American Ambassador, and the ranking officers of the Embassy staff. The occasion was marked by a cordial and interesting toast from Prime Minister Diomedes and by the Secretary’s telling response.

[Here follow portions of the texts of the toasts exchanged by Prime Minister Diomedes and Secretary Snyder.]

Secretary Snyder was received by the King at 5:30 on the afternoon of July 23, the King having returned from his vacation especially to receive the Secretary.

The Secretary left Athens at 7:00 a. m. on Sunday, July 24. Ministers Helmis, Ailianos, and Mavros3 saw him off on behalf of the Greek Government at the Hellenikon airfield. Ambassador Grady accompanied Secretary Snyder and his party on their special plane to Washington, D.C., where he will testify before Congress on the Military Assistance Program for Greece. Secretary Snyder and all of his associates pronounced themselves well satisfied with their visit to Athens.

Respectfully yours,

Harold B. Minor

1 Not printed; it reported the arrival of Secretary Snyder at Athens (102.1/9–2249).

2 The memoranda under reference here are not printed.

3 Minister of Finance Dimitrios Helmis, Minister of Press and Information Michael Ailianos, and Minister of National Economy George Mavros.

Editorial Note [Document 196]

Editorial Note

On August 2, 1949, the United Nations Special Committee on the Balkans completed and signed in Athens its report to the Fourth Session of the United Nations General Assembly. The Report, which was adopted unanimously, covered the period from October 1948 to July 1949, and dealt with the organization and functioning of the Special Committee; reviewed the conciliatory role of the Special Committee; described in some detail the external support given to the Greek guerrilla forces; described the cooperation of the Special Committee with other international organizations on such matters as international refugees, internal refugees in Greece, and the Greek children removed from Greece; and submitted some conclusions. It was the conclusion of the Special Committee that Albania and Bulgaria had continued to render moral and material assistance to the Greek guerrilla forces and that Albania was the principal source of material assistance. For the text of the report, originally designated document A/AC.16/800 and subsequently released to the press on August 20 and published on August 25 as U.N. doc. A/935, see United Nations, Official Records of the General Assembly, Fourth Session, Supplement No. 8, Report of the United Nations Special Committee on the Balkans. For the text of the report (less the annexes) together with a summary account by Harry N. Howard, see Department of State Bulletin, September 19, 1949, pages 407–433. The last-named item was subsequently reprinted (with the addition of Annexes 1, 4, and 5 of the Report and a Chronology) as Harry N. Howard, Greece and the United Nations 1946–49: A Summary Record, Department of State Publication 3645, International Organization and Conference Series III, 40 (Washington, Department of State, Office of Public Affairs, 1949). For the text of the conclusions of the report, see Margaret Carlyle, editor, Documents on International Affairs 1949–50, issued under the auspices of the Royal Institute for International Affairs (London, New York, Toronto: Oxford University Press, 1953), pages 233–235.

Editorial Note [Document 197]

Editorial Note

On August 2, 1949, Ambassador Grady appeared before the Committee on Foreign Affairs of the House of Representatives to testify in favor of the passage of the Mutual Defense Assistance Act of 1949. In his prepared statement and his subsequent testimony, Ambassador Grady reviewed United States military assistance to Greece and the course of the efforts of the Greek Government to suppress the Greek guerrilla movement. For the text of his statement and testimony, see Mutual Defense Assistance Act of 1949: Hearings before the House Committee on Foreign Affairs, 81st Cong., 1st sess., on H.R. 5748 and H.R. 5895 (Washington, Government Printing Office, 1949), pages 131–160.

Editorial Note [Document 198]

Editorial Note

On August 1, 1949, President Truman transmitted to Congress the seventh quarterly report on United States military assistance to Greece and Turkey. The report covered the period from January 1 to March 31, 1949. The report reviewed military assistance to Greece, Greek Army, Naval, and Air Force Operations, the Greek guerrilla situation as of March 31, the status of Greek military training, economic assistance to Greece, and the organization of the American Mission for Aid to Greece. The report concluded that during the period under review, the Greek Government, with United States military assistance, had made solid progress in its efforts to restore internal security in Greece. The most important accomplishment of the Greek armed forces during the period was the virtual elimination of guerrilla activity in the Peloponnesus. United States military aid valued at nearly $39 million and economic aid valued at over $4 million was delivered to Greece during the report period. For the text of the report, see Department of State Publication 3594, Economic Cooperation Series 21, Seventh Report to Congress on Assistance to Greece and Turkey For the Period Ended March 31, 1949 (Washington, Government Printing Office, 1949).

The Ambassador in Yugoslavia (Cannon) to the Secretary of State 868.00/8–449: Telegram

[Document 199]

The Ambassador in Yugoslavia (Cannon) to the Secretary of State

secret Belgrade, August 4, 1949—9 p. m.

755. Discussion on Greece with Bebler (see preceding telegrams for other topics1 ) was inconclusive because Tito was then speaking at Skoplje (see Embtel 743, August 32 ) and Bebler did not yet have text. We arranged for second round later.

Having in mind Peake’s talk with Popovic at my house July 20 (available to Department through British Embassy Washington3 ) and talks both of us have had with Political Director Prica4 we feel we are maintaining pressure for evolution of Yugoslav-Greek policy along lines Deptel 372, July 14. See also Athens 1401 July 19.5

Bebler felt sure Tito would go easy in attacks on Greek Government and on West generally which proved to be case (Embtel 746, August 36 ) but “Cominform attacks oblige us to say certain things and Macedonia is delicate spot”.

He hoped we would see that Yugoslavs must move with great caution “but we want good relations with our neighbors”.

This seemed good opening for raising economic topics. I reviewed pre-war trade which incidentally does not afford very promising point of departure and proposed Yugoslav experts study possibilities. He saw symbolic as well as practical advantages of opening rail communications Skoplje–Salonika but seemed to think railroad badly out of order on Greek side. We said Greek Government had made repairs (is this not correct?) and with good will on both sides trains could soon start moving. He said administrative machinery, et cetera, for free zone at Salonika could soon be got in order.

Feeling I was pressing a bit too fast I decided to postpone to later talk such topics as compliance with GA resolutions, repatriation children, et cetera.

Referring to third paragraph above we can see that Greeks will probably consider passages Tito speech referring to Aegean Macedonia as revival territorial demands and thus ill-designed to improve relations. Bebler’s explanation hardly disposes of this point and now that we have text I shall draw him out on this in next conversation.

Sent Department 765 [755]; repeated Athens 51, London 44, Paris 91, Moscow 84.

Cannon

1 Telegrams 752 and 754, August 4, from Belgrade, neither printed.

2 Not printed; it transmitted a summary of a major speech made by Marshal Tito at Skoplje, Macedonia on August 2 before a huge mass rally to celebrate the fifth anniversary of the People’s Republic of Macedonia (860H.00/8–349). In his speech, printed in the newspaper Borba the following clay, Tito reviewed recent Macedonian history, cited the successes achieved in the Macedonian People’s Republic, castigated Bulgarian obstructionism in reaching a solution of the Macedonian question, and firmly asserted Yugoslav leadership for achieving the aspirations of the Macedonian peoples. Tito also appealed for the friendship of the Bulgarian and Albanian peoples over the heads of their leaders. On the other hand, Tito showed great restraint in his references to Greece. Telegram 740, August 2, from Belgrade, not printed, reported that a conference of refugees from Aegean Macedonia held in Skoplje on July 28, extensively covered in the Yugoslav press, had passed a resolution thanking Yugoslavia for its assistance, condemning the Cominform, and rejecting the activities of the Communist organization of Aegean Macedonia (760H.68/8–249).

3 No record has been found of the conversation between British Ambassador Peake and Yugoslav Assistant Minister for Foreign Affairs Vladimir Popović.

4 Srdja Prica, Director, Western Department, Yugoslav Foreign Ministry,

5 Not printed, but see footnote 5 to telegram 372, July 14, to Belgrade, p. 370 [Pg. 370 includes portions of Doc. 191 and Doc. 192].

6 Not printed.

Memorandum of Conversations, by Mr. Leonard J. Cromie of the Division of Greek, Turkish, and Iranian Affairs 7438.75/8–549

[Document 200]

Memorandum of Conversations, by Mr. Leonard J. Cromie of the Division of Greek, Turkish, and Iranian Affairs

secret [Washington,] August 5, 1949.

Participants: I. Lord Jellicoe, British Embassy

Mr. Cromie, GTI

Miss Synder, GTI

II. M. Winckler, French Embassy

Mr. Campbell,1 SE

Mr. Cromie, GTI

(a) Problem: From recent conversations in Athens with Messrs. Tsaldaris and Pipinelis, the British and French have some fear that the Greeks may be planning an imminent invasion of Albania. They wish to determine the American attitude with respect to Greek military operations in Albania and also what measures the United States would take if the Greeks, notwithstanding American advice, did enter Albania. They suggest that the United States, Great Britain and France should arrive at an agreed common position on these matters and make it known to the Greeks.

(b) Action Required: Intra-Departmental consultations. (Lord Jellicoe and M. Winckler were informed of the steps taken by the United States to discourage the Greek military operations in Albania.)

(c) Action Assigned to: Messrs. Campbell, EUR; Mr. Cromie, NEA.

Lord Jellicoe called on Mr. Cromie at 3:30 p. m. at his request and showed Mr. Cromie a telegram just received by the British Embassy from the British Chargé d’Affaires at Athens.2

In this telegram the British Chargé said that, in the course of a conversation with Mr. Tsaldaris, the latter had brought up the subject of Greco-Albanian relations. Mr. Tsaldaris said he had been informed of plans for the establishment of an Albanian exiles political committee in either Rome or Paris and that he had been asked to avoid any Greek declaration which might be a handicap to the work of this committee.3 This, Mr. Tsaldaris said, was satisfactory to him, since Greece had no political designs on Albania. However, Mr. Tsaldaris was much concerned lest Italy regain its former ascendency over Albania and earnestly hoped therefore that the headquarters of the Albanian exiles committee’s activities would be in Paris rather than in Rome.

Mr. Tsaldaris then went on to tell the British Chargé in a very casual manner that Albanian aid to the guerrillas was of course an intolerable burden for Greece. However, he assured the Chargé that “if the Greek Army went into Albania it would be purely on military grounds rather than to achieve any political objective”.

The British Chargé reported that he reacted strongly to this matter-of-fact announcement that the Greek Army might be contemplating such action and warned Tsaldaris against any Greek military ventures in Albania. He felt, however, that he had made no impression on Tsaldaris and he therefore went out and repeated the same warning to Pipinelis and the Minister of War. The British Chargé concluded the telegram by stating that present Greek troop dispositions, while justified for an attack against Vitsi, could equally well provide the basis for a take-off into Albania. He fears that we cannot dismiss this latter possibility.

Mr. Cromie informed Lord Jellicoe of the repeated warnings we have given Greece on the subject of any rash military ventures in Albania.

II

M. Winckler called on Mr. Campbell at 4:30 p. m. by appointment at his request.

He said that Mr. Pipinelis had recently summoned the French Ambassador in Athens and told him that the Greek Army would be faced with a dilemma upon reaching the Albanian frontier after the successful conclusion of the Vitsi campaign. If the Army were to stop at the frontier, serious internal difficulties would ensue in Greece, since the Greek people would not understand why the Greek Army should not pursue the guerrillas into traditionally enemy territory. The Government would be overthrown and the morale of the Army would be undermined since, Mr. Pipinelis said, the “Army people” were strongly in favor of military intervention in Albania. On the other hand, Mr. Pipinelis recognized that military intervention by Greece in Albania would create a “difficult international situation”.

Mr. Pipinelis said he wished to know what the French attitude would be on this question and also, in general, what the Great Powers propose to do to “recall Albania to the respect of international law”. He said that the United States “did not appear to oppose Greek military intervention in Albania” and that the United States “would welcome a change of regime in Albania.”

In response to M. Winckler’s inquiry as to whether this correctly represented the American point of view, Mr. Cromie told him that while it was quite true that the United States would welcome a change of regime in Albania, the Greeks had been repeatedly warned by us to undertake no military operations there; they had been told by Ambassador Grady that if they invaded Albania in force they might get into serious difficulties with the Albanian Army, in which case we could not guarantee them either diplomatic or military support. M. Winckler then said that the Quai d’Orsay wished to know what action the United States would take if, despite American advice, the Greeks invaded Albania.

Mr. Campbell and Mr. Cromie replied that this had not been thought out, that we undoubtedly could not remain indifferent to a violation by Greece of its obligations under the Charter, and that we would let him have a more definite answer after further consultations in the Department.

M. Winckler said that French intelligence reports from Belgrade indicated that Tito was closely watching Albanian developments, that he had recently released from detention large numbers of anti-Hoxha Albanians, and that he was preparing to set up an Albanian government of his own. The French Minister in Tirana reported that the Albanian authorities are seriously worried by the threats from both Tito and the Greeks and are considering a renewed démarche to the United States in an effort to obtain American recognition of Albania and an American guarantee of Albania’s present frontiers. Political opposition to the Hoxha regime is mounting, though it is still disorganized and ineffective, and the economic situation is desperate. Russia is actually providing Albania with very little in the way of economic assistance and it is unlikely that Albania will be able to carry on on the present basis through the winter. Finally, it is the estimate of the French Minister at Tirana that the Albanian army would disintegrate if it came into conflict with the Greek Army or any other foreign force.

M. Winckler concluded his remarks by pointing out that many people in the present Hoxha regime are young, French-educated opportunists. Now that the wind is blowing against the USSR in the Balkans, he suggested that many of them could easily be induced to re-orient their policy, although obviously some of the top leaders such as Hoxha himself are too committed to do so.

Mr. Cromie informed M. Winckler that Ambassador Grady doubts that the responsible Greek officials are really contemplating an invasion of Albania and he gave him some of the background on this matter. Mr. Cromie speculated that, in approaching the three powers separately with regard to a Greek invasion of Albania, Tsaldaris and Pipinelis probably have little hope of obtaining a favorable response. Of course they would be delighted if France, the UK and the US told them to go ahead and to count on western military and diplomatic backing. However, in the event of a negative reply, which has in fact already been made by the US and UK, Tsaldaris and Pipinelis are at least cleared of responsibility for opposing this Greek military move vis-à-vis the Greek military authorities and the Greek people.4

M. Winckler commented that this corresponded to the Quai d’Orsay’s own analysis of the reasons for the Tsaldaris–Pipinelis démarches.

1 John C. Campbell, Acting Chief, Division of Southeast European Affairs.

2 Ponsonby M. Crosthwaite, Counselor of the British Embassy in Greece.

3 For documentation regarding the establishment of a Free Albania Committee in August 1949, see vol. v, pp. 854 ff.

4 Telegram 1241, August 6, to Athens, not printed, reported that the Department had been informed of the recent conversations by British and French officials with Tsaldaris and Pipinelis. It was suggested by the Department that Tsaldaris and Pipinelis were attempting to plant rumors calculated to frighten the Albanian regime into ceasing guerrilla aid and to clear themselves of personal responsibility for opposing a move against Albania desired by Greek military authorities and by the Greek public. The Embassy in Athens was instructed to make it unmistakably clear once again to Greek authorities that the United States opposed any rash Greek military action such as an attempted encirclement of Greek guerrillas through Albanian territory or the mass pursuit of guerrillas into Albania. (768.75/8–649)

The Chargé in Greece (Minor) to the Secretary of State 768.75/8–649: Telegram

[Document 201]

The Chargé in Greece (Minor) to the Secretary of State

secret Athens, August 6, 1949—5 p. m.

1552. British Chargé Crosthwaite has telegraphed Foreign Office that notwithstanding British Ambassador’s and Foreign Office’s recent warning to Greeks against military incursions into Albania, he feels possibility still exists of Greek military action across Albanian frontier. He reports that in private conversation August 3, Prime Minister Diomedes expressed view that guerrilla use of Albania as base imposed intolerable strain on Greece, that while latter had no aggressive intentions whatever GNA troops might be forced enter Albania for purely military considerations. Prime Minister, Crosthwaite states, listened patiently but was apparently unimpressed with his caution against GNA crossing Albanian frontier.

According Crosthwaite, BMM advices indicate GNA troops dispositions in border areas while designed for anti-guerrilla action within Greece are in fact such as would facilitate operations across the frontier.

Crosthwaite intends to caution Pipinelis and Minister of War against any such action but has informed his government that in his view only way to insure Greek Government will do nothing rash would be for British and US to warn Greeks of grave consequences ensuing from any incursion into Albania. He suggests that warning might include statement that in certain circumstances US and UK might even be unable to continue their help to Greece in its present form.

I informed Crosthwaite that we have repeatedly cautioned Papagos, Tsaldaris and Pipinelis against military adventures in Albania and that Ambassador Grady and McGhee had recently given similar warnings to Dendramis in Washington.1 Commander-in-Chief and Foreign Office have categorically assured us no invasion Albania intended but have indicated some isolated and minor GNA border crossings might take place for purely local tactical reasons and particularly in answer to fire from Albanian territory, harassing GNA movement on Greek side Albanian frontier. Minister War2 informed me last night as matter of urgency of contents special GGS communiqué refuting Albanian charges reported by Agence France Presse that GNA troops had violated Albanian territory August 2 in Bozigrad region. Greek communiqué, contrary, states from August 2–4 Greek forces on Greek territory subject to artillery machine gun and anti-aircraft fire from Albanian territory and lost 10 killed and 14 wounded as result. (Details this communiqué being reported by Military Attaché.) Minister War inquired pointedly how Greeks could be expected to tolerate continued action this sort. Also yesterday Kosmas, Chief GGS,3 asked our Military Attaché what would reaction be if GNA Division were required enter Albania in order effectively prosecute operations against guerrillas.

In my opinion we cannot expect Greeks scrupulously and invariably respect border markings in heat of battle but we must insist Greeks undertake no outright military adventures into Albania. In view importance of question and Diomedes’ attitude as reported by British Chargé, Department may consider it advisable again to make our position this matter unmistakably clear both here and to Dendramis in Washington.4

Sent Department 1552; repeated London 64, Belgrade 66.

Minor

1 Regarding the conversation under reference here, see Cromie’s memorandum of conversation, July 27, p. 373 [Pg. 373 is part of Doc. 194].

2 Panayotis Kanellopoulos.

3 Lt. Gen. Georgios Kosmas, Chief of the Greek Army General Staff.

4 In his telegram 1567, August 8, from Athens, not printed, Chargé Minor reported that in conversation with Pipinelis that day he had made clear beyond any question the opposition of the United States to any rash or deliberate Greek military action on Albanian soil. Pipinelis replied that the Greek Government was in entire accord and had no intention of taking such actions, but he did point out that he could not guarantee that there would be no minor incidents. Pipinelis further explained that Greek public opinion was becoming highly inflamed over the Albanian issue and that there must be some assurance to the Greeks that Albania would not serve for a third time as a base for a guerrilla invasion of the Grammos. (868.00/8–849)

Editorial Note [Document 202]

Editorial Note

Sometime in early August 1949, British Ambassador Peake conferred with Yugoslav Assistant Foreign Minister Bebler on the Albanian situation. In his telegram 928, September 15, from Belgrade, Ambassador Cannon recalled that the principal theme in the conversations was Bebler’s preoccupation with the idea that the Soviet Union might oblige Albania to invoke its mutual assistance treaties. Cannon observed that the danger of a chain reaction if the system of satellite mutual assistance pacts were to be operative was the evident and doubtless the chief deterrent to Yugoslavia risking involvement in Albanian affairs (875.00/9–1549). Telegram 1175, November 14, from Belgrade, not printed, reported that Bebler on August 8 expressed anxiety to Peake over Greek violations of the Albanian frontier. Bebler hoped that Britain would urge restraint on the Greek Government. After learning that British authorities in Athens had given a strong warning to the Greek Government, Peake on August 17 advised Bebler that the Greeks were aware of the Yugoslav attitude. The telegram concluded with a statement that Ambassador Cannon was not approached at any time during August about the Yugoslav attitude toward possible Greek intervention into Albania. (860H.75/11–1449)

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in Yugoslavia 760H.68/8–1149: Telegram

[Document 203]

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in Yugoslavia 1

secret Washington, August 11, 1949—5 p. m.

450. Reurtel 755 Aug 4. Dept appreciates Yugo must act with caution in moving toward closer relations with Greece. Accordingly, timing of attempts to encourage that evolution and apply pressure left to your judgment. Bebler’s receptive attitude on opening railway to Salonika and on free zones indicates time may be ripe for Grk approach to Yugo on those subjects. Grk Emb here has been informed Yugo FonOff showed interest and favorable attitude as reported urtel 755. Grk Emb believes railway line in running order on Grk side. Athens pls confirm.

Recently completed UNSCOB report to fourth session GA,2 which bears down hard on Alb and Bulg while stating Yugo aid “has diminished and may have ceased”, makes possible UNSCOB recommendations next month differentiating between Yugo on one hand and Alb and Bulg on other. You may be able get from FonOff indication re line Yugo intends to pursue in GA discussions on Grk question (re Athens tel 1553 Aug 6 Combal 4663 ) and prospects for normalization Grk-Yugo relations before or during GA session. Some concrete progress this direction wld be helpful to USDel in handling Greek case GA.

You will recall that in UN conciliation talks last year Evatt proposed draft Grk-Yugo declaration Dec 1, 1948 which Yugo turned down on ground matter cld not be considered alone but only as part of entire problem involving also Alb and Bulg, and Northern Epirus question blocked Grk-Alb accord (See Embtel 1527 Dec 11, 1948 and H. N. Howard memo of March 10, 1949 on conciliation talks, Appendix XIV, pouched to you4 ). You might inquire of Yugos whether consideration for Alb and Bulg position which held up their consent last year has same weight now. You may say that US believes Yugo-Grk agreement on lines Dec 1 draft wld be sound basis for stabilizing frontier, to advantage both states, and for more normal relations in future.

Acheson

1 Repeated to Athens as 1273, London as 2860, Paris as 2980, and Moscow as 575.

2 Regarding the Report of the United Nations Special Committee on the Balkans to the Fourth Session of the General Assembly, see the second editorial note, p. 379 [Pg. 379 includes portions of Doc. 198 and Doc. 199].

3 Not printed; it reported that a Yugoslav official had told an UNSCOB official of Yugoslavia’s great dissatisfaction with the activities of the Special Committee (501.BB. Balkan/8–649).

4 Neither printed. For authoritative accounts of the preparation of the draft declaration under reference, see the articles cited in footnote 4 to telegram 308, Combal 368, February 19, from Athens, p. 254 [Pg. 254 is part of Doc. 121].

The Chargé in Greece (Minor) to the Secretary of State 868.00/8–1649: Telegram

[Document 204]

The Chargé in Greece (Minor) to the Secretary of State

confidential Athens, August 16, 1949—10 a. m.

1613. In after dinner talk with Diomedes and Pipinelis I took occasion to revert to question of general conditions for surrender and amnesty of Andartes. I presented our view that Greeks themselves should announce favorable conditions for surrender and amnesty in order prevent further agitation for international control or supervision of some sort.

They responded to effect that their study on subject is advancing and should soon be ready for presentation to Council of Ministers. Pipinelis was reluctant to reveal details since question has to be passed on by Council but he revealed his tentative thinking along following lines:

Andartes would be divided into three categories: first, top level leaders of the rebellion who they hoped would not find themselves within Greek jurisdiction; second, hardcore leaders of rebellion who would be placed in camps such as Makronissos for indoctrination and eventual return to normal life; third, rank and file Andartes who would be screened and returned to their homes almost at once. He expressed hope that further executions under court martial, except for common crimes, could be avoided.

I replied that I was sure Greek sense of justice would prevail, but that I felt timing was of utmost importance. Greeks should make such announcement before end of rapidly developing Grammos operation and well in advance to GP [ GA?] meeting. I have feeling that both men were impressed with urgency of matter and that we may expect some action in near future. I realize that subject is much more complicated than would appear on surf ace but Greeks have had sufficient time to examine all angles. I will see Pipinelis later in week and again needle him for action.1

Minor

1 Telegram 1663, August 23, from Athens, not printed, reported that Minor had again spoken with Prime Minister Diomedes on the question of amnesty and executions. Diomedes stated it was his intention that the Greek Government issue a declaration as soon as possible that there would be no further executions for offenses connected with the rebellion committed from 1946 (868.00/8–2349). Telegram 1402, August 26, to Athens, not printed, informed the Embassy of the Department of State’s gratification to learn of the declaration proposed by Diomedes. The Department urged that the Greek Government bear in mind the impact on world opinion and the possible loss of faith in the Greek Government’s pronouncements which would doubtless result from subsequent executions of groups and individuals still under sentence for crimes committed during the 1944–45 rebellion. (868.00/8–2649)

Editorial Note [Document 205]

Editorial Note

Paul G. Hoffman, Administrator of the Economic Cooperation Administration, made an official visit to Greece from August 18 to August 21. Hoffman was accompanied by his wife and daughter and a small party of ECA officials. During his visit, Hoffman dined with the Greek King and Queen on the evening of August 18, attended a series of briefing sessions by officers in the EGA Mission to Greece on the morning of August 19, and held a press conference on that same afternoon, followed by a meeting with Fotios Makris, Secretary General of the General Confederation of Greek Labor. On August 20, accompanied by Ambassador Grady, Lieutenant General Van Fleet, Deputy Prime Minister Venizelos, and others, Hoffman made an air tour of northern Greece. On the evening of August 20, Hoffman, accompanied by Ambassador Grady and other American Embassy and EGA officials, took part in a conference with Prime Minister Diomedes and the principal Greek Cabinet ministers. The ten-page account of the Hoffman visit to Greece, transmitted in despatch 616, August 25, from Athens, not printed, concluded that the visit had been of paramount importance, and Hoffman’s meetings, comments, and addresses were reported upon in the Greek press in great detail (840.50 Recovery/8–2549).

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Deputy Under Secretary of State (Rusk) 501.BB Balkan/8–3949

[Document 206]

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Deputy Under Secretary of State (Rusk)

secret [Washington,] August 29, 1949.

Participants: The Greek Ambassador, V. Dendramis

Dean Rusk, Deputy Under Secretary—G

John D. Jernegan, Chief, GTI

The Ambassador called at his request for an exchange of views prior to his departure this afternoon for consultation in Paris with Greek Foreign Minister Tsaldaris. He was especially interested in learning our position on the suggestion made by the Greek Government that UNSCOB or the Assembly should recommend consultation among UN members to determine means of eliminating the Albanian threat to Greek independence and integrity. With respect to this particular point, I told the Ambassador that at the present time, at least, we were not prepared to accept the suggestion because we could not see where it would lead. It would place us in the position of being forced to sit down at a table with other nations without having any course of action to propose. Past experience has shown that in international gatherings the other nations always look to the United States to take the necessary action. In the present instance we did not see exactly what action we might take. However, I did not altogether exclude the possibility that we might change our views, and I told the Ambassador that it was something we could discuss again after his return from Paris.

Ambassador Dendramis then asked if there was anything else I could tell him regarding our plans for the Assembly. I said we had been working on this for some time and had a number of thoughts but had not yet finalized them sufficiently for me to discuss them today. The Ambassador asked whether we did not expect a resumption of discussions with the Russians, possibly among the Big Four, in continuation of my talks with Gromyko last spring. I replied that it was quite possible that there would be consultations among the powers during the Assembly session, although they might not have any direct relation to the Gromyko talks. The Ambassador said he thought it important that certain prior conditions be laid down, namely, that there be no discussion of Greek internal affairs, no discussion of territorial claims, and no representation at the Assembly of the Greek guerrillas. I said it might be difficult, in a discussion of frontier problems, to avoid territorial claims altogether. However, a distinction might be drawn between discussing a matter and negotiating it. If one of the parties should bring up a question, it might be impossible to ignore it even though one might not be prepared to enter into negotiations.

Mr. Jernegan remarked that he thought the way to deal with any approach to internal Greek affairs would be for the Greek Government to make clear its position in advance of such questions. Then all that would be necessary during consultations at the Assembly would be to refer to this position.

With respect to the question of guerrilla representation, both the Ambassador and I recalled that the last General Assembly had rejected the proposal. We did not go into this matter further.

After Mr. Jernegan had mentioned that we hoped to send some instructions to Ambassador Grady containing our ideas on certain points on which we would like to reach agreement with the Greek Government before the Assembly, Mr. Dendramis urged that we defer any such instructions until after he had returned from his visit to Paris. He expected that this would be in about a week. I said that we would hold up our instructions until his return.

The Ambassador suggested that we might consider breaking up UNSCOB into separate committees to deal with Albanian-Greek, Bulgarian-Greek and Yugoslav-Greek affairs. I replied that I thought there might be a good deal of merit in this suggestion but that we might find it desirable to have international committees to handle affairs with Albania and Bulgaria but leave Yugoslav-Greek relations to a body on which only Yugoslavia and Greece would be represented.

After I was called away, Mr. Jernegan continued the discussion with the Ambassador and explained that the working level officers of the Department thought it desirable for the American and Greek Governments and, if possible, also the French and British Governments, to agree beforehand on the position to be taken on any consultations at the Assembly, whether these were formal or informal. Among the elements of this position might be the question of elections to be held in Greece, the treatment which the Greek Government would offer to the guerrillas after they had surrendered, and our attitude toward any renewal of the Soviet proposal for a mixed international commission to control the northern frontier of Greece. He said that there would probably be other points still which we would wish to consider. One way of handling the procedure in the Assembly itself might be for the political committee to call upon the Big Four to consult with each other and with Albania, Bulgaria, Greece and Yugoslavia to arrive at a settlement. The Four would be directed to report back to the committee. If the ensuing consultations failed to produce results, there would probably be a majority and minority report by the subcommittee to the political committee. We would then work for a new resolution in the Assembly which would expressly condemn Albania. At that time we might also propose the setting up of the separate committees which the Ambassador had suggested to take the place of UNSCOB. It was our thought, however, that UNSCOB should not itself recommend this change but rather should include in its supplementary report a very general recommendation that there be continued UN machinery to deal with the problem. This would permit flexibility in the Assembly while at the same time avoiding any appearance that UNSCOB was itself admitting failure and recommending its own dissolution.

The Ambassador asked whether we did not think it a good idea to press Yugoslavia to conclude now a frontier agreement with Greece of the sort proposed by the Evatt Conciliation Committee. Mr. Jernegan said he believed Ambassador Cannon had standing instructions to raise this question whenever he saw an appropriate moment. So far as he knew, the Ambassador had not yet done so and he assumed this indicated that Mr. Cannon did not think it would serve a useful purpose. On such a question we would feel obliged to defer to his judgment. Furthermore, while Mr. Jernegan agreed that the conclusion of such an agreement would be desirable, the important thing was that the Yugoslavs should act correctly, whether or not their actions were based on any formal document.

Referring to the announced creation of a “Free Albanian Committee”, Ambassador Dendramis expressed some fear that the Committee’s declared intention of working for the preservation of the integrity of Albania might cause difficulty in Greece in view of the Greek claim to northern Epirus. He also thought it might cause trouble in Yugoslavia, since Albania had a territorial claim against that country. He also recalled the informal undertaking of the Italian Government, made at our request, to warn the Albanian Government against aiding the Greek guerrillas. He wondered if there was not a danger in such measures that Italy would again seek to assert a predominant influence in Albania. He believed it desirable that neither Italy nor Yugoslavia nor Greece should exercise undue influence in Albania. Mr. Jernegan said that he agreed and believed that this was the view of the Department of State. He did not think, however, that an approach such as that we had suggested to the Italians carried with it any real danger of Italian preponderance.

As he was leaving, the Ambassador asked Mr. Jernegan’s opinion as to whether it would not be desirable for the Secretary and Mr. Tsaldaris to establish the general Greek position in their opening-speeches to the Assembly without waiting for the matter to come up on the agenda of the First Committee. He thought such early statements might lay the foundation for subsequent informal discussions “in the corridors”, whereas action in the First Committee might be delayed for some time. Mr. Jernegan said that he thought the suggestion warranted careful consideration.

It was understood that the Ambassador would call again at the Department immediately upon his return from Paris.

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom 868.00/8–2449: Telegram

[Document 207]

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom 1

secret Washington, August 29, 1949—6 p. m.

3099. In view importance support given by Alb to Grk guerrillas, which is emphasized at present moment when Grk forces driving guerrillas back into Alb, Grk Govt has suggested US, Brit, and France might make further démarche at Tirana. Dept agrees Alb is key to present military sit in Greece and that if guerrillas could be prevented from reorganizing and rearming in Alb, and then returning to resume struggle in Greece whole problem would be largely solved. UNSCOB report of Aug 22 now released singles out Alb as principal source foreign aid to guerrillas.

While realizing past approaches Tirana have had little if any effect, Dept thinks changing circumstances such as isolation Alb from direct contact with Cominform, recent successes Grk armed forces, and possibility that Cominform is becoming discouraged over Grk sit, warrant another attempt. Possibility seems to exist that Hoxha may be alarmed at his position and disposed improve relations with West.

Pls convey foregoing to FonOff and ask whether Govt to which you accredited would be willing join US Govt in communication to Alb Govt along following lines: (We would wish French Min to make presentation on behalf of 3 Govts)

“Govts of US, Great Brit, and France have received completely convincing evidence that Govt of Alb has continued during recent months provide arms, ammunition and other essential supplies to guerrillas fighting against legal Govt of Greece. Three Govts wish to point out this in direct violation recommendations GA of UN contained resolution of Nov 27, 1948.3 Continuance such actions by Alb Govt can only bring on it world condemnation and work against interests of Alb people.

Three Govts further note that large numbers defeated Grk guerrillas have recently sought refuge in Alb. Past experience shows that they will attempt reorganize and re-arm themselves under protection Alb flag with object of returning to Greece a process which rep assembly of world opinion has repeatedly and unqualifiedly condemned. American, Brit and French Govts believe Alb Govt would be well advised in its own best interest take necessary measures prevent such reorganization and re-arming of guerrillas and their reentry into Greece. Further believe Alb’s position in community of nations would be greatly improved if its Govt would demonstrate its respect for world opinion and cooperation with UN by inviting reps of UN to visit localities in Alb where Grk guerrillas may be established and Alb-Grk frontier so that they may testify to character and efficacy of measures taken by Alb Govt.

Three Govts are strongly desirous of seeing adjustment relations between Alb and Grks and believe way for such adjustment will be open at forthcoming GA if Alb Govt demonstrates that it will not allow its territory to be used as base for guerrilla attacks on Greece.”4

Acheson

1 This telegram was also sent for action to Paris as 3204 and to Athens for information as 1416.

2 See the second editorial note, p. 879 [Pg. 879 includes portions of Doc. 564 and Doc. 565].

3 Regarding the resolution under reference here, see footnote 5 to telegram 308, Combal 368, February 19, from Athens, p. 254 [Pg. 254 is part of Doc. 121].

4 In his telegram 1741, August 31, from Athens, not printed, Ambassador Grady expressed general agreement with the démarche proposed in this telegram, but he suggested stiffening some of the language (868.00/8–3149). In his telegram 743, September 3, from Sofia, not printed, Minister Heath thought the démarche would be both timely and useful on Western opinion but would have little impact on Albania (868.00/9–349).

The United States Representative on the United Nations Special Committee on the Balkans (Drew) to the Secretary of State 501.BB Balkan/9–249: Telegram

[Document 208]

The United States Representative on the United Nations Special Committee on the Balkans (Drew) to the Secretary of State

secret Athens, September 2, 1949—5 p. m.

1759. Combal 479. From Drew. Reference Deptel 1416, August 29, 1949.1 There can be no question that key to future of war in Greece lies in elimination of threat from guerrillas who have found refuge in Albania. Their continued presence across border continues menace Greek security and will involve Greece and US in indefinite military and economic effort. Even though number involved may be smaller than original estimates, presence of any sizeable force will be equally serious.

However, I am not in agreement with desirability of making new tripartite démarche in Tirana as Greek Government has proposed. I recall complete ineffectiveness of démarche undertaken last September, although I concede circumstances have altered somewhat. I also have in mind Department’s objections to further démarche with regard to presence of Greek army prisoners in Albania as expressed in its telegram 1565 to Athens dated October 29, 1948,2 objections which I consider still valid. I agree with position, stated in that telegram that such action would by-pass UN and in present instance would be inconsistent with our oft-repeated policy of utilizing UN machinery in effort to find solution of Greek problem. Prospective early discussion of Greek case at GA and possibility that serious conciliatory efforts may be made there, suggest that timing of proposed démarche may be poor unless tied in in some way with such efforts.

Furthermore, I am not optimistic that recent developments will necessarily drive Albanian regime toward West. We should bear in mind that Russian infiltration is reportedly intense and probably sufficiently effective to prevent any serious wavering. It seems more likely to me that Cominform intervention may be stepped up in campaign against Tito from Albanian base.

If proposed démarche is made, I feel it should be in strongest possible terms but that no reference should be made to Free Albanian Committee. Indirect reference to it might be made in some such language as “continuation of such actions by the Albanian Government can only lead to stigmatizing the present regime as UN” representative of the Albanian people and as an outlaw group with no claim to membership in the community of nations”.

I further suggest that it is unrealistic to expect Albanian Government to undertake indefinite or protracted internment of several thousand Greek guerrillas. I believe practical measures should be suggested for their voluntary removal, either to Greece under satisfactory guarantees as to their treatment or to non-Balkan countries. It might be suggested that facilities of appropriate UN body or ICRC might be availed of by Albania to accomplish their removal.

I assume Department has given careful consideration to effect of proposed démarche on possible recommendation along similar lines by UNSCOB in its supplementary report to GA.3

[ Drew ]

1 Same as telegram 3080, August 29, to London, supra.

2 Not printed.

3 The Special Committee on the Balkans completed a supplementary report to the General Assembly on September 16; see the editorial note, p. 418 [Pg. 418 includes portions of Doc. 221 and Doc. 222].

The United States Representative on the United Nations Special Committee on the Balkans (Drew) to the Secretary of State 501.BB Balkan/9–249: Telegram

[Document 209]

The United States Representative on the United Nations Special Committee on the Balkans (Drew) to the Secretary of State

secret Athens, September 2, 1949—4 p. m.

1758. Combal 481 from Drew. Reference Balcom 296 August 29, 1949.1 Please inform me soonest whether Department’s proposed recommendations have been communicated to French and UK Governments. If not I urge it be done forthwith. I have in mind possible presentation of agreed three-party working paper to committee and my British and French colleagues will want clearance from their respective governments before committing themselves. Also may I expect any additional instruction based on suggestions made in my Combal 476 of August 24?2 Must know before presenting formal proposals to committee to avoid any backing and filling.

Am constrained to confess that in general am disappointed in Department’s proposals. With exception of first suggestion re conciliation consultations at GA they are either repetition of recommendations in previous GA resolution or conclusion of committee in 1949 report. They completely skirt issues of return of guerrillas from Albania and isolation of that country as outlaw. I fully realize difficulty of coming up with any really workable recommendation to that effect and concede my own inability to supply answer. I do feel however that recommendation proposed by Department would represent something of new low in pious platitudes.

While I would be first to deplore empty dramatic gesture, could we not for example consider some such move as proposal to resubmit whole issue to SC for considerations during period of Assembly where failing unanimity on solution case could again be brought before Assembly? Could we suggest to Greece that it bring northern neighbors or at least Albania and Bulgaria before International Court to demand reparations for material damages caused by guerrilla war? Could we recommend that all UN members withdraw diplomatic representatives from Tirana? Might we authorize UNSCOB to extend [garble] function (read blockade) to Albania sea frontier utilizing vessels of members (US UK and Greece)? In line with suggestion advanced in Legation Sofia’s 583 of July 123 might committee recommend that GA determine that Albania and Bulgaria are engaging in conduct of undeclared war against Greece through use of foreign (Greek) mercenaries.

Extreme as these ideas may be, I feel committee must go much further than Department has suggested even if GA resolution eliminates part or all of our recommendations.

Australian representative has circulated working paper proposing recommendation that GA address appeal to Albania Bulgaria and Yugoslavia for return to Greece under aegis of UN of guerrillas who have sought refuge in their territory. Appeal would: 1. Call on all nations members or not to cooperate in return; 2. Take into account wishes of individual guerrillas; 3. Request Greek Government to cooperate and assign suitable “protected area” to UN or their reception under UN auspices; 4. Include guarantee of safe conduct to area and protection therein with provisions for resettlement in Greece under terms fixed by Greek authorities or outside Greece under conditions agreed by SYG and receiving country; 5. Be applicable to present guerrilla prisoners if requested by Greek Government; 6. Include Greek children in consultation with ICRC.

Atyeo’s paper probably drafted in or inspired by Canberra argues that guerrilla morale must be at low ebb and many would welcome chance to quit if guaranteed fair treatment; that scheme does not involve any negotiations with, guerrillas—only Albania, Bulgaria and Yugoslavia; and that it offers sheltering countries easy way out of embarrassing political and economic problem involved in protracted sheltering of guerrillas. Despite a possible conflict with Greek amnesty plans and need for ironing out certain unclear details I feel plan deserves careful study. If advanced by special committee as whole it should at least allay Greek suspicions of anything Australian. It offers fresh approach and with vigorous Australian support at GA should enlist sympathy of many liberally inclined delegations. It should appeal to Yugoslavs at least and might interest Bulgaria which of late has displayed increasing signs of being fed up with whole business. Albanian attitude while of course dictated from Moscow might even prove receptive.

Hope Department can give me earliest possible indication its preliminary reaction to preceding proposals. If negative on my ideas which I recognize have serious procedural and substantive objections I urge careful consideration of Australian proposal which may contain germ of recommendation which would at least lift UNSCOB proposals out of present doldrums.

[ Drew ]

1 Not printed; it transmitted the substance of the recommendations subsequently set forth in the Department of State policy paper on Greece, SD/A/C.1/272, September 9, p. 404 [Pg. 404 includes portions of Doc. 214 and Doc. 215].

2 Not printed.

3 Not printed.

The Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Kirk) to the Secretary of State 768.75/9–349: Telegram

[Document 210]

The Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Kirk) to the Secretary of State

secret Moscow, September 3, 1949—1 p. m.

2213. Depinfotel September 1.1 Re proposal approach. Albanian Government on Greek guerrillas Embassy wonders whether Albanian communiqué reported Embtel 2174, August 282 does not, despite its generally provocative tone, indicate possibility that Hoxha regime may intend take steps now safeguard its exposed internal position by preventing return to Greece of “democratic invaders” mentioned therein. Embassy aware that Albanian representative made even stronger undertaking this regard before UNGA committee in October 1948 (UNSCOB report August 2, 1949, page 213 ) which was shown by subsequent events to be completely meaningless. Circumstances latest Albanian statement, however, plus further considerations of present situation set forth Depinfotel suggest, in Embassy view, that Albanians may be inclined to initiate more cautious course re Greek civil war at least temporarily.

Embassy notes that line proposed note might be interpreted as indicating possibility rehabilitating Hoxha regime in eyes world opinion. Embassy appreciates that Department’s decision proceed in this matter result careful weighing pros and cons with particular attention present phase Greek military situation, but is somewhat apprehensive re implications of move suggesting whitewash Soviet puppet state which has to date shown no independence whatsoever from Kremlin.

Embassy in thorough agreement present Department policy pinpointing Albanian complicity Greek civil war (Embtel 1701 July 8), but attaches great weight to desirability of continuing to use UN machinery this purpose, particularly in view imminence UNGA session.

Sent Department 2213, repeated Athens 69, Belgrade 103, Paris 318, London 223.

Kirk

1 Not printed; it transmitted the summary of telegram 3099, August 29, to London, p. 392 [Pg. 392 includes portions of Doc. 206 and Doc. 207].

2 Not printed; it reported that the Albanian regime had issued a statement that it intended to disarm and intern all combatants entering its territory from Greece (768.75/8–2849).

3 Regarding the Report under reference, see the second editorial note, p. 379 [Pg. 379 includes portions of Doc. 198 and Doc. 199].

The Chargé in the United Kingdom (Holmes) to the Secretary of State 868.00/9–349: Telegram

[Document 211]

The Chargé in the United Kingdom (Holmes) to the Secretary of State

secret London, September 3, 1949—5 p. m.

3538. Deptel 3099 August 29 to London, Paris 3204, Athens 1416, and Embtel 3525 to Department, Athens 54, Paris 662.1 We have today received communication from Foreign Office giving comments and suggestions re US, UK, French démarche at Tirana.

Foreign Office in agreement with idea démarche be made but would like, if Department agrees, to see terms of note to Albanian Government somewhat strengthened. Foreign Office states there is suggestion in Department’s draft (Deptel 3099) that if Albanians cooperate with UN, Albania’s claim for admission UN might receive more favorable consideration. Foreign Office thinks there no point in holding out such intimation to Albanians this stage. Foreign Office also thinks it advisable include some reference to Albanian official or semiofficial statement that they are in fact disarming and interning rebels; otherwise Albanians would reply referring us to statements, and it better to discount this in advance.

[Here follows revised language for second paragraph of draft démarche transmitted in telegram 3099, August 29, to London, page 392 [Pg. 392 includes portions of Doc. 206 and Doc. 207], as well as a minor emendation to the third paragraph of the draft.]

Re publicity Foreign Office suggests last year’s precedent be followed and French Government asked to publish statement shortly after communication to Albanian Government.

Sent Department 3538, repeated Paris 664, Athens 55.

Holmes

1 Latter not printed; it reported the British Foreign Office’s preliminary favorable reaction to the proposed démarche (868.00/0–149).

The United States Representative at the United Nations (Austin) to the Secretary of State 501.BB Balkan/9–949: Telegram

[Document 212]

The United States Representative at the United Nations (Austin) to the Secretary of State

secret New York, September 7, 1949—3:18 p. m.

1062. Be teleconference with Bancroft1 and Popper,2 Ross3 discussed with Cadogan,4 McNaughton5 and Chauvel6 yesterday afternoon current Department thinking re conciliation effort Greek case during Assembly.

Cadogan said he felt sure FO would object strongly to any formula which would allow Russian “interference”. He leans strongly in direction formula putting primary responsibility on Assembly officers. He agreed, however, that if in course their efforts opportunity to get four-power agreement should develop (which he doubted would be the case) then Assembly officers might appropriately bring representatives four powers physically together to confirm such agreement. In any event, Cadogan felt we could not decide in advance whether or in what way four powers should be brought together; circumstances at the time would have to determine our action.

McNaughton’s views were somewhat similar to those of Cadogan. McKaughton has very strong, positive feeling Assembly officers should be used and felt this would be more acceptable to Assembly than four-power consultations without benefit of Assembly officers. He emphasized somewhat more strongly than Cadogan necessity of waiting until exact circumstances are known before making effort to bring four powers together. Assembly officers, he said, could do this at any time it seemed desirable.

Chauvel had no comment except to repeat indication he previously gave us that French FO favors principle of conciliation effort during Assembly.

Austin

1 Harding F. Bancroft, Director, Office of United Nations Political and Security Affairs.

2 David H. Popper, Officer in Charge of General Assembly Affairs in the Office of United Nations Political and Security Affairs.

3 John C. Ross, Deputy to Ambassador Austin.

4 Ambassador Sir Alexander Cadogan, United Kingdom Permanent Representative to the United Nations.

5 A. L. If. McNaughton, Canadian Permanent Representative to the United Nations.

6 Ambassador Jean Chauvel, French Permanent Representative to the United Nations.

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in Greece 501.BB Balkan/8–2949: Telegram

[Document 213]

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in Greece

secret
urgent Washington, September 7, 1949—7 p. m.

1473. Balcom 299. Fol are Depts comments on ideas for supp report contained in third and subsequent paras Combal 481, Aug 29[Sept 2]:1

I. Consider resubmission whole issue to SC during GA session undesirable as wld disrupt orderly GA handling and preclude contemplated form of conciliation effort. Proposal for submission of damages case against Alb and Bulg to ICJ inadvisable because Court does not have compulsory jurisdiction. Furthermore it most unlikely Greece wld be able conclude special prior agreement with Alb and Bulg defining issues for ICJ to decide. All this wld take matters off main track without producing concrete results.

Dept opposed to recommendation for withdrawal dipl reps from Tirana. Undesirable cut off what remaining contacts we still have there through states friendly toward us. Proposal for control of Alb sea frontier through extension UNSCOB observation function opposed because (a) raises difficult questions internatl law; (b) wld represent measure of enforcement action which GA or subsidiary organ thereof cld not take, and (c) serious practical difficulties. Dept also objects to attempt define conduct of Alb and Bulg as “undeclared war” which wld inevitably raise Art 512 implications and take matter back to SC.

II. Dept looks with favor on an UNSCOB recommendation that GA call upon Alb and Bulg to permit UN authorities to verify publicized claims of those Govts that they are disarming and interning Grk guerrillas fleeing into their territory (re last para Combal 479, Sept 2).3

Re Atyeo proposal, Dept favorably disposed. However, Grks shld be prepared in advance to accept such arrangement. Question of what agency cld arrange reception of guerrillas and control of “protected area” can best be discussed at GA. Dept believes return of Grk children shld not be lumped with this proposal because GA Res on children clearly prescribes procedure for their repatriation. In practice it might prove possible to handle some aspects both problems through recourse to services ICEC.

III. Dept wld appreciate your comments and preliminary reaction other Dels to idea of separate comms for the different countries as suggested in para (h), Balcom 296.4

Acheson

1 Telegram 1758, p. 395 [Pg. 395 includes portions of Doc. 208 and Doc. 209].

2 i.e., of the United Nations Charter.

3 Telegram 1759, p. 394 [Pg. 394 is part of Doc. 208].

4 Telegram 1417, Balcom 296, August 29 to Athens, not printed, contained the substance of the recommendations subsequently set forth in the Department of State policy paper on Greece, SD/A/C.1/272, September 9, p. 404 [Pg. 404 includes portions of Doc. 214 and Doc. 215]. Paragraph (h) of Balcom 296 was the same as paragraph 5 (i) of SD/A/C.1/272. In his telegram 1791, Combal 483, September 9, from Athens, not printed, Drew insisted that he saw no advantage in the establishment of three separate border commissions. Such separate commissions could only be justified if Albania and Bulgaria were capable of exercising independent win, and that was manifestly not the case. (501.BB Balkan/9–949)

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Chief of the Division of Greek, Turkish, and Iranian Affairs (Jernegan) 501.BB Balkan/9–849

[Document 214]

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Chief of the Division of Greek, Turkish, and Iranian Affairs (Jernegan)

secret [Washington,] September 8, 1949.

Participants: The Greek Ambassador, H. E. Vassili Dendramis

Mr. Dean Rusk, Deputy Under Secretary

Mr. John D. Jernegan, GTI

The Ambassador called at his request following his return from Paris where he had consulted with Greek Foreign Minister Tsaldaris. He said that after their consultation, Mr. Tsaldaris had returned to Athens and discussed the position with the Council of Coordination, composed of the leaders of the political parties in the coalition government, plus the Commander-in-Chief, General Papagos. The Ambassador had now received instructions approved by the Council. He then read the attached statement, which he said should be regarded purely as an oral exposition of the Greek Government’s views and not as a written communication.1

There followed some discussion of the reiterated Greek proposal for an Assembly recommendation that the UN members hold consultations to remove the menace from Albania. Mr. Rusk again pointed out that it was difficult for the United States to support such a recommendation, since the principal responsibility for action under it would fall upon us. He said we would give this proposal renewed consideration but he could not hold out any encouragement that we would accept it. With respect to the apparent opposition of the Greek Government to any formal arrangement for conciliatory talks in the General Assembly, Mr. Rusk said that it seemed almost certain that something of this sort would be proposed and that it would be virtually impossible for the United States to reject it, so long as provision were made for the interested parties to participate. We could reject any proposal for direct negotiations between Russia and the United States or among any other group which excluded Greece and her northern neighbors, since this would be in accord with our frequently stated position that we could not dispose of the interests of third parties in their absence. However, we could not refuse to discuss questions like the Greek case if the parties at interest were to be represented. Mr. Jernegan suggested that in view of this, it might well be desirable for the United States to take the initiative in proposing conciliation rather than let the Soviets gain an advantage by being the first to advance the idea.

Mr. Jernegan said the Greek Government appeared to be rather more confident than we were regarding the liquidation of the guerrilla threat. Despite the victories which had been won by the Greek forces, it still seemed possible that Albania and Bulgaria could rehabilitate the guerrillas and arrange their re-entry into Greece to resume the fighting. We therefore thought it was worthwhile to attempt to reach a political settlement at the General Assembly. He pointed out that there were two ways of removing the Albanian menace. One would be the use of some sort of force, but this would require action on the part of the United States which we had been unable to see our way clear to take. The other would be to negotiate an agreement which would give Greece at least some assurance that Albania would refrain from further intervention. The latter approach was what we had in mind in our planning for the General Assembly. We have not, however, contemplated that such an approach need involve any unacceptable concessions on the part of Greece.

The Ambassador emphasized the belief of his government that the best procedure would be to approach the Albanian, Bulgarian and Yugoslav governments through diplomatic channels and discreetly urge the resumption of normal relations and the cessation of intervention in Greek affairs. He pointed to the success which appeared already to have been achieved in the case of Yugoslavia, partly as a result of Ambassador Cannon’s talks with the Yugoslav Government. He thought the American Minister in Sofia might profitably take similar action. This sort of approach would avoid the dangers of public discussion at the UN during which a wide range of subjects might be brought up, subjects which we would not desire to discuss.

Mr. Rusk asked whether the Greek Government had any special information to indicate that Bulgaria might be disposed to soften its position towards Greece. The Ambassador replied that he himself had no such information but he believed the government in Athens had received some indications to this effect.

Mr. Rusk asked how the Greek Government would react to a proposal that the present frontiers of Greece be considered as permanent. In other words, if the northern neighbors agreed to drop their agitation about Greek Macedonia, would Greece be prepared to do likewise with Northern-Epirus? The Ambassador replied that the two cases were not comparable. Many Albanians desired a closer relationship with Greece, perhaps even a form of federation. Although he did not directly answer the question, it was apparent that he did not think his government would accept a proposal of the sort mentioned by Mr. Rusk.

In the course of the discussion, Mr. Rusk asked what the Ambassador would think of taking the case of the Albanian threat to Greece to the Security Council. Ambassador Dendramis indicated that he might look with favor on this even though a Russian veto was to be expected. He thought that this matter followed naturally from the proposed Assembly resolution for consultation among the UN members regarding the Albanian menace. After holding such consultations, the UN members might recommend that the matter be presented to the Security Council.

It was agreed that the Department would give further study to the point of view expressed by the Greek Government and would inform the Ambassador of its conclusions.

In reply to a question, the Ambassador said that the Greek representatives in Paris and London had been given the same instructions as those he had just communicated to us.

1 The text of the oral statement made by Ambassador Dendramis is not printed. The principal points of the statement, which covered more than six typewritten pages in the source text, were as follows: 1. Military operations had substantially liquidated the Greek guerrilla danger. Consequently, Greece’s position vis-à-vis the Soviet satellites had greatly improved.

2. The Soviet Government would be likely to turn any consultations to propaganda advantage by insisting on the discussion of subjects which the United States and Greece would wish to avoid, such as amnesty, the restoration of “democratic elements” in Greece, measures for the protection of Slav minorities in Greece, and the recognition of the present Greek-Albanian border as permanent. This would place the Western Powers in the position of either having to make concessions detrimental to Greece or appearing to block a settlement by rejecting the Soviet proposals.

3. Consultations at the General Assembly would not be the most favorable means of achieving a real adjustment in the relations of Greece with her northern neighbors. At the United Nations, the discussions would be public and would compel the Soviet Union to adopt a rigid attitude. Experience had shown that the only way to achieve any adjustments with the Soviet Union and its allies was by quiet negotiations through regular diplomatic channels. The Greek Government would therefore prefer to have the United States confine its efforts in this direction to discreet diplomatic conversations in Belgrade and Sofia and some form of diplomatic approach to Albania.

Position Paper Prepared in the Department of State for the United States Delegation to the United Nations IO Files

[Document 215]

Position Paper Prepared in the Department of State for the United States Delegation to the United Nations 1

secret [Washington,] September 9, 1949.

SD/A/C.1/272

United States Position on the Greek Case at the Fourth General Assembly

the problem

The problem is to determine what position the United States Delegation should adopt when the General Assembly considers the regular and supplementary reports of the United Nations Special Committee on the Balkans (UNSCOB) and further United Nations action on the problem of Greece.

recommendations

A. Procedural

1. On the procedural issue of the manner and extent of participation by Albania and Bulgaria in Committee 1 discussions, the United States should favor the same arrangement provided for those governments at the 1947 and 1948 Assemblies. (The Committee decided last October “to hear the statements of the Bulgarian and Albanian delegations” and requested them “to place themselves at the disposal of the Committee in order to reply to any questions which may be put to them”.)

2. In the event of any effort to obtain a hearing at the Assembly for representatives of the Greek guerrilla regime, the Delegation should oppose such hearing and should point to Committee 1’s rejection of a similar proposal on October 25, 1948 as a clear precedent.

B. Substantive

The following course of action is recommended in the expectation that the forthcoming UNSCOB supplementary report to the General Assembly will contain recommendations substantially along the lines of those which the United States Representative on the Balkan Committee has been instructed to support. It will be necessary to coordinate the proposed course of action carefully with the British and French, and, so far as the conciliation effort is concerned, with the Greeks.

1. When Committee 1 first takes up the UNSCOB reports, the United States should propose that separate, initial treatment be given to the (expected) UNSCOB recommendation for consultations among members with a view to achieving a settlement of the dispute between Greece and her northern neighbors.

2. The United States should then propose, or support a proposal, that the President of the Assembly, and the Chairman of Committee 1, arrange and guide consultations among the United Kingdom, United States, France and the USSR, with appropriate participation for representatives of Greece, Albania, Bulgaria and Yugoslavia, in an effort to bring about an agreement ensuring the restoration of peaceful conditions along the northern frontiers of Greece. The United States should endeavor to obtain terms of reference for the consultative mechanism which will be simple and flexible and which in their context will reflect our assurances to the Greeks that they would be protected from discussion of their internal affairs in the conciliation proceedings.

Provision should be made for a report to Committee 1 on the results of the consultations within a specified period so as to ensure that there will be adequate time for later Assembly action based on the outcome of such consultations. (A separate paper will be furnished the Delegation on the subject of the United States negotiating position in such projected consultations. That paper will also include a draft resolution suitable for adoption by Committee 1 on the projected consultations, together with suggested points for inclusion in a United States statement before Committee 1 when the Greek item is first considered.)

3. In the event that the conciliation effort results in an acceptable agreement for settlement, the United States should join in an agreed report to that effect to Committee 1. The subsequent course of action by the Delegation in Committee 1 would depend upon the extent to which the plan of settlement envisages a role for the United Nations and would have to be determined at a later date.

4. If the conciliation effort proves fruitless, the Delegation should endeavor to bring about a report to Committee 1, formulated so as to demonstrate the insincerity of the Soviet professions of a desire for peaceful settlement in the Balkans. The report to Committee 1 should also explain clearly the bases of the United States position during the consultations, and should be designed so as to reinforce the UNSCOB recommendations for further action.

5. The United States should then move, in conjunction with the British and French, to have Committee 1, and the Assembly, adopt a resolution along the following lines: (a) The General Assembly again to find that the continued aid to the guerrillas given by Albania and Bulgaria endangers peace in the Balkans and is inconsistent with the purposes and principles of the Charter;

(b) The General Assembly to consider that, since Albania is the principal source of material assistance to the Greek guerrillas, the Government of Albania is principally responsible for the threat to the political independence and territorial integrity of Greece;

(c) The General Assembly to renew its call upon the Governments of Albania and Bulgaria to cease forthwith their aid to the guerrillas and for their cooperation with Greece and the United Nations toward a peaceful settlement of their differences with Greece;

(d) The General Assembly to call upon the Governments of Albania and Bulgaria to permit verification on the spot by United Nations representatives of the claims of those Governments that they are disarming and interning Greek guerrillas fleeing into their territories;

(e) The General Assembly to note with concern that increased support has been afforded the Greek guerrillas from certain states not bordering upon Greece, particularly Rumania, and to remind such states that this is contrary to the Assembly’s Resolution 193 (III) A of November 27, 1948;2

(f) The General Assembly: (i) to state that world opinion has been profoundly disturbed to learn that, in violation of humanitarian principles, some children of adolescent age from among those previously removed from Greece have been sent back to Greece as guerrilla fighters.

(ii) to deplore failure on the part of those countries to which Greek children have been removed to comply with the unanimous Assembly Resolution 193 (III) C of November 27, 1948;

(iii) to call upon such states to render wholehearted and early compliance with that Resolution;

[(g) The General Assembly to find that the shipment of arms or other materials of war by other states to Albania and Bulgaria, so long as those Governments continue to furnish aid and assistance to the Greek guerrillas, is inconsistent with paragraph 9 of Resolution 193 (III) A of November 27, 1948; the General Assembly to request all Members to report periodically to the Secretary-General whether in fact they are acting in accordance with that resolution.]3

(h) The General Assembly to reaffirm the underlying principles contained in its Resolutions of 1947 and 1948 as providing a sound basis for settlement of the Balkan problem;

(i) The General Assembly to continue United Nations machinery with adequate powers of conciliation and observation for the purpose of furthering a settlement between Greece and its northern neighbors and of restoring peaceful conditions along the northern frontiers of Greece.

Depending upon the outcome of the projected conciliation effort, and after consultation with the Department and with other delegations, the Delegation should be prepared to develop proposals drawn from one or more of the following alternatives: (1) The continuance of UNSCOB in its existing form and with its existing functions;

(2) Transformation of UNSCOB into a commission composed of states represented on the Security Council with the same, or possibly expanded, terms of reference, and with an appropriate new name;

(3) Maintenance of the unified observation organization of UNSCOB for the entire northern frontier region, with separate conciliation commissions for Greek-Albanian and Greek-Bulgarian affairs and possibly one for Greek-Yugoslav affairs. Alternatively, there might be a commission directed to devote its attention to conciliation between Greece on the one hand and Albania and Bulgaria on the other, leaving political problems between Greece and Yugoslavia to be worked out bilaterally, if conditions are favorable.

discussion

The Greek Case will appear for the third time on the Assembly’s agenda. The problem has entered a new phase internationally despite the fact that assistance is still being furnished the Greek guerrillas by Albania and Bulgaria, and though increased support from Rumania has been evident. The Greek Army is making outstanding progress in destroying the guerrilla forces, most of the remnants of which have fled northward, chiefly into Albania. The Greek Government is contemplating early announcement of a comprehensive, lenient program for the re-integration of ex-guerrillas into national life. Announcement of such a program should induce considerable numbers of guerrillas to abandon the movement.

With the intensification of her quarrel with the Cominform, Yugoslavia has greatly curtailed, if not completely stopped, aid to the guerrillas. The prospects for some degree of rapprochement between Greece and Yugoslavia have correspondingly improved. Cut off as she is by Greece and Yugoslavia from direct contact with the Cominform group, Albania becomes more vulnerable to western and United Nations pressure. Greece is no longer confronted by a solid bloc of equally hostile states at her northern frontiers. The Balkan situation seems to warrant a fresh effort, during the coming Assembly session, to promote a settlement of the Greek case under the auspices of the United Nations.

Various trends and developments of the past six months point to the advisability of making a new conciliation effort during the General Assembly. The conciliation efforts of the Evatt group during the Assembly meetings at Paris and New York at least pointed the way toward means of achieving peaceful relations between Greece and the three northern states. The Rusk-McNeil-Gromyko conversations on Greece last spring gave rise to public expectation that further great power contacts might find a basis for the pacification of the Balkan problem. The Soviet “peace proposals” regarding Greece, made during the Big Three conversations mentioned above, have not yet been fully answered by the western democratic powers, and will doubtless be put forward again by the USSR during the Assembly session.

In the light of the above considerations, the Department favors a procedure in Committee 1, at an early stage of the Assembly session, which will provide for a renewed conciliation effort under the auspices of that Committee along the lines outlined in recommendations B–1 and 2, above. The objective would be to bring about, on terms satisfactory to the United States and to the Greeks, a settlement or plan for settlement of the Balkan dispute which the Assembly can endorse. The President of the Assembly and the Chairman of Committee 1 can be directed to arrange such consultations, with flexible arrangements for the mode of consultation between representatives of the Big Four and those of the Balkan States directly involved. An important objective is to avoid placing the Yugoslavs in the position of having to take part in formal conciliation group meetings. Even if events prove that the Soviets are not ready to cooperate toward a genuine settlement, it is believed that the effort should be made in order further to highlight Soviet complicity in the plot against Greece and to ensure wide support in the Assembly for another firm but constructive resolution. If the conciliation effort is fruitless, the way would be open for the Assembly to develop such a resolution.

The desired resolution should be based as far as practicable on the recommendations which we expect UNSCOB to make to the Assembly. However, it is the Department’s belief that the way should be left open for the possible modification of UNSCOB or its replacement by new machinery, if such a course seems best calculated to achieve better results during the post-Assembly period. This can best be determined in the light of developments during the conciliation effort and of the prevailing atmosphere in the Assembly during discussion of the final resolution on this problem. If it becomes apparent that conciliation on terms acceptable to the West is impossible, the continuance of UNSCOB may prove the most definitive answer. On the other hand, it is recognized that a fresh psychological start could be obtained if a new commission, or commissions, were established with better prospect of obtaining recognition from the northern governments. There is some danger that UNSCOB, if continued without some change, is likely to stagnate at the sacrifice of forward motion in United Nations handling of the problem.

Admittedly Greek-Yugoslav relations are already in a very different status than those between Greece, on the one hand, and Albania and Bulgaria, on the other. This may permit somewhat different treatment of Greek-Yugoslav affairs by the Assembly including the possibility of relieving the United Nations Commission of responsibility for political or conciliation work in that respect. However, it is considered probable that overall authority for United Nations observation of conditions along the Greek frontiers should remain broad enough to include observation of the Greek-Yugoslav frontier area.

1 This position paper was one of a series prepared in the Office of United Nations Political and Security Affairs constituting the instructions from the Department of State to the United States Delegation to the United Nations. The considerations and recommendations set forth here had been in the process of being formulated for some time prior to the date of this final paper. The substance of the recommendations of this paper were contained in telegram 1417, Balcom 296, August 29, to Athens, not printed (501.BB Balkan/8–2949). The text of Baicom 296 was in turn transmitted in telegram 3121, August 30, to London and in telegram 3218, August 30, to Paris, for discussion with appropriate British and French officials and was repeated in telegram 607, August 30, to Moscow, for information (501.BB/8–3049).

2 Regarding the resolutions on the Greek problem adopted by the United Nations General Assembly on November 27, 1948, see footnote 5 to telegram 308, Combal 368, February 19, from Athens, p. 254 [Pg. 254 is part of Doc. 121].

3 Brackets in the source text.

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in Greece 501.BB Balkan/9–1049: Telegram

[Document 216]

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in Greece 1

secret Washington, September 10, 1949—3 p. m.

1503. Balcom 301. Accordance instr which he says have been approved by Council Coordination, Grk Amb informed Dept his Govt prefers UNSCOB and GA avoid attempt at formal conciliation talks on Grk case during GA. Grk Govt considers guerrilla problem substantially liquidated and fears conciliation talks wld lead to demands for Grk concessions or intervention Grk affairs which existing situation does not require. Considers Grk position vis-à-vis Cominform so improved any polit settlement required can best be pursued quietly through ordinary dipl channels. Desires therefore GA confine itself to passing resolution strongly condemning satellites, especially Alb, and calling on UN members to consult re means of eliminating Alb threat to Grk independence and integrity.2

Dept appreciates Grk desire avoid being placed in position of discussing internal affairs in UN or being forced reject “peace proposals” such as demand for renunciation claim northern Epirus. Nevertheless, we believe Grk Govt may be unduly optimistic re liquidation guerrilla threat and overlooking dangers continued support of guerrillas by Alb and Bulg. We think positive effort achieve polit settlement during GA shld be made, and that western powers and Greece wld do well take initiative to prevent Soviets from posing as sole champions of peace. Furthermore, we believe in any case some form conciliation talks or consultations will be proposed during GA and do not believe US cld oppose such proposal provided Greece were given opportunity participate.

We think dangers foreseen by Grks in GA consultations cld be minimized by careful drafting terms of reference conciliatory group. We wld of course be in best position control drafting if we, Greeks, or Brit initiated proposal.

In anticipation such attempt at agreement during GA session Dept endeavoring formulate basis for position to be taken during discussion. First step appears to be to seek Grk agreement on points involved. We suggest fol items for consideration by Grk Govt: 1. Prior to mtg of GA Grk Govt shld announce, on its own initiative, policy it will follow in treating guerrillas after main fighting has ceased. This should be as lenient as possible.

2. Coupled with amnesty announcement Grk Govt might announce program for polit rehabilitation and econ reestablishment former guerrillas, including perhaps promise of employment on public works for those unwilling or unable return to former occupations.

3. Statement by Grk Govt that it wld welcome observation and advisory assistance of UN in rehabilitation program shld provide additional inducement to guerrillas to abandon struggle and also greatly strengthen Grk position in GA discussion, even if UN shld find itself unable accept invitation. This connection, Australian proposal submitted UNSCOB delegations wld seem to fit in (Combal 481 Sep 23 ).

4. Grk Govt shld announce intention to hold new general elections within specified period, with assurance elections wld be free and open to uncensored observation by world press. (We understand elections shld in any case be held by Mar 1950 to comply with constitution, and we assume Grk Govt wld see no difficulty in holding them if security conditions sufficiently improved.) We do not suggest that Communist Party be permitted compete in elections but still believe if internal situation Greece permits it wld be excellent polit move if elections cld be accompanied by simultaneous plebiscite on question of whether or not KKE shld be re-legalized. (See final para Dept’s Agram Jun 184 ) Also consider it wld be desirable avoid any blanket prohibition on voting by ex-guerrillas and former members KKE as individuals.

5. Although it is not our intention this subj be discussed in conciliatory group, if proposal shld be made that elections be under internatl observation, suggest Grks be prepared accept this if it appeared to be sole obstacle to agreement on effective measures to protect Greece against resurgence guerrilla activity.

6. Grk Govt shld be prepared accept proposal for mixed internatl frontier Comm under UN auspices to observe and control northern frontier and have access to all four countries.

7. Grk Govt might well reiterate acceptance principal bilateral agreements with Alb, Bulg, and Yugo along lines proposed by Evatt Conciliatory Comm at last GA session. Offer cld also again be made to restore full normal dipl relations and negotiate supplementary frontier conventions as well as commercial agreements or other arrangements which might be necessary to resumption normal intercourse between states.

Fol agreement with Greeks, and preferably Brit and French as well, on foregoing, we wld propose introduce resolution in GA directing GA president and chairman Polit Comite to arrange consultations among Big Four and with Alb, Bulg, Yugo, and Greece to work out settlement basis points 3, 6, and 7 above. Resolution wld define terms of reference so as to eliminate question of territorial claims or Grk internal affairs. If Soviets and satellites attempted modify terms reference in unacceptable fashion, we are convinced move cld be defeated and do not believe Russians cld gain important propaganda advantage.

Wld appreciate your comments. If you believe points above form suitable basis for approach, pls discuss with Grk Govt and report reaction. We understand Grks already thinking along lines of most of suggested items. Dept hopes Grks will recognize importance utilizing favorable atmosphere created by military victories to consolidate position through polit settlement. We think they wld be well-advised adopt position indicated paras 1 through 7 even if there were not to be consultations at GA.

Emb London and Paris pls discuss substance of foregoing with respective FonOffs, explaining position subj to modification in light their views and those of Amb Grady.

Acheson

1 This telegram was repeated to London as 3283 and to Paris as 3378.

2 Regarding Ambassador Dendramis’ visit to the Department on September 8 to present the Greek Government views summarized here, see Jernegan’s memorandum of conversation, p. 401 [Pg. 401 includes portions of Doc. 213 and Doc. 214].

3 Telegram 1758, p. 395 [Pg. 395 includes portions of Doc. 208 and Doc. 209].

4 Airgram A–404, June 18, to Athens, p. 358 [Pg. 358 is part of Doc. 181].

Editorial Note [Document 217]

Editorial Note

On September 12, John G. Campbell, Acting Chief of the Division of Southeast European Affairs, prepared a policy paper, presumably in connection with the Secretary of State’s forthcoming conversation with British Foreign Secretary Bevin on various Balkan matters (see the record of their conversation on September 14, page 414 [Pg. 414 includes portions of Doc. 218 and Doc. 219]). For the text of the Campbell paper, see volume V, page 311.

The future of the Albania regime, the interests of Yugoslavia, Greece, and the Western Powers in Albania, and the possibilities which were open to the United States in the area were questions which were also considered in the Policy Planning Staff’s paper PPS 60, September 12, “Yugoslav-Moscow Controversy as Related to U.S. Foreign Policy Objectives.” These same Albanian questions were considered again in the subsequent Report by the National Security Council to President Truman, NSC 18/4, November 17, “United States Policy Toward the Conflict between the USSR and Yugoslavia.” For text of document PPS 60, see ibid., page 947. NSC 18/4 could not be declassified for publication with other 1949 documents.

Memorandum of Conversation, by Mr. Leonard J. Cromie of the Division of Greek, Turkish, and Iranian Affairs 501.BB Balkan/9–1349

[Document 218]

Memorandum of Conversation, by Mr. Leonard J. Cromie of the Division of Greek, Turkish, and Iranian Affairs

secret [Washington,] September 13, 1949.

Participants: Mr. Jernegan

Lord Jellicoe

Mr. Cromie

Mr. Dixon1

Problem:

Action required: Telegraphic Instruction to Mr. Drew, UNSCOB.

Action ref erred to: Mr. Cromie

Lord Jellicoe called at 12:00 noon by appointment at his request to convey the British Foreign Office reaction to certain American views on the handling of the Greek item at the forthcoming GA.2

Lord Jellicoe opened the conversation by saying that the British Foreign Office is now substantially in agreement with United States thinking as to the form and timing of the so-called conciliation talks during the GA but felt that exact details of this could be worked out in New York after the session convened. The Foreign Office does not, however, like the idea of establishing three separate committees to deal with relations between Greece, Albania, Bulgaria and Yugoslavia respectively, but the Foreign Office thinks that this possibility need not be expressly excluded in the UNSCOB recommendations.

The Foreign Office, Lord Jellicoe continued, opposes the Australian proposal3 regarding UN supervision of repatriation of the guerrillas to Greece for the following reasons: 1. No UN body could assume responsibility for the safety of returning guerrillas which it will be difficult enough for the Greeks themselves to guarantee.

2. There is no reason to concede Russian participation in such a body where their nuisance value could be very high and difficult to control.

3. The Russians would be able, by their control of individual options, to select for their own purposes those guerrillas who would remain abroad and those who would return to Greece.

In any case, Lord Jellicoe concluded, the British Foreign Office feels that the Greek Government should be consulted at a very early stage regarding this proposal and that we should not go forward with it unless the Greeks are agreeable.

Lord Jellicoe then went on to say that the Foreign Office feels that UNSCOB should avoid a specific recommendation on the establishment of Mixed Frontier Commissions but believes that the establishment of such commissions would not necessarily be incompatible with the continued existence of UNSCOB or a successor organization.

The Foreign Office agrees that UN observers should be invited to verify the claimed internment and disarmament of the Greek guerrillas in Albania.

The Foreign Office, finally, is decidedly cool to the idea of a referendum on relegalization of the Greek Communist party simultaneous with the forthcoming planned Greek Parliamentary elections. The Foreign Office believes that the referendum is a successful political institution only in highly developed countries such as Switzerland and that it has not been especially successful in Greece where past referenda have been subject to political manipulation. Moreover, the simultaneous holding of Greek Parliamentary elections and a referendum, though logical and convenient, would be likely to confuse the Greek voters. When Mr. Jernegan and Mr. Cromie expressed some doubt as to the cogency of these arguments, Lord Jellicoe indicated that the real reason for the British opposition may be that the referendum is not a normal political device in British practice.

At the conclusion of the conversation Mr. Jernegan said that Mr. Drew would be informed of the British Foreign Office views relating to the Atyeo proposal.4

1 Ben Franklin Dixon, of the Division of Greek, Turkish, and Iranian Affairs.

2 Lord Jellicoe had previously met Jernegan and other officers of the Department of State on a number of occasions in late August and early September to discuss the manner of handling the Greek issue at the forthcoming session of the U.N. General Assembly. Records of the previous meetings are included in file 501.BB Balkan.

3 The reference here is to the proposal made by Australian Representative Atyeo and described in telegram 1758, Combal 481, September 2, from Athens, p. 395 [Pg. 395 includes portions of Doc. 208 and Doc. 209].

4 British objections to the Australian proposal were outlined in telegram 1546, Baicom 304, September 15, to Athens, not printed (501.BB Balkan/9–1549).

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Secretary of State 875.00/9–1449

[Document 219]

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Secretary of State 1

top secret [Washington,] September 14, 1949.

Participants: Mr. Bevin

Ambassador Sir Oliver Franks2

Sir Gladwyn Jebb3

Sir Roger Makins4

Mr. Barclay5

Mr. Acheson

Ambassador Jessup6

Mr. McGhee7

Mr. Thompson8

Mr. Achilles9

Mr. Satterthwaite10

With reference to Albania, Bevin said the British had followed a policy of unrelenting hostility to the Hoxha Government. Did we think it possible to lure Hoxha along the path Tito had followed if favorable circumstances should arise? He said the British had not considered this worthwhile, but thought we were inclined to take the contrary view. I said I did not think that we did. The differences revolve around whether we should take more active steps to make trouble for Hoxha. I said we had been trying to quiet the Greeks to dissuade them from precipitating a premature crisis in Albania, and that we thought the Albanian problem should be taken up in the UN instead. If we are not too eager, so that Russia would not attempt to exact a price, the Assembly might try to arrive at a solution which would result in interning the Guerillas or putting them under UN supervision. Bevin asked whether we would basically agree that we try to bring down the Hoxha Government when the occasion arises? I said yes, but if this were precipitated now, the Greeks and Yugoslavs might touch off serious trouble. Bevin agreed that we have to be careful or Russia will intervene. He asked what government would replace Hoxha if he is thrown out? Are there any kings around that could be put in? Mr. Thompson said a free Albanian Committee has been set up and would have a voice in the Government. Bevin was skeptical of the free Albanian Committee as a possible future government and said he thought a person we could handle was needed. Thompson said we had taken no decision with respect to a possible future government. The situation was still too fluid. We would have to reconsider it on a day to day basis and take advantage of any opportunities which may arise. Bevin said he thought Albania should be continually studied by US and UK experts.

Bevin then asked our opinion of bringing up the Greek and Albanian dispute for discussion among the Big 4. I replied I thought the Greeks would bring up the border situation in the General Assembly. I expressed the opinion that we should listen to what the Russians might have to say. If the Russians are looking to liquidate the situation, there are dangers in our taking the lead. If we are anxious, the price goes up. If the situation is propitious maybe the UN might suggest talks. Bevin inquired whether I meant the Big Four. I said I did not mean the Council of Foreign Ministers—I meant the UN representatives of the Big Four plus Greece, Albania, Bulgaria and Yugoslavia. Bevin said we had to be very careful about accusing Russia about Greece, as there seemed to be no evidence of direct Soviet intervention, but indicated acceptance of my suggestion without, however, indicating any enthusiasm. Bevin thought there was a possibility Stalin wanted to write off the Greek situation as a bad job, as long as the discussions about it were not handled through any agency in which a veto could be exercised. Bevin then expressed his annoyance at Evatt’s maneuvers and said he would ask Cadogan to continue discussion with Jessup. Bevin said now that things were going better in Greece, we should avoid any more slips, as they might affect the Middle East.

1 British Foreign Secretary Bevin was in Washington at this time in connection with the First Session of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization Council. This conversation on Albania and Greece appears to have been part of a longer meeting held in Secretary of State Acheson’s office beginning at about noon during which a number of other topics were also considered. For the record of the conversation on Yugoslavia, see vol. v. p. 955.

2 British Ambassador in the United States.

3 British Deputy Under Secretary of State; Superintending Under Secretary, United Nations Department, British Foreign Office.

4 British Deputy Under Secretary of State.

5 Roderick E. Barclay, Private Secretary to Foreign Secretary Bevin.

6 Philip C. Jessup, United States Ambassador at Large.

7 George C. McGhee, Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern and African Affairs.

8 Llewellyn E. Thompson, Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for European Affairs.

9 Theodore C. Achilles, Director, Office of Western European Affairs.

10 Livingston L. Satterthwaite, Chief, Division of British Commonwealth Affairs.

The Chargé in the United Kingdom (Holmes) to the Secretary of State 501.BB Balkan/9–1549: Telegram

[Document 220]

The Chargé in the United Kingdom (Holmes) to the Secretary of State

secret
priority London, September 15, 1949—4 p. m.

3715. Supplementing Embtel 3682, September 131 reporting UK Foreign Office reaction to Balcom 301, Rumbold states British Ambassador Athens being instructed in substance as follows:

He should discuss with Grady and has authority to join him in offering advice to Greek Government along lines suggested in our points 1, 2 and 7, although advanced state of Greek Government amnesty plans may make point 1 redundant. As regards observation and advisory assistance of UN (point 3), he is instructed UK would prefer omit this since Greeks would no doubt welcome rehabilitation assistance providing Soviets did not participate in administering it but UK hesitates to advise Greeks to ask for such assistance unless UK is prepared to join in giving it. (Foreign Office interprets rehabilitation as meaning economic assistance.) As to elections (our points 4 and 5), he is instructed that inasmuch as Greek Prime Minister is reported believing elections could take place beginning of 1950, this is probably as far as Greek Government could be expected to commit themselves at present. UK Foreign Office objections to idea of plebiscite on re-legalization of Communist Party have been repeatedly mentioned in telegrams to Washington and Grady does not like idea either. Re international supervision elections, UK Foreign Office under impression Department agreed this was to be resisted and is therefore puzzled at Department’s apparent modification of view. Re point 6, UK cannot foresee type of frontier commission which will emerge from discussions in GA. Consequently Greeks should not be pressed to commit themselves in advance on something unseen. End of instructions to British Ambassador Athens which was repeated to Washington, UK delegation New York and Belgrade.

Rumbold commented further upon vagueness of references to “conciliatory group”. He again expressed opinion it should not be Four-Powered group or otherwise be participated in by Soviets but suggested it should include some officers of GA friendly to Western Powers, possibly headed by Eomulo2 and Pearson,3 and should preferably not include representatives great powers as such. Embassy strongly concurs that such group should be formed under UN auspices at earliest opportunity to formalize end of Greek guerrilla war and should not include members from Soviet or satellite countries. Sent Department 3715; repeated Paris 705, Athens 58.

Holmes

1 Not printed; it reported some tentative initial British Foreign Office reactions to the proposals set forth in telegram 1503, Balcom 301, September 10, to Athens, p. 409 [Pg. 409 includes portions of Doc. 215 and Doc. 216] (501.BB Balkan/9–1349).

2 Brig. Gen. Carlos P. Romulo, Philippine Permanent Representative to the United Nations; President of the Fourth Session of the U.N. General Assembly.

3 Lester B. Pearson, Canadian Secretary of State for External Affairs; Canadian Representative to the Fourth Session of the U.N. General Assembly and Chairman of the Assembly’s First (Political and Security) Committee.

The Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Kirk) to the Secretary of State 501.BB Balkan/9–4549: Telegram

[Document 221]

The Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Kirk) to the Secretary of State

secret Moscow, September 15, 1949—6 p. m.

2320. Depinfotel September 12 on Greek fear re proposed UNGA conciliation talks.1 While agreeing that every effort should be made to prevent Soviets from posing as sole champions of peace, I venture hazard view that normal sequel to present favorable course of events in Greece should be conciliatory move from the opposition rather than from US (though we should, of course, be prepared to respond to serious overture); and that we may be taking undue risks by projecting new conciliation machinery and formulae just at a time when success by existing means seems in sight. I believe it important not to lose sight of fact that Soviets have shown no signs of relinquishing their ultimate objectives in Greece. Though temporarily stalled by guerilla defeats and the Tito defection, I am convinced that Soviets will continue to utilize every political or diplomatic opening to put their friends in power in Athens. I believe that utmost vigilance should be exercised lest our conciliation efforts afford Soviets and Greek Communists entering wedge with which to turn their present military defeat into eventual political victory. Great as need may be for putting Greek political house in order, the dangers inherent in pushing Greeks too far on amnesty and elections should not be minimized.

On basis foregoing considerations I see great advantage in adhering to procedure devised 1948 UNGA whereby President GA and chairman Committee 1 take lead in talks with representatives Greece and its neighbors (Usun 1067 September 8 to Department2 ) as against alternative proposals calling for US and Soviet participation. On same grounds I question wisdom proposals envisaging abolition UNSCOB and substitution three new commissions therefor (Deptel 607 August 303 ). UNSCOB has done useful work in past and can now (either under existing or possibly amended terms of reference) concentrate its efforts on Bulgarian and Albanian frontiers leaving Yugoslav-Greek frontier problems as much as possible to anticipated bilateral attention two governments directly concerned (unless unexpected but possible changes in Yugoslav leadership should necessitate renewed attention that boundary by UNSCOB. If purpose establishment new commissions is to solicit Soviet cooperation such action would appear to undermine moral and legal validity of good work done by UNSCOB in past and lend substance Soviet criticism that body.

Department will perceive that I feel strongly that means and methods developed over considerable period to deal with Greek problem represents sound and effective approach to peaceful settlement. This connection I am disturbed by September 14 BBC report suggesting possibility Greek unilateral military action against Albania on basis article 51 UN Charter.4 Especially in view Epirus question Greek military move against Albania now would appear outright territorial aggrandizement (see Embtel 1701 July 8) and nullify excellent plans outlined Deptel 607 August 30 for bringing maximum UNGA pressure to bear on Albania and other satellites as step towards pacification entire area.

Furthermore, any such move by Greeks could have endless repercussions, most certainly vis-à-vis the Soviets and would also interject serious complication Yugoslav position.

Athens please pass to UNSCOB.

Sent Department 2320 Department pass London 246, USUN 5, Belgrade 113, Athens 71, Sofia 44.

Kirk

1 Not printed; it transmitted a summary of telegram 1503, Balcom 301, September 10, to Athens, p. 409 [Pg. 409 includes portions of Doc. 215 and Doc. 216].

2 Not printed.

3 Not printed; it transmitted the substance of the recommendations subsequently set forth in document SD/A/C.1/272, September 9, p. 404 [Pg. 404 includes portions of Doc. 214 and Doc. 215].

4 In his telegram 1840, September 14, from Athens, not printed, Ambassador Grady reported that in a speech made in Larissa on September 11 and carried in the Athens press on September 13, Greek War Minister Kanellopoulos had warned Greece’s northern neighbors that renewed support by them for the guerrillas would result in Greek military action to destroy the guerrilla bases. Grady interpreted this statement, foreshadowing a possible invasion of Albania, as reflecting Greek Army views. (868.00/9–1449)

Editorial Note [Document 222]

Editorial Note

On September 16, 1949, the United Nations Special Committee on the Balkans completed and signed in Athens a Supplementary Report covering the period of August and early September. The Report called attention to the virtual elimination of guerrilla warfare along the northern Greek frontiers, to the fact that large numbers of guerrillas had fled across the frontiers, especially into Albania, and to the closing by Yugoslavia of its frontiers with Greece. The Committee also made ten recommendations to the General Assembly. For the text of the Report, U.N. doc. A/981, September 19, 1949, see United Nations, Official Records of the General Assembly, Fourth Session, First Committee, Annex, page 1. For the text of the recommendations of the Committee, see Department of State Bulletin, October 17, 1949, page 488.

The Ambassador in Greece (Grady) to the Secretary of State 868.00/9–1649: Telegram

[Document 223]

The Ambassador in Greece (Grady) to the Secretary of State

secret
priority Athens, September 16, 1949—3 p. m.

1854. Deptel 1503 September 10. As GA session approaches Greeks beginning to fear they may have much to lose and little, if anything, to gain. It is this feeling and not over-confidence which makes them fear formal conciliation talks. They are particularly anxious re Big Four discussions fearing compromise which might provide opportunity for Russians to intervene in Greek internal affairs such as elections and treatment guerrillas and thus continue through political means unrest and disorder that will require expenditure American aid largely for non-productive purposes.

Greeks are not unduly optimistic. Such optimism as exists here consists in feeling, as pointed out mytel 1804, September 101 that military victory has been achieved so far as it is within Greece’s power. Even this tapering off as result recent raid by Petritis Guerrilla band which caused over ten thousand resettled refugees to flee back to Yannina. Excellent work by ECA welfare section resulted in return of these people to land within short time but lesson has not been lost on Greek public. Greeks certainly are not over-optimistic concerning chances of international action to prevent return of guerrillas from Albania and Bulgaria. Quite the contrary. See Embtel 1835, September 14.1

I had hour’s talk with Pipinelis before US departure and lengthy conversation yesterday with Tsaldaris. It was unnecessary to raise specific points Deptel 1503 as both were familiar with and apprehensive of Department’s current proposals as result messages received from Dendramis. I assume officials of Department and our delegation will have ample opportunity discuss these and related matters with Tsaldaris and Pipinelis during GA. It should be remembered that Pipinelis memorandum which forms basis for Greek amnesty and internal conciliation measures scheduled shortly to become law was designed to prevent international intervention such Greek internal affairs as treatment guerrillas. (Embdes 640, September 62 )

I believe Foreign Minister and other Greek leaders realize necessity for Greece to present itself in best possible light before world public opinion as represented in GA. They are therefore prepared to announce prior to GA consideration of Greek case their plans for guerrilla rehabilitation, suspension of executions and elections. They are not prepared, however, to commit themselves in advance to adopt measures they consider dangerous to their national security such as re-legalization KKE and admission of Russian right to mix in Greek internal affairs in order to lay basis for possible deal with USSR.

My views on specific points raised in Deptel 1503, September 10 are:

Item 1. This covered by Pipinelis plan, formal announcement of which should be forthcoming within few days.

Item 2. Pipinelis plan will provide opportunity for gradual rehabilitation such former guerrillas as can and do surrender as well as those now in Greek hands. It is impossible for government to guarantee employment and other benefits for ex-bandits beyond its capability to do so for refugees and other loyal elements reduced to present straits by bandit activities.

Item 3. Greeks would strongly oppose UN guidance on guerrillas rehabilitation program, but might accept if UN were to contribute material financial assistance this purpose. I support Greek position this matter but would endorse plan provided UN Committee excluded Russians and was assured entrance Albania and Bulgaria to determine wishes of guerrillas and to escort to Greece those guerrillas who wished to leave and to register remainder as relinquishing Greek nationality.

Item 4. Greeks favor holding elections soon as practicable and I will urge Greeks to make early announcement their intention this respect. I continue to be strongly opposed plebiscite on re-legalization KKE which would probably be boycotted even by small minority favoring KKE with resultant contribution to Monarcho-Fascist myth and likening of vote to totalitarian plebiscite. In any case Greeks would not for a moment even consider it.

Item 5. International supervision of elections (which Department has opposed heretofore) would make whole subject of re-legalization KKE voting privileges ex-guerrillas, et cetera, matter for international discussion and negotiation of sort that must be avoided if Greece is to achieve some semblance of order. We might counter demands for this action by proposing similar action in Albania or other satellite states, particularly ex-enemy countries. We must steadfastly assume that Greece has the right and ability to run her own affairs.

Item 6. Establishment of frontier commission is kind of practicable international action which I feel we should support. I trust that plans for such commissions include provisions for TIN officials or other nonpartisan arbiters since commissions consisting only of Balkanites might well be little more than mutual accusation societies. However, Greeks should not be pressed on this point until nature of commission much clearer.

Item 7. I also endorse proposal for Greeks to reiterate willingness conclude bilateral agreements with its northern neighbors including establishment frontier conventions and resumption normal diplomatic relations. Greeks would, however, in my opinion, be justified in demanding effective guarantees cessation Albanian and Bulgarian aid to guerrillas and return of Greek children.

In general, we should concentrate on securing strong GA recommendations that provide some hope of interfering with, if not certain to bar return of guerrillas from Albania and Bulgaria. This connection I consider proposed UNSCOB recommendations include several points such as eight and nine (Combal 486, September 113 ) that might prove useful in providing protection for Greece. Similarly I would favor that consultation between Greece and northern neighbors be under UN rather than Big Four auspices unless concrete indications are available of alteration USSR attitude. Greek Government in any case strongly opposed to intervention Big Four.

I am conferring with British Ambassador but considering my views expressed above and those contained London telegram 3715, September 15, I feel we have no basis joint discussion with Greeks at present.

In conclusion, I suggest we adhere to our policy of non-interference in Greek internal affairs and that we concentrate our efforts on heart of problem, viz., Albania and Bulgaria. In this connection I commend to Department’s attention Moscow Embassy’s admirable telegram 2320, September 15.

Drew has read this telegram and concurs generally but prefers withhold detailed comment until he arrives US.

Sent Department 1854; repeated London 77, Paris 93, Belgrade 74, Sofia 51; Department pass Moscow 28.

Grady

1 Not printed.

1 Not printed.

2 Not printed; it transmitted the text of a memorandum, dated August 12, 1949, setting forth the recommendations of Greek Permanent Under Secretary for Foreign Affairs Pipinelis regarding amnesty to the Greek guerrillas and their active supporters. Pipinelis had informed the Embassy in Athens that his memorandum had been approved by King Paul, Prime Minister Diomedes, General Papagos, and the Greek Coordination Council. (868.00/9–649)

3 Not printed; it transmitted the draft text of the Supplementary Report of the Special Committee on the Balkans. Points 8 and 9 recommended that the General Assembly provide for appropriate machinery to further a settlement between Greece and its northern neighbors and call upon the Governments of Albania, Bulgaria, and Yugoslavia to cooperate with the appropriate international bodies in the verification of assertions that Greek guerrillas entering their territory were being disarmed. In the final version of the Supplementary Report, dated September 16 (see the editorial note, supra), these points, somewhat revised, appeared as items 9 and 6, respectively.

The Ambassador in France (Bruce) to the Secretary of State 868.00/9–1749: Telegram

[Document 224]

The Ambassador in France (Bruce) to the Secretary of State

secret Paris, September 17, 1949—3 p. m.

3837. Deptel 3204, August 29.1 While cool from the start to whole conception of tripartite démarche to Albanians, on whose timeliness and efficacy they entertain real doubts, French are willing to associate themselves with US and UK in note to be delivered by French Minister, Tirana. General atmosphere in Foreign Office is “if you really feel strongly about it we will not stand in your way.”

Regarding text, Foreign Office considers draft in Deptel satisfactory through third sentence of paragraph 2 ending “reentry into Greece” although they think it would be useful to include some reference to recent Albanian declaration regarding internment and disarming of guerrillas. They object to final sentence second paragraph on grounds it holds forth unrealizable promise of rewards. Their thinking in this respect follows that of British as reported in London’s 3538.2 They object to last paragraph as repetitive and superfluous.

French Embassy Washington fully instructed and will presumably present note.3

Sent Department 3837, repeated London 634, Athens 56.

Bruce

1 Same as telegram 3099, August 29, to London, p. 392 [Pg. 392 includes portions of Doc. 206 and Doc. 207].

2  Ante, p. 398 [Pg. 398 includes portions of Doc. 210 and Doc. 211].

3 The French Embassy note anticipated here has not been found in the files of the Department of State.

The Acting Secretary of State to the Embassy in Greece 868.00/9–2049: Telegram

[Document 225]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Embassy in Greece 1

secret Washington, September 20, 1949—7 p. m.

1577. Deptel 3099 to Lon Aug 29, rptd Athens 1416, Paris 3204. Upon reexamination problem tripartite démarche Alb and for several reasons, notably coolness from some quarters to idea, time elapsed and fact GA now in session, Dept proposes suspending consideration démarche this time.

Ideas developed during exchange tels this subj can be impressed upon Albans, and more important, upon Russ during course GA discussions if appropriate, and devs there may lead to other possibilities of resolving problem.

Fr and Brit Embs here being advised accordingly. Fr Emb was told we wld see no objection to informal observations by Fr Min Tirana on appropriate occasion along lines that Alb wld have much to gain and nothing to lose by permitting neutral verification their claim re internment, disarmament guerrillas if made in good faith.2

Webb

1 This telegram Was also sent to London as 3418, to Paris as 3521, to Belgrade as 559, to Moscow as 671, and to Sofia as 334.

2 British Embassy Second Secretary Lord Jellicoe and French Embassy Second Secretary Jean-Claude Winckler were called to the Department of State on September 23 to be apprised of the decision set forth in this telegram. The British Foreign Office had already made known its gratification at the decision. Winckler stated that the French Foreign Ministry did not approve of the informal French démarche suggested in the third paragraph of this telegram. The French Foreign Ministry felt strongly that nothing should be done which might in any way serve to encourage or bolster the current Albanian regime (memorandum of conversation by Cromie, September 23, 1949: 868.00/9–2349).

The Ambassador in Yugoslavia (Cannon) to the Secretary of State 860H.00/9–2149: Telegram

[Document 226]

The Ambassador in Yugoslavia (Cannon) to the Secretary of State

secret Belgrade, September 21, 1949—4 p. m.

964. I was this morning invited to have look at bust of Tito being made by sculptor Jo Davidson, and Tito then took me aside for half hour conversation.

His chief concern was danger of Greek action against Albania “please inform your government this would create most difficult situation for us. It is vital to us Albanian independence be respected. Greeks must not be allowed settle things their way.” I assured him we had already given “strong advice” to Greek Govt and thought that situation would be kept in control. I added that US has always stood for independence Albania and we are not supporting idea of frontier changes. I then said that as regards internal situation in Albania if we accept reports of unrest caused by economic troubles and progressive demoralization Albanian people, themselves, might be obliged to take matters into their hands. He said, “that’s all right. It is their business how Albanians manage their affairs as long as other people keep out of it. It would be very hard for us if there should be intervention from outside. Let Greeks again be told”.1

For other topics discussed see separate telegram. Dept will note this telegram not being repeated Athens or elsewhere.

Cannon

1 Regarding earlier Yugoslav appeals for a warning to the Greek Government to desist from intervention into Albania, see the editorial note, p. 386 [Pg. 386 includes portions of Doc. 201 and Doc. 202].

The Acting Secretary of State to the United States Mission to the United Nations, at New York 868.00/9–2249: Telegram

[Document 227]

The Acting Secretary of State to the United States Mission to the United Nations, at New York 1

secret Washington, September 23, 1949—6 p. m.

Gadel 9. Athens tel 1905 Sept 22 to Dept.2 For Howard. Pls inform Tsaldaris and Venizelos3 of Dept’s hope they will be able give prompt approval to draft leniency legis in order permit its pub and adoption prior opening Grk discussions.

At same time you may express Dept’s astonishment and disappointment at apparent capitulation of polit leadership to mil auths on matter of executions.4 Orig Pipinelis proposal for immed suspension executions followed by abolishment capital punishment for all rebellion offenses upon cessation guerrilla resistance wld have had maximum impact free world press and opinion, wld have corresponded elementary requirements justice in view strong possibility judicial errors and excesses, and wld have placed squarely upon guerrillas responsibility for continuing executions their own sympathizers. Wld it not at least be possible reach compromise suspending and abolishing capital punishment for crimes less than murder?

It is not clear from Athens Reftel whether leniency-measures will apply also to over 2500 “December criminals” now languishing five years under technical sentence death. You might suggest that time of adoption overall leniency program wld seem best psychological moment resolve this long outstanding problem on realistic basis that Greece cannot execute 2500 people without creating internatl furor.5

Webb

1 This telegram was also sent to Athens as 1604. For President Truman’s views on the subject under reference here, see Acting Secretary Webb’s memorandum of his conversation with the President on September 26, p. 427 [Pg. 427 includes portions of Doc. 229 and Doc. 230].

2 Not printed; it transmitted a summary of the principal provisions of draft amnesty legislation prepared by Greek Minister of Justice George Melas. The draft legislation, which had been approved in general by the Greek Coordination Council, had been taken to New York by Deputy Prime Minister Venizelos to secure Tsaldaris’ approval and support. Melas’ draft legislation differed sharply from suggestions made in mid-August by Pipinelis, in particular the rejection of the Pipinelis proposal for the abolition of executions for all crimes committed in connection with the rebellion. (868.00/9–2249)

3 Greek Deputy Prime Minister Sophocles Venizelos and Foreign Minister Tsaldaris were serving as representatives on the Greek Delegation to the General Assembly.

4 Telegram 1571, September 19, to Athens, not printed, stated that the Department of State was disturbed by press reports that strong pressure from military leaders had caused the Greek Government to backtrack on the announcement of suspension of executions. Ambassador Grady was authorized to inform appropriate Greek authorities of the Department’s concern and of the great importance which the Department attached to the suspension of executions. (868.00/9–649)

5 Telegram Delga 20, September 24, from New York, not printed, transmitted a brief, agreed record of conversation of September 23 between Tsaldaris and Venizelos and Harry N. Howard, an adviser to the United States Delegation to the General Assembly. Tsaldaris informed Howard that he and Venizelos had approved the draft legislation which aready had been flown to Athens and would soon be discussed by the Greek cabinet and be submitted to the Greek Parliament. With respect to the 2500 prisoners held in custody since the December 1944 rebellion, Venizelos doubted whether any would be executed save in cases of criminals charged with several murders. (501.BB/9–2449)

The Acting Secretary of State to the Embassy in Greece 868.00/9–2349: Telegram

[Document 228]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Embassy in Greece 1

top secret Washington, September 23, 1949—7 p. m.

1605. Dept informing Tsaldaris that while we understand he may be obliged make some statement in GA re Alb in view advanced publicity in Greece and in order satisfy Grk opinion, we hope this will be confined to general declaration along lines Greece will defend itself in event armed attack. Such general declaration shld be unobjectionable and might even have some psychological value in stressing importance solution Grk problem and in giving Alb and USSR some cause for reflection. On other hand categoric statement Greece will invade Alb if guerrillas permitted return might expose Greece to charge of aggressiveness, open protracted GA debate on applicability Art 51 this situation, or quickly be exposed as bluff by subsequent developments.

As you know, Dept considers any invasion of Alb wld be extremely unwise even from Grk point of view. Impossible foresee consequences such action and repercussions likely spread far beyond Balkans and be of most dangerous character. Therefore, despite recognition of great provocation which wld be produced by renewed guerrilla incursions from Alb, believe we must be absolutely firm in preventing Grk mil attack that country.

So long as Grk action not imminent we of course prefer confine ourselves to type of advice you have been giving and which Dept has given Grk Amb here, pointing out dangers to Greece of any drastic steps such as Grk officials have recently suggested publicly. However, if at any time it appears Grks are about to attack and normal dipl representations are insufficient to influence them, you shld, after consultation with ur Brit colleague and preferably in conjunction with him, immediately bring strongest pressure against Grk mil action until you have had opportunity consult ur Govt. If you consider it necessary, you may say that US wld be unable support Greece in aiiy UN Security Council case arising out of such action, that we wld be forced reconsider our entire policy toward Greece and that you will recommend ur Govt immediate cessation mil assistance to Greece.

Webb

1 This telegram was repeated on September 24 as 3479 to London, 2328 to Rome, and 576 to Belgrade. Regarding President Truman’s approval of the instructions contained here, see Acting Secretary Webb’s memorandum of his meeting with the President on September 26, p. 427 [Pg. 427 includes portions of Doc. 229 and Doc. 230].

The Ambassador in Yugoslavia (Cannon) to the Secretary of State 501.BB Balkan/9–2449: Telegram

[Document 229]

The Ambassador in Yugoslavia (Cannon) to the Secretary of State

secret Belgrade, September 24, 1949—3 p. m.

981. Athens 1854, September 16 just received here after servicing. I confess to much sympathy with Greek Government position and fully endorse Grady’s recommendations. We are also impressed by Moscow’s 2320, September 15 and would only observe that in supporting idea of separate frontier commissions we did not and do not believe they would map retreat from or even curtailment of UNSCOB. Moreover record will show this Embassy has been skeptical of conciliation projects and still feels we should give not one inch to projects which would enable Soviets to transfer to political field what they have failed to achieve by military intervention.

We should not like to see any unnecessary broadening of what seems basic issue in Greek problem, i.e. closing of northern frontiers to guerrilla incursions. Like Embassy Moscow, we would favor new attempts at political settlement (but of border issue only) through President GA and Chairman Committee 1 and it would appear (Department’s infotel September 2, 5 p. m.1 ) that UK favors similar procedure.

Soviet Union acting through Albania and Bulgaria may not permit agreement on basic issue of effective frontier conventions unless permitted to participate in over-all settlement Greek case including internal issues. However we recall nothing in history of western negotiations with Moscow to encourage belief that satisfactory solution of Greece’s internal problems may thus be achieved and in any event we wonder whether Moscow may not now be sufficiently worried over Albania’s shaky isolation to permit conclusion this key frontier agreement. Exclusion of Moscow at this stage seems to us well worth trying.

We believe Yugoslavia would be more disposed to cooperate with UN President and Chairman Committee 1 than with any group Soviet Union can use as propaganda sounding board although present Yugoslav concern over Albania may well oblige them to continue to press for Albanian-Greek frontier conventions prerequisite to Yugoslav-Greek agreement despite Bebler statement (see Embtel 898, September 82 ).

Since we do not now see anything incompatible between existence of UNSCOB (though emphasis in operations may be shifted), proposal for separate border conventions and in view stubborn opposition of Bulgaria, Albania and Yugoslavia to UNSCOB we wonder whether insistence on UNSCOB participation in border supervision is advisable or necessary under terms original GA resolution. At same time it is clear that notable lack of progress in achieving return of refugees and children from Cominform countries makes imperative continuation UNSCOB with emphasis on its activities these matters.

Sent Department 981, repeated Athens 63. Department pass Moscow as 129.

Cannon

1 Not printed.

2 Not printed; in it Ambassador Cannon reported that during a conversation that day, Yugoslav Assistant Foreign Minister Bebler stated that Yugoslavia no longer was concerned about maintaining solidarity with Albania and Bulgaria (501.BB Balkan/9–849).

Memorandum of Meeting With the President, Monday, September 26, by the Acting Secretary of State 768.75/10–149

[Document 230]

Memorandum of Meeting With the President, Monday, September 26, by the Acting Secretary of State 1

top secret [Washington,] October 1, 1949.

Authorization to Ambassador Grady To Use Drastic Measures If Necessary To Prevent Greek Invasion of Albania

The President read our telegram of instructions to Ambassador Grady, and approved it.2 He indicated, however, that he thought the present Greek Government was like any other dog who has been down in a fight and then gets on top. He believes it is necessary for us to restrain the Government and take whatever steps are necessary to prevent the wholesale slaughter of prisoners. He thinks the Government should take steps, in which we should join, to rehabilitate the people, who have been so debilitated by the guerrilla activity, and that as hostilities clear all the Greek people should be given an opportunity to progress. He feels that the Greek Government has been unnecessarily brutal in punitive measures and that we have some responsibility to restrain these.

James E. Webb

1 This is one of several memoranda by Acting Secretary Webb on the various individual topics taken up with the President on September 26.

2 The reference here appears to be to telegram 1605, September 23, to Athens, p. 425 [Pg. 425 includes portions of Doc. 227 and Doc. 228]. The remainder of the discussion appears to refer, however, to the matter dealt with in telegram Gadel 9, September 23, to New York, p. 424 [Pg. 424 is part of Doc. 227].

The Ambassador in Greece (Grady) to the Secretary of State 868.00/9–2849: Telegram

[Document 231]

The Ambassador in Greece (Grady) to the Secretary of State

secret Athens, September 28, 1949—11 a. m.

1949. ReDeptel 1604, September 23.1 Embassy officers have called on Prime Minister and War Minister to stress importance immediate passage satisfactory leniency law. They confide that yesterday they persuaded General Papagos to agree to amendment leniency law to provide all court martial death sentences passed on civilians be reviewed by specially created civilian pardon boards.2 They state that as Rendis and Melas also favor amendment no doubt of its inclusion in law which they insist will be enacted this week.

War Minister agrees press for further amendment providing immediate restoration civil rights on release from Makronnisos organization3 and for revision articles 6 and 19. He expressed confidence martial law could soon be lifted Crete and most Aegean islands, but said this not yet feasible Peloponnesus and other parts Greece. He firmly opposed civilian control Makronnisos organization, a matter Embassy considers of minor importance.

Diomedes, Canellopoulos and Melas seem to realize importance this subject and I am hopeful of immediate action.

Grady

1 Same as telegram Gadel 9, September 23, to New York, p. 424 [Pg. 424 is part of Doc. 227].

2 Telegram 1953, September 28, from Athens, not printed, reported that all Athens newspapers that day published an announcement by Prime Minister Diomedes that a special section of the Supreme Council of Pardons would be established to examine all court-martial death sentences against civilians (868.00/9–2849). On September 30 Prime Minister Diomedes announced that as of that day the execution of all death sentences would be suspended until reviewed by the Council of Pardons. The action was taken in conformity with draft clemency legislation introduced in the Greek Parliament the same day. The clemency law was subsequently enacted on October 6.

3 A detention and rehabilitation center for captured guerrilla soldiers.

The Acting Secretary of State to the Embassy in Greece 868.20/9–2849: Telegram

[Document 232]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Embassy in Greece

secret Washington, September 28, 1949—7 p. m.

Gama 54. Budget for remaining three qtrs FY 50 MAP Program for Greece soon to be submitted to Bur Budg will provide $106.4 mil for Army $7.9 mil for Navy, $15.7 mil for Air—a total of $130 mil. This amount plus $81 mil for Turkey will total $211 mil provided for under Title II MAP Authorizing Legis. This amt rep funds required for obligation during last three quarters FY 50. In terms of matériel Grk program has been developed against requirements outlined Dec 6, 1948 AMAG Budget, minus $20 mil cutback by Bur Budg last spring and excluding first quarter FY 50 Grk requirement (est at approx 37.9 mil dols) provided by interim appropriation.

Inasmuch as requirements set forth in AMAG Dec Budget have undoubtedly changed and in view success Operation Torch1 there is strong feeling in Bur Budg that $130 mil program outlined above cld be further reduced as much as $50 mil. However, insufficient data available here estimate how much of replacement and re-equipment program contemplated in previous budget nec to meet requirements for eventual 80,000 man Grk Armed Force contemplated para G Van Fleet’s L40452 and to what extent large items individual equipment and ammunition contemplated in previous budget have been met or are still required.

Ur full comments and recommendations requested soonest as to possibility making any such further reduction FY 50 budget, bearing in mind current levels of supply in Greece, planned strength Grk Armed Forces during FY 50 as recommended Amag 74,3 and estimated operational requirements during remainder this FY.

Webb

1 The final Greek National Army operation in August 1949 during which the guerrilla forces were cleared from the Greek-Albanian frontier.

2 Not printed.

3 Not printed; it reviewed recent progress in reducing the size of the American Military Advisory Group in Greece and the Greek National Army (868.00(P)/9–2349).

Editorial Note [Document 233]

Editorial Note

The Fourth Session of the United Nations General Assembly opened on September 20, 1949. Despite the opposition of the Soviet Union and the states of Eastern Europe, the Assembly agreed to place the Greek question on its agenda once again. The Assembly also referred the issue to its First Committee for consideration. During the general debate in the General Assembly (222d to 229th Meetings, September 21–26), various aspects of the Greek question were raised. For the official records of these meetings, see United Nations, Official Records of the General Assembly, Fourth Session, Plenary Meetings, pages 1–95. (Hereafter cited as GA (IV), Plenary.) For the text of Secretary of State Acheson’s address to the Assembly Plenary Session on September 21, see Department of State Bulletin, October 3, 1949, pages 489–497. For an account of the Greek question in the general debate of the Assembly, see Harry N. Howard, The Greek Question in the Fourth General Assembly of the United Nations, Department of State Publication 3785, International Organization and Conference Series III, 47, reprinted from the Department of State Bulletin, February 27 and March 6, 1950 (Washington: Department of State, Division of Publications, Office of Public Affairs, 1950), pages 3–5. (Hereafter cited as Howard, The Greek Question in the Fourth General Assembly.)

The first phase of discussion of the Greek question in the First (Political and Security) Committee of the United Nations General Assembly began at the Committee’s 275th Meeting on September 28 with the consideration of an Australian proposal for the appointment of a new Conciliation Committee whose objective would be to reach a pacific settlement of the existing differences between Greece on the one hand and Albania, Bulgaria, and Yugoslavia on the other. The resolution, which was supported by the United States Delegation, was adopted by the First Committee at its 276th Meeting on September 29. At this same meeting, the Committee rejected a Polish resolution concerned with a possible appeal for clemency in Greece in the case of capital punishment. At the 280th, 282d, 283d, and 284th Meetings, October 3, 4, and 5, the Polish and Byelorussian representatives on the Committee sought unsuccessfully to raise again the issue of the executions in Greece. For the official record of this phase of discussion of the Greek question in the First Committee, see United Nations, Official Records of the General Assembly, Fourth Session, First Committee, Summary Records of Meetings, pages 3–14, 29–33, 38–52. (Hereafter cited as GA (IV), First Committee.) For the text of the Australian resolution (U.N. doc. A/C.1/493), adopted by the First Committee, see United Nations, Official Records of the General Assembly, Fourth Session, Plenary Meetings, Annex, page 61. (Hereafter cited as GA (IV), Plenary Meetings, Annex.) For the text of the statement made by the United States Representative to the First Committee on September 28 in favor of the Australian resolution, see Department of State Bulletin, October 10, 1949, pages 542–543 or Documents on American Foreign Relations, Volume XI, 1949, pages 662–664. For an account of the discussion in the First Committee during this first phase of consideration of the Greek question, see Howard, The Greek Question in the Fourth General Assembly, pages 5–8.

The Ambassador in Greece (Grady) to the Acting Secretary of State 868.20/10–349: Telegram

[Document 234]

The Ambassador in Greece (Grady) to the Acting Secretary of State

secret Rome,1 October 3, 1949—noon.

3084. From Grady. Re Gama 54.2 My thinking regarding need for limitation on number of men and size of budget for Greek Armed Forces has been set forth at considerable length in messages to Department in last year. I refer to Amag 1605, 1613, 1614, 1652, 1657, 39 and 62.3 My general line of thought remains unchanged, and I assume that austerity policy enunciated in Gama 1341 and WAR 801494 is also unchanged.

Since I testified before Congressional Committees in July, the Vitsi and Grammos battles have been successfully concluded, all the border pockets have been eliminated, the number of guerrillas within the country has been reduced to about 2500, the present threat from Yugoslavia has almost disappeared, the threat from Albania and Bulgaria seems to have declined, and the economic prospects have been strengthened by a generous ECA allocation to Greece, and by a healthful reaction to devaluation. Under the circumstances, I think it reasonable to say that we have completed the open warfare phase of the problem in Greece. This open warfare may again break out if the Soviets so will or if economic or political conditions deteriorate enough to make rebellion again attractive to a part of the population. But, whichever course events may take the best way to make Greece strong against either type of attack is: (1) to move rapidly toward the small well equipped, efficient armed force which we have planned, and (2) to strengthen the economy by relieving it of the drachmae burden of a large armed force. The struggle is now primarily political and economic, rather than military. If these conclusions are correct, I think we must now move with decision, just as we did after March 12, 1947.

To obtain the best use of American military aid funds, there must be kept in mind the need for correlation between the size of the dollar budget and the size of the Greek armed forces. Small budget cuts can safely be made, because of the cessation of active operations, but drastic cuts without a decrease in man strength would leave the forces unable to properly feed, clothe and train the men still on the rolls. Due to the Greek desire for a large army for nationalist purposes, and due to their reasoning that a large army will force us to give large aid, there will be no initiative and only reluctant cooperation on the part of the Greeks in decreasing strengths. Therefore, judgement in Washington that there should be drastic budget cuts should be accompanied by judgement in Washington that there be contemporaneous strength cuts. In my opinion, these cuts should be made. In this connection, very serious consideration should be given to eliminating the 50,000 men in the NDC by January 1, 1950 as originally planned.5

In the JUSMAPG appreciation of 18 June 19496 which outlined strengths and costs for each of two possible situations, assumption A was that guerrilla warfare within the country would be reduced to police proportions and confined to border areas with a continued threat of support from the north. I think the present situation conforms to assumption A, and that the plans in assumption A, with some modifications should be our guide. Under assumption A the budget of $198 million was reduced by $66 million. Apparently The Bureau of the Budget now contemplates cuts totalling $70 million or $80 million. I now think all of these cuts are too drastic and would be contrary to our best interests in Greece. The primary reason for my present opinion is the hesitation of JUSMAPG in concluding that today’s situation conforms to assumption A. I further recognize that past and present budget cuts at a time when the strengths have remained high, have reduced supplies and equipment below adequate levels. I fully agree with the Bureau of the Budget cut of $20 million, a cut which as originally planned was to be compensated for by an equivalent amount of supplies from United Kingdom.

I further agree with some further cut so that the total budget for the year would be about $160 million. This is on the low side, and it is very possible that we will have to ask for additional funds later in the year, particularly if trouble should again flare up here. This cut will come as a profound shock to the Greeks, but I think that properly presented it will have a salutary effect upon them. In the authorizing legislation naming $211 million, plus $50 million, we have shown that we are wholeheartedly supporting them. Now by a lesser appropriation, we must translate into action our judgement that the period of open warfare has had a successful conclusion, and we must make plain to them our judgement that a strong, small force must care for Greece’s internal problems.

The major expenses in the 6 December budget are for (1) ammunition and equipment to be expended in active operations, (2) food and clothing for a large force, (3) replacement of worn equipment, and (4) miscellaneous and administrative expenses. Number one will not be as high as contemplated if operations are not resumed. Number two can be reduced only in proportion to reductions in man strength. Number three cannot be reduced appreciably if we wish to leave the Greek forces reasonably well-equipped. Number four can be slightly reduced, due to the general improvement in the Greek situation.

A categorical answer to whether the equipment to be purchased under the 6 December budget is for a total armed force of the present strength or of about 100,000 as planned, is not possible. It is certainly insufficient to equip well a force of the present size or to equip at American standards a force of 100,000. However, if we are to leave a small reasonably well-equipped force in Greece in 1951, virtually all of the equipment is needed. If we do not supply this equipment, it will not be possible to scrap the large amounts of worn out equipment now being used with high maintenance costs.

I have not attempted to review the 6 December budget to determine, in detail which items can be cut. The 18 June determination that a saving could be made is an indication that some cuts are possible under assumptions similar to the actual situation of today. The three JUSMAPG officers who are now in Washington on budget matters can suggest areas for economy.

Despite my support of cuts in strength and budget, I wish to make it perfectly clear that I think too drastic a budget cut is not wise. For FY 1949 there was a budget of $170 million. This year in the interests of minor savings, we should not neutralize what has been accomplished. In order to insure a continuance of the present favorable situation, we must lean toward an appropriation of ample size, rather than at this time taking risks by excessive cuts.

[ Grady ]

1 Ambassador Grady had stopped in Rome en route to Paris for a brief consultation visit. This telegram was sent via the facilities of the Embassy in Rome.

2 Dated September 28, p. 428 [Pg. 428 includes portions of Doc. 230, Doc. 231, and Doc. 232].

3 Telegrams Amag 1605, October 16, 1948, Amag 1613, October 22, 1948, Amag 1614, undated, Amag 1652, November 22, 1948, Amag 1657, December 7, 1948, all from Athens, are printed in Foreign Relations, 1948, vol. iv, pp. 160, 168, 170, 187, and 210, respectively. Telegrams Amag 39, April 7 and Amag 62, June 28, both from Athens, are printed ante, pp. 291 [Pg. 291 includes portions of Doc. 141 and Doc. 142] and 360 [Pg. 360 includes portions of Doc. 182, Doc. 183, and Doc. 184].

4 Neither of these November 1948 messages is printed.

5 In his telegram Amag 75, October 15, from Athens, Ambassador Grady reported that further review had resulted in full agreement of all American authorities in Greece that the Greek Army should be reduced by 50,000 men by January 1950. Considerations leading to the decision included the assumed continued decline of guerrilla activity, the need for the reduction of governmental spending, and the realization that American military aid must be saved for the long-range maintenance of a smaller Greek army. (868.20/10–1549)

6 The Van Fleet appreciation under reference here is summarized in telegram Amag 62, June 28, from Athens, p. 360 [Pg. 360 includes portions of Doc. 182, Doc. 183, and Doc. 184].

Editorial Note [Document 235]

Editorial Note

On October 16 the so-called Greek Provisional Democratic Government issued an appeal, broadcast over the Greek guerrilla radio station, announcing the suspension of military activities. The announcement was reported upon in telegram 2114, October 18, from Athens, not printed (501. BB/10–1849). For an English translation of the appeal, see Margaret Carlyle, editor, Documents on International Affairs 1949–1950, issued under the auspices of the Royal Institute of International Affairs (London, New York, Toronto: Oxford University Press, 1953), page 235. For a summary-translation of the guerrilla announcement as it was published in the Soviet newspapers Pravda and Izvestia on October 21, see Current Digest of the Soviet Press, Volume I, Number 43, November 22, 1949, page 28.

At his press and radio news conference on October 19, Secretary of State Acheson commented upon the Greek guerrilla cease-fire announcement. For the text of the Secretary’s prepared statement (Department of State Press Release Number 811), see Department of State Bulletin, October 31, 1949, page 658 or A Decade of American Foreign Policy, 1941–49, page 773. In the course of his press conference, Secretary Acheson was asked if the Greek civil war was substantially over. He replied in the affirmative, saying that he thought it was more than substantially over, that it was practically entirely over. Asked if the United States proposed to reduce the amount of its assistance to Greece, the Secretary replied that he thought that was a matter which would have to be taken up with the Greek Government. He added that it would seem to him that it would be an indicated step to reduce the extent of the Greek military establishment (memorandum of the Press and Radio News Conference Number 39, October 19, 1949: ON Files, Lot 60 D 641).

Editorial Note [Document 236]

Editorial Note

In a statement issued to the press on October 4, 1949, the Department of State announced that as of October 3 the political, economic, and international organization work of the Department had been re organized. This reorganization involved the establishment of several new bureaus including the Bureau of Near Eastern, South Asian, and African Affairs under the supervision of George C. McGhee, Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern, South Asian, and African Affairs. Raymond A. Hare was designated Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern, South Asian, and African Affairs. Included in the new Bureau was the Office of Greek, Turkish, and Iranian Affairs (GTI) under the supervision of the following officers: Director, John D. Jernegan; Deputy Director, William M. Rountree; Officer in Charge of Greek Affairs, Leonard J. Cromie; Officer in Charge of Turkish Affairs, C. Robert Moore; Officer in Charge of Iranian Affairs, C. Vaughan Ferguson. For the text of the Department press release, see Department of State Bulletin, October 31, 1949, pages 677–679.

Memorandum of Conversation, by Mr. Ben Franklin Dixon of the Office of Greek, Turkish, and Iranian Affairs 841.2368/10–2049

[Document 237]

Memorandum of Conversation, by Mr. Ben Franklin Dixon of the Office of Greek, Turkish, and Iranian Affairs

confidential [Washington,] October 20, 1949.

Participants: Mr. W. D. Allen, Counsellor of the British Embassy

Mr. John D. Jernegan, NEA

Mr. Ben F. Dixon, GTI

a) Problem: Formulation of United States Position with regard to withdrawal of British Garrison Troops from Greece.

b) Action Required: Consultation with Embassy Athens and Department of Army.

c) Action Assigned to: GTI

Mr. Allen said he had come to inform the Department of a telegram which was sent from the Foreign Office to their Ambassador in Athens concerning the reduction of the British garrison in Greece. He said that Sir Derick Hoyer-Millar had mentioned the matter briefly to Mr. McGhee on passing him in the corridor but that he, Mr. Allen, wanted to inform the Department more fully. He said that the matter had arisen in the course of the reexamination of the disposition of forces in connection with the problem of garrisoning in Hong Kong. Troops from the Middle East had been sent to Hong Kong and it was necessary to reenforce some of the reduced garrisons in the Middle East. The telegram was simply the first step being taken, that of consulting the British Ambassador in Athens.

Mr. Allen said the point of the matter at this time was the transfer of one of the Battalions of the British garrison, but that the Chiefs of Staff papers he had seen indicated that the ultimate intention was the transfer of the entire garrison from Greece, located at Salonika. The matter only concerned the British garrison, not their Mission. The British Ambassador, Mr. Norton, had been authorized to discuss the matter with the American Ambassador as well as the Chiefs of British Missions in Athens.

Mr. Jernegan asked if Mr. Allen desired the reaction of the Department to the telegram or if we were simply being informed. Mr. Allen said that he was informing the Department now and would ask for views later. He felt that the military situation in Greece was probably favorable to the reduction of the British forces.

Mr. Jernegan said that he was not surprised at this news; it was the logical time to consider the matter. He said that the kernel of the problem was the Greek reaction. The effect of the British troops being stationed in Greece was ninety-five per cent psychological. The original intention of their being there, of course, was to bolster the Greek morale by satisfying them that they had some protection against incursions by the northern neighbors or communist moves within the country against urban centers. In other words, could this withdrawal be accomplished without unduly disturbing the Greek morale. He said he felt that the opinion of our two Ambassadors in Athens as to what the Greek reaction would be would be extremely helpful.

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in Greece 868.20/10–2049: Telegram

[Document 238]

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in Greece

confidential
priority Washington, October 20, 1949—1 p. m.

1789. Re news release Grk guerrillas and reduction Grk armed forces at Secy’s press conference Oct 19, relayed you verbatim Wireless Bulletin.1 This does not mean any change in policy since reduction Grk forces always contemplated upon cessation guerrilla operations. You are authorized ur discretion issue statement to prevent any undue perturbation on part Grks. In answer to Grk Emb here we have called attn to Secy’s statement that reduction US assistance Greece “was a matter which wld have to be taken up with the Grk Govt, that it w;ld have to be seen what they proposed to do with their mil estab.” There is not contemplated any hasty or drastic unilateral action by US along these lines; although we intend press vigorously for implementation our present policy of having Grk Govt reduce 50,000 NDC troops by Jan 1, 1950, as orginally planned. Re ur Amag 75 Oct 152 Secy’s statement shld be helpful to you in persuading Grks they shld cut forces and will be used in talk this subject Grk Amb.

Acheson

1 Regarding the Greek guerrilla regime announcement of October 16 and the Secretary of State’s press conference statements of October 19, see the editorial note, p. 434 [Pg. 434 includes portions of Doc. 236 and Doc. 237]. The “Wireless Bulletin” referred to here was an unclassified daily review of news and press comment, prepared by the International Press and Publications Division of the Department of State and transmitted overseas for the information of Foreign Service Officers.

2 Not printed. In it Ambassador Grady reported that all American officials in Greece were agreed on the necessity for reducing the Greek Army by 50,000 men by January 1, 1950, and they were emphasizing the need for it to the Greeks. The message predicted that many Greeks in the press and higher military circles could be expected to oppose for the usual nationalistic reasons. (868.20/10–1549)

The Ambassador in Greece (Grady) to the Secretary of State 841.2368/10–2149: Telegram

[Document 239]

The Ambassador in Greece (Grady) to the Secretary of State

confidential Athens, October 21, 1949—6 p. m.

2144. British Ambassador came to see me October 19 at his request to ascertain, upon instructions from his government, my views concerning withdrawal of British brigade from Greece. He explained that British Government had always said their policy was to move it when situation allowed, and was again actively considering it in view of military developments in Greece.

I told Sir Clifford that my personal view was that the brigade might well be withdrawn without adverse effects and that this move might be expected to have favorable consequences in international public opinion and in fostering increased self-reliance among Greeks. The withdrawal, I said, seemed to me to be a logical concomitant of altered military situation and the prospective decrease of American and British military missions. I told him that reduction of American missions and revision of their relations with British missions appeared possible and desirable in view of altered military situation but we did not discuss in detail the size of such reduction or any long range differentiation of functions. Our own program for reduction had been forwarded to Washington and approved, I stated. Sir Clifford asked me whether I believed brigade should be withdrawn entirely or battalion by battalion. I told him that I would like to discuss this question with members of my staff. After such discussion I yesterday informed Sir Clifford that it was the Embassy’s view that the British should announce their intention to withdraw entire brigade. The procedure which would then be followed would be question of available transport and other technical matters which did not seem to me to have any particular political importance. The announcement was the important factor.

Sir Clifford informs me that he has communicated these views to his government.1

Grady

1 Telegram 1827, October 26, to Athens, not printed, stated that the Department of State concurred in Ambassador Grady’s views and had no objection to the withdrawal of British garrison forces from Greece. The Department felt, however, that the matter must be considered by the Joint Chiefs of Staff before the final determination of the United States position (841.2368/10–2649). In his telegram L 4164, October 27, from Athens to the Department of the Army, Lieutenant General Van Fleet also concurred heartily with the proposed complete withdrawal of British forces from Greece. Van Fleet felt that the British Brigade’s presence in Greece during 1948 and 1949 had contributed very little to the success of the Greek Army in that it had not assisted in the training of Greek armed forces. The British battalion in Athens was almost completely utilized in guarding British supplies (Department of Defense files).

The Secretary of State to Certain Diplomatic Offices 800.00 Summaries/10–2049: Circular telegram

[Document 240]

The Secretary of State to Certain Diplomatic Offices 1

top secret Washington, October 21, 1949—5 a. m.

Topsec infotel. We have informed Brit Emb that our short-range objectives in Albania are weakening and eventual elimination of Sov-dominated regime under Premier Hoxha cessation of use of Albania as base for guerrilla operations in Greece and possibly Yugo prevention of partition of Albania by Greece and Yugo, encouragement of rapprochement between Belgrade and Athens, encouragement of rapprochement between Belgrade and Rome, and denial to Sovs of military rights and bases in Albania in time of peace which would facilitate conduct of possible future Sov military operations. Our basic long-range objective is establishment of Albania which is free of foreign domination and whose govt is responsive and responsible to will of Albanian people. Our proposed present action to gain our objectives includes utilization of US, UK, and French influence in Athens to prevent Greek Army from entering Albania except in case of direct military aggression from Albania; direction of present UN consideration of Greek case toward mobilization of world opinion against present Albanian govt in order to weaken its international position but without going so far as to support direct enforcement action under UN auspices; utilization of US, UK, and French influence in Belgrade at proper time to prevent Yugo military intervention in Albania; continuing US–UK contact with view to controlling any action on part of Albanian groups toward overthrow of present regime and with view to having Albanian National Committee be as representative as possible; and maintenance on appropriate occasions of our present position in favor of respect for existing frontiers in Balkans.

Acheson

1 This telegram was sent to the Embassies in Athens, London, Paris, and Rome. It summarizes the salient points of a Department of State position paper on Albania, dated September 21, 1949, which Deputy Assistant Secretary of State Thompson discussed with British Minister Hoyer Millar during a conversation on October 18. For texts of the Department paper and the record of the conversation, see vol. v, pp. 319 and 320.

Editorial Note [Document 241]

Editorial Note

The Conciliation Committee, established by the First Committee of the General Assembly on September 29 (see the editorial note, page 429 [Pg. 429 includes portions of Doc. 232 and Doc. 233]), held 29 meetings between October 4 and October 22. The Committee, which consisted of General Assembly President Carlos Romulo, United Nations Secretary-General Trygve Lie, Chairman of the First Committee Lester B. Pearson, and Vice Chairman of the First Committee Selim Sarper, held meetings with the representatives of Albania, Bulgaria, Yugoslavia, and Greece, and also with the representatives of the United States, the United Kingdom, and the Soviet Union. In the course of its work, the Committee developed a series of suggestions for draft agreements between Greece and its northern neighbors. These agreements involved the renewal of diplomatic relations, the preparation of frontier conventions for the settlement of frontier incidents, and the establishment of mixed frontier commissions. The Committee also advanced a suggestion for a formula which would cover the Albanian-Greek frontier. The Albanian delegation refused to consider the proposals of the Conciliation Committee unless the Greek Government formally abandoned its claim to Northern Epirus. Albania also rejected significant aspects of the proposed frontier conventions and the mixed frontier commissions. The Bulgarian delegation declined to approve the Committee’s suggestions unless all parties concerned also did so. Yugoslavia was favorably inclined toward the Committee’s work, and the Greek delegation generally accepted all of the proposals. A preliminary report to the First Committee on the work of the Conciliation Committee was presented in a letter of October 18 from General Assembly President Romulo; for the text of the letter (U.N. doc. A/C.1/503), see United Nations, Official Records of the General Assembly, Fourth Session, First Committee, Annex, page 12 (hereafter cited as GA (IV), First Committee, Annex); or Department of State Bulletin, October 31, 1949, pages 657–658; or A Decade of American Foreign Policy, 1941–49, page 772. The Conciliation Committee submitted its formal and more detailed report to the First Committee on October 22; for the text of the report (U.N. doc. A/C.1/506), see GA (IV), First Committee, Annex, page 12, or Howard, The Greek Question in the Fourth General Assembly, pages 24–29. For brief, authoritative accounts of the work of the Conciliation Committee, see ibid., pages 8–9 or Harry N. Howard, “Greece and Its Balkan Neighbors (1948–1949): The United Nations Attempts at Conciliation,” Balkan Studies, 1966, Volume 7, Number 1, pages 19–24.

The Chief of the American Mission for Aid to Greece (Grady) to the Greek Prime Minister (Diomedes) 868.20/10–2349

[Document 242]

The Chief of the American Mission for Aid to Greece (Grady) to the Greek Prime Minister (Diomedes)1

[Athens,] October 23, 1949.

Excellency: As Your Excellency is aware, there has recently been an exchange of views between the Greek military authorities and. American advisers concerning the best method of utilizing American military aid, now that the guerrilla warfare in Greece has been reduced to insignificant proportions. The American advice has been that the Greek Army should be sharply and progressively reduced in size. In this event American military aid might be utilized in such a way that by June 1950 Greece would possess a relatively small but modern, efficient and well-equipped Army backed by an adequate number of well-trained reserve forces. It has been pointed out that if the Greek Army were to remain at its present size, the largest proportion of American military assistance would necessarily continue to be devoted to expendable items, such as food and clothing. The result of such a policy would be that in June 1950 the Greek Army would be inadequately provided with artillery, transport and the other machines of modern warfare. It seems to me apparent that the American advice is in line with the best interests of Greece. I should like to emphasize, moreover, that the amount of American aid is strictly limited and is not sufficient to maintain Greek armed forces of the present size and concurrently to provide the capital equipment needed for a modern Greek army.

The economic consequences of maintaining an Army of the present size are of even more importance than the purely military implications. It is unnecessary to point out to such a distinguished economist as Your Excellency the adverse effects upon Greek recovery resulting from the continued maintenance of Greek armed forces totalling more than 260,000 men. The loss of productive labor, the diversion of funds that might otherwise be utilized for rehabilitation and reconstruction, the impossibility of attaining a balanced budget under such circumstances—these are but a few of the numerous economic consequences. I should like particularly to stress another most significant consideration. In this second year of the European Recovery Program Greece is receiving the maximum dollar aid of the four year period envisaged in this program. In order fully to utilize this aid the maximum amount of drachmas must be made available for reconstruction. Indeed, this was a major premise of the rather generous aid allocated to Greece for this year by OEEC and EGA. In this connection, I feel that I should recall to Your Excellency that the current allocation of dollar aid and drawing rights to the nations participating in the European Recovery Program will be subject to review by OEEC and EGA in January 1950. Your Excellency will, I am sure, wish to take all possible steps to forestall any question being raised as to the adequacy of drachma availability. It is imperative, therefore, for the recovery of Greece that expenditures for enterprises not directly connected with the expansion of Greek production be held at a minimum. As Your Excellency is aware, the principal sector of the Greek budget in which sizeable economies can be effected is that portion devoted to military affairs. I am sure that it is equally clear to-all-concerned that no significant economies can be carried out in drachma expenditure for military purposes as long as the Greek Army remains at its present size.

I should like to review for Your Excellency in the briefest fashion the American position with regard to the size of the Greek armed forces. The initial plan for American military aid envisaged support of a Greek Army of 132,000 men. In January 1948 the American Mission for Aid to Greece agreed to the establishment of a National Defense Corps of 50,000 men in addition to the figure just mentioned. This National Defense Corps was formed to relieve the Greek National Army of static defense duties so that it might undertake the offensive operations necessary to eliminate the guerrilla menace. It was the understanding at that time that the provision of the additional 50,000 men was a temporary measure, subject to review whenever the occasion warranted. Operations during 1948 did not bring the conclusive results anticipated. It was therefore not possible, as had been hoped, to eliminate the National Defense Corps and thereby reduce the size of the Greek armed forces. Rather, it was decided to increase the Greek National Army by 15,000 men in the hope that Greek armed forces totalling more than 250,000, well-trained and equipped and capably led, might achieve victory in 1949.

This hope has been realized. As a result of last summer’s campaign, guerrilla warfare within Greece has been practically terminated. It is now appropriate and urgent that the altered military situation be reflected in the size of the establishments of the Greek armed forces.

I wish strongly to advise Your Excellency that the Greek Government wholeheartedly support the tentative plans which have been subject of recent discussion between the Greek military authorities and American advisers. The initial phase of this plan calls for the discharge of 68,000 in the Greek Army by December 31, 1949. This would be partially offset by the call-up of 18,000 men during November and December. There would, however, be a net reduction of 50,000 men, that is, the equivalent of the forces authorized in January 1948 for the National Defense Corps. Subsequent phases of the plan call for additional reductions in the Greek National Army and in other branches of the Greek armed forces as well.

Implementing the details of these plans is the proper concern of the Greek military authorities and the American advisers. What is required of Your Excellency and the Greek Government as a whole is the firm, frank and public affirmation of your agreement with the policy and the principle. I fully realize that there is some risk involved in reducing the size of the Greek armed forces at a time when neither the international situation or its Balkan reflection has been stabilized. On the other hand, it seems to me that it would be serving only the designs of the enemies of Greece to maintain under the present circumstances a military establishment of such size and costliness that it could not fail to result in the continuance of economic despair and discontent.

I trust, Mr. Prime Minister, that I will find you in agreement with the views outlined in this lengthy letter, and I hope that I may have your response to this communication in the very near future.

Please accept [etc.]

[ Henry F. Grady ]

1 In his telegram 2160, October 24, from Athens, not printed, Ambassador Grady reported that he was writing to Prime Minister Diomedes in view of the reaction to Secretary of State Acheson’s statement of October 19 (see the editorial note, p. 434 [Pg. 434 includes portions of Doc. 236 and Doc. 237]) regarding the American position on the size of the Greek armed forces. Grady also issued a lengthy statement to the press on the matter which was featured in the Athens press of October 27 and the text of which was transmitted in telegram 2175, October 27, from Athens, not printed (868.20/10–2749). In his telegram 2173, October 26, from Athens, not printed, Grady reported having been informed that the Greek Government and General Papagos would shortly reply affirmatively to this letter. Papagos was in full agreement and had so informed his government (868.20/10–2649). In his telegram Amag 79, November 3, not printed, Grady reported that Ms public statement, conversations with Prime Minister Diomedes, and vigorous persuasion of the Greek General Staff by American military authorities had overcome Greek reluctance to take steps to reduce the strength of the Greek Army. On October 26 Diomedes announced plans for a net reduction of 50,000 men by December 31 in accordance with the earlier American plan. The actual discharge would amount to 68,000 (868.20/11–349). The Department of State on October 21 presented to the Greek Embassy an aide-mémoire strongly endorsing the reduction of the Greek Army by 50,000 by January 1950 (868.20/10–2149). Telegram 1817, October 25, to Athens, not printed, transmitted a summary of the aide-mémoire (868.20/10–2549).

The Ambassador in Greece (Grady) to the Secretary of State 868.20/10–1449: Telegram

[Document 243]

The Ambassador in Greece (Grady) to the Secretary of State

secret Athens, October 14 [24], 1949—6 p. m.

2164. Attention McGhee.1 Reduction AMAG and GNA strength making satisfactory progress. See my telegrams Amag 74 of September 232 and Amag 77 of October 19.3 By January 1, 1950 approximately 250 persons connected with AMAG (officers, men and their dependents) will have left Greece. Our field detachments with GNA being sharply reduced and will shortly be limited to representation only at four corps hdqtrs. JUSMAPG cooperating whole-heartedly in reducing AMAG and in bringing about decrease in size of Greek Army. I fully expect net reduction of 50,000 GNA to be effective by January 1.

We plan compensating for smaller size of army by increased efficiency, equipment and training. We contemplate, in conjunction with ECA, a program for road building in mountainous and border areas so as to increase mobility of relatively small army envisaged.

With general MAP appropriation now available, it becomes particularly important that requisitions for Greece now on file be quickly filled. There should also be prompt reduction of British military mission and withdrawal, as soon as practicable, of British brigade. I recognize full well that there is some hazard in all these military reductions, but I feel these dangers must be risked.

Progress on the economic front is encouraging. Because of counter-measures taken devaluation has gone off smoothly. Commodity prices are remaining steady and the open market price of gold sovereigns is dropping slowly.

Immediate budget picture is not bright. After careful screening of civil ministries budgets and assuming a 25 percent reduction in military expenditure during last half of FY 1950 and with most optimistic forecast of revenue including much larger collection of income tax, budget deficit will range between 1500 and 2000 billion drachmae. In addition to large sums for military purposes, principal contributory reasons for large size deficit are larger subsidies resulting from devaluation and allocation of 600 billion drachmae for refugees. It is, however, not unreasonable to envisage possibility of balanced budget for following year provided military expenditures can be further reduced, refugee problem liquidated, subsidies repealed and revenue continues to improve.

Porter4 sees eye to eye with me on streamlining ECA organization. Divisions are being consolidated and number of personnel slowly reduced. We are endeavoring to limit our objectives to essentials and clearly to define them. Morale of the organization is excellent.

We have had in effect the same government since last January and the ministers are on the whole working effectively with ECA. I am pressing for official announcement in the near future of a general election for next spring, perhaps as early as March. I am inclined to consider that fairness and representative character of these elections would be enhanced by installation of a service government four, five days prior to ballotting. I expect no government crises in the interim unless there should be some momentous change in the external situation. It is quite likely that elections may produce no significant change in Parliament or in government of the nation, but this reaffirmation of the democratic process should be beneficial in itself, both within Greece and abroad and together with the restoration of security and economic improvement may pave the way for the development of new and energetic political forces. I am encouraging other developments essential to the restoration of political freedom such as progressive lifting of martial law in safe areas. Removal of military control in Athens, for example, would have a profound effect in increasing press freedom throughout the country in view of the wide provincial circulation of Athens dailies. As situation becomes progressively stable I shall not hesitate to use this press freedom to carry our story to the Greek people to encourage, perhaps some times to force the Greek Government to take action we consider essential.

There are, of course, disturbing factors in the external situation, but I feel that to postpone vitally necessary measures such as the reduction of the Greek Army until Balkan and world situation becomes stabilized would mean dissipation of ECA funds with little permanent benefit.

Economic situation within Greece must be improved if Communists are not again, in not too distant future, to find ready at hand widespread discontent which can easily be welded into mass movement. This aspect of the Communist danger to Greece is as real, if not so immediate, as the renewal of aggression by armed bands across the frontier.

I am not particularly disturbed at the failure of UN conciliation efforts.5 The Balkan countries can themselves probably do better than ill-informed intermediaries from Australia, the Philippines and elsewhere. UNSCOB, if continued and revitalized, may be able to assist in this work and aid in discouraging renewed aggression.

Grady

1 In telegram 1828, October 26, to Athens, not printed, Assistant Secretary of State McGhee personally replied that he found the Ambassador’s summary of the Greek situation presented here most gratifying, and he added the following comment: “Improvement from mil, econ and polit viewpoints source of greatest satisfaction as indicating corner has been turned in our efforts to reestablish Greece in her proper place among independent nations. Realize there are dangers and difficult times ahead, but Dept has full confidence in your ability to carry through with winning program.” (868.00/10–2649)

2 Not printed, but see footnote 3 to telegram Gama 54, September 28, to Athens, p. 429 [Pg. 429 includes portions of Doc. 232 and Doc. 233].

3 Not printed; in it Ambassador Grady expressed support for the recommendation made by Lieutenant General Van Fleet that the British Military Mission in Greece be reduced in strength. Grady believed that a general agreement with the British to accomplish this purpose would prepare the way for sizable reductions in both the American and British Military Missions, and he also urged consideration be given to withdrawing the British Brigade stationed in Greece in order to increase Greek self-reliance. (868.20 Mission/10–1949)

4 At the beginning of September 1949, Paul It. Porter, until then Deputy United States Representative to the U.N. Economic Commission for Europe, succeeded John Nuveen, Jr., as the Chief of the Economic Cooperation Administration Mission in Greece.

5 Regarding the work of the Conciliation Committee established by the First Committee of the U.N. General Assembly, see the editorial note, p. 439 [Pg. 439 includes portions of Doc. 240 and Doc. 241].

Memorandum of Telephone Conversation, by the Director of the Office of Greek, Turkish, and Iranian Affairs (Jernegan) 841.2368/10–2749

[Document 244]

Memorandum of Telephone Conversation, by the Director of the Office of Greek, Turkish, and Iranian Affairs (Jernegan)

top secret [Washington,] October 27, 1949.

Participants: Major General Gruenther, Joint Chiefs of Staff.1

Raymond A. Hare, Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern, South Asian, and African Affairs.

John D. Jernegan, Director, Office of Greek, Turkish, and Iranian Affairs.

General Gruenther called with respect to the attached message received by the British Joint Staff Mission in Washington from the British Chiefs of Staff.2 He said this had been communicated to the American Joint Chiefs earlier today and had been considered by them in preliminary fashion this afternoon. The initial reaction of the American Joint Chiefs of Staff had been negative, but they had arrived at no decision because it was felt they needed more time to-study the question.

General Gruenther said that the Joint Chiefs felt the British Government had not “played ball” on this matter. On October 25, he said, the Joint Staff Mission had asked for the views of our military authorities on withdrawal of British troops from Greece and had suggested three alternatives: first, to withdraw only one of the three battalions; second, to withdraw two; and third, to withdraw the entire force. A reply had been requested next week, and it had been agreed that the American Joint Chiefs would give their answer on Tuesday, November 1. Yet, only twenty-four hours later, the British Government had taken its decision without waiting for any reply of any kind from the American military authorities.

Mr. Hare informed General Gruenther that Sir Derick Hoyer Millar, British Minister in Washington, had advised the Department at four o’clock this afternoon that the British Government had instructed its Ambassador in Athens to inform the Greek Prime Minister of the British intention to withdraw all British troops from Greece.3 In the face of this fait accompli, the Department had responded that from a political point of view we saw no objection to the decision but had pointed out that the matter was still under consideration in the Pentagon and that the British military authorities should clear the decision with the Joint Chiefs of Staff. Sir Derick had replied that if the American military authorities thought it necessary, he believed the British Government would be willing to keep a portion of the British units in Greece for a longer period. He understood that the physical withdrawal of all the units would take some time in any case and thought there would be no great difficulty about postponing the departure of, say, one battalion until Spring.

General Gruenther said that, if he had called earlier in the day, he would have suggested that the Department of State refrain from any comment at all, so that the United States Government could speak with one voice on the matter. Mr. Hare recognized the desirability of this but again pointed out that we had been confronted with a fait accompli and could not have taken any action which would have prevented the British notification to the Greek authorities. Furthermore the Department had taken pains to refer to the fact that this matter was the subject of the Anglo-United States military discussion and to observe that agreement on the military level would presumably be reached through established channels. Mr. Hare asked whether the Joint Chiefs of Staff would like to have the Department make any further communication to the British Embassy, to put it on notice that the American military authorities might have reservations on this subject. General Gruenther said he did not wish to request any such action at this time, and believed that the attitude of the Joint Chiefs should be conveyed to the British through military channels, if, in fact, it developed that the Joint Chiefs wished to raise objections. He did not yet know whether the final decision would be to oppose or to accept the British action. He did feel, that the question had to be studied carefully as there were “danger areas” involved. He would advise the Department if any further action on our part should be deemed necessary by the Department of Defense.4

1 Maj. Gen. Alfred M. Gruenther, Director, The Joint Staff, Joint Chiefs of Staff.

2 The message of October 26, not printed, stated that Foreign Secretary Bevin had agreed that steps be taken to reduce the British garrison in Greece with a view to final withdrawal without undue loss of time.

3 Telegram 2188, October 28, from Athens, not printed, reported that when he was informed by British Ambassador Norton of the impending withdrawal on October 27, Greek Prime Minister Diomedes asked if the British Government could not at least leave fifty or so soldiers. Norton replied that it was the British intention to withdraw all troops and as soon as practicably possible. (841.2368/10–2849)

4 In a letter of November 22, not printed, Secretary of Defense Louis A. Johnson informed Secretary of State Acheson that it was the opinion of the Joint Chiefs of Staff that the withdrawal of the British brigade from Greece should be accomplished by the withdrawal of not more than two battalions in the immediate future. They believed the timing of the withdrawal of the last battalion should be deferred until a later date to be dependent upon the internal situation in Greece at the time. The views of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, in which Secretary Johnson concurred, had been transmitted to the British Chiefs of Staff (841.2368/11–2249). In a reply dated December 5, not printed, Under Secretary of State Webb expressed the view that it would not be necessary for the Department of State to take any action in the matter in the light of the action already taken by the Joint Chiefs of Staff (841.2368/11–2249).

Editorial Note [Document 245]

Editorial Note

In late October 1949, American missions in Europe were informed that the Department of State considered that Albania should be prevented from augmenting its war potential in view of the threat to Greece and in order to maintain Yugoslavia’s strength vis-à-vis the Soviet bloc. Pursuit of such an objective involved the prevention of shipments of goods with military potential to Albania, whether from points of origin in the West or from other Soviet satellites. Efforts were inaugurated to prevent or restrict as far as possible the transit to Albania through Italy, Trieste, and Austria of items of security significance. For documentation on these efforts, see volume V, pages 61 ff.

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Secretary of State 840.20/10–2849

[Document 246]

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Secretary of State

top secret [Washington,] October 28, 1949.

Participants: Constantine Tsaldaris, Foreign Minister of Greece.

Vassili Dendramis, Ambassador of Greece.

The Secretary.

John D. Jernegan, Director, Office of Greek, Turkish, and Iranian Affairs.

Mr. Tsaldaris began by saying that he had not come to discuss the UN questions. He did, however, wish to thank me for having settled a slight misunderstanding which had arisen between the Greek and American delegations at the General Assembly in New York. This question could now be regarded as finished.

He then read to me the attached Aide-Mémoire 1 and went on to explain that in presenting this short document he was merely giving expression to his belief that the time had come to renew the talks on the general question of Greek inclusion in a defense pact that had been held last spring. Now that the Atlantic Pact was in force and that Greek Army forces were about to be reduced and British troops withdrawn from Greece, he felt that it was necessary to do something to prevent undesirable developments in Greece. He was, in fact, asking the questions “What can we do?” and “How far can we go?”.

I observed that the Aide-Mémoire seemed to relate solely to psychological considerations. I had been Acting Secretary at the time that the question of American support for Greece was raised by the British early in 1947, and I had presented the situation created by this to the President. Since then, the United States and Greece had been through two and a half difficult years. The United States have not incurred all that expense and effort in order to throw away the results. We had achieved more success than I had dared to hope for. Greece had been saved from the danger in which it stood. If Greece should be in trouble again our resources would again be available to assist her.

I did not feel, I said, that this was the time to discuss a new formal treaty. The United States had recently entered two large international groupings under the Rio Pact and the North Atlantic Pact. The commitments we had assumed with respect to western Europe were completely outside our history. We had not yet had time to see how this new engagement would work out. If our military aid to Europe and our participation in the North Atlantic Pact produced a gain in the strength of the European nations themselves, then our own commitments would be correspondingly reduced; we would be placed more or less in the position of re-insurers rather than direct insurers. We would no longer be the only force available for the defense of the peace in Europe. Following such a development, we might be able to consider an expansion of our formal commitments to other nations. Until we were sure that this would be the result of the steps already taken, I said I should be most averse to a new treaty relationship for the United States, because failure of the European nations themselves to gain in strength might well mean that we were already over-committed and should certainly avoid additional engagements.

What I wished to emphasize, however, was that Greece should be well-pleased by the underlying situation as it now stands. I reiterated that we in the United States were not foolish people. Greece should have no doubt that if she were again to be threatened, the United States would come to her aid.

Ambassador Dendramis mentioned that he had recently been talking to General Bradley and had urged him to visit Athens. The Ambassador felt that such a visit would be very good for the morale of the Greek people. I replied that the morale of the Greek people at the present time ought to be very good.

Mr. Tsaldaris then handed me the attached memorandum dated October 25 prepared by General Kitrilakis,2 which stresses the military importance to the western powers of a Balkan bloc consisting of Turkey, Greece and Yugoslavia. The Foreign Minister asked if it would not be well for Greece to renew conversations with Turkey and progress later to an attempt to draw Yugoslavia into the group. I merely said that we were entirely in agreement as to the importance of Yugoslavia. Mr. Tsaldaris went on to argue that according to his own military experts the Western powers would be greatly menaced without the assistance of the Balkan bloc which he was suggesting and might well lose the next war through loss of the Balkans. He did not pretend himself to be a military expert and he realized that it was possible our own military people might have other ideas. But he thought we might take some preliminary steps to consider the question.

Mr. Tsaldaris went on to argue that the Greek Army, by virtue of its recent combat experience, was an extremely important element in the Balkans. He remarked that the Turkish Army might or might not be effective; no one had had the opportunity to observe its qualities for the past twenty-five years. However, the Greek, Turkish and Yugoslav armies together would provide an important force.

In conclusion, I confined myself to assuring Mr. Tsaldaris that we would be glad to consider what was best to be done at the present time with respect to the suggestions he had made.

1 The Greek Embassy Aide-Mémoire under reference here, dated October 28, not printed, set forth the views of the Greek Government that the time had arrived to consider a defense pact for the areas immediately east of the North Atlantic Treaty countries (868.20/10–2849).

2 The memorandum under reference here, prepared by Lt. Gen. Stylianos Kitrilakis, Deputy Chief of the Greek National Defense General Staff, is not printed.

The Ambassador in Greece (Grady) to the Secretary of State 501.BB/11–149: Telegram

[Document 247]

The Ambassador in Greece (Grady) to the Secretary of State

secret
priority Athens, November 1, 1949—11 a. m.

2206. Deptel 1862, October 30.1 I am somewhat concerned over GADel views re draft resolution on Greece. I seriously question that resolution could be called “wholly one-sided” if specific reference to leniency were omitted as was done in amended version submitted to Political Committee. We should not permit revival of discredited theory that Greek Communist rebellion reflected political and economic dissatisfaction of large number of Greeks and was not solely Communist bid for power. As Department knows, facts are clear and to the contrary: Soviet-sponsored minority tried twice to add Greece to list of Balkan “popular democracies” and failed. Despite Greek Government’s adherence to Varkiza agreement and despite broad amnesties offered by Sophoulis, Greek Communist Party preferred recourse to sword. Communists had to be beaten finally by their own weapon and although innocents through forced recruitment were dragged along bloody trail, I see no reason why, in mistaken confusion over these unfortunates, real leaders should go unpunished. Greek Government is trying to attain lasting peace by refusing to pardon leading rebels while still reclaiming as many of their followers as possible through recent leniency law.

I have personally taken every opportunity to convey Department’s views on leniency to Greeks, who have not turned deaf ear. However, since this matter has assumed unwarranted proportions in GA, our chance of helping Greek Government to solve ticklish problem through its own efforts have materially lessened. Judging from press comment over Soviet attacks against Greece in UN and what many Greeks believe to be our own complacent attitude there, local backs are up and there may result a stiffening rather than a relaxing of Greek attitude on executions.

I am, of course, not in a position to evaluate properly state of mind of GA or to understand fully the pressures which may be put on our delegation there. But I do feel we are deluding ourselves if we believe that originally draft resolution contains “no conceivable reference to Greek internal affairs.” In any case this is not feeling of Greeks who have been following debate avidly and with disapproval. Any reference whatsoever to such a troublesome problem as leniency to Communists by outsiders who have never been objects of their aggression is in Greek minds a reference to internal affairs.

In enacting leniency law, Greek Government has already shown sincere desire to return as many rebels as possible to full participation in Greek life and I do not believe that GA resolution contemplated would induce any more to surrender than have so far done so. We must not forget that rebels to whom we are appealing are dominated by fanatic leaders and quartered and fed in satellite countries. They are only pawn in Russia’s Balkan strategy and not individuals free to direct their own destiny.

I firmly believe that net result of persisting in course proposed by USDel will be to give further ammunition to Soviets. I therefore hope we will do everything we can to discourage reintroduction of original disputed paragraphs of resolution. At same time I hope US delegation will seize every opportunity to emphasize points of fact made in my first paragraph and to stress real effort Greek Government is making to make good Greeks out of former bandits.

Grady

1 In his telegram 2181, October 27, from Athens, not printed, Ambassador Grady reported that Prime Minister Diomedes had called on him the previous evening and stated that he had received a cable from the Greek Delegation at the United Nations advising that the United States Delegation was preparing a draft resolution for submission to the General Assembly calling for the complete amnesty for all guerrillas and political prisoners. Diomedes was deeply disturbed and felt that such a resolution would neutralize completely the recent Greek Army military victory over the guerrillas. A strong fifth column would arise in Greece aimed at overthrowing the current regime, and the Soviet Union would finally accomplish what it had previously failed to accomplish. Diomedes further predicted that his government would fall, and King Paul would be obliged to name a Communist fellow-traveler to form a new government (501.BB/10–2749). Telegram 1862, October 29, to Athens, not printed, explained that Greek anxieties arose as a result of a confusion of various drafts of a resolution under discussion in New York among the United States, British, French, and Australian Delegations to the U.N. No general amnesty proposal was being considered. It was the view of the United States Delegation, however, that some reference to the desirability of Greek clemency measures would be necessary to avoid passage of a resolution likely to be criticized for being wholly one-sided (501.BB/10–2749). Regarding the resolution under discussion, ultimately passed by the First Committee of the General Assembly on November 4, see the editorial note, infra.

Editorial Note [Document 248]

Editorial Note

The First Committee of the United Nations General Assembly resumed its consideration of the Greek question on October 24. At the outset (294th–298th Meetings, October 24–27), the Committee became involved in a discussion of the problem of alleged executions and certain death sentences in Greece of persons convicted of treason or subversion. The Soviet Delegation, supported by other Soviet bloc delegations, advanced a proposal asking for the suspension and repeal of certain death sentences. The debate gave rise to a number of other resolutions by South American delegations regarding death sentences and executions. Ultimately, the Committee decided that it was not competent in the matter proposed by the Soviet Delegation. The Committee did, however, adopt a resolution requesting General Assembly President Romulo to ascertain the views of the Greek Government concerning the suspension of death sentences passed by Greek military courts for political reasons. For the official record of these Committee deliberations, see GA (IV), First Committee, pages 90–115.

The First Committee continued its consideration of the Greek question from its 298th Meeting, October 27, to its 311th Meeting, November 4. On October 27 the Delegations of Australia, China, the United Kingdom, and the United States introduced a joint resolution (U.N. doc. A/C.1/513) continuing the United Nations Special Committee on the Balkans with somewhat broadened terms of reference. Although receiving wide support by other delegations in the Committee, the joint resolution was vigorously opposed by the Soviet Delegation and the delegations of the other Soviet bloc nations. On October 27 the Soviet Delegation introduced its own resolution (U.N. doc. A/C.1/518) which incorporated Soviet proposals made earlier in the year, including the dissolution of the United Nations Special Committee. The joint resolution of October 27 was adopted by the First Committee on November 4 by a vote of 38 to 6 with 2 abstentions. On the same day, the Soviet resolution was overwhelmingly defeated in paragraph-by-paragraph voting. At its 310th meeting on November 3, the First Committee adopted unanimously an amended version of a joint resolution introduced by the Australian, Chinese, United Kingdom, and United States delegations dealing with the repatriation of Greek children under the auspices of the International Red Cross. For the official record of this phase of the work of the First Committee, see ibid., pages 115–190. For the text of the report to the General Assembly on the First Committee’s consideration of the Greek question, including the texts of the resolutions mentioned above, see GA (IV), Plenary Meetings, Annex, pages 61–68. The joint resolution of October 27 and the Soviet resolution of October 27 were considered again by the General Assembly at its meetings on November 17 and 18; see the editorial note, page 456 [Pg. 456 includes portions of Doc. 249, Doc. 250, and Doc. 251]. For the text of the Soviet resolution as circulated on October 27 (U.N. doc. A/C.1/518), see Carlyle, Documents on International Affairs, 1949–50, pages 235–236. For the text of the statement made in favor of the joint Australian-Chinese-United Kingdom-United States resolution of October 27 (U.N. doc. A/C.1/513) at the First Committee’s 298th Meeting, October 27, see Department of State Bulletin, November 21, 1949, pages 779–783. For an authoritative account of the deliberations of the First Committee on the Greek question, see Howard, The Greek Question in the Fourth General Assembly, pages 5–22.

The Director of the Joint United States Military Advisory and Planning Group, Greece (Van Fleet) to the Department of the Army Department of Defense Files: Telegram

[Document 249]

The Director of the Joint United States Military Advisory and Planning Group, Greece (Van Fleet) to the Department of the Army

top secret Athens, November 7, 1949.

L 4192. 1. Reurad WAE 95948.1 JUSMAPG planners and senior officers service groups are not sufficiently familiar with current US world wide strategic policy to be sure their thinking and recommendations be in accord with that of the Joint Staff. However there are a few facts bearing directly upon our European strategic policy which appear to be obvious. These are: a. Past major strategic concepts have been oriented towards stemming the Russian advance into Western Europe and Mediterranean area. These efforts have achieved an obvious measure of success.

b. Recent and future strategic concepts are oriented largely toward rolling the iron curtain back. Some results are already evident by the disaffection of Yugoslavia and its leanings toward the West. In addition, Albania is undergoing serious internal unrest; and should the present regime collapse, Albania will turn to the West. Bulgaria is having internal difficulties and these may lead to eventual revolution and alliance with the West. To strengthen our efforts to roll back the iron curtain in the Balkans the US and the British must maintain a strong combined posture in Greece.

c. To further its long range strategic concepts the US has established a solid belt around Western Europe and through Mediterranean area including Norway, Denmark, Holland, Belgium, France, Italy, Greece, Turkey and Iran, and it appears that Yugoslavia is about to be absorbed into this belt.

2. The English speaking world must stand solidly together in support of these strategic concepts. Specifically the US and British Commonwealth must be solidly unified militarily and must pursue this common objective on a combined basis. However, the US is financing the program necessary to mold this belt of nations into a unified whole. Thus, the US must hold the predominant position on all fronts in the establishment of policy inasmuch as the US provides the funds and the equip for implementation.

[Here follow numbered sections 3, 4, and 5. In these sections Van Fleet observed that contacts between the Joint United States Military Advisory and Planning Group and the British Military Mission in Greece had disclosed few if any differences of opinion as to overall strategy. Van Fleet further pointed out that the principal task remaining to be pursued in Greece by the missions, other than the delivery of supplies and equipment, was the field training of the Greek armed forces. These sections summarized some of the points made in message L 4124, October 17, to the Department of the Army, not printed, in which Van Fleet had presented in some detail his views on the future of American and British military missions in Greece (Department of Defense files).]

6. Current Greek situation: a. The situation in Greece changed quickly. Less than a year ago the military, political and economic situations were discouraging, and the Greek Government was asking for a larger army. Now the Government has agreed to a reduction of the armed forces. Presently all large, organized Communist inspired groups of guerrs have been driven from Greece. Yugoslavia has ceased to furnish military aid to those guerrs remaining in Greece while Albania and Bulgaria continue to furnish active aid to guerrs remaining inside Greece and to those driven out. Small guerr groups still exist within Greece and are being harassed and pursued by Greek armed forces, these groups are now and can, until they are exterminated, spread terror and acts of sabotage and are cells for the Communists. It is not believed that large guerr groups can enter Greece this winter, however, individuals can infiltrate at will and in the spring large groups can reenter and live off the land. If this should happen, active military operations will again occur.

b. The military successes of 1949 were due to continued American aid, revitalized Greek armed forces and noninterference in military affairs by the Greek Government. These successes have raised the Greek prestige among its northern neighbors. The economic recovery is slow, standards of living are low, there is much unemployment, many refugees still must be given relief, and reconstruction except for engineering projects, is slow. Discontent must still exist among many Greeks.

c. The geo-political position and military strategic position of Greece remain unchanged from time “Truman” doctrine was announced. However, it appears here that the strategic control of the Mediterranean area by US has increased since that announcement.

d. Greece offers an important base for the collection of strategic intelligence.

e. Greece has appreciated US military aid and has made effective use of it. None of it willingly or scandalously got to the enemy. She has demonstrated clearly that she was a good ally in World War I, World War II, and post-World War II, and will continue to be in event of World War III. No other European nation has a better record and a stouter heart against aggression and Communism.

7. From the Russian point of view, the US-British-Greek victory in this area in 1949 may be considered extremely local and temporary. In fact, the balance sheet to date may be overwhelmingly in favor of Russia in that the guerr movement has cost them money only and possibly not more than the equivalent of ten million dollars. It has cost US and Great Britain in excess of a billion dollars plus many British lives and untold destruction, suffering and lives of Greece itself. It seems logical to conclude that Russia in time will renew attack. Any weakness in Greece—military, political, economic or social will be exploited by the Soviets whereas a strong position along these lines would be discouraging to the Soviets. It is believed that US and Great Britain should seize the initiative and exploit current successes to roll back the iron curtain still farther in the Balkans. The opportunity calls for strong and careful handling.

8. While US military policy to date in Greece has been internal security and on a year to year basis, it now should be accepted that we are here to stay. Greece today is the keystone of the defense line from Western Europe to Middle East. I strongly recommend that we revise our thinking “that Greece is not important militarily”. With Greece in possession of the Nazis the Allies lost control of the Eastern Mediterranean. The same would be true should Russia take it over. But Greece in allied hands is a secondary front of tremendous strategic value. Russia could not ignore it by concentrating against Western Europe. It is believed that we should play up prominently our part in Greece as propaganda to divert Russian forces in event of hostilities. This could easily be done without too much financial investment. For instance, believe there could be important visits to this area with reconnaissance at critical points in the north. As example, a party of 36 Marine Corps aviators passed through here recently on a world tour of orientation. They were oriented by JUSMAPG but unfortunately they could remain only one day. I believe a two-day inspection of critical areas in Northern Greece would not only have been good instruction for them but could have had tremendous effect upon the Soviets.

9. My conclusions are summarized as follows: a. Greek victory local and temporary.

b. Russia, permitted, will renew attack.

c. Strong united stand by US and United Kingdom essential.

d. US year to year policy must be changed to a long term policy. The US is here to stay.

e. Greece can be secondary front for Soviet diversion in event of war. Also its strategic position has greatly increased.

f. Greeks will fight, are a good investment.

g. Soviets are in critical shape themselves, are unable to support a war and definitely would not declare one. We must eliminate fear of them.

h. Now is the time to win in the Balkans.

i. US and British Missions can be reduced and dove-tailed. More on this 10 November.

10. In this radio I have commented upon the current Greek situation and the US position. My thoughts on what the British position will be and what it should be will be conveyed to you in radio Thursday, 10 November. General Sir John Crocker, Commander British Forces Middle East, will be in Athens on 8 and 9 November and has requested audience with me to discuss our military missions and common interests. So far the subj matter has been classified “for American eyes only.” It is requested that I be given authority to fully discuss the subj with the Chiefs of the British Missions and Gen Crocker.2

1 Dated October 27, not printed. It requested Lieutenant General Van Fleet to give his views on the U.S. long-range position in Greece, the probable British position in Greece, and, from the U.S. military point of view, What the British position should be (Department of Defense files).

2 Message WAR 96278, November 8, from the Department of the Army to Lieutenant General Van Fleet, not printed, authorized Van Fleet to discuss with the British authorities on an exploratory basis the activities of the military missions and other allied matters pertaining to Greece (Department of Defense files). In his message L 4201, November 10 to the Department of the Army, not printed, Van Fleet reported that he had discussed with General Crocker and the heads of the British Military Missions in Greece such issues as the future size and composition of the Greek armed forces and of the U.S. and British military missions. Van Fleet found British views practically identical with American thinking, and the British appeared to be most willing to accept the American solution. Van Fleet concluded his message as follows: “It is my strong view that it is paramount that any solution adopted for Greece must be one which will present a solid US-British front in the Balkans. The strongest position that can be taken in the Eastern Mediterranean and specifically in Greece should be in US-British posture presenting a very obvious and incontestable united front which will insure an unbroken link in the present chain of US interests around Europe from Norway to the Middle East.” (Department of Defense files)

Editorial Note [Document 250]

Editorial Note

President Truman received a courtesy visit from Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of Foreign Affairs Tsaldaris and Deputy Prime Minister Venizelos at the White House at noon on November 18. Tsaldaris and Venizelos, who had headed the Greek Delegation to the Fourth Session of the United Nations General Assembly, were about to return to Greece. According to the brief statement issued to the press on November 18 (Department of State Bulletin, November 28, 1949, page 829, and Public Papers of the Presidents: Harry 8. Truman, 1949, page 572), the President took the occasion to congratulate the Greek leaders on the victories won by the Greek national forces over the guerrilla movement. The President also assured his callers of the continued interest of the United States in the welfare and security of the Greek people. No additional record has been found in the files of the Department of State regarding the substance of the conversation.

Editorial Note [Document 251]

Editorial Note

At its 244th, 245th, and 246th Meetings, November 17 and 18, (GA (IV), Plenary, pages 225–264), the United Nations General Assembly took up the Greek question in plenary session. The positions of the delegations expressed earlier in the First Committee meetings (see the editorial note, page 451 [Pg. 451 includes portions of Doc. 247 and Doc. 248]) were restated. For the text of the speech by the United States Alternate Representative, Benjamin V. Cohen, to the 244th Plenary Meeting of the Assembly, setting forth the position of the United States on the Greek question, see Department of State Bulletin, November 29, 1949, pages 813–816, or A Decade of American Foreign Policy, 1941–49, pages 774–779. At its 246th Meeting the General Assembly adopted the joint resolution on the continuation of the United Nations Special Committee on the Balkans, introduced in the First Committee jointly by Australia, China, the United Kingdom, and the United States, by a vote of 50 to 6 with 2 abstentions. At the same meeting the Assembly also adopted unanimously the resolution adopted previously by the First Committee on the repatriation of Greek children. For the texts of these two resolutions designated 288 (IV) A and B, respectively, see United Nations, Official Records of the General Assembly, Fourth Session, Resolutions, pages 9–10. (Hereafter cited as GA (IV), Resolutions.) The texts of these resolutions also appear in Carlye, Documents on International Affairs, 1949–50, pages 236–239 and A Decade of American Foreign Policy, 1941–49, pages 780–782. The Soviet draft resolution on Greece, which had failed to be adopted earlier by the First Committee, was again rejected by the General Assembly on a paragraph-by-paragraph vote. The General Assembly considered the Greek question for the last time during the Fourth Session when, at its 268th Plenary Meeting, December 5 (GA (IV), Plenary, page 522), the Soviet Delegation withdrew a proposed resolution concerning the suspension of certain Greek death sentences in favor of a resolution introduced by the Ecuadoran Delegation requesting Assembly President Romulo to ascertain the views of the Greek Government concerning the suspension of death sentences. For the text of this final resolution, designated 288 (IV) C, see GA (IV), Resolutions, page 10, or Carlyle, Documents on International Affairs, 1949–50, page 239. In a statement to the 276th and final Plenary Meeting of the General Assembly, December 10 (GA (IV), Plenary, page 615), President Romulo reported having been informed by the Greek Government that there had been no further executions following the recent Greek clemency legislation. For the text of Romulo’s statement, see the Department of State’s aide-mémoire of December 21 to the Greek Embassy, page 468 [Pg. 468 is part of Doc. 261]. For a brief, authoritative account of General Assembly plenary meetings on the Greek question, see Howard, The Greek Question in the Fourth General Assembly, pages 22–23.

The Secretary of State to the United States Mission to the United Nations, at New York 501.BB/11–1849: Telegram

[Document 252]

The Secretary of State to the United States Mission to the United Nations, at New York 1

secret Washington, November 18, 1949—8 p. m.

604. Dept suggests USUN take appropriate occasion to talk to Yugo Del, preferably Bebler, re likely Yugo attitude toward implementation GA Res on Grk case, especially Paras 11, 12, 13 on verification disarmament and disposition guerrillas and repatriation Grk nationals, and also Res on Grk children.2 Dept wld like to have Yugo views on this subj before proposing UNSCOB take initiative by communicating with Alb, Bulg, Yugo and other states on it.

You might say US realizes Yugo Govt might find it difficult cooperate with UNSCOB in view previous strong stand against it, but wld like to know whether Yugos have given any thought to compliance with GA Res and methods whereby this might be done. The point cld be made that, in light Yugo reliance on UN as instrument for maintenance peace and election to SC,3 Yugo’s standing with UN members can hardly remain unaffected by failure comply with GA resolutions. Therefore, we hope Yugo will give serious consideration to means of compliance present Res Grk case. Suggest USUN apprise Aglion4 this approach and encourage him sound out Yugos same problem.

Acheson

1 This telegram was repeated to Belgrade as 730 and to Athens as 2015, Baicom 317.

2 Regarding the General Assembly resolutions of November 18 under reference here, see the editorial note, p. 456 [Pg. 456 includes portions of Doc. 249, Doc. 250, and Doc. 251].

3 Yugoslavia was elected to the membership of the United Nations Security Council on October 20. For documentation on the Yugoslav candidacy and election to the Council, which was supported by the United States, see vol. ii, pp. 310 ff.

4 Raoul Aglion, Principal Secretary of the United Nations Special Committee on the Balkans.

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern, South Asian, and African Affairs (McGhee) 868.00/11–1849

[Document 253]

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern, South Asian, and African Affairs (McGhee)

confidential [Washington,] November 18, 1949.

Participants: Mr. Venizelos, Deputy Prime Minister of Greece

Mr. McGhee, NEA

Mr. Dixon

Mr. Venizelos asked me if I had seen Mr. Exintaris and if he had discussed the Markezinis proposed Papagos Service Government with me.1 I said that he had been to see me and had briefly discussed that subject. Mr. Venizelos said that Mr. Exintaris had been to see him and had tried to point out that it was Mr. Venizelos’ duty to assist in bringing about the Proposed Service Government. Mr. Exintaris had said that he did not believe it would be possible for the Papagos Service Government to assume power unless the movement were supported by the two major parties in Greece. Mr. Venizelos said that he was not in favor of the Papagos Service Government and that he felt elections should be held this winter. I said that while this was an internal Greek matter and that while I did not wish to interfere with internal matters of Greece, nevertheless I felt that nothing should be done there which was unconstitutional. I said I did not believe in the idea of being too flexible about the holding of elections. The United States held elections during the Civil War and also during the last war. In holding these elections the normal processes of Government were not in any way impaired. The idea of providing an interim to allow the quieting down of passions which had been engendered during the civil war did not seem compelling to me. I said that I could not see the necessity for having such an Interim Government. The question of timing elections, if carried to an extreme, could result in the election occurring at such a time as to be able almost to predict the exact outcome of the elections. I said I felt that even an election which occurred within the constitutional period required, should be announced in advance in order to facilitate as normal an expression of the will of the people as possible. Mr. Venizelos said that the elections would probably be held in February. He said that he was going “to be quiet about the civil war” and the political aspects which arose therefrom in his campaign. I told Mr. Venizelos that I believed that Greece would at least have some period of peace while the Cominform trained its guns on Yugoslavia.

Mr. Venizelos said that Eleftheria was the only real democratic paper in Greece. The newspaper in the past had been rumored to be in the fellow-traveler category, but its status as a liberal newspaper was pretty well understood now. However, there had been from time to time many difficulties interposed to prevent it from circulating freely. This was especially true in the provinces of Greece. Not long ago a loan was approved by the Greek Currency Committee for Eleftheria to buy a new printing press from Germany. A subsequent loan was granted in order for the newspaper to build an appropriate building for the housing of the press and newspaper offices. The extreme right newspapers had taken up the matter of the Currency Committee’s approval of the loan and had attempted to portray the action as a scandal. Because of the political pressure created, the Committee’s approval of the loan was submitted to the Steering Committee where it is still under consideration. Mr. Venizelos said he felt that the loan should be granted. He said that if the Americans on the Steering Committee were favorable to the granting of the loans, he felt that would facilitate their being finalized. Mr. Venizelos said he believed that Mr. Tsaldaris was also in favor of granting this loan. I told Mr. Venizelos that those matters came under the cognizance of Ambassador Grady who had all power to decide and act on behalf of the American Government in Athens. I said that I would be in Athens in a few days and that I would be pleased to discuss the matter with the Ambassador.

1 In late September and early October, Spyridon Markezinis, the leader of the New Party, published a series of articles in the newspapers Estia and Vima in Athens outlining his proposals for a solution to Greece’s political problems. Central to Markezinis’ program was the postponement of elections and the establishment of an interim government under Gen. Papagos which would carry out needed reforms. Markezinis’ proposals had given rise to much speculation in political circles in Athens. The texts of Markezinis’ articles and a commentary thereon were transmitted in despatch 771, November 7, from Athens, not printed (868.00/11–749). Markezinis’ views, as reported to an officer of the Embassy in Athens during a conversation on October 12, were transmitted to the Department in despatch 719, October 13, from Athens, not printed (868.00/10–1349). George Exindaris, a minister in several Greek cabinets before World War II and Greek representative in Italy, 1945–46, discussed Markezinis’ proposals with officers of the Department of State during a call on October 11 (memorandum of conversation by Dixon, October 11, 1949: 868.00/10–1149).

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in Greece 868.00/11–2149: Telegram

[Document 254]

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in Greece 1

secret Washington, November 21, 1949—5 p. m.

2027. [Here follows a one-paragraph summary of the conversation of November 18 between Assistant Secretary of State McGhee and Greek Deputy Prime Minister Venizelos, reported upon in McGhee’s memorandum of conversation, supra.]

At the same time Dendramis called on Hare to ascertain Dept’s further views re Grk proposal for eastern defense pact embracing Greece, Turkey and perhaps eventually Yugo. Hare replied Dept’s position, as explained by Secy to Tsaldaris Oct 28,2 was unchanged, namely that US cld not consider extending present commitments until West Eur members North Atlantic Pact able contribute substantially to west Eur defense. Added Dept wld consider any approach to Yugos on mil defense Pact entirely premature, but wld welcome prelim Grk-Yugo rapprochement. Said Dept cld not oppose direct Grk-Turk negots and desired neither encourage or discourage purely local Grk-Turk Pact although psychological benefits Greece of such Pact might be offset by other disadvantages. In response Dendramis’ request for continuing gestures of US support Greece such as visits by US and North Atlantic mil leaders, Hare agreed some gestures desirable but pointed out we must avoid provoking USSR or appearance of promising Grks more than we can deliver. Hare ended conversation by strong plea for internal clemency Greece, especially urging executions shld not be resumed on previous scale fol termination GA.

Acheson

1 This telegram was repeated to the Embassies in Turkey and Yugoslavia.

2 See the Secretary of State’s memorandum of conversation, October 28, p. 447 [Pg. 447 includes portions of Doc. 244, Doc. 245, and Doc. 246].

The Acting Secretary of State to the Embassy in Greece 868.20/11–749: Telegram

[Document 255]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Embassy in Greece

secret Washington, November 22, 1949—4 p. m.

Gama 59. Re Amag 791 and 82,2 question specific allocation for Greece FY 50 undecided and in apportioning funds Dept will take fully into account ur views and those of Van Fleet as to minimum requirements to accomplish objective of program. That objective, reviewed below, shld be underlying principle in relation recommendation for mil aid.

Grk mil aid program designed for purpose supplying and equipping Grk forces to enable them successfully cope with guerrilla warfare existing within country, in reestablishing internal security. There has been no commitment concerning Amer aid to Grk forces after guerrilla menace reduced to police proportions. In light developments thus far, and considering threat further incursions by guerrilla forces now in neighboring countries, Dept considers objective of program during remainder FY to support Grk forces in (a) continued liquidation remaining guerrillas within Greece, and (b) preparing cope with any reactivation guerrilla hostilities resulting from return of forces now abroad, based on reasonable expectations in light all existing info. In latter connection, your own evaluation possibility further guerrilla activity is requested. There is no present intention utilize Amer aid funds in supplying Grk forces in preparing meet such eventuality as an outright invasion by fon troops, or for other purposes going beyond the objective indicated.

Dept therefore feels requirements must be set forth on basis of actual needs for program purposes within foregoing objective, without reference amt theoretically earmarked for Greece in Congressional appropriation. Dept cannot agree any commitment, moral or otherwise, not to reduce funds announced if not fully justified present US objective. In this connection Dept urgently needs tele info on program data upon which estimated $160 million minimum need is based in order plan magnitude program and in light thereof justify further current commitments. This shld include (a) rations, clothing and other consumable quartermaster supplies for troops, (b) ammunition and other consumable ordnance supplies, and (c) equipment program. Data shld include general plan for nr and types manpower and organizational units, and level of supply which program is intended accomplish. Also report on level supplies on hand and in pipeline. It shld also include extent to which program provides for stockpiles for use after end FY 50.3

Pending final determination fund allocation suggest Grks be not informed that fund reduction is contemplated, although impression to contrary shld be avoided. Understandable Grks wld be more susceptible cut in forces if assurance cld be given that dollar funds which otherwise wld go into rations and supplies for surplus troops wld be put into equipment program; however cogent argument shld be that unless forces are cut Greece cannot reap appreciable benefits ECA development program.

Foregoing of course does not exclude reappraisal at later date of objective in Grk Aid program in event JCS shld recommend long range mil objectives and NSC shld approve change in position re long-range US strategic interest in Greece. Every effort will be made obtain from JCS and NSC views in light present situation before final Grk allocation will be made.

Webb

1 Not printed, but see footnote 1 to the letter of October 23 from Grady to Diomedes, p. 440 [Pg. 440 is part of Doc. 242].

2 Telegram Gama 58, October 28, to Athens, not printed, suggested that further reductions in military assistance to Greece could be made in view of the favorable developments within Greece—perhaps to the extent of the $20 million in assistance which had been transferred the previous year from the Turkish program to the Greek program (840.50 Recovery/10–2049). In his telegram Amag 82, November 7, from Athens, hot printed, Grady replied that both he and General Van Fleet were greatly disturbed by the suggested reduction. They feared that the reduction would dangerously cripple the plan to leave a modern and effective military force in Greece (868.20/11–749).

3 In his telegram Amag 88, December 8, from Athens, not printed, Ambassador Grady presented the detailed program data requested here (868.20/12–849).

Editorial Note [Document 256]

Editorial Note

On November 28, 1949, President Truman transmitted to Congress the eighth quarterly report on United States military assistance to Greece and Turkey. The report, which covered the period from April 1 to June 30, 1949, reviewed military assistance to Greece, Greek Army, Navy, and Air Force operations, the Greek guerrilla situation as of June 30, Greek military training, and the organization of the American Mission for Aid to Greece. The report concluded that in August 1949 the Greek armed forces reestablished themselves along the northern frontiers of Greece and substantially eliminated organized guerrilla resistance in Greece. Greek economic efforts during the period were devoted mainly to holding the line against war-generated inflationary pressures, developing a program for the rehabilitation of guerrilla-stricken refugees, and implementation, with American advice, of various reforms designed to insure a stable basis for future economic development. United States military aid valued at nearly $32 million and economic aid valued at over $3 million were delivered to Greece during the period. For the text of the report, see Eighth Report to Congress on Assistance to Greece and Turkey for the Period Ended June 30, 1949, Department of State Publication 3674, Economic Cooperation Series 22 (Washington: U.S. Government Printing Office, 1949).

The Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern, South Asian, and African Affairs (McGhee) to the Secretary of State 868.20/11–3049: Telegram

[Document 257]

The Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern, South Asian, and African Affairs (McGhee) to the Secretary of State 1

secret Istanbul, November 30, 1949—2 p. m.

275. From McGhee. In conversation with me in Athens and during Istanbul Conference Ambassador Grady has expressed his sincere and serious apprehensions that Department, in attempts to conserve funds or find additional funds for military assistance to other areas, may reduce sums for Greek program to point endangering a very real success for American foreign policy that has been achieved in Greece. As Department is fully aware, Ambassador Grady has on numerous occasions this year and last, taken the lead in proposing large-scale economies in Greek aid funds and has worked tirelessly for earliest possible reduction Greek armed forces, as well as exercising tightest control over expenditure aid funds. I believe that we should give most thorough and careful considerations to Ambassador Grady’s line of thought as follows:

“Danger of guerrilla war is not great at present. There are, however, possible developments, such as installation of a Cominform regime in Yugoslavia, which could change the picture very quickly and again subject Greece to the active dangers of Russian imperialism. In any case, it is essential that Greece possess strong if reduced striking force to protect its borders from any large-scale infiltration of 11,000–12,000 guerrillas now in neighboring northern countries and to attain objectives set out in Department’s working paper ‘to discourage renewed guerrilla activity and to strike effectively at any attempts by Communists to revive such activity on a large scale’.

There is also the complementary question of morale of Greek people which has in past at times been dangerously low and has upon occasion constituted a serious obstacle to success of our efforts in all fields, political and economic as well as military. Drastic action with regard to reduction of American military aid and over-hasty demobilization might well again depress morale to dangerous level. We can carry out our plans for demobilization during calendar year 1950 only if we can retain full cooperation of Papagos and GGS and assistance of some of principal political figures including the King. For example, if the leaders drag their feet on proposed demobilization, which they can do if they choose, the ECA program will be adversely affected.

Greeks are understandably preoccupied with preservation their security. They feel they have been and again will be object of Russian direct or indirect invasion as soon as, if not sooner, than Western Europe. Latter has Atlantic Pact and MAP. Greeks have only MAP and I have frequently told them that military assistance for FY 1951 will be on relatively minor scale. Furthermore, despite its best efforts UN has been unable provide anything in nature of real protection for Greece. Greeks feel strongly necessity of some form of guarantee for their borders. They are not so insistent upon this matter as some other states, but sad experience has given them more than ample cause for concern with regard to this question. At our meetings in Istanbul all have agreed that conclusion of pacts in this part of world is not wise or practicable at this time. In view of the lack of any definite assurances and demonstrated inability of UN to cope with aggression against their country, Greeks realize full well that their only real security at present lies in their own forces. These factors should be taken into account in assessing military needs of a country as exposed as is Greece.

I want army reduced as quickly and to as great degree as is practically possible. I will continue make every effort to keep expenditures Greek aid funds to minimum consistent with our objectives and to this end will carefully review planned program and reply fully to Deptel Gama 592 shortly after my return to Athens.”

Although I believe Greece represents critical test case for our ability to reduce assistance and that we must move as soon as possible to reduce the total level of aid to Greece, I am impressed with Ambassador Grady’s argument and particularly with desirability not sacrifice hard-won gains of past two years. There is further consideration that Greek army may be of advantage in light new Balkan situation which was not envisaged original PL 75 policy and which I hope can be thoroughly evaluated by JCS soonest. In general, I believe too in giving benefit of doubt to man on spot. A decision as to actual reduction should, I believe, be based on technical analysis after Grady’s reply to Gama 59 has been received. However, I believe foregoing should be kept fully in mind as basis for such evaluation.

[McGhee]

1 This telegram was transmitted via the facilities of the Embassy in Istanbul where Assistant Secretary McGhee was in attendance at the Near Eastern Chiefs of Mission Conference. For additional documentation on that conference, see pp. 165 [Pg. 165 is part of Doc. 71] ff.

2 Dated November 22, p. 461 [Pg. 461 includes portions of Doc. 254 and Doc. 255].

Editorial Note [Document 258]

Editorial Note

At his press and radio news conference on November 30, Secretary of State Acheson took note of that portion of the United Nations General Assembly resolution of November 18 (see the editorial note, page 456 [Pg. 456 includes portions of Doc. 249, Doc. 250, and Doc. 251]) which recommended that all members of the United Nations and other States refrain from the direct or indirect provision of arms and other materials of war to Albania and Bulgaria until it was determined that the unlawful assistance of Albania and Bulgaria to the Greek guerrillas had ceased. Secretary Acheson promised that the United States would abide faithfully by the recommendation and was continuing in force all necessary measures to ensure that no arms or other materials of war were made available to Albania or Bulgaria through areas under American control and jurisdiction. For the text of the Secretary of State’s statement (Press Release No. 937), see Department of State Bulletin, December 12, 1949, page 911. For documentation on the embargo on arms shipments to Albania and Bulgaria, see volume V, pages 61 ff.

The Chargé in Greece (Minor) to the Secretary of State 868.00/12–1649: Telegram

[Document 259]

The Chargé in Greece (Minor) to the Secretary of State

confidential Athens, December 16, 1949—11 a. m.

2496. Embtel 2487, December 14.1 I called on Prime Minister yesterday for one of our periodic talks, desiring particularly express our hope martial law and its attendant restrictions will be abandoned as rapidly as possible in order that Greece may resume full democratic procedures and enter pre-election period unfettered by measures which make difficult or impossible free expression of opinion. I stressed importance of revealing Greece to World in its true democratic light and thereby averting criticisms which are inevitable if Greeks show sign of retaining measures which would render free elections impossible. Prime Minister replied he was in full agreement and that government is moving in this direction. He admitted, however, that it is not easy to convince military persons along this line and suggested that I make these views known “elsewhere.”2

Prime Minister then quickly turned discussion to politics and said he wished to express his concern and that of most political leaders in Greece at possibility of Papagos entering politics.3 His objections may be summarized in following three points: 1. Papagos is essential in Army, the threat to Greece by no means having been eliminated.

2. His entry into politics would probably be interpreted as sharp swing to right and as paving way to military dictatorship. This would show Greece to world in bad light and might be used by Russia and satellites as pretext for further action against Greece.

3. It may come to be believed that King is backing Papagos in which case crown would become involved in internal politics to its detriment. King should remain aloof from all politics to maintain the high respect he has earned. Prime Minister said that while he himself does not believe King is involved in Papagos movement, the general impression can hardly fail to develop among public.4

In conclusion he read me sentence from Bismarck outlining danger inherent in introducing military mentality into politics. I replied, along lines last paragraph Embtel 2490, December 15,5 that these matters were for the Greeks to decide.

Later I saw Minister of Foreign Affairs on another subject and when conversation turned to politics Tsaldaris also expressed concern re Papagos entering politics. However, he based his objection on sole point that Papagos is irreplaceable in military establishment and cannot be spared for politics. He added that while the Americans understandably cannot express preferences in purely political matters, it is their right and even duty to see that military establishment into which they have put so much money is provided with effective leadership.

Minor

1 Not printed; it reported that Greek Minister for Public Order Rendis had refused permission to a former follower of the late dictator John Metaxas to hold a political rally in Athens. Rendis explained the ban in terms of the great internal turmoil in Greece and the continued existence of martial law. (868.00/12–1549)

2 Telegram 2559, December 27, from Athens, not printed, reported that the Greek Government had abolished martial law in the Athens area, Peloponnesus, and in nearly all Greek islands (868.00/12–2749).

3 In his telegram 2490, December 15, from Athens, not printed, Chargé Minor reported that Markezinis on December 13 urged King Paul to make every effort to induce Field Marshal Papagos to enter politics. Minor further reported that Papagos’ entry into politics was the principal Greek political issue currently being discussed and the Embassy’s position in the matter was being sought from all sides. Minor explained that when questioned, the Embassy was replying that questions relating to political parties and personalities were for the Greek people to resolve and that no indication as to American preference could be expected of the Embassy. (868.00/12–1549)

4 In his telegram 2582, December 29, from Athens, not printed, Ambassador Grady reported that King Paul had told an Embassy officer in categorical terms that Papagos would not stand for election or enter politics at “this time.” The King stated that about a week earlier he had so advised Papagos who had replied that he had come independently to the same conclusion. The King explained that he had carefully considered the merits of Papagos’ candidacy under current conditions and had decided that the disadvantages far outweighed the advantages. (868.00/12–2949)

5 See footnote 3, above.

The Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Kirk) to the Secretary of State 868.00/12–1849: Telegram

[Document 260]

The Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Kirk) to the Secretary of State

secret Moscow, December 18, 1949—1 p. m.

3134. While agreeing with conclusion enclosure Department instructions 134, November 161 that Greek Communist guerrillas have been rendered ineffective as striking force for present, Embassy inclined place considerable emphasis on provisional character this situation and to caution against understandable tendency to consider current Soviet tactical lull as justifying appreciable reduction in total level US assistance to Greece (Grady–McGhee talks as reported Istanbul’s 275, November 30 to Department and Depintel December 122 re Anglo-American and NME planning Greek military forces).

Embassy thinking influenced by obviously close link between Tito problem and recent Greek guerrilla defeats (Embtel 3062, December 93 ) and also by conviction that as long as Greek rebel forces of 10,000 capable of military service are in satellite or Soviet territory (Department instructions 134) and at disposal Soviet power, they constitute latent military threat which Soviets can always reorganize rapidly for action inside Greek borders.

Aside from military factors, including strategic importance Greece in any Soviet thrust to eastern Mediterranean area, Embassy concerned with possible harmful effect on politico-economic health of Greece of any appreciable decrease US aid this time. This connection Embassy suggests that Greek agricultural problem appropriate sphere of long-term US action under Point Four technical assistance program.

It would appear preferable to utilize relative calm of what may be short breathing spell from direct Communist military threat to push vigorously to completion projected programs for strengthening Greek economy and administration services. Otherwise, we run risk of having to answer another Greek fire-alarm on emergency basis.

Sent Department 3134. Department pass London 342, Athens 94.

Kirk

1 Not printed; it transmitted a copy of Department of State, Office of Intelligence Research Report No. 5073, October 26, 1949, entitled “Estimate of Greek Guerrilla Strength and Disposition Outside Greece,” not printed. The report concluded that the Greek Communist rebels had been rendered ineffective as a striking force as a result of the Vitsi–Grammos defeat of August-September. Sporadic rebel incursions into Greece from Albania and Bulgaria might be expected, but the Cominform would have to devise a new plan for the domination of Greece. (868.00/11–1649)

2 Not printed; it reported that the British Embassy had informed the Department of State that the British Chiefs of Staff would soon approach the National Military Establishment regarding long-range plans for the size and support of Greek military forces, long-range US–UK strategic objectives in Greece, and possible integration of the US and UK military missions in Greece (800.00 Summaries/12–1249).

3 In it the Embassy in Moscow presented a year-end appraisal of Soviet policies and attitudes towards Europe. For the text of the telegram, see vol. v, p. 681.

The Department of State to the Greek Embassy 501.BB Balkan/12–2149

[Document 261]

The Department of State to the Greek Embassy 1

confidential

Aide-Mémoire

Reference is made to the verbal inquiry of December 16, 1949 of the Royal Greek Embassy concerning the remarks on the Greek conciliation effort in President Romulo’s address to the General Assembly on December 10, 1949. The full remarks appear as follows in the verbatim record of the 276th plenary meeting:

“We are now approaching the closing exercises, but before we reach that item, as Chairman of the Conciliation Committee I would like to inform the General Assembly that the Committee has held further informal conversations with the representatives of the governments primarily concerned in the Greek question. From those conversations it appears that the prospects of peace are encouraging. I am confident that the progressive betterment of relations between the states concerned can be assured if all parties abide in good faith by the resolutions of the General Assembly and the provisions of the Charter.

It is my hope that all parties will, by their own free decisions, do all in their power to heal the wounds left by the conflict of the last few years. I have been informed by the representatives of Greece that there have been no death sentences carried out in Greece since the recent clemency legislation was enacted. The Committee has ex pressed to the Greek representatives its belief that this fact may help improve the situation between Greece and her Northern neighbours. The Committee hopes that the situation will continue to improve in the future. Attitudes of humanitarianism and tolerance, compatible with security and public order, cannot but help to facilitate the work of conciliation which must eventually take place among the States involved in this problem.”

It is understood that the Royal Ministry for Foreign Affairs is disturbed by the relationship drawn by President Romulo between the suspension of executions in Greece under the recent clemency legislation and the hope for improvement in the situation between Greece and Greece’s northern neighbors. It was maintained by the Embassy that, from the legal point of view, the internal administration of justice in Greece is not a proper matter of international action while, from the political point of view, President Romulo’s remarks might lead Greece’s northern neighbors to justify their refusal of conciliation proposals on the grounds of death sentences in Greece. It was said that when Mr. Kyrou recently raised these points with President Romulo, the latter commented that the reference in question in his address had been incorporated on the basis of suggestions made by the United States and United Kingdom representatives at the General Assembly.

It is a fact that competent representatives of the United States Delegation, in discussing informally with President Romulo the question of completing the conciliation effort of the fourth regular session of the General Assembly and of complying with the Ecuadorian Resolution on death sentences in Greece, did suggest to President Romulo that he incorporate something along the lines of the abovequoted remarks in his closing address. It is understood that this specific suggestion was not discussed with the British Delegation.

In making this suggestion, the United States representatives were aware that the question of the suspension of Greek executions had been discussed at considerable length in the General Assembly, which had asked President Romulo to ascertain the views of the Greek Government on this matter. They were impressed, moreover, by the deep concern manifested by several non-communist Delegations for the humanitarian aspects of this question and by the extent to which the suspension of Greek executions, as of September 30, 1949, had resulted in the creation of a political atmosphere favorable to Greece.

President Romulo’s remarks, though based on an American suggestion, were of course made on his own responsibility as Chairman of the Conciliation Committee. Their appropriateness should, in the Department’s opinion, be judged in the light of the existing situation in the Balkans and of the atmosphere at the General Assembly, as outlined above. The Department believes, moreover, that it would be difficult to take issue with the general statement addressed by President Romulo to all Governments involved in the Greek situation: “Attitudes of humanitarianism and tolerance, compatible with security and public order, cannot but help to facilitate the work of conciliation which must eventually take place among the States involved in this problem.” As the Embassy is aware, the United States Government has consistently championed the observance of human rights throughout the world and especially in the communist-dominated countries. It has not concealed its hope that the Government of Greece will, in its own political interest and in accordance with the high tradition of Greek humanitarianism, pursue the broad policy of judicial leniency on which it has already embarked with such favor able results.

Washington, December 21, 1949.

1 At the concluding meeting of the Fourth Session of the United Nations General Assembly on December 10, Assembly President Romulo made a statement in his capacity as Chairman of the Conciliation Committee. The text of the statement appears in the document printed here. For the official record of the Assembly meeting, see GA (IV), Plenary, pp. 608–619 [Pgs. 608–619 include portions of Doc. 352, Doc. 353, Doc. 354, Doc. 355, Doc. 356, Doc. 357, Doc. 358, and Doc. 359]. On the afternoon of December 16, Greek Minister Economou-Gouras called at the Department of State at his request to protest, on instructions of the Greek Foreign Ministry, the substance of Romulo’s remarks. Economou-Gouras stated that offending portions of Romulo’s remarks had been included at the suggestion of the United States and British Delegations at the United Nations. Economou-Gouras com plained that it was inadmissible that the conduct of Greece’s northern neighbors with respect to Greece should be made conditional upon whether or not the Greek Government executed some Communists who had been supporting the aggressive designs of those countries against Greece (memorandum of con versation by Cromie, December 16, 1949: 501.BB/12–1649). The aide-mémoire printed here, prepared in the Department of State in response to Economou-Gouras’ oral démarche of December 16, was handed to Economou-Gouras by Deputy Director Rountree during a visit to the Department on December 22. In presenting the aide-mémoire, Rountree summarized the points made in it and expanded on the reasons which had led the United States Delegation to propose to Romulo that he include certain remarks on clemency in his statement to the General Assembly. Economou-Gouras reiterated the view of the Greek Government that references in Romulo’s statement to clemency for the rebels amounted to walking into a Communist propaganda trap. He said with some heat that American thinking on the matter represented a “deviation from the truth” which was that the one aim of the Soviet bloc was the overthrow of the Greek Government and its replacement by a Communist regime (memorandum of conversation by Cromie, December 22, 1949: 501.BB/12–2249).

IranIran

Contents

Concern of the United States with the hostile attitude of the Soviet Union toward Iran; political support of Iran by the United States; the question of United States military and economic aid to Iran (Documents 262-340)

Concern of the United States with the hostile attitude of the Soviet Union toward Iran; political support of Iran by the United States; the question of United States military and economic aid to IranConcern of the United States with the hostile attitude of the Soviet Union toward Iran; political support of Iran by the United States; the question of United States military and economic aid to Iran1

1 Continued from Foreign Relations, 1948, vol. v, Part 1, pp. 88–200.

[262] Editorial Note

[263] The Secretary of State to the Embassy in Iran

Washington, January 29, 1949—2 p. m.

891.00/1–2949: Telegram

[264] Policy Statement on Iran Prepared in the Department of State

[Washington,] February 1, 1949.

711.91/2–149

[265] The Secretary of State to the Embassy in Iran

Washington, February 1, 1949—7 p. m.

893.00/2–149: Telegram

[266] The Secretary of State to the Embassy in Iran

Washington, February 1, 1949—7 p. m.

891.011/2–149: Telegram

[267] The Chargé in Iran (Somerville) to the Secretary of State

Tehran, February 3, 1949—6 p. m.

891.011/2–349: Telegram

[268] The Chargé in Iran (Somerville) to the Secretary of State

Tehran, February 4, 1949.

891.001 Pahlavi, Reza Shah/2–449: Telegram

[269] The Chargé in Iran (Somerville) to the Secretary of State

Tehran, February 14, 1949—3 p. m.

891.00/2–1449: Telegram

[270] The Chargé in Iran (Somerville) to the Secretary of State

Tehran, February 15, 1949.

761.91/2–1549: Telegram

[271] The Chargé in Iran (Somerville) to the Secretary of State

Tehran, February 17, 1949—3 p. m.

891.00/2–1749: Telegram

[272] The Secretary of State to the Embassy in Iran

Washington, February 22, 1949—5 p. m.

891.00/2–2149: Telegram

[273] The Chargé in Iran (Somerville) to the Secretary of State

Tehran, March 4, 1949.

891.00/3–449: Airgram

[274] Memorandum by the Associate Chief of the Division of Eastern European Affairs (Hooker) to the Director of the Office of European Affairs (Hickerson)

[Washington,] March 8, 1949.

891.50/3–849

[275] The Secretary of State to the Embassy in Iran

Washington, March 9, 1949—7 p. m.

891.20/3–949: Telegram

[276] The Ambassador in Iran (Wiley) to the Secretary of State

Tehran, March 12, 1949—3 p. m.

891.248/3–1249: Telegram

[277] Memorandum of Conversation, by the Secretary of State

[Washington,] March 14, 1949.

761.91/3–1449

[278] The Ambassador in Iran (Wiley) to the Secretary of State

Tehran, March 16, 1949—11 a. m.

761.91/3–1649: Telegram

[279] The Secretary of State to the Embassy in Iran

Washington, March 23, 1949—2 p. m.

761.91/3–2349: Telegram

[280] The Ambassador in Iran (Wiley) to the Secretary of State

Tehran, March 24, 1949—11 a. m.

761.91/3–2449: Telegram

[281] The Ambassador in Iran (Wiley) to the Secretary of State

Tehran, March 29, 1949.

891.00/3–2949

[282] The Secretary of State to the Embassy in Iran

Washington, March 30, 1949—3 p. m.

761.91/3–2549: Telegram

[283] Editorial Note

[284] The Secretary of State to the Embassy in Iran

Washington, April 8, 1949—7 p. m.

761.9115/4–749: Telegram

[285] The Secretary of State to the Embassy in Iran

Washington, April 8, 1949—7 p. m.

890.20/4–849: Telegram

[286] The Ambassador in Iran (Wiley) to the Secretary of State

Tehran, April 12, 1949—noon.

891.00/4–1249: Telegram

[287] The Secretary of State to the Embassy in Iran

Washington, April 18, 1949—4 p. m.

891.20/4–949: Telegram

[288] The Secretary of State to the Embassy in Iran

Washington, April 18, 1949—4 p. m.

761.91/4–1249: Telegram

[289] The Ambassador in Iran (Wiley) to the Secretary of State

Tehran, April 20, 1949—10 a. m.

891.20/4–2049: Telegram

[290] Memorandum by the Director of the Office of Near Eastern and African Affairs (Satterthwaite) to the Coordinator for Military Assistance Programs (Berkner)

[Washington,] April 20, 1949.

891.20 Mission/4–2049

[291] The Ambassador in Iran (Wiley) to the Secretary of State

Tehran, April 21, 1949.

891.032/4–2149: Telegram

[292] The Secretary of State to the Embassy in Iran

Washington, April 21, 1949—7 p. m.

891.00/4–1249: Telegram

[293] The Ambassador in Iran (Wiley) to the Secretary of State

Tehran, April 22, 1949—3 p. m.

761.91/4–2249: Telegram

[294] The Secretary of State to the Embassy in Iran

Washington, April 22, 1949—7 p. m.

761.91/4–2249: Telegram

[295] The Ambassador in Iran (Wiley) to the Secretary of State

Tehran, April 26, 1949—3 p. m.

891.00/4–2649: Telegram

[296] The Ambassador in Iran (Wiley) to the Secretary of State

Tehran, April 28, 1949—11 a. m.

891.50/4–2849: Telegram

[297] The Secretary of State to the Embassy in Iran

Washington, April 29, 1949—7 p. m.

761.91/4–2249: Telegram

[298] The Ambassador in Iran (Wiley) to the Secretary of State

Tehran, April 29, 1949—5 p. m.

891.00/4–2949: Telegram

[299] Memorandum by the Director of the Office of Near Eastern and African Affairs (Satterthwaite) to the Secretary of State

[Washington,] May 3, 1949.

891.00/3–2949

[300] The Secretary of State to the Embassy in Iran

Washington, May 6, 1949—7 p. m.

891.00/4–2949: Telegram

[301] The Ambassador in Iran (Wiley) to the Secretary of State

Tehran, May 15, 1949—noon.

891.20/5–1549: Telegram

[302] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Iran (Wiley)

Washington, May 16, 1949.

891.00/3–2949

[303] The Acting Secretary of State to the Embassy in Iran

Washington, May 24, 1949—7 p. m.

891.20/5–2049: Telegram

[304] The Acting Secretary of State to the Embassy in Iran

Washington, May 25, 1949—1 p. m.

891.00/5–949: Telegram

[305] The Acting Secretary of State to the Embassy in Iran

Washington, May 25, 1949—6 p. m.

891.50 Seven Year Plan/5–2549: Telegram

[306] The Ambassador in Iran (Wiley) to the Secretary of State

Tehran, May 26, 1949—9 a. m.

891.20/5–2649: Telegram

[307] The Acting Secretary of State to the Embassy in Iran

Washington, May 27, 1949—6 p. m.

891.20/5–2649: Telegram

[308] The Acting Secretary of State to the Embassy in Iran

Washington, May 27, 1949—7 p. m.

891.50/6–2749: Telegram

[309] The Ambassador in Iran (Wiley) to the Secretary of State

Tehran, June 8, 1949—4 p. m.

891.24/6–849: Telegram

[310] The Ambassador in Iran (Wiley) to the Secretary of State

Tehran, June 22, 1949.

891.24/6–2249

[311] Memorandum of Conversation, by Mr. Philip A. Mangano of the Office of United Nations Political and Security Affairs

[Washington,] July 7, 1949.

761.91/7–749

[312] The Ambassador in Iran (Wiley) to the Secretary of State

Tehran, July 7, 1949—noon.

891.51/7–749: Telegram

[313] The Ambassador in Iran (Wiley) to the Secretary of State

Tehran, July 12, 1949—10 a. m.

891.50 Seven-Year Plan/7–1249: Telegram

[314] Memorandum by Mr. Henry L. Deimel, Jr., of the Office of Near Eastern and African Affairs to the Assistant Chief of the Division of Greek, Turkish, and Iranian Affairs (Dunn)

[Washington,] July 15, 1949.

891.20/7–1549

[315] Report of the National Security Council on the Position of the United States With Respect to Iran

[Washington,] July 21, 1949.

S/S–NSC Files, Lot 63 D 351, NSC 54 Series

[316] The Ambassador in Iran (Wiley) to the Secretary of State

Tehran, August 9, 1949—2 p. m.

891.20/8–949: Telegram

[317] The Secretary of State to the Embassy in Iran

Washington, August 30, 1949—6 p. m.

891.20/8–949: Telegram

[318] Memorandum by Major General L. L. Lemnitzer to the Coordinator for Military Assistance Programs (Berkner)

Washington, September 2, 1949.

891.24/9–249

[319] The Secretary of State to the Embassy in Iran

Washington, September 15, 1949—8 p. m.

891.20/9–549: Telegram

[320] The Secretary of State to the Iranian Ambassador (Ala)

Washington, September 22, 1949.

891.24/7–2949

[321] The Acting Secretary of State to the Embassy in Iran

Washington, September 28, 1949—7 p. m.

501.BD Europe/9–2849: Telegram

[322] The Secretary of State to the Embassy in Iran

Washington, October 19, 1949—5 p. m.

891.20/10–1949: Telegram

[323] Memorandum by the Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern, South Asian, and African Affairs (McGhee ) to the Director of the Mutual Defense Assistance Program (Bruce)

[Washington,] October 21, 1949.

891.24/10–2149

[324] The Ambassador in Iran (Wiley) to the Secretary of State

Tehran, October 22, 1949—4 p. m.

891.248/10–2249: Telegram

[325] The Secretary of State to the Embassy in Iran

Washington, October 26, 1949—6 p. m.

891.50 Seven Year Plan/10–2649: Telegram

[326] The Acting Secretary of State to the Embassy in Iran

Washington, November 9, 1949—7 p. m.

891.51/11–749: Telegram

[327] The Acting Secretary of State to the Embassy in Iran

Washington, November 10, 1949—7 p. m.

891.20 Mission/9–2149: Telegram

[328] Memorandum by the Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern, South Asian, and African Affairs (McGhee) to the Secretary of State

[Washington,] November 17, 1949.

891.001 Pahlavi [,Reza Shah]/11–1749

[329] Memorandum by the Secretary of State

[Washington,] November 18, 1949.

Secretary’s Memoranda, Lot 53 D 444, Secretary’s Memos

[330] Memorandum of Conversation, by the Secretary of State

[Washington,] November 18, 1949.

891.001 Pahlavi [,Reza Shah]/11–1849

[331] Memorandum of Conversation, by the Secretary of State

[Washington,] November 18, 1949.

891.20/11–1849

[332] Memorandum of Conversation by, the Secretary of State

[Washington,] November 18, 1949.

891.77/11–1849

[333] Editorial Note

[334] The Ambassador in Iran (Wiley) to the Secretary of State

Tehran, November 18, 1949.

891.20/11–1849

[335] Memorandum of Conversation, by the Director of the Office of Greek, Turkish, and Iranian Affairs (Jernegan)

[Washington,] November 19, 1949.

891.0001 Pahlavi [, Reza Shah]/11–1949

[336] The Iranian Embassy to the Department of State

Washington, November 29, 1949.

891.20/11–2949

[337] Memorandum of Conversation, by Mr. C. Vaughan Ferguson, Jr., of the Office of Greek, Turkish, and Iranian Affairs

[Washington,] December 6, 1949.

891.001 Pahlavi [, Reza Shah]/12–649

[338] The Secretary of State to the Embassy in Iran

Washington, December 6, 1949—7 p. m.

891.24/12–649: Telegram

[339] Memorandum by the Deputy Director of Mutual Defense Assistance (Ohly) to Major General L. L. Lemnitzer

Washington, December 14, 1949.

891.20/12–1449

[340] Joint Statement by President Truman and the Shahinshah of Iran (Mohammad Reza Shah Pahlavi)

December 30, 1949

Editorial Note [Document 262]

Editorial Note

James Somerville, the Chargé d’Affaires in Iran, and Evan M. Wilson, the First Secretary of Embassy, had an audience with the Shah on January 20. The Iranian monarch cited recent conversations in Washington by Iranian Ambassador Hussein Ala and Brigadier General Mohammad Mazhari, the Iranian Military Attaché, with a Department of the Army official. During the conversations, the Iranian representatives were said to have “advanced three alternative proposals for the defense of this country in the event of Russian aggression: (a) the first, which would involve holding Azerbaijan and Khorassaii as well as the rest of the country, would require an army of at least 500,000 men; (b) the second, which would involve holding certain mountain areas in the western and southwestern portion of the country in order to permit the defense of the oil fields, would require an army of 300,000 men including two armored divisions; while (c) the third, which was what could be accomplished by the present Iranian Army of about 100,000, with the American equipment it is now receiving, would permit only a small force in the same mountains to carry out guerrilla operations and try to defend the oil fields as much as possible.”

The Shah stressed the second alternative and expressed confidence that the Iranian Army as augmented along those lines would hold the indicated area. He stated “that if it were not possible for the United States to give Iran any more equipment than that coming in under the present arms credit, or for Iran to expand its Army beyond the present figure of roughly 100,000 men, the Iranian Army would have to confine its role to guerrilla and harrassing operations centering in the area around Hamadan, Kermansáh and Khurramabad.” He “stressed most earnestly the need for the United States giving Iran some indication of its strategic plans as regards this country.”

The Shah “concluded the audience by saying that in any case the Iranian Army would resist any aggression, and reiterating his re quest for more information as to the extent of aid which could be expected from the United States in such a contingency.” (Memo randum of conversation, presumably by Messrs. Somerville and Wilson; copy transmitted to John D. Jernegan, Chief of the Division of Greek, Turkish, and Iranian Affairs, by Mr. Somerville in his letter of January 21, 891.24/1–2149)

For the statement released to the press by the Department of State on July 29, 1948, detailing the credits extended to the Iranian Government for the purchase of American surplus military equipment, see Foreign Relations, 1948, volume V, Part 1, page 166.

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in Iran 891.00/1–2949: Telegram

[Document 263]

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in Iran 1

top secret Washington, January 29, 1949—2 p. m.

68. Following is substance oral statement made [to] Iranian Ambassador Jan 25 reply Shah’s inquiry as to whether US would give favorable consideration to Iran Gov request for military assistance on Greek-Turkish model:2 1. US desires help Iran. Extent of assistance is necessarily limited by (a) availability funds and equipment; (b) capacity Iranian forces to receive and utilize equipment and (c) economic capacity Iranian Gov to maintain equipment and forces required to utilize it.

2. World-wide demands on us for military assistance are enormous. We do not yet know their total magnitude or relative urgency nor what funds and materials will be available to satisfy them.

3. We lack legal authority furnish further military assistance to Iran or any other countries except Greece, Turkey and China. Action by Congress would be required. We are working on problem but cannot tell what Congress will do either in granting authority or in appropriating funds to meet various requests for military aid.

4. Delivery surplus military equipment to Iran under current program is just beginning and will require full year to complete. We believe capacity Iranian ports and transportation facilities will be fully occupied with this material during current year. In case of Turkey, despite careful advance preparations and number of available ports, we found that deliveries of military equipment strained capacity to utmost. It has not been possible even yet to deliver all of first year’s program.3

5. In light of foregoing we are unable at this time give definite reply Shah’s inquiry. We consider however that discussions of Ambassador and Military Attaché with State and Army officials have been very useful and we will bear carefully in mind considerations advanced by them in connection our continuing study and planning on problem military assistance programs.

It was emphasized this statement merely constituted progress report and not final answer either way.

All above is FYI to be used only in response to questions by Shah and Razmara,4 none other.

Acheson

1 This telegram was repeated to Moscow as 45 and London as 335.

2 For documentation on this subject, see pp. 227 [Pg. 227 is part of Doc. 105] ff. and 1638 [Pg. 1638 includes portions of Doc. 1139 and Doc. 1140] ff.

3 In a memorandum of January 10 to Under Secretary of State Robert A. Lovett, Joseph C. Satterthwaite, Director of the Office of Near Eastern and African Affairs, discussed the problem of an “Iranian Inquiry re Possible Military Aid Program for Iran.” The memorandum included seven recommendations and Mr. Lovett approved them. The first four recommendations are closely summarized in paragraphs numbered 1 to 4 in telegram 68. The remaining recommendations in the memorandum read as follows:“5. For the reasons given in paragraphs 2, 3, and 4 above, we consider it premature to give any assurances at this time regarding our attitude toward a request for further military aid to Iran. At a later date we should know better what it may be in our power to do and should then be in a position to consider, along with the proper Iranian authorities, to what extent the Iranian forces could effectively utilize any additional aid we might be able to offer and the extent of the burden on the Iranian economy which would be imposed by such aid.

“6. The whole question raised by the Iranian Ambassador on the instructions of the Shah will be discussed with Ambassador Wiley during his stay in the United States, and Mr. Wiley will be instructed to discuss it with His Majesty immediately on his return to Iran.

“7. If the Ambassador should argue that Iran will be left in an especially exposed position as a result of our (anticipated) close association with Western Europe in the North Atlantic Pact, such an association implying a lack of determination to defend the security of other parts of the world, he should be told that we have no intention of lessening our support for Iran and that we are working on means to make this clear to the world. The provision of military equipment to a nation is not the only, or even necessarily the best, means of assuring its independence. The strengthening of the military power of Western Europe through the North Atlantic Pact and any military aid program which might accompany it would in itself constitute a major element of security for Iran by helping to restore the balance of forces which has so often protected Iran in the past.” (891.24/1–1049)

Ambassador Ala, on January 25, had inquired whether Iran had been considered for membership in the North Atlantic Pact. The Department informed him that “we recognized we must avoid giving false impression that, by apparently preemptive commitment to Western Europe, we are abandoning Iran to predatory Soviet designs. Iranian people must not be led to feel that increased US support of Western Europe means any lessening of support for Iran and correspondingly USSR must not be given impression that aggression against Iran would go unchallenged because of apparent US concentration on European security. There would be in fact no slackening in US support of Iran and we were studying ways and means of making this clear to world.” (Telegram 86, February 1, to Tehran, 840.20/2–149; for the full text of telegram 86, see vol. iv, p. 60.)

4 Maj. Gen. Ali Razmara, Iranian Chief of Staff.

Policy Statement on Iran Prepared in the Department of State 711.91/2–149

[Document 264]

Policy Statement on Iran Prepared in the Department of State

secret [Washington,] February 1, 1949.

Iran

a. objectives

The primary objective of our policy toward Iran is to prevent the domination of that country by the USSR, and to strengthen Iran’s orientation toward the West. Because of its internal weaknesses and vulnerability to attack by its northern neighbor, Iran is the weakest link in the chain of independent states along the Soviet border in the strategically important Middle East. If Iran should come under Soviet domination, the independence of all other countries of the Middle East would be directly threatened and important security interests of the US would be jeopardized throughout the area. Specifically, if the USSR should achieve the historic Russian objective of gaining access to the Persian Gulf, it would (1) acquire advance bases for subversive activities or actual attack against a vast contiguous area including Turkey, Iraq, the Arabian Peninsula, Afghanistan, and Pakistan; (2) obtain a base hundreds of miles nearer to potential US-UK lines of defense in the Middle East than any held at present; (3) control part and threaten all of the Middle Eastern oil reservoir upon which we draw to conserve limited western hemisphere resources; (4) control continental air routes crossing Iran, threaten those traversing adjacent areas, and menace shipping in the Persian Gulf: and (5) undermine the will of all Middle Eastern countries to resist Soviet aggression.

Secondary objectives of our policy toward Iran are (1) to encourage relations between Iran and all states calculated to elicit United Nations support for its continued independence; (2) to maintain conditions of internal security, thereby increasing respect for Iranian sovereignty and avoiding a pretext for Soviet intervention, as well as making indirect Soviet aggression more difficult; (3) to foster an expanding economy with the purpose of alleviating economic discontent and strengthening allegiance to the central government; (4) to improve democratic institutions and processes in Iran so that Iranians might increasingly feel an affinity for the western world; and (5) to induce influential Iranians actively to support US interests in Iran, the Middle East, and the United Nations.

b. policy issues

Iran’s foreign policy is dictated largely by its inability to defend itself against an attack by the Soviet Union. Traditionally, Iran has maintained a modicum of independence as a buffer state by playing one foreign power off against another in a spheres-of-influence regime imposed by the Russians in the north and the British in the south. Recently, however, when US encouragement and support in large measure replaced British power and influence in the area, Iran has found it possible to achieve and maintain an effective degree of national independence. Having at first followed a policy of procrasti nation, evasion, and compromise when confronted by an aggressive Soviet attitude during and directly following the war, Iran has for the past two years, thanks to strong US support, stood up firmly for its independence in the face of persistent Soviet threats. As evidence of the tendency of certain Iranian leaders to align their country with the western powers, the Shah, the Iranian Chief of Staff, and the Iranian Ambassador in Washington have asked for US reaction to a contemplated Iranian request for military assistance of a type similar to that provided Greece and Turkey, in order to strengthen Iran’s defensive position.

[Here follow subsections dealing with political and economic subjects and Sections C (Relations with Other States) and D (Policy Evaluation).]

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in Iran 893.00/2–149: Telegram

[Document 265]

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in Iran 1

secret Washington, February 1, 1949—7 p. m.

us urgent

84. [From] Wiley2 for Somerville. Rumors have reached me that Shah intends nearest future precipitate question constitutional reform.3 While I am not out of sympathy with his aim I still feel he should proceed step by step with creation of senate as already provided for in constitution as essential first step. In view of fact that our Arms Credit Program is now beginning to flow in, that Iranian Govt intends to take step with SC re Iranian-Soviet relations4 and that we quite possibly may follow up this step with strong note to Sov Govt with copy to SC for info, it looks to me as if situation is such that there should be no added perturbation at this moment. In other words Shah should carefully consider not merely what steps he may desire to take for constitutional reform but still more important timing of any such steps. In my opinion he will be very ill advised to rock boat in any way at this time.

Pls try and get this message to Shah soonest. [Wiley.]

Acheson

1 This telegram was repeated to London as 361.

2 John C. Wiley, Ambassador to Iran; at this time, in Washington for consultation.

3 For documentation on the question of constitutional reform in Iran, see Foreign Relations, 1948, vol. v., Part 1, pp. 88 ff.

4 This reference is to the so-called AlA–Entezam proposals which called for the Iranian Government to send a communication to the Security Council, for its information, detailing Iranian relations with the Soviet Union, in connection with the Iranian case, which remained on the agenda of the Council. Nasrollah Entezam was Iranian Representative at the United Nations. The Department, on January 14, informed Tehran that Ambassador Ala had expressed renewed interest in communicating to the Council developments bearing on the Iranian case. It advised Ambassador Wiley that the “US is not urging course of action upon Iran. However, if Iran Gov is united in favor this step, it can be assured of sympathetic reaction here.” (Telegram 27, 501.BB/1–649)

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in Iran 891.011/2–149: Telegram

[Document 266]

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in Iran 1

secret Washington, February 1, 1949—7 p. m.

us urgent

85. Supplementing Deptel 84 Feb. 1: Brit Emb Rep on instruction FonOff read Dept Jan. 31 Le Rougetel2 report Shah’s plan issue decree this week calling Constituent Assembly amend Constitution, FonOff disposed accept Le Rougetel recommendations he be instructed (1) inquire Shah whether focal Iranian Cabinet and Majlis figures have been consulted, (2) take occasion discourage proposed action on basis present time ill chosen for series national polls, and (3) advise Shah implementation present Constitution provision re Senate should precede attempt obtain amendment basic laws. FonOff desired Dept views and expressed desirability parallel US–UK representations.

Dept indicated agreement Le Rougetel views and undertook re quest Emb Tehran consult Le Rougetel re concerting US–UK conversations with Shah. Dept expressed additional views: (1) introduction by Shah contentious issue at this time would upset possibility favorable Majlis action on pending Seven-year plan legislation and (2) internal dissension Iran might have serious effect abroad by exposing Iran to predatory Soviet designs and greatly decreasing ability US and UK support Iran. Brit Emb and Dept agreed that even introduction subject Senate might have unfortunate effect upon pending Majlis legislation but that sympathetic attitude toward implementation present Constitution might be necessary tactic discourage Shah from more grandiose scheme at this time.

Consult closely with Le Rougetel with view to urgent, energetic representations Shah along above lines.

Wiley concurs.

Acheson

1 This telegram was repeated to London as 362.

2 Sir John H. Le Rougetel, British Ambassador in Iran.

The Chargé in Iran (Somerville) to the Secretary of State 891.011/2–349: Telegram

[Document 267]

The Chargé in Iran (Somerville) to the Secretary of State

secret Tehran, February 3, 1949—6 p. m.

113. For Ambassador Wiley. Deptel 84, February 1. Your message was transmitted to Shah today. Please see immediately preceding telegram for my conversation with Le Rougetel on subject.1 In view of fact that Shah had taken initiative in sending word to Le Rougetel re his proposals and that latter expects to see Shah for full discussion next few days, it seemed to me best that I transmit your message through an intermediary, leaving it to Le Rougetel to have the initial discussion with Shah.2

As intermediary I chose Ebtehaj3 because I knew he had discussed same subject with you last fall at Shah’s request and because he had recently been sent to see me (on another subject) by Shah. After I had outlined to Ebtehaj considerations set forth your telegram, he said although personally disappointed at prospect of further delay he would urge Shah give favorable consideration to first securing Majlis action on Seven Year Plan4 and then making effort secure favorable action on Senate.

Ebtehaj saw Shah and later today informed me of conversation. Shah apparently was greatly upset at suggestion his plans be delayed. According Ebtehaj, Shah although not inclined accept validity of our arguments against early action eventually said “final concession” he could make would be: first, to “have Senate bill passed” by present Majlis and then “when Senate and new Majlis meet” to bring up question constitutional reform. When I inquired of Ebtehaj whether this would mean there would be no action on constitutional reform for some months, he said this was so. When I added it would seem from Shah’s reference to “final concession” that Shah was erroneously assuming we were permanently opposed to all his proposals for constitutional reform, Ebtehaj said he made much the same observation to Shah, but latter did not seem convinced.

Ebtehaj added he thought “a lot would depend” on way Shah’s conversation with Le Rougetel goes.

I am, of course, informing Le Rougetel fully.

Sent Department; repeated London 17.

Somerville

1 No. 112, February 3, 5 p. m., not printed.

2 The Department, on February 7, instructed Tehran to request Ambassador Le Rougetel to emphasize the full concurrence of Ambassador Wiley in his representations to the Shah (telegram 113, 891.011/2–749).

3 Abol Hassan Ebtehaj, Governor of the Central Bank of Iran.

4 The Policy Statement on Iran, p. 474 [Pg. 474 is part of Doc. 264], in the section on economic subjects, relates that “In December 1946 the Morrison–Knudson International Company, Inc. was engaged by the Government of Iran to make a survey and report on the potentialities for economic development in the country. The draft Seven–Year Plan bill, approved in Majlis committees, is based on the findings of the Morrison–Knudson report. In October 1948, Iran signed a contract with Overseas Con sultants, Inc., a group of US engineering and management planning organizations, to make a study of economic and social conditions in Iran and make additional recommendations relating to Iran’s development program.”

The Chargé in Iran (Somerville) to the Secretary of State 891.001 Pahlavi, Reza Shah/2–449: Telegram

[Document 268]

The Chargé in Iran (Somerville) to the Secretary of State

Tehran, February 4, 1949.

niact

119. Shah shot in face and side this afternoon by alleged member fanatical Moslem society “Parcham–I–Islam” (Flag of Islam), during celebration anniversary establishment Tehran University. Wounds not believed serious and eyewitness informs Embassy he saw Shah alive in car presumably on way to hospital.

Shah was mounting law school steps when man posing as photoggrapher approached him, pulled out gun, and shot him in mouth and cheek obviously with intent to kill. Bullet reportedly did not touch bone. Attacker then shot Shah in body causing flesh wound.

Attacker was seized by bodyguard (50 soldiers), dragged to side and shot to death. Police and soldiers maintained order in crowd which was dismissed in good order.

Further information follows.

I have sent message congratulating Shah on escape.1

Sent Department; repeated London 19, Moscow 8.

Somerville

1 President Truman, in a telegram to the Shah on February 4, stated: “I am deeply distressed at information received from the American Embassy at Tehran that an attack has been made on Your Majesty. I am, however, pleased to learn that later reports on your condition are reassuring. The people of the United States join me in wishing you a speedy recovery.” (891.001 Pahlavi, Reza Shah/2–449) As a result of the assassination attempt, the Iranian Government, on the night of February 4, declared martial law, outlawed the Tudeh Party, the Communist Party in Iran, and made many arrests (telegram 120, February 5, 10 a. m., from Tehran, 891 Pahlavi, Reza Shah/2–549).

The Chargé in Iran (Somerville) to the Secretary of State 891.00/2–1449: Telegram

[Document 269]

The Chargé in Iran (Somerville) to the Secretary of State

secret Tehran, February 14, 1949—3 p. m.

161. During audience which I had yesterday with Shah he commented at some length on crisis precipitated by attempt on his life and gave evidence of determination meet situation. He said, “We have some problems here which we must resolve and finish.” He continued that once a struggle against a fifth column was started it must be completed. Half measures were dangerous. This, of course, did not mean that there should be any excesses.

Shah said most important thing was that there must be a decent standard of living in this country and a new sense of social justice. He characterized Seven Year Plan as the most important means of achieving this and said it must be executed. There were other important social measures such as tax bill and land reforms.

His Majesty continued, course of events in last two years had shown that in order to carry out social reforms in this country it is necessary to have “a sane political force based on completely democratic forms as in the western European monarchies”. A strong government, he said, was necessary. Social reforms in Iran were not possible without political reforms, otherwise they were a waste of time. He said present moment was very important for the reason that the Iranian people had been greatly disturbed by attempted assassination. They now realized more keenly danger in which country stood. They could, however, forget in two or three months.

Shah said situation in Iran as it existed just prior to the attempt provided best possible opportunity for communism to make headway. Pie asserted, “For the sake of the country I cannot permit this situation to recur.” He went on to say he hoped he had sympathy of US as a great nation struggling for freedom and independence of world. In this struggle, he added, Iran was a most important element as it was gateway to greatest oil resources in world.

I referred to message which I had on instructions, sent Shah about ten days ago, prior to assassination attempt, urging that the present time was not propitious for constitutional reform (Deptels 84 and 85, February 1 and Embtels 112, February 3,1 and 113, February 3). Shah replied he understood our position but whole situation had changed.

Foregoing remarks of Shah correspond very closely to account given me by British Ambassador of audience he had two days previously. He also has definite impression Shah is planning drastic action of some sort in near future. While Shah did not disclose to me what he has in mind, from conversations with Le Rougetel, Bank Governor Ebtehaj, and others who have spoken with Shah in last few days, I gather Shah intends call a constituent assembly to deal with reform of constitution and at same time immediately to dissolve present Majlis, although it is not clear he has constitutional authority to do so. The royal decree calling for the constituent assembly and dissolving the Majlis would apparently be issued in place of the decree which Shah would have had to issue in any event within next two weeks calling for elections before July. Under the new program, Shah apparently hopes have constituent assembly meet by middle of April, following which new elections would be called so the new Majlis would be in session by July. In order to carry out these plans, Shah evidently feels a strong government will be necessary and is said to be thinking of Hakimi, Seyid Mohammad, Sadeq Tabatabai, and Ali Mansur, in that order, for Prime Minister. These points are covered more fully in Le Rougetel’s telegram to FonOff which should be presumably available to Department and Embassy London.

In his talk with Shah, Le Rougetel said he had been instructed to urge Shah proceed cautiously in this entire matter and that he knew this attitude was shared by Department of State and Ambassador Wiley as well as his FonOff. Shah, however, just as in his conversation with me, took position that whole situation had changed and that now was time to act. If he waited, opportunity for effective action might pass.2

Sent Department; repeated London as 28.

Somekville

1 Telegram 112 is not printed.

2 London reported, on February 14, that Ambassador Le Rougetel had had an audience with the Shah on the twelfth and had advised the Foreign Office of the Shah’s determination not to heed American and British advice and of his decision to dissolve the Majlis in a fortnight and order a Constituent Assembly (telegram 561, 891.00/2–1449). No. 561 also transmitted Ambassador Le Rougetel’s comment, presumably to the Foreign Office, that he agreed the time was ripe for the Shah to act and that failure to take decisive action would probably entail the overthrow of the regime in the next few months.

The Chargé in Iran (Somerville) to the Secretary of State 761.91/2–1549: Telegram

[Document 270]

The Chargé in Iran (Somerville) to the Secretary of State

priority Tehran, February 15, 1949.

168. Following official statement broadcast last night by Radio Tehran:

“Soviet Ambassador to Iran, Mr. Sadtchikov, in meeting with Iran Foreign Minister Saturday, February 12, protested against a part of statement made by Minister Health, Dr. Eqbal, in Majlis (National Assembly) on February 5. Mr. Sadtchikov stated Dr. Eqbal read documents which accused the Russians of interference in activities of political parties in Iran. Soviet Ambassador added purpose of reading said documents was to harm relations between Iran and Soviet Union and to please foreign circles. He also submitted an aide-mémoire on this statement. In reply Iran Foreign Minister explained statement Dr. Eqbal made in Majlis was merely confined to reading extracts from diary of Nasser Fakhr Arai1 (who made unsuccessful attempt on life His Imperial Majesty) which was discovered at his house and was in his own hand. By reading these extracts His Imperial Majesty’s Government had no ulterior motive. Furthermore, Iran Government not only did not intend any unfriendly feelings toward Soviet Union but on contrary endeavors establish understanding and cordial relations between the two neighboring countries in order that peoples of two countries may enjoy peace and comfort through goodwill both governments.

“A reply to the aide-mémoire based on this statement was today submitted to Soviet Embassy by Minister Foreign Affairs”.

Broadcast then quoted extensively from strong editorial in independent daily Keihan for February 12 of which full text being transmitted to Department by despatch.

Under Secretary Foreign Affairs confirmed to Embassy today that account of Soviet protest given in foregoing broadcast was substantially correct.

Sent Department 168, repeated London 31, Moscow 17.

Somerville

1 Chargé Somerville, on February 14, advised of information from the Iranian Prime Minister the previous evening that the “Soviet Ambassador had called on Foreign Minister two days ago to protest statements made by Minister of Health Eqbal in Majlis immediately after attempt [on the Shah’s life], to effect would-be assassin had left notebook in which he had admitted he was member of Tudeh Party in spite of fact it was controlled by USSR. Prime Minister also said that Soviet Embassy had filed routine protest with Foreign Office re closing last week of Russian bookstore here.” (Telegram 164 from Tehran, 761.91/2–1449) The Chargé had an audience with the Shah on the evening of February 15. The Shah referred to the recent Soviet protest “and said he did not believe there was any immediate danger from USSR so long as internal situation in Iran remains under firm controls as he intends it shall. In reply to my question whether he thought time might now be opportune for an Iranian approach to SC, with parallel declaration by US Government, he said this might be useful but thought a still more effective deterrent to Soviet aggression against Iran could be provided, if in any statement which US Government might make regarding non-inclusion of certain countries such as Iran in proposed Atlantic Pact, it could be made plain there had been no lessening of our determination to resist aggression anywhere.” (Telegram 174, February 16, 1 p. m., from Tehran, 891.00/2–1649)

The Chargé in Iran (Somerville) to the Secretary of State 891.00/2–1749: Telegram

[Document 271]

The Chargé in Iran (Somerville) to the Secretary of State

secret
priority Tehran, February 17, 1949—3 p. m.

176. Deptel 140, February 15.1 It is generally agreed the recent attempt on Shah’s life changed political situation in following major respect: (1) Shah’s own standing with Iranian people immensely improved, and there was greater disposition accept his leadership. This was all more true because of heightened realization by the people of extent to which their welfare and security were dependent upon him and of what would have happened if attempt had succeeded. Restraint and moderation shown by Shah in public statement following incident have increased public respect and affection for him.

(2) In new situation created by incident, it became possible take measures control subversive and disruptive elements, notably banning Tudeh Party, which had not hitherto been feasible.

Shah’s decision take early drastic action regarding constitutional reform (my 126, February 6,2 and 161, February 14) should be viewed against following background: (a) For some time Shah has been convinced that in order have a workable government able carry through economic and social reforms, which he feels necessary to save Iran from Communism, certain measures of constitutional reform, requiring calling constituent assembly, are necessary. He has held this view a long time and in recent months has become increasingly convinced action could not be delayed much longer without disaster.

(b) About three weeks ago he came to conclusion time to take action would be when decree calling for elections to next Majlis were issued and he so informed British Ambassador (Deptels 84 and 85 February 1).

(c) As result parallel representations from both US and UK, which were primarily based on view that while we did not disagree with objective we thought timing was bad, Shah was persuaded, reluctantly and against his own judgment, to defer for a time his decision call constituent assembly (Embtels 112 and 113, February 33 ).

(d) A few days later, attempt on his life occurred.

(e) In consequence of two major changes in situation, (1 and 2 above) both of which were favorable to his plans but might prove transitory, Shah decided if he was ever to act, time was now.

Shah’s view is that of man who has long determined on a course of action, who has been waiting for most propitious moment to put it into effect, and who is now convinced that present moment is more favorable than is likely to be case at any foreseeable future date.

If he is to be deterred by any arguments, they must be either against constitutional reform per se, against this method of accomplishing his objective, or against timing of his action.

He is no longer disposed to listen to any arguments against first, i.e., action toward effecting some constitutional changes. The need for such seems clearly to exist, and we have told him in past we are not opposed in principle (Embtel 1249, November 14 ).

From conversations with British Ambassador and Ebtehaj in last few days, I have impression Shah’s mind regarding method may still be fluid. There is no provision for amendment of present constitution, hence some extraordinary procedure is essential if change is to be made. There may be some precedent in his father’s action for calling constituent assembly. However, it now seems he may be thinking in terms of having the new Majlis and the Senate themselves constitute the constituent assembly, rather than following procedure outlined Paragraph 6, mytel 161. He still appears to have in mind dissolving present Majlis. This step might provoke considerable opposition that would not otherwise be expressed against constitutional reform as such Shah would obviously lack constitutional authority to dissolve Majlis. Moreover, present Majlis in passing Seven-Year Plan law this week has shown itself in better light.5

Regarding timing, Shah is no longer disposed to listen to any general arguments. He is convinced that he is now in position to deal with any internal dissension. As regards the argument that the Seven-Year Plan might be delayed, its passage by the Majlis has now been effected, and in the Shah’s view one of the main reasons for his plan of action is that rapid progress in implementation of Seven-Year Plan cannot be realized under existing political procedures.

British Ambassador tells me he has sent a further telegram to London emphasizing importance reaching definite decision on policy to be followed. He feels any temporizing advice at this stage would be a mistake and we should either oppose the whole project in principle or let the Shah go ahead, now that circumstances have made the present a more favorable time.

Le Rougetel seems convinced situation, has deteriorated to point where only drastic action can avoid disaster. While I do not recall his having made comment attributed to him in paragraph 4 London’s 561 to effect nothing useful can come from Majlis during next three months, it is conceivable his pessimism with regard to present situation may be influenced in some degree by difficulties British Government is encountering in its current negotiations with Iran on two highly important matters: AIOC and IBI.

As regards Le Rougetel’s view that situation is such that regime might be overthrown in a few months’ time, I think it is true weakness of government and general lack of cohesion are such that if Shah had been assassinated, complete chaos would have ensued, creating a situation of which Soviet Government would have known how to take advantage. Such a development, however, does not appear as imminent now as prior to attempt on Shah.

This telegram has been drafted after consultation with General Evans6 and Colonel Drury,7 who concur.

Sent Department 176, repeated London 35.

Somerville

1 Not printed; the Department advised that it was “Puzzled by Shah’s sudden decision take drastic action at this time,” as set forth in Tehran’s telegram 161, February 14, p. 478 [Pg. 478 includes portions of Doc. 267, Doc. 268, and Doc. 269]. The message also stated that “Le Rougetel’s apparent about-face and particularly his comment present regime in imminent danger incomprehensible to Dept (London’s 17, Feb. 14).” (891.00/2–1449) London’s 17 to Tehran was a repeat of No. 561 to the Department, not printed; but see footnote 2, p. 480 [Pg. 480 includes portions of Doc. 269 and Doc. 270].

2 Not printed.

3 No. 112 not printed.

4  Foreign Relations, 1948, vol. v, Part 1, p. 191.

5 The Majlis, on February 15, passed a law which authorized the Government to proceed with the Seven–Year Economic Development Program. The legislation authorized the expenditure of 21 billion rials, or the equivalent of $656 million, at the official exchange rate of 32 rials to the dollar. The major categories involved social and municipal reforms ($188 million), agriculture ($164 million) and railroads, roads, ports, and airports ($156 million) (airgrams 63, February 18, and 79, March 3, from Tehran, 891.50/2–1849, /3–349).

6 Maj. Gen. Vernon Evans, Chief of the American Military Mission with the Iranian Army.

7 Frederick W. Drury, Military Attaché in Iran.

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in Iran 891.00/2–2149: Telegram

[Document 272]

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in Iran

secret Washington, February 22, 1949—5 p. m.

us urgent

163. Brit Emb consulted Dept Feb 21 re Shah’s project Constitutional reform, showing copy FonOff instructions to Tehran (London’s 624, Feb 18 and 636, Feb 211 ) and Le BougeteFs report to London (Tehran’s 195, Feb 212 ), which communications apparently had crossed.

Tentative Dept position was elucidated as follows, largely against background Tehran’s 176, Feb 17: (1) We have never advanced, nor are we inclined now advance, any argument against Iranian constitutional reform per se. On contrary, must be clear to any observer Iranian politics that present constitution is faulty in certain respects and legislative processes might be improved by amendment. At same time, constitutional revision is not only means correcting obvious faults present system. Increase of both Shah’s influence and Majlis responsibility might well be achieved by implementation present constitutional provision re Senate. In any event, constitutional reform cannot be expected per se to cure quickly weaknesses which have become traditional in Iranian politics and politicans.

(2) Concerning method of accomplishing objective desirable constitutional reform, we continue feel strongly that Shah in taking initiative should scrupulously avoid procedure which would create serious cleavage in Iranian political life and lessen world sympathy and support for Iran in its international relations. We are convinced both dangers would be run if Shah should take clearly unconstitutional step dissolving Majlis or antagonize Iranian political opposition by creating subservient Govt for purpose defying Majlis. In unfortunate premises Iranian constitution having no amending clause, we believe constitutional change should be initiated only after Shah has gained acceptance idea by preponderance political personages in Iran. Otherwise, Shah might well lose newly acquired prestige and create situation welcome only Soviet Union. Re foreign repercussions, Shah should not lose sight of adverse effect which domestic disorder would have on possibility Iran contracting economic development loans and which appearance of dictatorial methods would have on continued extension kind of support for Iran U.S. has extended in the past. Public opinion in democratic countries is offended by appearance of dictatorial methods, which are typified by illegal dissolution parliaments. On other hand, if Shah should be able gain Majlis support for strengthened Govt which would commit itself to summoning constituent assembly, allegation could not justifiably be made that he is acting against representative political opinion.

(3) Concerning timing, we realize occasion will probably never be perfect and Dept unable judge whether any exact moment more propitious than others. We believe however Shah should take into account in choosing his time as well as methods external factors, such as possible effects of action on world opinion, as well as internal factors such as his degree of political strength at moment.

Urtel 197, Feb 213 just received confirms above Dept thinking, which Brit Emb has transmitted FonOff. As you suggest, it would seem present govt might well be broadened and so be able itself meet needs of situation. It cannot be called anti-Shah and has shown considerable strength in security measures taken following attempt on Shah’s life, making opium declaration UN and effecting Majlis passage 7–year plan bill.

On basis above, you should (urtel 202, Feb 224 ) consult Le Rougetel with view to making observations to Shah or his emissaries when and as you consider it desirable.5

Acheson

1 Neither printed; the former summarized the Foreign Office’s draft instructions which set forth arguments against the Shah taking action. The latter informed that the draft instructions had been sent to Ambassador Le Rougetel on February 19 (891.00/2–1849, /2–2149).

2 Not printed.

3 Not printed.

4 Not printed; it advised that the British Ambassador had showed Chargé Somerville a telegram from London to Washington inquiring whether the Department wished to instruct the American Embassy in Iran to make representations to the Shah regarding constitutional reform, in concert with the British Embassy (891.00/2–2249).

5 This telegram was repeated to London as No. 607. The next day, the Department directed London to show the text of No. 607 to the Foreign Office (No. 608, 891.00/2–2349). No. 608 concluded that the parallel instructions sent to American and British representatives at Tehran were substantially in accord and that the concerting of timing, method, and details of approach should be left to the Embassies. Chargé Somerville conveyed the substance of telegram 163 to the Shah on February 24 (telegram 214, February 24, 5 p. m., from Tehran, 891.00/2–249).

The Chargé in Iran (Somerville) to the Secretary of State 891.00/3–449: Airgram

[Document 273]

The Chargé in Iran (Somerville) to the Secretary of State

secret Tehran, March 4, 1949.

A–84. Weekly Political Airgram, Period Ending March 4, 1949.

1) Constitutional reform: Toward the end of the week the Shah summoned representatives of all the Majlis factions to inform them of his decision to call a constituent assembly. On Sunday the Majlis considered the Shah’s proposals in secret session and, contrary to the expectations of some observers, the deputies gave their virtually unanimous assent to the convocation of a constituent assembly for the following specific purposes: a) To add to the Constitution an article setting up procedures for amending the basic law in the future;

b) To consider means to revise and “complete” Article 48 of the Constitution providing under certain circumstances for the dissolution of the Majlis.

c) To consider means to “complete” Article 44 of the Constitution providing for the establishment of a Senate.

Early this week, at the request of the Government, the Shah issued his “firman” or imperial decree ordering the convocation of a constituent assembly. The complete text of the decree and the regulations governing the elections will be submitted under cover of a separate communication.1

[Here follow sections on Radio Moscow, the trial of Tudeh leaders, the extension of martial law, the press bill, and the Shah’s firman calling on the Minister of Interior to undertake preparations for the election of the 16th Majlis.]

Somerville

1 The Department, on February 11, had informed Tehran that President Truman wished to invite the Shah to visit the United States for about three weeks, suggesting that March 30 would be a convenient date for the monarch’s arrival in Washington (telegram 128). The Shah informed the Embassy that “his decision proceed with constitutional reform proposals makes it impossible for him to leave country now. He reiterated hope it might be possible for him to make such visit in late summer or early autumn.” (Telegram 257, March 5, 3 p. m., from Tehran) President Truman expressed his understanding of the “mitigating circumstances and looks forward to pleasure of receiving Shah at later convenient date.” (Telegram 216, March 9, 7 p. m., to Tehran) The three telegrams are filed under 891.001 Pahlavi, Reza Shah. No. 128 bears enclosure date /2–249; nos. 257 and 216 both bear enclosure date /3–549.

Memorandum by the Associate Chief of the Division of Eastern European Affairs (Hooker) to the Director of the Office of European Affairs (Hickerson) 891.50/3–849

[Document 274]

Memorandum by the Associate Chief of the Division of Eastern European Affairs (Hooker) to the Director of the Office of European Affairs (Hickerson)1

[Washington,] March 8, 1949.

The request which the Iranian Ambassador is about to make that we “refute” the Soviet charges of US economic and military penetration in Iran raises a difficult question. It is assumed that the Iranian Government will have taken the necessary steps to complete the record in the UN, and that there will be no unwillingness due to Iranian inaction to go along with their request. Nevertheless it would seem scarcely appropriate for this Government to address a note to the Soviet Government undertaking any such refutation of the charges made in the Soviet note to Iran and in Soviet propaganda. Such an initiative on our part would certainly elicit a stinging reply and certainly does not look to me like a good move propaganda-wise.2

Another reason for not addressing any note to the Soviet Union is that it would imply some degree of accountability on our part to the Soviet Government. This raises the possibility, however, that it might reassure a fearful and bewildered world if we were to take some appropriate occasion to state, perhaps in a speech by the President or the Secretary, our profound sense of accountability to the world community.

[Here follow suggestions as to the nature and timing of the proposed statement.]

1 Addressed also to Llewellyn E. Thompson, Jr., Deputy Director of the Office of European Affairs.

2 Marginal notation by the Secretary of State: “I agree.”

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in Iran 891.20/3–949: Telegram

[Document 275]

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in Iran 1

top secret Washington, March 9, 1949—7 p. m.

214. Re Joint Weeka 21, Mar. 4 Razmara statements “American-Iranian defense plans”.2

US Govt position re direct mil assistance Iran remains same as reported Deptel 68, Jan. 29 and memo conversation dated Jan. 28,3 copy to Emb. Conferences here limited to State and Army sympathetic hearing Mazhari exposition Iran Army estimate alternative plans and materiel needs. No US defense plans revealed nor any indication US attitude Bazmara plan use 300,000 men in emergency.

As stated Jernegan’s letter Feb. 15,4 all programs mil aid coming year being considered under integrated plan with no specific ref Iran. Iranians here have not been informed nature proposed bill nor extent aid to Iran contemplated. Above FYI and in your discretion for info Drury.

Acheson

1 Repeated to London as 785, Moscow as 140.

2 Joint Weeka 21 not printed; it reported information from General Razmara that several conferences had been held recently in Washington concerning integrated American-Iranian defense plans; that a bill had been or was about to be presented to the Congress to provide for further aid to Iran, but without mentioning the name of the country; and that American military authorities had approved a plan for an Iranian army of 300,000 men in the event of an emergency (891.00 (W)/3–449). Joint Weekas were summary reports of major political, economic, and military events of the preceding week prepared by officers of the Embassy.

3 Memorandum of conversation by W. Clyde Dunn, Assistant Chief of the Division of Greek, Turkish, and Iranian Affairs, not printed. The conversation was held with Military Attaché Mazhari and First Secretary Aram. (891.24/1–2849)

4 Presumably to Ambassador Wiley; copy not found in Department of State files.

The Ambassador in Iran (Wiley) to the Secretary of State 891.248/3–1249: Telegram

[Document 276]

The Ambassador in Iran (Wiley) to the Secretary of State

secret Tehran, March 12, 1949—3 p. m.

282. My 266, March 10.1 Have discussed with British Ambassador and British Air Attaché question of jet planes and training desired by Shah. British here do not seem foresee any active program in near future, owing fact Iran would have pay cash, lack of sufficient Iranian personnel with necessary qualifications including knowledge of English, and other considerations including availability of jet planes for Iran and possible complications arising from presence our ArMish.

Embassy is forwarding details, as received by MA Office from British Air Attaché Innes, of alternative schemes proposed to Shah February 23 which conform very closely to those outlined paragraph 2 London’s 4776 to Department November 8.2 Alternatives are: (1) Three wings, comprising three squadrons of 12 jet planes each, or a total of 108 planes calling for a complement of 2000 men and 160 officers, as well as radar, GCA, transportation, and other equipment, the 160 officers and 1500 of the men to be trained in UK providing they are thoroughly conversant with English; and

(2) One wing comprising four squadrons of 12 planes each or a total 48 planes, this unit to be completely mobile and requiring a complement of 1600 men and 65 officers, the officers and 800 of the men to be trained in UK, again provided they have necessary knowledge of English.

Significant feature of above as outlined by Innes is that he states decision has been taken by us and that we do not desire provide these planes or training and have given UK “green light” on whichever program they and Shah decide upon. British Embassy has had no indication of Shah’s preference. Innes believes, however, that in view of language difficulty Shah may propose contract training in Iran by representatives of UK commercial firms similar to Hurricane training group previously sent here.3

Repeated London 6.

Wiley

1 Not printed; it advised that the Shah had disclosed to Ambassador Wiley that he had definite plans for British training of 866 Iranian officers and men to maintain three wings of jet planes (891.001 Pahlavi, Reza Shah/3–1049).

2 Not printed; paragraph 2 read as follows: “[British] COS have reviewed promise to Shah while [at] London to provide him with phased training plan for 200 aircraft and although plan has been drawn up, COS finds that apart from difficulty of finding Iranian pilots it will not be possible ‘for some years’ to build up Iranian Air Force with British aircraft on scale 200 suggested by Shah who had in mind three wings of Vampire 5’s. Phased plan for this number clearly shows difficulties inherent in such an ambitious program. In consequence COS is preparing more modest second plan, involving ‘mobile wing of four squadrons’ which it feels Iran ‘might be able to afford’ and for which Iranian pilots might be found.” (891.248/11–848)

3 London, on March 18, reported the feeling of the British Foreign Office that the British Air Attaché “may not have made sufficiently clear to Shah that alternative one is ‘largely academic’ and that chances UK being able sell jets Iran have deteriorated since Shah broached idea.’“(Telegram 1063, 891.248/3–1849)

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Secretary of State 761.91/3–1449

[Document 277]

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Secretary of State 1

secret [Washington,] March 14, 1949.

Mr. Ala stated that his Government was very apprehensive over the recent increase of Soviet press and radio propaganda accusing Iran of unfriendly acts. As evidence of the apparent Soviet intention to undermine the Government of Iran, Mr. Ala referred to the recent attempt upon the life of the Shah as part of a larger Soviet plan, through the Tudeh Party in Iran, to create confusion within the country. He referred also to Soviet complicity in clandestine publications in Tehran which stated that the Governments of the United States, the United Kingdom, and the USSR were conferring in order to determine the future status of Iran. Mr. Ala added that he was certain no such conferences were in progress and would not take place without the knowledge of the Iranian Government. I assured Mr. Ala that his views were correct.

Mr. Ala stated that on February 19 the Foreign Minister of Iran had handed the Soviet Ambassador in Tehran a memorandum pro testing Soviet press and radio allegations which the Iranian Government felt constituted interference in the internal affairs of Iran. He handed me a copy of the memorandum,2 stating that it had been released to the press in Tehran on March 3. The Iranian memorandum had not previously been brought officially to the attention of this Government.

Mr. Ala stated that he had been instructed by Foreign Minister Hekmat to see me and to request the support of the United States Government in refuting fallacious Soviet charges against Iran which were, in the opinion of the Foreign Minister, also charges against the United States. Mr. Ala said his instructions were, more specifically, to request that we send a note to the Soviet Government rejecting the Soviet charges of United States activities in Iran hostile to the USSR and reminding the Soviet Government that the United Nations Charter prevails in situations where one member state feels threatened by another.

I told Mr. Ala that officers of the Department directly concerned with Iranian affairs seemed to feel that a note to the Soviet Government or some statement on the subject in question might be made by the United States more appropriately as a commentary upon a communication which the Iranian Government might address to the United Nations for its information. I asked why the Iranian Government did not, as is apparently the case, wish to communicate the pertinent facts to the United Nations.

Mr. Ala replied that, on his part, he had been urging his Government for more than a year to make such a communication to the United Nations in which reference should be made not only to the unfounded nature of Soviet charges but also to the fact that the United Nations Charter prevails over any prior agreement with which it might be in conflict, in this case, the Soviet-Iranian Treaty of 1921. Mr. Ala stated that his Government had hesitated to send such a communication for two reasons: (1) it would be provocative to the Soviet Government in that it would bring to the attention of the world a situation which the Soviet Government would prefer to remain bilateral; and (2) Iranian refutations, of which a communication to the United Nations would be merely a reiteration, have proved to be ineffective in their object of stopping unfounded Soviet charges against Iran.

I asked the Ambassador what was the nature of Article VI of the Soviet-Iranian Treaty. He replied that Article VI stated that, should a third party introduce into Iran a considerable force with the purpose of making Iran into a base of military operations against the Soviet Union and should the Iranian Government upon notification by the Soviet Government prove unable to correct the situation, the Soviet Government would have the right to introduce troops into Iran for the purpose of removing the threat to the Soviet Union, He added that in 1941 the Soviet Government claimed that presence of German agents in Iran constituted a situation contemplated by Article VI and, on that basis, introduced troops into northern Iran.3 He continued by saying that Soviet press and radio propaganda is re minding Iran of the events of 1941 with the clear implication that the present situation of American advisers in Iran is analogous.

I told Ambassador Ala that we would consider what we could do to show our support for Iran in the present circumstances and would consider whether a note to the Soviet Government was the most effective means. Mr. Ala referred to the North Atlantic Pact and said he appreciated information which had been given him by the Department4 to the effect that some statement would be made, at the time of the publication of the text of the Pact, which would make clear that our interest in the North Atlantic area should not be interpreted as any lessening of our interest in Greece, Turkey, and Iran. I told Ambassador Ala that we are trying to do what we can to make clear our interest in Iran.

Before leaving, Mr. Ala raised the subject of railway spare parts which Iran had bought and paid for before the War and which have been held by our military authorities since the capitulation of Germany. He said that the equipment in question was essential to the maintenance of the Iranian railways, which were now in a depreciated condition, and were necessary to permit, among other things, the delivery of surplus military equipment purchased from the United States and now stored in Iranian ports. I told Mr. Ala that there had been certain differences of opinion between agencies of our Government about release of such material in Germany. I promised that we would look into the matter and try to have the Iranian equipment released.

(After leaving my office, Mr. Ala was greeted by several members of the press who inquired as to the nature of his appointment with me. Mr. Ala replied that his visit was principally a courtesy call but that he had discussed with me the general situation in Iran. Replying to a question pursuing the subject, Mr. Ala stated that the situation in Iran was one of apprehension caused by Soviet press and radio propaganda against the Iranian Government. He added that his Government had taken notice of the situation in a memorandum handed the Soviet Ambassador in Tehran on February 19, copies of which he handed to the representatives of the press. When Ambassador Ala was asked whether the memorandum had been made public by his Government, he replied that it had not been made public immediately but had susequently been released (on March 3) to the press in Tehran.)

1 Drafted by Mr. Dunn, who was present at the conversation.

2 Not found in Department of State files. The Department, on February 24, notified Tehran that the memorandum strongly protested Soviet propaganda on the following points: “(a) Allegation ‘Amer advisers intend transform Iran into mil base to be used against Soviet Union’; (b) Accusation IranGov employees are ‘fon agents’; (c) Criticism IranGov action re illegal polit parties.” The memorandum was said to refute charges of foreign interference and to state that the control of political parties was an internal Iranian affair. (Telegram 168, 761.91/2–2449) Tehran, on March 19, reported the intensification of Soviet diplomatic and propaganda pressures on Iran. Soviet Ambassador Sadchikov had “again called on Foreign Minister to complain about Iranian attitude re Soviet Union and specifically against statements made by Army Prosecutor-General in trial of Tudeh Party leaders linking Tudeh Party with USSR.” Foreign Minister Hekmat’s reply to the Soviet Ambassador was said to be firm (telegram 332, 761.91/3–1949).

3 For documentation on the occupation of Iran in 1941 by troops of the Soviet Union and the United Kingdom, see Foreign Relations, 1941, vol. iii, pp. 388 ff.

4 See final paragraph of footnote 3, p. 473 [Pg. 473 is part of Doc. 263].

The Ambassador in Iran (Wiley) to the Secretary of State 761.91/3–1649: Telegram

[Document 278]

The Ambassador in Iran (Wiley) to the Secretary of State

secret
niact Tehran, March 16, 1949—11 a. m.

304. My concern over the position of Iran vis-à-vis Russia was first brought to Department’s attention in my 206 dated July 15, 1948 from Istanbul.1 Since then the position of Iran has constantly worsened. The Russians have made their position entirely clear: “The dishonor of the repudiation of the northern oil agreement2 must be effaced and the presence in Iran of American military missions is intolerable.” I think the (Deptel 234, March 14 and Embtel 303, March 163 ) Russians may be genuinely worked up over what they suspect we are up to here. It is normal to judge others by yourself. Moreover it may be presumed that Soviet intelligence in and on Iran is based very largely on a Persian network and that the Soviets are doubtless being fed a lot of fantastic nonsense.

The situation should be appraised in the light of the Soviet notes of protest to Iranian Government, the strong oral representations made by the Soviet Ambassador to me,4 and the daily outburst by the Soviet radio and press. The Russians do not play for fun: they play for keeps. When they were erased out of Azerbaijan5 they departed with greatest reluctance and certainly with every determination to return.

Whether their arguments are valid or spurious they have established a juridical case for intervention in Iran. They have complied with the proviso of the treaty of 1921 in that they have given “warning.” Also, the treaty of 1927 between Russia and Iran strengthens the treaty of 1921. Protocol one of the former treaty specifies that neither party has any international obligation whatsoever “inconsistent with the said treaty”, and that, moreover, neither party will “assume any such obligations during the whole life of the treaty.” This may lead to the specious argument on the part of the Russians that Article 103 of the UN Charter does not override the 1921 treaty.

In my opinion the Soviet return to Iran is not a question of “if” but is solely a question of “when.” The Soviet build-up is so similar to what preceded the Red Anschluss of the Baltic States6 (of which Vishinsky7 was one of the principal artisans) as to be truly alarming. For the possibilities the Soviets may enter Iran in near future one may consider the following: Soviet policy in many areas has not been successful and in few, Soviets have suffered checks and even reverses. By now surely the Soviet Union has despaired of blocking the Atlantic Pact, perhaps the major point in Soviet planning. The successful organization of the Atlantic Pact will certainly incite Soviet reaction. That the USSR could take over Azerbaijan, and perhaps terrorize the Iranian Government into dismissing the American military missions, “effacing” the northern oil “disorder,” and removing itself from the western orbit, without risk of a shooting war, all this sounds fairly plausible. (The consensus is that in Azerbaijan there would not be an atmosphere particularly hostile to Russia and not more than token resistance). Such a move on the Russian part would regain the initiative, push the Atlantic Pact off the front page and make many smaller countries quake with apprehension. Also, it would disrupt Iranian economy (Azerbaijan accounts for more than 30 percent in food-stuffs and raw materials of Iran) and torpedo the Seven Year Plan.

The Soviet position is, I think greatly strengthened by the fact that we have permitted false and malicious charges against us to pass so long without effective refutation. (Please see Ambassador Smith’s telegram from Moscow No. 1366 of July 20, 1948.)8

In conclusion, the possibility of the Soviet Union occupying Azerbaijan at no remote date, thus reverting to the status quo and [ante,?] merits active and vigilant apprehension.

Sent Department 304, repeated London 63, Moscow 34, Ankara 10.

Wiley

1  Foreign Relations, 1948, vol. v, Part 1, p. 160.

2 For the refusal of the Majlis to ratify the Iranian oil agreement with the Soviet Union, see telegram 1031, October 23, 1947, from Tehran, ibid., 1947, vol. v, p. 969.

3 Neither printed.

4 The editors have found no documentation on “the strong oral representations” made by Ambassador Sadchikov to Ambassador Wiley.

5 For documentation on the withdrawal of Soviet armed forces from Iran, see Foreign Relations, 1946, vol. vii, pp. 289 ff.

6 For documentation on the occupation of the Baltic States and their incorporation into the Soviet Union, see ibid., 1940, vol. i, pp. 357 ff.

7 Audrey Yanuaryevich Vyshinsky, at the time Assistant People’s Commissar for Foreign Affairs of the Soviet Union.

8  Foreign Relations, 1948, vol. v, Part 1, p. 164.

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in Iran 761.91/3–2349: Telegram

[Document 279]

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in Iran 1

us urgent Washington, March 23, 1949—2 p. m.

272. SecState made following statement at press conference today:

“For some time now, our Embassy at Tehran has reported Soviet pressure upon Iran in the form of persistent press and radio propaganda, alleging among other things activities by United States advisers in Iran hostile to the Soviet Union. That pressure seems to have intensified in recent weeks. When Ambassador Ala called on me on the 14th of this month, he handed me a copy of a memorandum to the Soviet Ambassador in Tehran in which the Iranian Government pro tested against disturbing Soviet press and radio attacks upon Iran. This memorandum was also released to the press in the Iranian capital. One type of Soviet allegation mentioned in the Iranian memorandum is that ‘American advisers intend to transform Iran into a military base to be used against the Soviet Union.’ Such charges are altogether false and demonstrably untrue. In this connection I might refer to certain statements which I tried to emphasize in my radio talk last Friday:2 ‘This country is not planning to make war against anyone. It is not seeking war. It abhors war.’ I might say in connection with Soviet allegations of hostile United States activity in Iran what I have already said with regard to allegations that aggressive designs underlie our participation in the Atlantic Pact, namely, that this ‘can rest only on a malicious misrepresentation or a fantastic misunderstanding of the nature and aims of American society.’”

SecState elaborated his categoric rejection Soviet allegation with description limited personnel and activities US Mil Missions operating under agreements requested by Iran Govt and filed with UN.

Acheson

1 Repeated to Moscow as 180, London as 992.

2 Secretary Acheson’s talk dealt with the meaning of the North Atlantic Pact and was delivered over the Columbia and Mutual Broadcasting Systems on March 18; for text, see Department of State Bulletin, March 27, 1949, p. 384. The Secretary stated in part: “Therefore it is our policy to help free peoples to maintain their integrity and independence, not only in Western Europe or in the Americas, but wherever the aid we are able to provide can be effective. Our actions in supporting the integrity and independence of Greece, Turkey, and Iran are expressions of that determination. Our interest in the security of these countries has been made clear, and we shall continue to pursue that policy.” (ibid., p. 386)

The Ambassador in Iran (Wiley) to the Secretary of State 761.91/3–2449: Telegram

[Document 280]

The Ambassador in Iran (Wiley) to the Secretary of State

secret Tehran, March 24, 1949—11 a. m.

361. Colonel Drury, Military Attaché and I lunched with HSO 1 today. He informed us frontier incident reported Embtel 342, March 22,2 had assumed more serious aspect. Soviet political officer conferred with his opposite number Iranian forces and demanded that Iranian forces withdraw from “Soviet territory” to line south of Neftelidje by 6 p. m. yesterday. Otherwise Soviet forces would attack. Soviet forces had been reinforced by 500 men and 10 tanks. HSO sent orders that no Iranian soldier was to withdraw. If Red Army wished to attack it could attack. HSO directed that Russians be informed that frontier forces had no authority to discuss frontier boundaries. Any question on this score would have to be raised through proper channels with government in Tehran. Iranian forces were re inforced by two infantry companies with machine gun section.

HSO stated that in spite of Soviet ultimatum and expiration of time limit there had been no further aggression from Soviet side. HSO added that text of Iranian protest handed to Soviet Ambassador Tehran has been telegraphed to Iranian Embassy Moscow for Soviet Government.

HSO very pleased that firmness Iran position re incident has so far successfully prevailed. He describes Soviet initiative as “bluff”. Please pass to Army.3

Sent Department 361, repeated London 73, Moscow 44.

Wiley

1 General Razmara.

2 Not printed; it reported that on March 21 an Iranian patrol of three men proceeding from Neftelidje to Cenkertepe, in the frontier area east of the Caspian, was attacked by 50 Soviet cavalrymen. One Iranian soldier was killed and the remaining two were taken prisoner. The Iranian Government lodged a pro test with the Soviet Ambassador and the commander of the Gurgan District protested to the Soviet Consul at Gurgan. General Razmara categorically denied the Soviet allegation that the patrol was in Soviet territory. (761.91/3–2249) The Soviet forces released the two Iranian soldiers “fully armed and in good condition” three weeks later. (Telegram 483, April 11, 4 p. m., from Tehran, 761.91/4–1149)

3 In telegram M–433, March 30, to the Departments of State, Air, and Navy, Colonel Drury cited the following actions as reflecting a worsening of Soviet-Iranian relations: the recent intensification of Soviet radio propaganda against Iran; the Soviet note demanding that Iran close its Consulate in Baku and announcing Soviet intention of closing all of its Consulates in Iran because of the “hostile Iranian attitude toward USSR;” the incidents in Gurgan on March 21 and later involving the “shooting of Iranian soldiers and ultimatum and threats backed up by considerable show of Soviet force;” intensified maneuvers near Baku in full view of the Iranian border; and reported but unconfirmed rumors concerning increased troop and rail movements in the Caucasus. (761.91/3–3049) Tehran had reported, on March 18, that “several days ago Iran Government received reply from Soviet Government to notes requesting that Soviet Consular representation in Iran be reduced to basis strict reciprocity. Soviet reply announces that all Soviet Consulates in Iran will be closed. Soviet note calls for closing Iran Consulate Baku, which is sole Iran Consulate Soviet Union.” (Telegram 326, 702.6191/3–1849)

Foreign Minister HekmaT, in a press conference on June 5, announced that an agreement had been reached between Iran and the Soviet Union to close one another’s Consulates in both countries (telegram 749, June 6, from Tehran, 702.6169/0–649).

The Ambassador in Iran (Wiley) to the Secretary of State 891.00/3–2949

[Document 281]

The Ambassador in Iran (Wiley) to the Secretary of State

top secret Tehran, March 29, 1949.

Dear Dean: You may have got the impression from some of my telegrams that I am a bit concerned about Iran and its relations with its great neighbor to the north. I am.

I think that I would give odds of about one to three that the Sovs (curiously enough, according to the best philological research, “v” is practically identical with “b”) will jump the gun on Azerbaijan this year. That the USSR might nip off all or a part of the northern provinces without provoking war is accentuated by the fact that most of the world is completely unaware whether Azerbaijan is a river, a mountain, or merely a new religion. A carefully engineered coup in the north of Iran might go even more smoothly than the business of the Sudeten Germans.

As you know much better than I, the Russian eye has leered at the Persian Gulf for lo, these many decades. The Russian appetite has been constantly whetted by new “apéritifs”. Of course, Iran has always been a land bridge that outflanks many areas of great importance to Russia. Now, however, there are new considerations. The Caspian, on the Persian side, presumably represents vast wealth in sub-sea oil. Then, alas, Iran is particularly vulnerable in the north. The two northern provinces have probably more than ⅓ of the population of the country and provide better than 50 percent of Iran’s food and essential raw materials. In other words, the elimination of the two northern provinces from the Iranian structure would decapitate the country. One of the greatest oil deposits in the world is in the hands of the British, with American participation in the oil, in the south of Iran. The greatest oil refinery in the world is at Abadan. To deny the western world the petroleum products of the AIOC would be an important Soviet objective. Finally, the Russians now, as in the past, desire to reach the warm waters of the Persian Gulf.

The presence of American military missions in Iran, the Arms Credit Program, and the probable initiation of direct military aid constitute to the Russians something which they consider to be “intolerable”. They have the idea that the presence of Americans in Iran makes Baku particularly vulnerable. Razin, the Soviet Military Attaché in Iran, makes it more than clear that Baku is admittedly the Soviet solar plexus.

I am very pleased indeed that you made your statement to the press on the subject of Soviet charges regarding our activities in Iran. It was forthright and good. However, we must keep up the good work. I shall continue here to encourage the idea of an Iranian initiative along the lines of the Ala-Entezam proposal. If the Iranian Government goes ahead on this we should, I think, be prepared to follow along, along the lines I discussed when recently in Washington with the Department.1 And then on every possible occasion we should wheel into action again. In other words we should permit nothing to go by default.

[Here follow two brief paragraphs on personal matters.]

Sincerely yours,

John

1 The editors have been unable to find any record of such discussions.

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in Iran 761.91/3–2549: Telegram

[Document 282]

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in Iran

secret Washington, March 30, 1949—3 p. m.

296. London’s 35, Mar 24 and 38 Mar 25.1 Brit FonOff through Emb Wash has requested Dept views on draft tel Bevin to Le Rougetel stating IranGov wld be wise adopt Shah’s suggestions (1) offer with draw Iran case from SC provided SovGovt agrees to allow Art 6 1921 Treaty be regarded null and void; (urtel 372, Mar 252 ) and, (2) agree mutual withdrawal consular Reps from each others territories.

Re (1). Brit draft states chances SovGovt agreement remote but “friendly gesture” wld have tactical advantage for Iran in that Sov refusal wld strengthen Iran’s case before SC and world opinion. Draft continues, in unlikely event Sov acceptance, Moscow wld be deprived of powerful propaganda weapon and Iran quid pro quo wld only mean giving up immed advantage opportunity obtaining SC publicity and conceding Soviets possible advantage from delay Iran getting dispute again on SC agenda.

Re (2). Draft considers Iran advantage reciprocal withdrawal all consular Reps to be overwhelming, but admits non-consular Sov estabis wld remain focus for dissident elements Iran.

Dept views re (1) conveyed to Brit Emb as fols: 1. No compelling reason exists for Iran request deletion its case from SC agenda. No question has, until now, arisen over wisdom SC remaining seized of Iran case. Sov boycott Iran case during active SC consideration, Sov refusal subsequently report withdrawal troops, Sov complicity in Azerbaijan regime late 1946, and Sov persistence in pressure against IranGovt and fomenting dissidence among Iran people, all fully justify, in our mind, Iran acquiescence in SC retention Iran case. Sov representations, propaganda attacks, and border incidents during 1948 and increased pressure 1949 make more desirable than ever SC retention Iran case at this time. Iran advantage SC retention case (Moscow’s 759, Mar 263 ) is attested by Sov Amb’s strongs, rptd pressure on this subject.

2. We recognize advantage to Iran of SovGovt laying down propaganda weapon represented by Art VI 1921 Treaty, but Sov record vis-à-vis Iran shows no indication any offer such surrender cld be bona fide. If Sov intentions were friendly, they shld be demonstrated by deeds and not by promise. Even if SovGovt shld act in good faith in promising abandon Art VI, it wld be doing no more than recognizing true legal status that Art at present time, in light of annexes 1921 Treaty and prevailing UN Charter which contemplates ref SC all disputes threatening peace. In using Art VI as quid pro quo, Iran wld be bargaining for a right already possessed.4

3. Since two elements proposed swap are different in character and in degree, public knowledge of such deal wld not redound Iran’s credit. Its complicated nature cld not appeal to world public opinion as bona fide, reasonable offer by Iran.

4. Shah wld be ill-advised proceed with proposed offer. On contrary. Shah wld be well-advised take full advantage Iran case SC by transmitting letter UN for info only SC transmitting evidences of developments bearing upon Iran case and refuting as yet uncontested Sov assertions legal basis unilaterally introduce troops into Iran under 1921 Treaty. As US UN Dei Austin told Iran UN Del Entezam in NY last spring, Iran has obligation keep SC fully informed evidence bearing upon its case of which SC is seized. That obligation is as yet unfulfilled. Suggested Iran communication SC shld have beneficial effect upon three publics: (a) Iran Govt and people wld understand for first time they are not under shadow of Sov legal right impair Iran’s territorial integrity and, therefore, might achieve desirable self-confidence in face of Sov war of nerves; (b) SovGovt cld no longer feel that silence implies acquiescence in heretofore unrefuted Sov assertions relevance 1921 Treaty and might be deterred from action which wld evoke armed Iran resistance and, therefore, serious threat to peace: and (c) Western Democracies wld be more ready support Iran realizing, contrary current press opinion, no semblance legality underlying Sov action against Iran.

5. Sec State has made statement requested by Iran Govt rejecting categorically Sov allegation of US activity in Iran hostile to USSR and Dept remains prepared take Iran communication SC as occasion support Iran position SC is appropriate arbiter disputes threatening peace.

Dept agrees with FonOff draft re mutual withdrawal Sov and Iran consular Reps, with suggestion IranGov release relevant exchanges of notes.

Consult Brit colleague on above subjects and in ur discretion convey substance above views Shah and other appropriate Iran officials.5

Acheson

1 These were repeats of telegrams 1161 and 1205, respectively, to the Department; neither printed.

2 Not printed; the Shah made this suggestion to Ambassador Wiley on March 24 and the Ambassador expressed “incredulous bewilderment.” Telegram 372 also noted that for some time, the Soviet Ambassador “had been bringing strong pressure to bear on Iran Government to withdraw its ease from SC agenda.” The Department, on March 31, informed Tehran that it was “quite surprised” to learn of this information and “to deduce IranGov has reacted such persistent pressure with equanimity.” (Telegram 299) Telegrams 372 and 299 are filed under 701.91/3–2549.

3 Not printed.

4 Ambassador Wiley, on March 29, had advised that he was “a little fearful that any Iranian attempt to horse trade with Russians at this time will end [in] disfavor Iranians. Moreover by entering into discussion with Soviets subject cancellation Article 6 there may be implied recognition its validity vis-à-vis Charter UN. In other words Iran Government if it does not proceed with scrupulous care and greatest caution could contribute to Soviet efforts to build up spurious juridical case for intervention.” (Telegram 402 from Tehran, 501.BC/3–2949)

5 This telegram was repeated to London as 1096, Moscow as 193, and to the United States Delegation at the United Nations, at New York, as 196. Ambassador Wiley discussed the content of telegram 296 with the Shah, Ambassador Le Rougetel, and Foreign Minister Hekmat. He informed the Foreign Minister that “If the Iranian Government was so unwise as to enter into a discussion of Article 6 with the Soviet Government, it could only be interpreted by public opinion that indeed there was something to discuss.” After a lengthy conversation, the Foreign Minister stated he was opposed to an approach to the Soviet Union on the matter (telegram 434, April 4, 3 p. m., from Tehran, 761.91/4–449).

Editorial Note [Document 283]

Editorial Note

President Truman’s speech on April 4 at the ceremony for the signing of the Atlantic Pact contained a statement designed to endorse and emphasize recent statements by the Secretary of State on Iran, as well as on Greece and Turkey; for text, see circular telegram of April 2, volume IV, page 270.

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in Iran 761.9115/4–749: Telegram

[Document 284]

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in Iran

secret Washington, April 8, 1949—7 p. m.

328. Urtels 438, Apr. 41 and 456, Apr. 7.2 In view frequency recent border incidents Dept appreciates Iran desire achieve formula remove possible boundary causes those incidents. At same time, we feel Iranians wld be ill-advised pursue at present time consideration lodging formal complaint SC basis Sov incursions. We adhere view next Iran step vis-à-vis USSR shld be communication SC for info only record events pertinent Iran case SC agenda, including border incidents, and taking occasion elucidate treaty situation. Formal Iran request SC action re Sov initiation border incidents might be interpreted imply no complaint other obvious Sov pressures and befog principal issue Iran immunity unilateral Sov mil action.

Acheson

1 Not printed; it reported a border incident in Azerbaijan, said to be the sixth incident in the last eight months of Soviet aggression within Iranian territory (761.91/4–449).

2 Not printed; it advised that Soviet Ambassador, Sadchikov had seen Foreign Minister Hekmat on the morning of April 7 and that the Foreign Minister had been instructed to place before the Soviet Ambassador three proposals: “(1) Hekmat and Sadchikov to try to reach prompt agreement on exact delineation of boundaries in regions where incidents have taken place (i.e., Gurgan and Moghan).

“(2) Irano-Soviet boundary commission to be formed with possible participation one or more neutrals. …

“(3) Iran to submit formal complaint to Security Council on basis six acts of aggression by Red Army in past year.” (761.9115/4–749)

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in Iran 890.20/4–849: Telegram

[Document 285]

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in Iran

secret Washington, April 8, 1949—7 p. m.

329. Urtel 445, Apr. 5.1 Iran Reps Wash, like FonMin Tehran, have raised subj regional pact including Iran. For some time Ala has mentioned informally his conversations with Turkish, Greek, Egyptian, and possibly other Ambs here this subj. Early Mar, Iran MA Mazhari, “acting as interpreter for His Majesty”, asked Director Army Intelligence “to consider Iran most important country in Mediterranean Pact”. Subsequently Iran Counselor Aram referred to Tehran tel reporting FonMin belief regional pact “of utmost importance to Iran fon policy”.

For ur guidance, Dept position conveyed IranEmb follows: Dept has given no consideration question Mediterranean or Middle Eastern Pact; is not in position to do so until ramifications North Atlantic Pact are clarified; and cannot encourage or discourage consideration such pact by countries possibly party to such regional arrangement.

Acheson

1 Not printed.

The Ambassador in Iran (Wiley) to the Secretary of State 891.00/4–1249: Telegram

[Document 286]

The Ambassador in Iran (Wiley) to the Secretary of State

secret Tehran, April 12, 1949—noon.

488. Lunched alone with Shah today and spent three hours with him. He covered widest range Iranian affairs. Shah was in a very complaining mood and full of reproaches for what America was not doing for Iran and what America was doing for other countries, …Iran, he stated, remained in darkest shadow of doubt with regard to American intentions. Until US clarified its position as regard to military and economic aid to Iran, it was impossible for him and his government to formulate any policy whatsoever. I recalled his attention to your two recent statements1 and to the recent speech of the President;2 the fact that we offered two and one-half times what Iran accepted under the arms credit program and inquired what Iran has requested that the US had refused or what the US had obligated itself to fulfill that had not been fulfilled. I then put on the biggest act since Sarah Bernhardt played “L’Aiglon”.

He asked me, “What are the American military missions doing in Iran?” I replied, “They are here to advise Your Majesty as head of Iranian army. When did you seek their advice last?”

Shah changed subject and said it was essential that Iran know precisely what its destiny was. I answered, “Iran will learn this quickest by keeping on right side of fence.”

On military subjects, Shah was most anxious to work out some effective line of defense in Iran involving extensive training of Persian personnel in US and supplying of modern weapons of war. He stated, reverting throughout whole conversation constantly to Turkey, that we are inviting Soviet aggression against Iran, explaining that by our making Turkey impregnable we were definitely inviting attack against Iran. I outlined to him the relationship of US to the problems of Greece and Turkey and recalled again that Iran had never re quested direct aid from the US. I added that the US was a completely loyal member of UN and that the US would view aggression on Iran by Turkey just as seriously as aggression on Iran by any other power. He was not convinced.… The only solution for the situation for Iran would be in the course of the next two years to build up an efficient army of 300,000. He told me that the US General Staff had acquiesced in this figure.

I endeavored to calm his anxiety with regard to Turkey and suggested it might be well to cultivate if possible relations of real understanding with the Turks. Between the two, I added, collaboration could be most fruitful.

With regard to his military plans, I warned him that with new equipment now in production anything that might be given to Iran would be a painful subtraction from what was urgently needed elsewhere and that I was convinced that the US Army would not consent to provide Iran with such equipment without being convinced of Iran’s capacity for its effective utilization. This of course would depend on training and if he would submit his plans in this respect, the Embassy would be glad to submit them through the State Department to American competent authorities.

He wanted detailed infomation on what the US was prepared to do for Iran in respect of direct aid. I assured him that if the question of direct aid for Iran should come up the Department would certainly take most sympathetic attitude but that the matter had not as yet been submitted to Congress.

He then spoke of reinforcing Saadabad pact.3 I replied that in his desire to fortify destiny of Iran he might be well advised to study the realities of the world situation but that if he thought a regional pact would be of any genuine value to the future security of Iran I should be happy to convey his views to my government.

He seems disinclined to go ahead at this time on the Ala-Entezam proposal. We discussed the matter in considerable detail and I conveyed to him the Department’s thinking re Deptel 328, April 8. Apparently he has abandoned any idea of proceeding with the “deal” re withdrawal Iran case in return for Soviet acknowledgement in validity article 6 treaty 1921.

Sent Department 488, repeated London 84, Ankara 17, Moscow 61.

Wiley

1 See telegram 272, March 23, to Tehran, p. 494 [Pg. 494 includes portions of Doc. 278 and Doc. 279].

2 Presumably President Truman’s address of April 4 at the occasion of the signing of the North Atlantic Treaty. At one point, the President stated: “Under my ‘authority and instructions, the Secy of State has recently made it abundantly clear that the adherence of the US to this Pact does not signify a lessening of Amer concern for the security and welfare of other areas, such as the Near East.”; see editorial note, p. 500 [Pg. 500 includes portions of Doc. 282, Doc. 283, and Doc. 284].

3 Treaty of nonaggression signed on July 8, 1937, by Afghanistan, Iran, Iraq, and Turkey at the Saadabad Palace, Tehran.

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in Iran 891.20/4–949: Telegram

[Document 287]

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in Iran

secret   us urgent Washington, April 18, 1949—4 p. m.

347. Draft mil assistance bill reaching advanced stage Budget Bur clearance, with introduction Cong expected soon and Comite hearings possibly beginning early May. Possible recipient countries will not be mentioned by name in bill, but justification will doubtless involve elucidation specific needs North Atlantic Pact countries and continuation Grk-Turk aid. To assure provision funds for future Iran program, however limited, it wld probably be necessary to name Iran in Cong hearings (urtel 472, Apr. 91 ) Favorable Cong consideration might well depend upon Iran having made formal, however general, request for mil assistance.

Principal argument favor naming Iran is Cong might be expected to be more favorable to specified recipients or to appropriation contingency fund including specified recipients.

Principal argument against naming Iran is implicit necessity stimulating request which cld be met in only limited amount. In any event, amount allocated for Iran is bound to be small, say, twelve million, with no chance for material increase. As you must be aware, this situation is dictated by assessment supply-demand factors largely in terms probable immediate mil effectiveness assistance accorded. As we see it, justification future Iran program based primarily on polit-psychological considerations (urlet Mar. 252 ), which cannot be used support anything approaching scale of Turk program.

Wld appreciate ur views urgently re: a) Shld Iran be mentioned by name in public presentation to Cong?

b) Shld we sugest IranGov make formal request for limited mil aid?

c) Timing and method advising IranGov its place in our mil aid planning.

Acheson

1 Not printed.

2 Ambassador Wiley’s letter to Mr. Jernegan, not printed (891.24/3–2549).

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in Iran 761.91/4–1249: Telegram

[Document 288]

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in Iran 1

secret Washington, April 18, 1949—4 p. m.

348. Urtel 491, Apr 12:2 1921 Treaty is considered valid (that is, legally binding). It has not been denounced by either party pursuant any clause in Treaty itself, has not been terminated by mutual consent of parties, has not been superseded by subsequent treaty concluded by parties, and has not been declared terminated by competent internatl tribunal (e.g., on ground of doctrine rebus sic stantibus); Art 6 is integral part that Treaty; therefore, Art 6 is valid, not null and void.

Altho Art 6 considered valid, it is applicable (that is, operative in situation contemplated by Treaty which wld permit Sov introduction troops into Iran) only if four conditions stipulated in Art itself and first para Rothstein Itr constituting Annex 2 which is integral part 1921 Treaty, co-exist. (See page 32 [Pg. 32 is part of Doc. 4], OIR Report 4619, Apr. 28, 1948.3 )

Dept considers none of conditions contemplated by Treaty exists at present. Iran has categorically denied (1) Persia is being made into “base for mil operations against Russia”, (2) “there is threat of danger to frontiers” USSR from Iran, and (3) “Persian Govt finds itself unable to avert such danger”. FonMin, on behalf of Shah, has stated (4) activity in Iran hostile to USSR by “partisans of (Czarist) regime which has been overthrown or by its supporters” is inconceivable.

Dept’s views stated above for ur background info. Definitive answers to questions, particularly those on interpretation and application 1921 Treaty, cld be reached only by agreement of parties or decision of competent internatl tribunal.

Dept views relation 1921 Treaty and UN Charter are reflected Deptel 637, July 8, 1948,4 final para stating “Dept concurs fully” with conclusions Iran Emb attorneys re Sov rights under Art 6 1921 Treaty.

Acheson

1 Repeated to London as 1330, Moscow as 233.

2 Not printed.

3 Not printed; the four conditions as set forth on page 32 [Pg. 32 is part of Doc. 4] read as follows: “(1) A third country (or party) must attempt by military interference to usurp control in Iran or to establish a base in Iran for military operations against the USSR;

“(2) There must at the same time be a threat of danger to the frontiers of the USSR;

“(3) Preparations must have been made for a considerable armed attack upon the USSR;

“(4) The Iranian Government must be unable to remove the danger.”

4  Foreign Relations, 1948, vol. v, Part 1, p. 158.

The Ambassador in Iran (Wiley) to the Secretary of State 891.20/4–2049: Telegram

[Document 289]

The Ambassador in Iran (Wiley) to the Secretary of State

secret
priority Tehran, April 20, 1949—10 a. m.

523. Reference Deptel 347, April 18, 4 p. m. As Department knows from previous reports both Shah and Chief of Staff have been greatly agitated over American aid to Turkey.… US “token” aid to Iran, while more ample aid is extended to Turkey, will under any circumstances be viewed here with very jaundiced eye. Also “token” aid to Iran, while irritating Iranians, will still be provocative to USSR. Though I completely understand considerations behind decision re Iran, I am very much afraid our relations here will be made difficult.

I therefore think that the answers to paragraphs a and b should definitely be negative and that decision may be deferred with regard to paragraph c.

However, language of authorization bill should permit military aid to Iran and other countries desired but without specific mention in bill or hearings thereon of countries other than those North Atlantic Pact, Greece, and Turkey. It is hoped this may be possible since sum proposed aid to Iran is not large.

It is realized “token” aid to Iran must eventually come out in open but there is no advantage in hastening that unhappy day.

ArMish, GenMish and service attachés concur in foregoing.

Wiley

Memorandum by the Director of the Office of Near Eastern and African Affairs (Satterthwaite) to the Coordinator for Military Assistance Programs (Berkner) 891.20 Mission/4–2049

[Document 290]

Memorandum by the Director of the Office of Near Eastern and African Affairs (Satterthwaite) to the Coordinator for Military Assistance Programs (Berkner)1

secret [Washington,] April 20, 1949.

I assume you have seen the attached telegram no. 523 of April 20 from Tehran, which replies to the Department’s telegram no. 347 of April 18, a copy of which is also attached for your convenience.

In the light of Ambassador Wiley’s views, which correspond substantially to our own, this office believes it is necessary to eliminate specific mention of Iran by name from all documents dealing with the military aid program which may become public. I assume this would include the section in the Congressional presentation book since I understand that it is anticipated this will not remain confidential.

I do not think it is necessary to eliminate the small section on Iran in the draft brief for the Secretary’s meeting with the Foreign Relations Committee tomorrow, since this is to be an executive session. However, I suggest that there be inserted in that section a notation to the effect that Iran will not be specifically mentioned by name in the public presentation and that the Secretary may wish to inform the Senators of this fact together with our reasons.

These reasons may be stated as follows: Iran definitely needs a certain small amount of military aid to balance the equipment of its existing forces and enable them fully to maintain internal security. This small amount, we consider, should be provided. However, the Iranian Government desires a very much greater degree of military assistance, considering that it should be on at least the same level as Turkey. To present a program to Congress in such a way that the small amount earmarked for Iran would become apparent would have a very adverse effect on the Iranian Government and Iranian public opinion, whereas if the amount is not apparent but is lumped in with other programs or as part of a contingency fund we shall have room to maneuver in our negotiations with the Iranian authorities.

As indicated, we remain firmly convinced that provisions should be made for a limited arms program to Iran during fiscal 1950. The only change we are recommending is in the manner of public presentation. You will recall, that from the beginning this particular question has been reserved for later decision, because we anticipated just the difficulty which Ambassador Wiley has emphasized in his telegram.

1 Lloyd V. Berkner, administratively, was Special Assistant to the Secretary of State.

The Ambassador in Iran (Wiley) to the Secretary of State 891.032/4–2149: Telegram

[Document 291]

The Ambassador in Iran (Wiley) to the Secretary of State

Tehran, April 21, 1949.

539. Constituent Assembly was convened today by Shah with brief opening address.1

Wiley

1 The Majlis passed legislation creating a Senate by a voice vote on May 4 (telegram 607, May 5, from Tehran, 891.032/5–549).

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in Iran 891.00/4–1249: Telegram

[Document 292]

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in Iran 1

secret Washington, April 21, 1949—7 p. m.

us urgent

364. Representations to you by Shah (urtel 488, Apr. 12) and Hekmat (urtel 531, Apr. 212 ) re Turkish mil power reiterated here today by Amb Ala on basis Hekmat tel conveying Shah’s views. Dept observations to Ala follow:

Experience US Reps working closely with Turk officials in Ankara and Wash over past few years is basis for Dept conviction that Turk Republic has not had in past (except for Alexandretta) and gives no indication of having in future any aspirations for territory beyond its present borders. Evidence of this introspective attitude is consistent opposition Turk Republic Govt toward Pan-Turanianism. Intimate assoc US dipl and ECA Reps with Turk Govt and US mil advisers with Turk Army places us in position to be aware of any adverse Turk disposition toward Iran. We know of only friendliest disposition Turk officials and public toward Iran. US mil assistance to Turkey is predicated, in part, upon Turkey’s friendly relations with neighbors which share its own security interests. Therefore, US mil assistance to friendly neighbor of Iran is calculated to contribute to security of Iran.

Acheson

1 This telegram was repeated to Ankara as 144, London as 136, and Moscow as 246.

2 Not printed.

The Ambassador in Iran (Wiley) to the Secretary of State 761.91/4–2249: Telegram

[Document 293]

The Ambassador in Iran (Wiley) to the Secretary of State

secret Tehran, April 22, 1949—3 p. m.

543. I am of course fully conscious of the thought and care dedicated to drafting Deptel 348, April 18. I remain, however, deeply concerned over certain considerations which enter into the question: 1. Two steps which apparently have led to Department’s conclusion trouble me: (a) Department states categorically that Treaty of 1921 has not been superseded by subsequent treaty concluded by parties. Does this not sidestep question as to whether obligations assumed under UN Charter have superseded right to take unilateral aggressive action under Article 6? (b) Department states that none of conditions contemplated by Treaty exist at “present”. This implies that these conditions might present themselves again at any future time with possible right in USSR to determine whether or not they have arisen. It would seem to me that we would be justified in saying that conditions contemplated by Article 6 have gone forever.

2. Should there be a showdown with the USSR over Iran, we must be able to present situation in a manner which is not merely readily intelligible to American public opinion but to world opinion too. “In applicable validity” would be inexplicable no matter how clear it might be to the legal mind. The one thing the Russians desire is to provoke obfuscating juridical argumentation. Since there is no possibility that USSR would for one instant tolerate submitting the juridical questions involved, like Article 6 of the Treaty of 1921, to any impartial tribunal, I urge it is essential to avoid insofar as possible any suggestion that there are issues open to debate.

3. Indications I have received in the past from British Ambassador suggest that the “Inapplicable validity” formula may have originated with the legal experts in the British Foreign Office.1 It is well known that certain British influences not remote from AIOC have in the past toyed with the idea of reverting to the techniques of 1907.2 In other words, that it would be feasible to make a deal with the USSR whereby the Soviet demands for oil rights in north would be granted in return for an undertaking safeguarding the Great Britain petroleum interests in Khuzistan. This of course is in the Munich tradition and diametrically opposed to our conception of Iran sovereignty and independence. It would also, I fear, in the end be fatal to British interests in this country and possibly in the long-run to world peace. In other words: there is a risk that British legal experts have inspired a legalistic interpretation which might clearly facilitate the Soviet desires to build up a spurious juridical case for aggression.1

Under no circumstances have the Soviets any juridical basis what-soever to occupy any part of this country. We should cleave to this in simplest and clearest-cut terms.3

Sent Department 543; repeated London 87; Moscow 69.

Wiley

1 Marginal notation by an unidentified Department officer: “No.”

2 The reference is to the division of Iran into spheres of influence by Great Britain and Russia in the convention signed by the two countries in St. Peters burg on August 31, 1907, concerning their interests in Persia, Afghanistan, and Tibet. The text of the agreement is printed in Foreign Relations, 1907, pt. 1, p. 550.

1 Marginal notation by an unidentified Department officer: “No.”

3 Marginal notation by an unidentified Department officer: “OK.”

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in Iran 761.91/4–2249: Telegram

[Document 294]

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in Iran 1

secret Washington, April 22, 1949—7 p. m.

370. Background requested urtel 530, Apr. 212 for meeting PriMin Apr. 23: [Here follows paragraph numbered one dealing with the Ala-Entezam proposals.]

2. While Hekmat may be correct in stating neither Sov notes nor radio attacks make specific ref Art 63 and Sov Govt has never specifically threatened (urtel 537, Apr. 212 ) recourse 1921 Treaty, possibility invocation Art 6 is clearly implied in Sov representations and propaganda re US activity in Iran. IranGov note of Mar. 24, 1948 to Sov Govt4 refers explicitly to Art 6, stating Sov Govt had improperly used that Art as pretext for introduction troops 1941.

3. We note ur apparent concern over Hekmat’s seeming satisfaction with friendly termination recent representations by Sov Amb.5 We recognize, of course, fundamental danger inherent in Iran officials accepting at face value such indications of change in Sov attitude. Yet, as long as Iran officials uniformly pursue determined policy stand up for Iran’s independence and refuse concessions to USSR, they shld have tactical flexibility in dealing with such Sov maneuvers in order to avoid any pretext which Sovs cld successfully exploit.

4. Dept adheres to position consistently taken over past year that it wld be desirable for Iran at appropriate time communicate SC along lines proposed by Amb Ala and so often discussed by you and Dept, and for US to make public its support of Iran’s position. We also continue to maintain view that IranGov decision to make such communication shld be, in fact and for the record, entirely independent one (Deptel 47, Jan. 242 ). This we regard as absolutely essential if we are to avoid (1) making Iran, in world opinion, appear pawn in big-power politics and (2) causing Iran shift responsibility to US for consequences its fon policy. We are somewhat concerned lest emphasis upon Iran’s strategic plight, which has been used to move IranGov to communicate with SC, might, in part at least, have occasioned increasing Iran concern with mil defense and requests for US guarantee its security which we are unable to give. In the premises, wo feel constrained to avoid appearance of positively encouraging at this time specific Iran action vis-à-vis USSR.

5. Foregoing shld not be interpreted as any lessening of our interest in Iran or of our support of Iran’s determination to stand up for its independence. To evidence that support, we are prepared to demon strate US interest in Iran by continued words and increased deeds of every feasible, effective sort. In addition Iran profit from direct US support and assistance, Iran shares security benefits accruing from broad US policies, such as Truman Doctrine and principles of North Atlantic Pact, and is in position to participate in social and economic contributions Fulbright, Smith-Mundt, and Point Four. In development US global policy and relations with countries having interests similar to those of Iran, we keep constantly in mind intimate connection of Iran security and advancement with overall US fon policy objectives.

Acheson

1 Repeated to London as 1385, Moscow as 252.

2 Not printed.

3 As reported in telegram 530 from Tehran.

2 Not printed.

4 The editors are unaware of a note of March 24, 1948, sent by the Iranian Government to the Soviet Government. Presumably, the reference is to the note of April 1, 1948, sent by the then Iranian Prime Minister Hakimi to Ambassador Sadehikov; see Foreign Relations, 1948, vol. v, Part 1, p. 127.

5 In telegram 530, Ambassador Wiley had advised of information from Foreign Minister Hekmat that the Soviet Ambassador “had always initiated meetings with long face and ‘harsh reproaches’. Invariably, though, interviews had terminated [in] friendly atmosphere.”

2 Not printed.

The Ambassador in Iran (Wiley) to the Secretary of State 891.00/4–2649: Telegram

[Document 295]

The Ambassador in Iran (Wiley) to the Secretary of State

secret Tehran, April 26, 1949—3 p. m.

558. Some weeks ago Prime Minister Saed informed me that he proposed to send me an important letter on economic, military and political matters. Several days ago he stated that he would promptly send me the letter he had previously spoken of but would address it tome in Persian since he did not desire to have it translated by his own people. This may suggest some lack of confidence in the Foreign Office which handles translations. Letter in question was received yesterday. Embassy’s Iran advisor, Saleh, made translation. He believes letter was drafted in Saed’s own handwriting and from style of drafting that it was not processed through Council of Ministers. I had long interview with Foreign Minister Hekmat this morning. He made no allusion to letter and probably knows nothing of it. The text in translation follows:

“My Dear Friend: Your Excellency has been in Iran for nearly one year and I am certain that the adequate studies and observations that you have had during this period have clarified the conditions of Iran for Your Excellency.

Of course you have learned that as long as the flames of war had not spread over Persia, in other words before the Allies arrived in our country, Iran was one of the countries that not only had budgetary equilibrium and was not in need of internal or external loans, but her revenues exceeded her expenditures. Iranian money had not suffered from inflation and depreciation and as a result of the absence of any obstacle in internal and external trade there was plenty of work for the people and the cost of living was low. The people of this country enjoyed peace and comfort under the banner of security throughout the country with which the whole world agreed, and long strides were being taken on the road to progress and prosperity in all social, economic, financial and administrative realms, both civil and military.

The occupation of Iran dealt a severe blow to Iran. Because of the blockade of trade routes and the restriction of the power of the government in occupied zones and the creation of insecurity, production of crops and manufactures diminished and from whatever that was produced (such products) were consumed for Allied needs and con sequently the cost of living went up higher and higher every day in the country and disturbed economic and social affairs, increased the poverty and distress of the people.

National resources suffered from the political and military conditions of the country and especially in northern Iran the property of the Government and people was not immune from encroachments by foreign troops and numerous plunderings were the deplorable con sequences in those regions.

After the evacuation of Iran which was made possible as the result of great political efforts, the Government wanted out of the rack and ruin caused in the past to make fundamental reforms but the disturbed state of social and economic and financial and even political affairs of Iran which resulted from the war was such that our weak budget did not have and still does not have the power to reform and redress the damages or to remedy our needs during the short period of time which the Government and the people expected, and the efforts of the Government to regulate financial and economic affairs and prepare the means of maintaining internal and external security are still meeting with numerous crises, one of which is perhaps the menace of another aggression and encroachment upon Persia. The Iranian Government and people are concerned that Your Excellency’s Government by strengthening some of the neighbors of Iran in a military and political way may be directing the danger of aggression in the future against Iran and Iran may become a victim to the policy of the US Government strengthening them unless with the true aid of Your Excellency’s Government to strengthen Iran in a military way the defensive capacity of Iran with her internal possibilities should be as much as her neighbors.

Iran at the present time has imperative need of importing agricultural, irrigation and well-drilling machines and artificial fertilizer in order that her wheat crops may reach the extent of five million tons per year and in order that she may have a permanent reserve in her stores of at least 200,000 tons of grain and in order that she may have sway on her economic conditions and control prices of articles needed by the public she must import at least one year’s domestic consumption of sugar and piece goods (cotton textiles) from abroad.

In order to repair and improve her railways which have rendered noteworthy services to the Allies during the war and which were called the bridge to victory and in order to complete the branch lines the Iranian Government needs at least 100 locomotives and 3,000 rail way cars and 3,000 kilometers of rail and, furthermore, with a view to creating work for the unemployed and promoting commerce and establishing security it intends to link its railway with Iraq and Pakistan. For the same purpose as mentioned the Iranian Government must asphalt all its existing highways and other roads that should be built and it should procure new road building and snow-clearing machinery. In order to transform at least the three seaports in south Persia into ports in the full modern sense of the word, possessing all the means for embarkation and debarkation and warehousing and, moreover, in order to create two big landing fields equipped with all modern means of air navigation of the nature of an international landing field and in order to build airports which should be of service in all seasons of the year in the important centers of the country and also in order to prevent diseases and improve the sanitary conditions and universalize public health with all modern medical means and also in order to lay pipes in the main towns of the country, the Government must make great sacrifices in order that as a result of the implementation of these operations the continuance of an independent and free life may be ensured for the people of Iran with as much comfort as possible and in order that the people may be relieved of poverty and distress and the country may be restored to its normal state. And, to the end that the Iranian people may be immune from any domestic and foreign crisis it is necessary that Iran should be recognized as being on the first line of countries seeking peace and security and fighting (for it) and she should be equipped in every respect in order to be able to hold forever the banner of peace and freedom and security through moral, intellectual and material resistance.

Therefore, in view of the foregoing considerations, I request Your Excellency to be so kind as to take measures that Your Excellency’s Government which is rendering every assistance to all countries defending their own independence and liberty may consider the sensitive position and circumstances of Iran, to adopt plans to meet the true needs of Iran and to lend effective assistance which would cause further to strengthen friendly and amicable relations and oneness between the two (countries). Most respectfully, Mohammad Saed.”1

Comments follow.

Wiley

1 The Shah advised Ambassador Wiley on May 8 that Prime Minister Saed’s letter had been prepared with his knowledge (telegram 626, May 9, 10. a. m., from Tehran, 891.00/5–949).

The Ambassador in Iran (Wiley) to the Secretary of State 891.50/4–2849: Telegram

[Document 296]

The Ambassador in Iran (Wiley) to the Secretary of State

secret Tehran, April 28, 1949—11 a. m.

564. Embtel 558, April 26. Economic and social projects listed by Prime Minister on which there would be no controversy include: (1) agricultural, irrigation and well-drilling machinery; (2) asphalting main highways and extending secondary roads; (3) import of road and snow clearing machinery; (4) development of seaports; (5) build airports; (6) health program including piped water system.

Linking railways with Iraq and Pakistan is dubious. Tentative OCI conclusion is that completion railway to Tabriz should have first priority, then Meshed, and eventually connection with Turkish rail ways which would give short route from Azerbaijan to seaboard. Spare parts from Germany would rehabilitate 25 locomotives which would probably be adequate for immediate needs. Completion 2 international airports desirable but Office Civil Aviation is actively developing Tehran and Abadan and has recently obtained funds to complete program this year.

OCI feels experiments must be made with various artificial fertilizers before entertaining any projects for building fertilizer factories. Prime Minister’s proposal for wheat crop of 5,000,000 tons would be more than double present output. Although improved agricultural methods and bringing in more land will naturally en large wheat yield we believe emphasis should be on diversified crops to broaden diet rather than concentration on wheat. Regarding proposal hold one year stock of sugar and piece goods, government is currently negotiating for purchase 100,000 tons sugar which with existing stocks would provide more than year’s supply. Existing piece good stocks plus orders placed are probably equal to more than year’s consumption requirements.

Evaluation and conclusions follow.

Wiley

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in Iran 761.91/4–2249: Telegram

[Document 297]

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in Iran 1

secret Washington, April 29, 1949—7 p. m.

387. In stating, as Dept thinks correct, that Treaty of 1921 (including Art 6 and Annex 2) “has not been superseded by subsequent treaty concluded by the parties” (para 1 (a) urtel 543 Apr. 22), Dept did not state that relations and mutual obligations Iran and USSR were unaffected by their signing Charter and becoming members UN. As stated in final para Deptel 348, Apr. 18, Dept regards Charter obligations as having important bearing on Iran-USSR relations, including difference of views over Art 6, 1921 Treaty. Deptel 637, July 8, 19482 shld be studied in its entirety. It is clear, in view of 1921 Treaty and UN Charter, that USSR, as stated in para 1 (a), Deptel 628, July 5, 1948,3 is not permitted “unilaterally to introduce forces into Iran”. This conclusion, however, does not result in abrogation or supersession Art 6 or remainder 1921 Treaty.

Ref para 1(b) urtel 543, Apr 22, Dept believes one or more of three conditions mentioned in Art 6 itself cld conceivably come into existence in future, but with no exclusive Sov right to determine their existence. However, US wld maintain that fourth condition (specified in Annex 2) has now become impossible of realization; thus, Dept’s position is that co-existence of all four necessary conditions will not be possible.

Dept agrees ur phrase “inapplicable validity” (para 2, urtel 543) wld be difficult for comprehension by world opinion. Necessary distinction between “validity” and “applicability” not intended suggest issue of Sov right unilaterally introduce troops into Iran is open to serious debate.

In event of need to present our point of view in SC and to world public opinion, desirable approach, presumably, wld be to lead off with statement that fact situation (conditions claimed by Sovs), does not and cannot exist and that therefore, treaty cannot be applied. We might next point out that under any circumstances, signing of UN Charter by both parties prohibits either party from exercising unilateral right to introduce troops into other’s territory and any Sov claim to such prerogative is clearly indefensible.

“Inapplicable validity formula” not inspired by Brit legal analysis. We do, however, share your concern over indications in some quarters of nostalgic Brit propensity to return to 1907 regime and possibility of legalistic approach to 1921 Treaty by Brit as means of promoting revival of spheres-of-influence regime.

Acheson

1 The Department repeated this telegram to London and Moscow on May 2.

2  Foreign Relations, 1948, vol. v, Part 1, p. 158.

3  Foreign Relations, 1948, vol. v, Part 1, p. 155.

The Ambassador in Iran (Wiley) to the Secretary of State 891.00/4–2949: Telegram

[Document 298]

The Ambassador in Iran (Wiley) to the Secretary of State

secret
priority Tehran, April 29, 1949—5 p. m.

576. Embtels 558, April 26 and 564, April 28. Prime Minister’s letter to me, while it deals at length with economic matters, it is primarily political. It is a document to which we must attach great importance, give prompt consideration and reply at an early date.

Fact that US has given vast sums to aid large areas of world, especially Turkey, has created no obligation on US to give aid to Iran. Politically, however, it has created a pressing obligation on Government of Iran towards its own people to obtain such aid.

Iran is of course aware of pending consideration by World Bank of requests for financial aid submitted by certain of its neighbors. It is however, our aid to Turkey, both military and economic, which has become an obsession with Iranian leaders. On this subject I have been badgered by Shah, harassed by Foreign Minister and wearied by Chief of Staff. They know that a substantial road-building program in Turkey is being financed from funds advanced for military aid and that in addition to military aid, Turkey is greatly benefitting from ECA support.

All this presents an enigma to the Iranian mind. Iran, in opinion of Iranians, is more exposed, more vulnerable, and from a strategic point of view, more important. They see in execution of American policy a discrimination against Iran which might be most dangerous to them—as though US were putting up a road sign for benefit of Russians, “detour via Iran.”

The question posed is whether Iran can hope for anything like the type of assistance given Turkey, even on a modest scale. If so, the Government of Iran can be oriented in the sense we wish, if not we may expect resumption of a period of indecision and vacillation.

For the first time the Prime Minister has appealed in writing for our direct aid. I believe it essential to our interests to respond favorably to this request: (1) It would stiffen the Iranian’s spine by making it clear we consider Iran in same category as Turkey insofar as eligibility for assistance is concerned.

(2) It would put Soviets further on notice re our interest in independence of Iran.

(3) It would serve to associate foreign policy of Iran with that of western democracies.

Iran is in process of allocating considerable economic resources and is committed to pledging its credit to the seven-year economic development program. Effective military aid is therefore essential to assist in supporting Iranian military requirements.

Although there is still much that can wisely be done to fill up numerous chinks in the Iranian military establishment, Iran’s capacity to absorb military aid is of course limited. We must, however, scrupulously avoid any consideration of “token aid” in dealing with Iran and proceed rather on basis of our judgment as to its capacity effectively to absorb military aid.

Moreover, the political advantages gained from military aid as outlined above must be taken most seriously into consideration.

As regards economic assistance, Prime Minister’s letter has perhaps not put forward the best possible arguments but Department will doubtless recall that at time of Tehran Declaration1 we gave assurances to Iranian Government that we recognized Iran’s part in the war and would grant appropriate economic assistance to Iran for post-war rehabilitation. These assurances have been frequently reemphasized but glossed over. The key position which Iran occupies makes it all the more important that we extend more substantial aid. Unless means are soon found to bring about material improvements in living conditions of people of Iran, the Soviets will find increasingly fertile ground for subversive activities.

I realize that since Iran is outside of ECA it is difficult to extend direct economic aid, but possibly, following Turkish precedent, some indirect financial support on economic side could be given within military aid and applied to such closely related projects as roads, harbors, and landing fields. This would give great impetus to Seven-Year Plan and would permit Iran to devote its immediate resources to pressing improvements in fields of agriculture, sanitation and irrigation.

Prime Minister’s letter has presented us with a most serious decision. It is one that will influence policy here for the immediate future. Wise action now may avoid the need of a costly salvage operation later; perhaps too late.

Wiley

1 For the text of the Declaration regarding Iran, dated December 1, 1943, see Foreign Relations, 1943, vol. iv, p. 413. The Declaration was made at Tehran by President Roosevelt, British Prime Minister Churchill, and Soviet Premier Stalin.

Memorandum by the Director of the Office of Near Eastern and African Affairs (Satterthwaite) to the Secretary of State 891.00/3–2949

[Document 299]

Memorandum by the Director of the Office of Near Eastern and African Affairs (Satterthwaite) to the Secretary of State

top secret [Washington,] May 3, 1949.

Subject: Proposed Reply to Personal Letter from Ambassador John C. Wiley.

Background:

In his letter to you of March 29 (attached Tab A)1 Ambassador Wiley emphasizes the Russian desire to dominate Iran and his fear that the Soviets will succeed, at least to the extent of taking over Azerbaijan. He also refers to his efforts to get the Iranian Government to make a communication to the Security Council describing recent Russian pressures on Iran and denying the right of the Soviet Union to introduce troops into Iran under the authority of Article VI of the Irano-Soviet Treaty of 1921 (he refers to this suggested action as the “Ala-Entezam proposal”).

In his telegrams and other communications to the Department, Ambassador Wiley has repeatedly expressed the opinion that a Soviet move into Iran is only a question of time, that the problem is not one of “if” but “when”. We have the impression that he has communicated this sense of impending doom to the Iranian officials with whom he is in contact. We also have the impression that he has been urging the “Ala-Entezam proposal” on the Iranian Government so insistently that at least some officials, including the Shah, have begun to feel that we have an ulterior motive and are pursuing the matter more for our own interests than those of Iran.

Discussion:

Our own feeling is that a Soviet invasion of Iran is not inevitable and that there are dangers in alarming the Iranians unduly in this regard. So long as we are unwilling to give Iran an outright guarantee, we believe we should be wary of so frightening the Iranians that they might in desperation seek to appease the U.S.S.R.

We think Ambassador Wiley’s letter to you affords an opportunity to give him a polite indication of the ways in which our viewpoint seems to differ from his own and the attached draft has been prepared with that in mind.

Recommendation:

That you sign the attached letter to Ambassador Wiley (Tab B).2

There is attached a recent despatch from Mr. Wiley which I suggest you read to brighten up your day (Tab C)3

1  Ante, p. 496 [Pg. 496 includes portions of Doc. 280 and Doc. 281].

2 Tabbed materials not found attached. For text of letter as sent on May 16, see p. 519 [Pg. 519 includes portions of Doc. 301 and Doc. 302].

3 The editors are unable to identify Tab C.

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in Iran 891.00/4–2949: Telegram

[Document 300]

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in Iran

secret Washington, May 6, 1949—7 p. m.

420. Dept giving careful consideration Embtels 558, Apr. 26, 564, Apr. 28 and 576, Apr. 29 and will reply shortly.

However, early introduction arms legislation before Cong, and events related Connally statement Apr. 22 have led Dept consider new approach re handling Iran portion arms bill. Dept wld appreciate ur urgent comments following:

In earlier thinking, reflected Deptel 347, Apr. 18 and Embtel 523, Apr. 20, Dept and Emb considered it desirable not mention Iran by name in hearings and to plan obtain Iran share aid from “general contingency” portion bill.

However, survey present situation reveals:

1) Name of Iran put before Committee in Dept’s testimony in executive session Apr. 22; 2) Connally’s remarks revealed to world Iran receiving some consideration; 3) IranEmb inquired several weeks ago if Iran not included and was informed it wld be considered; 4) Shah’s attitude shows he expects consideration and he and world undoubtedly wld misunderstand if Iran not mentioned in public hearings; 5) Undersecy Webb assured Amb Ala Apr. 29 Iran wld receive consideration; 6) Dept believes it will be difficult get appropriation for Iran from Cong if Iran not mentioned in view previous mention and our feeling “general contingency” will be most difficult portion appropriation request to defend. Therefore since “contingency” might be reduced or eliminated and since there are many claimants for “con tingency” funds (including Latin American countries) no absolute assurance possible that any help can be given Iran from this portion bill.

Dept therefore proposes that name Iran be mentioned in public hearings along with other recipient countries. However, proposed country-by-country allocations will be mentioned only in executive session. Effect calculated give Iran sense of participation without revealing to world extent aid, which might be construed as evalaution importance US attaches to Iran. When time came break news Iranians, our approach might be that aid must be geared into ability to absorb, must be related to continuing deliveries under surplus program, and be designed for filling chinks, as suggested Embtel 576, Apr. 29. US Gov wld carefully avoid use phrase “token aid” in any ref program and wld relate any description to phrases foregoing sentence. Filling chinks is, after all, basis our aid plan for Western Europe.1

Acheson

1 Ambassador Wiley, on May 14, expressed himself as “in entire agreement with Department’s thinking as outlined in Deptel 420” (telegram 654 from Tehran, 891.00/5–1449).

The Ambassador in Iran (Wiley) to the Secretary of State 891.20/5–1549: Telegram

[Document 301]

The Ambassador in Iran (Wiley) to the Secretary of State

secret Tehran, May 15, 1949—noon.

655. HSO in spite twice repeated assurances to contrary is going ahead with project, Army’s taking over gendarmerie together with its police functions. The idea is bad and the timing is worse. HSO has been under heavy fire in Majlis, there is martial law, and Shah, following favorable action by Constituent Assembly and Majlis, is assuming greater powers. Soviet propaganda will make much of all this and will color absorption of gendarmerie by army as sinister move towards military dictatorship. Liberal elements in US and UK will doubtless view development unfavorably. Suggest Department mention matter to Ala who has some influence with Shah.1

Please pass Armed Forces.

Repeated London 104, Moscow 90.

Wiley

1 The Department, on May 17, advised Tehran that “Ala today cabling Tehran his and Mazhari’s views which parallel those expressed urtel 655” (telegram 449, 891.20/5–1549).

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Iran (Wiley) 891.00/3–2949

[Document 302]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Iran (Wiley)

top secret
informal
official Washington, May 16, 1949.

Dear John: Thank you for your letter of March 29. I have, indeed, realized from your telegrams that you are concerned about Iran’s position vis-à-vis its great northern neighbor. I need hardly tell you that we in the Department share your concern and had it very much in mind when we inserted the paragraph on Greece, Turkey and Iran in my talk of March 18 as well as in the special statement I made to the press a few days later.1 It was our hope, which seems so far to have been fulfilled, that these statements and the President’s reference to the Near East in his speech of April 42 would sound enough of a warning note to deter the Russians from embarking on any new major adventures in the direction of Iran.

The evidence which we can assemble here points to the conclusion that the Soviet Union does not want to risk war in the near future and that its activities in the Fear East, including Iran, will therefore not go beyond the sort of pressures and subversive attempts to which it has resorted during the past two years. The evidence also seems to lend itself to the interpretation that the Kremlin fears open aggression against Iran would involve it in grave risk of conflict with the United States. If this were not the case, it would be difficult to explain why Soviet forces have so far refrained from entering Iran despite the obvious Russian designs on that country and the equally obvious physical weakness of Iran.

The essential thing, therefore, is to keep the Iranians firm in their resistance to Soviet pressures short of war. This is undeniably difficult, but we have been successful so far and I think we are justified in having good hope of success in the future. From where I sit, it looks as though the first requisite has been achieved, namely, that the Iranian Government itself should realize its danger. I do not think we need to impress that on the Iranians any more strongly; in fact, I am sometimes afraid that we may go too far in this direction and so frighten them that they will resort to appeasement of the Russians out of sheer terror. They have, unfortunately, too many examples before them of small countries overrun despite the best efforts to preserve their independence. We must endeavor to steer Iran on a middle course between undue complacency and undue fear.3

The question of what concrete support, diplomatic and material, we can give to Iran remains a knotty one. In the diplomatic field, the Department continues to believe it desirable that the Iranians should make some non-provocative report to the Security Council regarding the various threats and pressures Russia has employed in the past year and a quarter. We would expect to follow up such a report with a statement of our own regarding American activities in Iran and our view as to the duty of the USSR to complain to the Security Council if she genuinely feels threatened. However, we have become somewhat concerned lest our repeated indications of this view to the Iranian Government should be construed as pressure exerted on our part and lest the Iranians, if they do take action, should do so un willingly, merely out of a desire to avoid offending the United States. Apart from the fact that the Iranian Government could not be relied upon to back up a démarche made under such circumstances (you will recall Qavam’s vacillations in 1946),4 I am afraid such a situation would impose upon us a tremendous moral responsibility to stand behind Iran whatever the consequences of her action. I do not want to be in the position of egging on a small country to do something it is reluctant to do in its own interest. Now that we have made our views abundantly clear and that the Iranian Government has received concrete and well-drafted proposals for action from its representatives and legal counsel in the United States, I am inclined to feel that we should let the matter rest for the time being, leaving the initiative entirely to the Iranians.

In the field of material aid, we have succeeded so far in keeping an amount of approximately 12 million dollars allocated to Iran in the draft Military Aid Program. Whether this will stay in the bill is, of course, for Congress to decide. It is not politically feasible to increase this amount, although we hope the bill will also include a “contingency fund” of perhaps 50 million dollars from which some small additional sum might conceivably be drawn to assist Iran if it seemed necessary. I realize that this would seem very small to the Iranians as compared with 75 or 100 million dollars for Turkey. We shall strive to minimize this difficulty by avoiding any revelation of the amounts allocated. Perhaps we can also diminish Iranian disappointment or resentment by continuing to emphasize, as you have done, the inability of the Iranian forces to absorb large quantities of additional equipment in the coming year and the need for extensive training before highly technical modern weapons and equipment could profitably be provided. A further argument which occurs to me, and on which I would like your opinion, is the economic one. Even though we might supply all of the foreign exchange costs of an enlarged and modernized Iranian Army, I should think the internal costs would be an extremely severe drain on the Iranian budget and would handicap the implementation of the economic development program. As you know, in the European arms program we are emphasizing that economic recovery is the first objective and all military programs must be subordinated to that. In our view, this applies equally to Iran.

On the economic side itself, we place great reliance on the working out of the Seven Year Program, with the assistance of Overseas Consultants and International Bank financing. Mr. Sa’ed’s recent letter to you5 seems to raise new aspects, and we are restudying the problem in its light. I shall not try to comment here, because you will probably receive a telegram on the subject before this letter reaches you.

[Here follows a brief paragraph on personal matters.]

Sincerely yours,

Dean Acheson

1 See telegram 272, March 23, to Tehran, p. 494 [Pg. 494 includes portions of Doc. 278 and Doc. 279].

2 See footnote 2, p. 502 [Pg. 502 is part of Doc. 286].

3 Ambassador Wiley’s reply of June 2 invited attention to the Secretary’s stress on “the importance of keeping the Iranians firm in their resistance to Soviet pressures and to the possible danger of their appeasing the Russians out of ‘sheer terror’.” The Ambassador stated his belief that “if anything, the Iranian attitude, which has not been soft, is stiffening. Curiously enough, I do not think the Iranian leaders are easily scared or susceptible to panic.… I am not disturbed at all about appeasement, capitulation, or fright on the part of the dominant figures in the Iranian setup, Too, the Iranian frontier guards have shown very good morale in resisting repeated Red Army incursions.” The Ambassador did express concern, however, “about the two great northern provinces of Azerbaijan and Mazanderin, containing not far from 30% of the entire population of the country, where one-half of the food is produced and many of the essential raw commodities of the country, such as, for example, wool. Economic conditions there are bad; little or nothing is being done either by the Government or by absentee landlords. There is discontent to an extent which makes this area, so vital to Iran, very vulnerable indeed. I fear that a not inconsequential part of the population would not be particularly averse to seeing the Russians return. Something should be done and done immediately to improve conditions in this area.”

The copy of Ambassador Wiley’s letter here cited was found attached to his letter of June 27 to Mr. Jernegan, not printed (761.91/6–2749).

4 For documentation on the administration of Prime Minister Qavam, see Foreign Relations, 1946, vol. vii, pp. 289 ff.

5 See telegram 558, April 26, from Tehran, p. 510 [Pg. 510 includes portions of Doc. 294 and Doc. 295].

The Acting Secretary of State to the Embassy in Iran 891.20/5–2049: Telegram

[Document 303]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Embassy in Iran

secret Washington, May 24, 1949—7 p. m.

us urgent

473. Embtels 676 and 677, May 20; 689 May 23;1 and Deptel 449, May 17.2 Ala and Mazhari conveyed State and Army May 23 lengthy elaboration Shah’s replies Iran Emb cables re Gendarmerie merger plan. Exposition was more rationalization than justification since organizational, administrative, econ, and morale improvements anticipated are not precluded under present set-up. Emb Reps were surprised to learn US Mil Missions had not been consulted and were “certain” their advice wld be sought before merger effected. Burden of remarks was that historical and analytical estimate Army-Gendarmerie relationship presented purely internal problem for which solution being sought in terms independent IranGov decision without implication affront any fon power.

We agree ur view “idea is bad and timing worse” (urtel 655, May 15). Furthermore, we regret apparent disposition IranGov not make full use US Mil Missions by requesting their advice and, in addition, rendering ineffective, without consultation. Missions’ latest recommendations on subj which resulted 1947 decree stipulating respective responsibilities Army and Gendarmerie. Particularly unfortunate is IranGov failure take Missions into its confidence in planning stages.

In spite of views preceding para, we must recognize that determination status of Gendarmerie in Iran’s security scheme is matter within exclusive competence IranGov and shld avoid any suggestion that US Govt, on own initiative, is opposing independent Iran decision. Our expressed concern shld be limited to our estimate world public opinion, particularly in US, as it relates to maximizing Western support for Iran and minimizing effectiveness Sov subversion efforts. Anything beyond that shld be kept completely informal and in response to specific inquiries. We regret apparent inference recent VOA broadcast that US Govt takes any position in matter. While IranGovt action this and other matters inevitably has effect making easier or more difficult US support Iran, we shld avoid giving impression US Govt will in any way retaliate for failure. IranGov fol friendly advice given only when solicited.

With all above in mind, we are today informing Ala and Mazhari proposed merger Gendarmerie-Army is considered matter for independent Iran decision and that action taken by IranGov will have no effect upon disposition exec branch US Govt accord continuing support Iran in its effort achieve secure well-being through democratic processes. We assume that, in taking decision, IranGov will weigh carefully possible effects proposed action in terms of world opinion, particularly US press and Cong, propaganda reaction USSR, and effect upon diverse elements in Iran polit picture.

In light of all above, you shld, in ur discretion and after consultation Brit colleague, undertake dispel Shah’s apparent apprehension over influence US intervention.3

Webb

1 None printed.

2 Not printed; but see footnote 1 to telegram 655, May 15, p. 519 [Pg. 519 includes portions of Doc. 301 and Doc. 302].

3 This telegram was repeated to London as 1802 and Moscow as 369. Ambassador Wiley, on May 26, replied that the Embassy had “followed precisely” the policy outlined in telegram 473. He observed further, however, that he did not “see anything to be gained by trying to ‘dispel Shah’s apparent apprehensions’ or apprehensions of anyone else.… It is most important that Department should abstain from any action that could be interpreted by Shah and HSO as ‘green light’.” (Telegram 706, from Tehran, 891.20/5–2649)

The Acting Secretary of State to the Embassy in Iran 891.00/5–949: Telegram

[Document 304]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Embassy in Iran

secret Washington, May 25, 1949—1 p. m.

477. Urtels 558 Apr 26, 564 Apr 28, 576 Apr 29 and 626 May 9.1 Our preliminary thoughts on Saed ltr fol.

1. Saed appears exaggerate Iran’s war damages. So far as we know, Iran’s “natural resources” did not suffer. We recognize presence three fon armies, plus arbitrary interference Iran affairs by Soviets, caused hardships and dislocations during war period but we are aware no evidence these had any effect on country’s econ potential. Only lasting change in econ situation seems to have been expansion AIOC production which is beneficial.

2. Statement that Iran’s “weak budget” does not have power repair damages or meet Iran needs seems contradicted by reported surplus in Gov receipts during year just past and by ambitious plans for 7 yr econ development which both Iran and fon experts have repeatedly said could be supported by Iran econ with certain assistance at a later date in form IBRD credit and fon private capital investment.

3. Saed assertion that aid to Turk adds to danger to Iran is illogical. If followed to conclusion it wld mean that Iran wld be safer if all free countries were as weak as Iran. Policy of strengthening all countries threatened by USSR equally in order present continuous ring of steel equally strong at all points wld be wholly impracticable. Apart from fact that US resources unequal to task, all countries are not able utilize and maintain same kinds and quantities mil equip or support mil forces of same magnitude. True deterrent to war and Sov aggression against Iran lies in overall strength and firmness of free nations, not in individual mil strength of any one.

4. Iranians seem to have exaggerated idea Amer econ aid to Turk. This aid consists of ECA credits (not grants) amounting to 39 million Dols for first year, 36 million Dols Ex-Im Bank credit granted 2 years ago only half of which has been utilized, and 16 million special credits for surplus property, purchase and repair of ships. Funds under all these credits are made available only on basis careful preparation presentation and justification of projects for which they are to be used. Note also that Turk has drawn down gold and fon exchange balances by one-third since end of war, and present budget position actually much weaker than Iran’s. Turk road building program received only 5 million dols out of first year mil aid allocations and nothing from 2nd year allocations. Future Turk road program will be financed out of domestic resources and ECA credits (not grants) which must be justified and repaid in substantially same fashion as Iran wld have to justify and repay an IBRD or other loan for same purpose.

5. Tehran Declaration of 1943 (re urtel 576) contained no assurances of econ assistance for post-war rehabilitation other than promise that Iran wld be included among participants in post-war econ conferences. Statement in Declaration that 3 Powers wld continue to give such econ assistance as possible subject to their other commitments was clearly intended to apply only to wartime circumstances when world-wide shipping and supply difficulties had made Iran imports dependent upon good will of Allies.

6. We agree your analysis (urtel 564, Apr 28) econ projects listed by Saed. Non-controversial projects considered part 7-Year Plan, however, and Dept has been assuming econ aid shld be within framework that plan, not isolated special requests. Further, we have been assured by Iranians themselves that general econ and fon exchange position wld make it possible execute plan without direct grants by US. As matter of fact, Iranians have stated, and figures available to us do not contradict, that loan from IBRD wld not be necessary for first year or so of program. If and when Iran believes a loan is necessary and presents justified application (which they have not done as you know) we will support them at IBRD. If some change in Iran econ situation has made execution plan impracticable without US grant, full explanation shld be given; otherwise, we do not see how justify Dept support. This especially true since temper Cong and advanced stage ECA appropriation requests wld seem make it impossible to obtain special funds for Iran in near future.

7. If Saed determined request loans to finance individual projects instead overall IBRD financing, you might remind him that we have repeatedly expressed willingness support all sound Iran requests for IBRD or Ex-Im Bank credits. In any case, Dept willing support Ex-Im Bank loan of approximately $1 million for purchase well-drilling machinery and irrigation pumps along lines indicated Deptel 841, Sept 8, 1948.2 Even for this magnitude aid, however, Saed shld know by now that fon Govts desiring help must themselves prepare plans and specifications and consult with US to determine whether they can be fitted into overall policies and resources US as determined by Congress.

8. We are convinced that Iran’s urgent need is for technical assistance and repeat UnSecy Webb’s statement to Ambassador Ala Apr 29 that Iran shld plan receive such aid under terms Truman Point Four Program and Smith–Mundt Act. Preliminary US and UN program established by Dept for Cong presentation provides $1-¼ million for fon exchange expenses and salaries 73 technicians to be sent Iran, 32 Iran trainees to go abroad, including $265,000 for demonstration material and equip. No provision capital for project financing. Emphasis for Iran is in fields agriculture and forestry, $350,000; health, $325,000; irrigation, $220,000; transportation, $120,000; industry, $75,000; industrial training, $67,000, and education, $50,000. Above program highly tentative. May be changed according IranGov needs. (All details this para still confidential. Iran officials can be informed only of type of program and fields of emphasis, stressing that size and character program depends Cong action. In accordance Depcirins May 3,3 particularly page 7 [Pg. 7 is part of Doc. 1], you shld not solicit, but may accept, proposals technical cooperation.)

9. We also note that US makes large contributions to international organizations such as IMF, ILO, FAO, WHO, UNESCO and ICAO in addition to IBRD. One of the purposes of US contributions to these programs is to enable them to help countries such as Iran. It is up to Iran, therefore, to make use of agency programs available and to join organizations such as FAO so as to benefit by their programs.

10. We are increasingly of opinion that perhaps greatest contribution we cld make to Iran econ improvement, in addition to conspicuous integrated pilot projects, wld be through effective en couragement of specific measures within exclusive competence of IranGov itself (e.g., speed-up implementation 7–Year Plan, land reform, improvement tax structure).

We realize foregoing not fully satisfactory basis for meeting Iran requests and complaints. It is intended only as step toward clarification thinking between Dept and Emb. Wld appreciate your comments and further suggestions re steps we might take within means available and manner of approach which wld meet real Iran difficulties and prevent undesirable political developments. Also which of preceding points you wld propose to include in written reply Saed, which you think shld be discussed orally, and which left completely unstated.4

Webb

1 No. 626 not printed; but see footnote 1, p. 512 [Pg. 512 includes portions of Doc. 295 and Doc. 296].

2  Foreign Relations, 1948, vol. v, Part 1, p. 178.

3 Not printed.

4 In reply on May 30, Ambassador Wiley expressed his entire agreement with telegram 477 and suggested that in preparing a written reply to the Prime Minister points 6, 7, and 8 be included without details; that points 2, 4, and 9 be given orally; and that points 1, 3, 5, and 10 be omitted (telegram 714, from Tehran, 891.00/5–3049).

The Acting Secretary of State to the Embassy in Iran 891.50 Seven Year Plan/5–2549: Telegram

[Document 305]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Embassy in Iran

secret Washington, May 25, 1949—6 p. m.

482. Subsequent to drafting preceding tel1 re Saed ltr, Ala, on instrs FonMin, made official his oft repeated informal requests for US econ assistance. At our suggestion, Ala has agreed put Govt-authorized request in writing. In preparation formal note, Ala is in communication with his Govt re specific types assistance to be sought.

Since above approach apparently parallels Saed ltr, wld be helpful if we cld discuss that letr with Ala. Do you see objection?

Ala has sought informal advice Dept Rep in framing written re quest with view to posing as acceptable proposition as possible. He has been given our understanding OCI recommendations 7-Year Plan are comprehensive in nature and contemplate satisfaction Iran’s essential econ needs; furthermore, contemplated first-year $30 million investment not expected by either IranGov or OCI to require fon financial assistance. US technical assistance to Iran under Point Four Program, through UN agencies and directly, might meet Iran’s desire for demonstration US interest in Iran and, at same time, provide impetus to implementation 7-Year Plan. Ala has been told Point Four appropriations are expected available late summer at approx same time OCI report will have been considered by IranGov, which coincidence shld enable IranGov formulate justifiable pilot projects for which US might conspicuously provide technical assist.

Ala stated that he wld immed urge his Govt join FAO and ICAO, and authorize him communicate to Asst Secy Thorp Iran’s intention to apply for Point Four assistance in fields of health, agri, education, and transportation. He feels that greatest service to Iran might be rendered by integration such functional assistance into several area pilot demonstration projects on Near East Foundation pattern.

Webb

1 No. 477, supra.

The Ambassador in Iran (Wiley) to the Secretary of State 891.20/5–2649: Telegram

[Document 306]

The Ambassador in Iran (Wiley) to the Secretary of State

top secret Tehran, May 26, 1949—9 a. m.

700. HSO yesterday informed General Evans, Chief ArMish, that a telegram has been received from Ala that $320,000,000 is being appropriated for direct aid to Greece, Turkey, Iran and others. HSO stated that 7 p. m. today General Evans was expected to submit to Shah complete list of additional matériel and equipment required for army of 300,000 which presumably will involve standing army of 150,000 and trained reserves 150,000.

General Evans does not see where present Iranian military budget could adequately support any such military establishment. He believes even present establishment too large for funds available. It is unlikely that Iran can afford much larger military appropriations than at present. He will however, comply insofar as possible with directive from Shah but will, I believe, explain his views quite frankly when he has audience.

Please pass to Armed Forces.

Wiley

The Acting Secretary of State to the Embassy in Iran 891.20/5–2649: Telegram

[Document 307]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Embassy in Iran

secret Washington, May 27, 1949—6 p. m.

us urgent

485. In conversation preceding Deptel 449, May 171 and subsequent Deptel 473, May 24, we have followed informally, in elaboration official position penultimate para Deptel 473, line substantially parallel ur own, carefully avoiding implication “green light” (urtel 706, May 262 ). In course of informal conversations with Ala, Mazhari, and Aram, question was raised whether our attitude, as in case limited constitutional reform, was sympathetic. We replied our objective weighing relevant factors led our dipl and mil Reps both Tehran and Wash to conclusion merger project intrinsically unwise and most untimely.

Conveying ur latest report strong opposition in Iran to merger, we have informed IranEmb informal Wash conversations are being reported Emb Tehran and encouraged Ala transmit full report H.I.M. You can assure Shah ur official representations are on instruction Dept and ur informal views in complete accord our own.

Ala’s correspondence with Tehran this subj limited exclusively H.I.M.3

Webb

1 See footnote 1 to telegram 655, May 15, p. 519 [Pg. 519 includes portions of Doc. 301 and Doc. 302].

2 Not printed; but see footnote 3, p. 523 [Pg. 523 includes portions of Doc. 303 and Doc. 304].

3 Tehran, on May 30, informed the Department of a meeting earlier in the day, attended by Colonel Pierce, at which General Razmara issued a directive for the merger of the Gendarmerie into the Army for a trial period of 6 months. Some 12,000 of the gendarmes were to be transferred to the Ministry of War for security purposes, while 4,000–5,000 were to remain under the Ministry of the Interior for civil functions (telegram 712, 891.20/5–3049). Tehran, on June 6, reported that the American Mission with the Gendarmerie was virtually inoperative, that neither Ministry was consulting its American Advisers and that the Army, in taking over the Gendarmerie, was acting in such a way that the reduced force of gendarmes attached to the Ministry of the Interior would be unable to function properly (telegram 753, 891.00/6–649).

The Acting Secretary of State to the Embassy in Iran 891.50/6–2749: Telegram

[Document 308]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Embassy in Iran

secret Washington, May 27, 1949—7 p. m.

488. On instruction FonMin, Ala today conveyed his Govt’s desire immediate US econ assistance to tune 500 million dollars for urgent rehabilitation 1941 level Iran economy. He stated understanding question had been discussed with Wiley who wld transmit request with his blessing. We indicated inability cope with vague request of such proportions. Ala said he had asked Tehran more details.

Webb

The Ambassador in Iran (Wiley) to the Secretary of State 891.24/6–849: Telegram

[Document 309]

The Ambassador in Iran (Wiley) to the Secretary of State

secret Tehran, June 8, 1949—4 p. m.

776. Following is text in translation of note dated June 7, 1949, with enclosures, which I have just received from Prime Minister Saed. Note is numbered 3533:

[“]My Dear Ambassador: I have previously furnished Your Excellency with the pertinent background explanation of what follows. You are well aware to what extent Iran (in view of her) geographical and political circumstances is today in imperative need of military and economic assistance to enable her with forces that should as far as possible be well equipped with modern matériel to resist and stand up to any undesirable development which might en danger the territorial integrity and political independence of the Iranian people.

During your period of residence in Iran and as a result of your studies of Iran’s geographical position, Your Excellency has well realized the delicate situation of Iran. You have learned the importance of Iran not only so far as her domestic situation is concerned but also (because of) her impact in international affairs. You know well that Iran in this part of the world is the advance guard of the democratic and free nations of the world. This being the case, the Iranian nation has the right to expect from the great people of the United States who are the protectors and supporters of human freedom and civilization, immediate and gratuitous assistance in order to protect her integrity and independence and fulfill her international duties.

You will notice that the appendix to this letter is a list of the immediate essential military needs of Iran. The minimum articles which may be used in one year have been noted therein. It goes without saying that in view of the speed with which progress is made in military techniques, every year the quality and quantity of such needs will naturally change and other lists should be prepared for future years in consultation with experts.

I trust Your Excellency will be so kind as to draw the attention of the US Government to the importance of this subject and to the necessity for granting this immediate assistance. I am sure that with your knowledge of the importance of the situation and the dangerous and delicate position of Iran and your personal knowledge of the limited financial capacity of Iran, you will be so kind as to take expeditious, prompt and efficacious measures in this respect and thus oblige the Iran Government.

I avail myself of the opportunity to renew to Your Excellency the assurances of my highest consideration.1 Signed Mohammad Saed.”

[Here follow the requirements for an army of 200,000 men, comprising list 1, which detailed ordnance for the artillery, munitions for arms and hand weapons, and equipment for the Engineering Department; lists 2–5 for automotive, quartermaster, medical, and air force equipment, respectively; and list 6, which detailed arms, ammunition, uniforms, etc., to equip 100,000 tribesmen. Some 129 items were set forth in the six lists.]

Comment follows.

Please pass to Armed Forces.

Wiley

1 Ambassador Wiley, on June 9, gave his view that the “Note clearly stems from Shah and General Razmara, Chief of Staff. Though in preparing this note Shah and General Razmara could have had most loyal and careful collaboration from chiefs of two American military missions, little or no advantage was taken thereof.” (Telegram 778, from Tehran, 891.24/6–949) In a conversation with the Shah on June 13, Ambassador Wiley took note of the very high sights set by the Iranian monarch on the extent of military assist ance. He informed the Department that he “tried to dampen his enthusiasm without discouraging him, pointing out value of establishing principle of direct aid, even if initial allotment comparatively small.” He advised also that the Shah continued to be partial to tanks and jet planes but that “His thinking this regard is strictly in never never land.” (Telegram 807 from Tehran, 891.001 Pahlavi, Reza Shah/6–1449) Prime Minister Saed’s lists, incidentally, included 100 M–4 tanks and 100 M–24 light tanks, but made no mention of jet planes.

The Ambassador in Iran (Wiley) to the Secretary of State 891.24/6–2249

[Document 310]

The Ambassador in Iran (Wiley) to the Secretary of State 1

top secret
official
informal Tehran, June 22, 1949.

Dear Dean: As you know, the question of direct military aid to Iran is now actively on the agenda. I have been giving much thought to the matter. I outline below some of the basic considerations which strike me as applicable in arriving at a workable solution here.

(1) There should be an effective and substantial training program for Iranian officers in American military and, so far as is feasible, in technical schools as well. Visual and tangible education of Iranian Army personnel in the United States could have great impact not only on the Iranian Army but on Iran itself.

(2) Whatever direct aid we do give must be something more than merely provocative (to the neighbor on the northern frontier); it must be fruitful. There are many chinks in the Iranian military establishment that can usefully be filled in.

(3) In giving direct military aid to Iran, nothing should be handed out. Everything should be doled out and we in Tehran should control the eyedropper.2

(4) We must not give the Iranian Army equipment which it cannot absorb.

(5) We should not give aid that can be procured locally.

(6) After considerable thought I have come to the conclusion that direct military aid to Iran should come to between $32,000,000 and and $38,000,000 for the first year. General Evans is presently exploring this field. In addition to the cost of procurement one must calculate something like 20 per cent or more for transportation. Certain other military expenses should be met by the Iranian Government out of the American direct aid credit in the same manner as is the case in Turkey.

There are here two American Military Missions, advisory in character, one to the Army and the other to the Gendarmerie. The first is headed by Major General Vernon Evans and the second by Colonel James R. Pierce. Both are outstanding officers and professionally most competent. As things stand today, our Military Missions are very seldom consulted by the Iranians in the planning stage of anything of real importance. On the other hand, matters of a “five and dime” character are frequently referred to the Missions. Past experience has been that when an important decision has been reached by the Iranians without American advice the Americans are usually called in to advise on implementation. Even this advice is often ignored unless it coincides with the already established Iranian viewpoint. If there is to be direct military aid to Iran, these conditions must be firmly corrected. The faultlies with the Shah and with the Chief of Staff, General Razmara.

It will be possible to correct this situation only if in direct military aid we can control everything all the time. I may add with satisfaction that the two Military Missions and the Embassy work together as a very close-knit team. We must be permitted, in the event of direct aid, to maintain at all times one foot on the throttle and the other on the brake.

In our dealings with the Medes and the Persians we must always recall that we have to do with a people for whom the intrigues of the day suffice. They are not without talent or ability, but they disdain the past and ignore the future.

Yours sincerely,

John C. Wiley

1 Copy transmitted to Mr. Jernegan in Ambassador Wiley’s letter of June 22. The transmitting communication stated that the Ambassador attached “considerable importance to the ‘eyedropper’ doctrine” set forth in his letter to the Secretary of State.

2 Marginal notation by Mr. Jernegan: “I agree.”

Memorandum of Conversation, by Mr. Philip A. Mangano of the Office of United Nations Political and Security Affairs 761.91/7–749

[Document 311]

Memorandum of Conversation, by Mr. Philip A. Mangano of the Office of United Nations Political and Security Affairs

secret [Washington,] July 7, 1949.

Participants: GTI—Mr. Clyde Dunn

L/P—Mr. Meeker

DRN—Mr. Upton

UNP—Mr. Mangano

Mr. Fawcett—UK Delegation

Mr. Walker—Second Secretary, British Embassy

Mr. Bromley—First Secretary, British Embassy

On Thursday afternoon, June 30, a meeting was held in Mr. Dunn’s office (GTI) to permit an exchange of views between interested officers of the Department and the British Embassy officials in connection with the Soviet-Iranian situation, with particular reference to Article VI of the treaty between Iran and the USSR of 1921. Earlier discussions with the British had suggested a not complete meeting of minds on the interpretation of the conditions and manner in which a Soviet right (under the treaty) to send troops into northern Iran could be applied.

Mr. Dunn furnished the British representatives with a copy of a paper prepared in the Department1 which outlined what the Department tentatively, at the operating level felt to be a desirable course of action for Iran in order to discourage the USSR from threatening or sending troops into Iran under the guise of the 1921 treaty. Inter alia, the paper proposed that the Iranian Government should communicate to the Security Council on developments, setting forth the position that the USSR does not possess a right under the 1921 treaty unilaterally to determine that conditions in northern Iran warrant the sending of troops. The US would then be prepared to issue a statement giving its views of the obligations of the parties under the UN Charter.

The discussion turned quickly to consideration of paragraph six in the Department’s tentative paper suggesting courses of action.

Mr. Fawcett observed that the British felt that subparagraph (a) would represent a sound position, but questioned the validity of sub paragraph (b) on absolute legal terms. He argued that it was important to know whether, at the time of signing the treaty in 1921, it was the clear intent of the Iranian Government to accord Soviet Russia the right of unilateral determination of the existence of conditions in northern Iran (threats to the Soviet frontier, the development of military bases by outside powers directed against the USSR, etc.) which would justify the introduction of Soviet troops. The British officials initially took the position that this appeared to be an absolute right, the enjoyment of which was not qualified by the signing of the UN Charter. The British officials also felt that if an emergency arose and the matter properly went to the Security Council, it would be better to avoid pressing detailed legal arguments on this point, resting the case almost entirely on the claim that conditions justifying the introduction of troops do not and cannot exist. In that connection, Mr. Fawcett observed that much of the dispute would then be between the USSR and the US, the former accusing this Government of trying to turn Iran into a military base for hostile purposes against the USSR, while the US would clearly refute such allegations.

In response to questions from the British as to how we felt that the exercise of the Soviet right under Article VI of the 1921 treaty was qualified by subsequent developments, including the signing of the Charter, Mr. Meeker outlined the following points: 1. The Treaty of 1921 specifies no procedure for determining whether or not the alleged conditions exist. However, in the treaty of guarantee and neutrality of October 1927, the two governments, under took “to settle by a specific procedure appropriate to the circumstances all disputes of any description which may arise between them and which it has not been possible to settle through ordinary channels.” Thus, if Iran were to claim that a dispute existed as to the interpretation of Article VI of the treaty of 1921, it would have a treaty right to call for special procedures of settlement, such as arbitration or adjudication—possibly by the International Court of Justice.

2. The UN Charter enjoins the settlement of international disputes by peaceful means and enjoins all members to “refrain in their international relations from the threat or use of force against the territorial integrity or political independence of any state.” Articles 33 and 37 of the Charter require the parties to a dispute involving the maintenance of international peace to seek, first, a solution by peaceful means of their own choice, and failing in that to refer it to the Security Council. Article 103 of the Charter establishes that where there is a conflict between the obligations of Members under the Charter and under any other international agreements to which they may be parties, the Charter shall prevail.

Mr. Meeker pointed out that it was clear that it was an obligation of the USSR not to use force, but to have recourse to any one of the various means of peaceful settlement known to international law, provided for in the Charter, or referred to in the Soviet-Iranian treaty of 1927. He then outlined our understanding of the difference between defense pacts under Article 51 of the Charter and the possible assertion of a right by the USSR to arbitrarily send troops into northern Iran without having it established by proper methods that conditions existed justifying such action. He also observed we did not feel that the Soviet-Iranian treaty could be considered as a “regional arrangement” in terms of the Charter with the possibility that the USSR could claim that steps, such as the sending of troops, were justified in order to preserve the security of the whole area, Mr. Meeker and Mr. Mangano pointed out that it would be paradoxical, to say the least, to think of Iran as a party to the treaty of 1921, agreeing to steps against itself under guise of fulfilling obligations of a regional arrangement. It was further maintained that, where regional arrangements might conceivably be used for “enforcement measures” in terms of the Charter, they would usually be of a multilateral rather than a bilateral character.

Mr. Dunn queried the British representatives as to whether the above discussion had eased their uncertainties as to the inter-relationship of the Charter with possible application of Article VI of the 1921 treaty. He said we felt that the British need not consider their treaty positions in Egypt and Trans-Jordan as paralleling a Soviet attempt to put troops into Iran. In the former case (as demonstrated by the Egyptian case in the Security Council) there was a matter of maintaining troops already in a country by treaty right; in the latter case, the matter would be one of forcibly attempting to introduce troops, without the free consent of the Iranian Government, thereby endangering international peace. Mr. Mangano attempted to summarize the position in the following terms:

There was no question about the validity of the treaty of 1921, and particularly, of Article VI. Indeed, there should be no question about the validity of any continuing treaties antedating the Charter. However, the advent of the Charter meant that member states, in seeking to apply particular treaty rights, must do so in a manner consistent with the Charter and with their obligations as members. Mr. Meeker emphasized that the essential point, in resolving the Soviet-Iranian dispute, was that force should not be used.

It appeared that the British officials were able to agree with such a general formulation. They also concurred generally with Mr. Dunn’s suggestion that the proposed Iranian communication to the Security Council be couched in bland and not overly-legalistic terms, avoiding a provocative tone, and strengthening thereby their position before the Security Council. It was hoped that such a course of action would help restrain the USSR from proceeding to any drastic action which might require Security Council consideration under Chapter VI.

[Annex]

[Washington,] July 7, 1949.

Desirable Course of Action Relative to Soviet-Iranian Treaty of 1921

1. The Iranian Government should, as a party to a case of which the Security Council is seized, keep the Security Council informed of developments bearing upon the Iranian case, including the Soviet contention of a “right” to take action in Iran under the 1921 Treaty.

2. In communicating such developments to the Security Council for information only, the Iranian Government should take such occasion to state its position with respect to Soviet assertions of its “rights” under the 1921 Treaty, avoiding, however, legalistic, tendentious argument—the purposes being as follows: a. To achieve agreement as to the Iranian position in advance of an emergency and, thus, avoid confusion and loss of time in the event of an emergency involving the 1921 Treaty;

b. The Iranian Government and people would understand that they are not under the shadow of any legal Soviet right to impair Iran’s territorial integrity and, therefore, might achieve a desirable degree of self-confidence in the face of a continuing Soviet war of nerves;

c. It would be made entirely clear that the Iranian Government does not acquiesce in the hitherto unrefuted Soviet assertions of unilateral Soviet “rights” under the 1921 Treaty and the USSR might be deterred from action which would evoke armed Iranian resistance and, therefore, pose a serious threat to the peace; and,

d. The peoples of the Western Democracies would be more ready to accord full support to Iran in the realization, contrary to wide spread press opinion, that no semblance of legality underlay Soviet military action against Iran.

3. The Iranian Government decision to communicate with the Security Council concerning the 1921 Treaty should be an entirely independent one, since the US desires to avoid: a. Making Iran appear to world opinion as the pawn in Big-Power politics; and,

b. Causing Iran to evade responsibility for the consequences of its own foreign policy.

4. While the Iranian position in this connection should be an in dependent one, the US should be prepared to give advice, when requested by the Iranian Government, along the lines of 1. and 2. above.

5. Should the Iranian Government communicate to the Security Council its interpretation of Article 6 of the 1921 treaty along lines stated in the Conclusions embodied in this paper, the US should be prepared to issue a statement giving US views of the obligations of the parties under the UN Charter.

6. Should Article 6 become the subject of attention by the Security Council, the desirable approach by the US would be to state: a. That the fact situation (conditions alleged by Soviet Government to exist in Iran) does not and cannot exist and that, therefore, the 1921 Treaty cannot be applied; and,

b. That under any circumstances, the signing of the UN Charter by Iran and the USSR prohibits either party from exercising any unilateral right to introduce troops into the other’s territory and that any Soviet claim to such a prerogative is clearly indefensible.

7. If the Soviet Union believes that, conditions exist which are envisaged in Article 6 and Annex 2 of the 1921 Treaty, and that it is entitled to send its troops on to Iranian soil, the appropriate course, in the absence of the free and present consent of Iran or solution of the dispute by pacific procedures under Article 33 of the UN Charter, is for the Soviet Union to refer the matter to the Security Council as a dispute likely to endanger international peace and to ask that body to recommend or apply remedies in order that international peace and security may be maintained.

8. If the Soviet Union, without the free and present consent of Iran, should attempt to introduce troops onto Iranian soil, Iran would be justified under Article 51 of the UN Charter in resisting with force this threat or use of force contrary to the principles of the UN, whether or not the conditions envisaged in Article 6 of the 1921 Treaty did in fact exist.

9. The Iranian Government would be ill-advised to denounce the 1921 Treaty in order to get rid of Article 6, for the following reasons: a. The Treaty contains certain provisions advantageous to Iran;

b. Denunciation of the Treaty by Iran might, with some justification, be interpreted by world opinion, and particularly the Soviet Union, as an unfriendly act toward Russia; and,

c. Article 6 does not permit the USSR unilaterally to introduce forces into Iran.

10. In view of the sound legal position of Iran in contending that the USSR has no legal right, under the 1921 Treaty or otherwise, unilaterally to introduce troops into Iran, the Iranian Government would be unwise even to discuss any bargain with the USSR looking toward Soviet agreement with such Iranian interpretation of Article 6.

11. It is most desirable that the policy of the UK be coordinated closely with that of the US in this connection.

1 Printed as an annex to this document.

The Ambassador in Iran (Wiley) to the Secretary of State 891.51/7–749: Telegram

[Document 312]

The Ambassador in Iran (Wiley) to the Secretary of State

secret Tehran, July 7, 1949—noon.

886. At direction of Shah, Ebtehaj came to see me and General Evans this morning for purpose of discussing all aspects US aid to Iran. I had Wagner1 present for purpose of outlining to Ebtehaj some of the information recently given him in Washington. I was present during first one and half hours of meeting but then had to leave to lunch with Shah. Meeting continued for one additional hour.

On economic side, World Bank offer2 and Point Four assistance was explained. Ebtehaj indicated clear understanding of World Bank offer but indicated he was still opposed to loan. He indicated that considerable concern had arisen in certain quarters because of belief that oil revenues would have to be “pledged” to service loan. It was pointed out to him that commitment probably a better word than pledge but that the Bank certainly would have to consider Iranian ability to repay together with a clear definition and understanding of Iranian convertibility rights under the Anglo-Iranian agreement. He went on to say that he did not consider the World Bank offer to represent in any way US assistance to Iran, remarking that the World Bank was obliged to loan money to its member nations.

His reception of proposed Point Four assistance (he was told in this connection that if legislation is passed Iran might expect about 1.6 million dollars) was even more bitter. He remarked that the US had presented Point Four as a bold new idea whereas actually there was nothing bold about it but when viewed in terms of what Iran might get, only insignificance.

He inquired what consideration the US was giving to Iran’s request for a direct economic grant. He said that Ambassador Ala in Washington and the Foreign Minister here believed that the US had agreed to give direct economic assistance. I told him that I had given no encouragement whatever to such an idea and Wagner told him that he knew from recent experience in Washington that absolutely nothing along the lines stated had been said to Mr. Ala. He insisted that Ala had reported that when he could justify his request for $500,000,000 economic grant, the Department would give it further consideration.

Concluding economic phase of discussion Ebtehaj said that he believed Iran did not need any direct economic grant but would want military assistance.

The proposed military assistance to Iran was then discussed with him along the lines agreed to by the Department, i.e., that total figures were unknown to the Embassy and that countries being assisted would be given matériel and not dollar allocations. His reaction to the presentation of this subject was even worse than anticipated. His main theme was that the proposed US military assistance to Iran, which he thought would come to some $15,000,000 represented but a “measly” sum and an offer which might very well be refused. He said that the Iranians absolutely could not understand why out of $320,000,000 which he understood was earmarked primarily for Greece, Turkey and Iran, it should receive such a “measly” allocation. General Evans endeavored in every way possible to convince Ebtehaj that the giving power, the US, had to decide upon the amount of aid each country would be given, considering the overall situation and operating under the principle that the interests of the whole group would probably often be served by greater aid in certain areas. Ebtehaj did not agree in any way and stated Iran would be offended if not treated on a parity with Turkey. He thought that Iran might very well reject the small offer made to it.

He went on to say that it might have to consider changing its foreign policy, disassociate itself with the US and look elsewhere for support of its interests. He said that the situation would be incomprehensible to Iranians if the US gave liberal assistance to Turkey and treated Iran in such a shabby manner. He went on to say that Iran had suffered much during the war, being occupied even by US troops—“Thanks to our British friends”—while the US was buying goods from the Turks at exorbitant prices and dumping them into the sea to keep them from the Germans.3

It was explained to Mr. Ebtehaj that the proposed Military Aid Program visualized the eventual reduction in the size of the armies of the receiving countries in line with their increased effectiveness. He discussed this phase in detail with General Evans. The General told him that unless additional rials could be provided the present size Iranian Army should be reduced to achieve a more effective army. He was told that [at] present so much goes for pay, food, clothing, housing and other living expenses that present army does not have funds necessary adequately to support present combat forces in the field; hence it cannot fight effectively. Ebtehaj asked General Evans what size army was needed to guarantee the security of the country. He was told no nation could afford the military establishment necessary to assure security and some risk must be taken. The greatest security which can be afforded should be provided, thus the problem can only be solved by determining the funds that can be afforded the military expenses and building the army accordingly. He was told that in such determination the relative security that can be obtained for various expenditures should be considered. Once such determination is made the most effective military establishment possible should be set up within the funds decided upon. Ebtehaj did not agree. He felt that the minimum army essential for security should be determined by US-Iranian consultation, then the cost computed, then what Iran can afford determined, and the difference made up in money from the US under the Military Aid Program. It was pointed out that such had not been done in the past with other countries and was believed to be contrary to US policy. Ebtehaj insisted, however, that Iran should be treated as a special case both in view of its strategic value and the fact that it had been ignored in the past for so long when other countries had been receiving aid. He added also that the Shah would never agree to an army of less than 100,000 as he, the Shah, could only feel that through any suggestion along those lines the US was trying to destroy his army. He asked as a corollary to his argument why the Iranian people should be made to suffer (meaning an even more reduced standard of living) by being forced to support the army the country needed.…

He several times repeated the statement that the US offer of assistance, characterized as “measly”, might very well be refused. He said he could not understand how or why such small assistance was being proposed for Iran especially in view of the fact that he had discussed the importance of military aid to Iran with the State Department when he was in Washington last year4 and had received the Department’s complete agreement. He went on to say that it was very clear in his mind that the three people with whom he was talking were simply avoiding his question in refusing to tell him exactly, in dollars, how much aid Iran would receive. He said he was willing to make any bet that the US had told the Turks how much they would receive and went on to say that we could not expect Iran as a nation to be satisfied with the vague statements being made. He also went back to General Evans’ statement that it was up to the giving nation to decide where and how much aid would be given and claimed that the receiving nation, Iran, had just as many rights in this respect and said, in effect, that the US could not ram such “measly” aid down Iran’s throat and expect her to be happy. He said that as an Iranian he absolutely felt that any US proposed military aid of $15,000,000 was completely unacceptable and that should his recommendation be asked for it would be that the proposal be acknowledged with a “no thank you.” He expressed the view that the entire question should again be considered in Washington for he did not wish to see the US make “mistake” in not allocating aid properly.

I had been obliged as previously indicated to leave the meeting prior to the issuance of Mr. Ebtehaj’s more forceful pronouncements. He therefore suggested that we hold another meeting within the next few days during which he could make the Iranian point of view (as set forth above) completely known to me.5 While Ebtehaj is many times the victim of his own emotions yet his views on military aid actually represent those of the Shah.

At lunch the Shah today followed the same line as Mr. Ebtehaj except that he made an impassioned plea for direct economic aid referring to aid already given to Turkey and most of Europe including ex-enemy countries and now to Korea, while Iran which had been an ally had been ignored. He expressed amazement that the strategic importance of Iran to the Western world was not adequately appreciated.

Wiley

1 Joseph J. Wagner, Second Secretary of Embassy in Iran.

2 In a memorandum prepared on June 18 by the staff of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development appears the following paragraph: “The Bank has already expressed to the Iranian Government its interest in Iran’s Seven-Year Plan and indicated its willingness and ability to participate in the financing of appropriate elements in this Plan when its assistance might be needed. If the Iranian Government wishes, the Bank is prepared to consider now a small initial loan for some one, or possibly two, specific projects included in an early stage of this Plan. Furthermore, subject to satisfactory progress in implementing the Plan, including the financial and administrative measures necessary to make it effective, and taking into account Iran’s need for external financing as then established, the Bank will be willing to consider additional loans for other projects as their preparation reaches the bankable stage. Any project submitted for consideration by the Bank should be of a tangible and directly productive nature and of demonstrable economic value as have been those development projects hitherto financed by the Bank.” The International Bank transmitted a copy of this memorandum to Mr. Dunn as Acting Chief of the Division of Greek, Turkish, and Iranian Affairs on June 20 (891.51/6–2049).

3 For documentation on preemptive purchases of Turkish goods, see Foreign Relations, vol. viii, pp. 566 ff.

4 For information on these discussions, see footnote 3, Foreign Relations, 1948, vol. v, Part 1, p. 186.

5 Ambassador Wiley, accompanied by General Evans and Mr. Wagner, held a further meeting with Mr. Ebtehaj on July 10, at which much the same ground was covered as at the discussion 3 days earlier. Mr. Ebtehaj “indicated Iran could afford to spend 2.0 billion rials upon its military establishment and by rough calculation stated it looked as though Iran could maintain an effective army of about 100,000 with such sum, provided an additional 2.45 billion could be obtained over a 2-year period for initial one-time expenditures. This latter sum I [i.e., Ambassador Wiley] gather is what he deems the only acceptable assistance the US could render Iran.” Mr. Ebtehaj was said to have repeated “many times” that the “US approach to Iran in this vital question was not only incomprehensible and unacceptable but also dictatorial in nature.” Ambassador Wiley observed to the Department that he had “expected that Iranian reaction to our military assistance offer would be a most unhappy one. While I am certain there are many people here who would appreciate any US assistance to Iran, yet we are faced with the cold fact that the Shah will only be satisfied with complete parity with Turkey and that the more our assistance diverges from the Turkish total, the greater will be the sense of frustration and resentment toward the US.” (Telegram 902, July 11, from Tehran, 891.20/7–1149)

The Ambassador in Iran (Wiley) to the Secretary of State 891.50 Seven-Year Plan/7–1249: Telegram

[Document 313]

The Ambassador in Iran (Wiley) to the Secretary of State

secret Tehran, July 12, 1949—10 a. m.

907. Department will recall that Ambassador Ala several weeks ago asked for direct economic assistance to extent of $500,000,000. He indicated at that time that I knew all about matter and would transmit similar request with my blessing. As Department was informed, I knew nothing about matter. All that had happened was that Foreign Minister once remarked that he would some day send me note formally requesting aid, statement which did not call for nor elicit any response from me.

He has now handed to me a note requesting gratuitous economic assistance of approximately $147,000,000. The note reads as follows:

“In pursuance of my repeated conversations with Your Excellency concerning the essential and urgent needs of this Empire and necessity of financial aid by the American authorities, I have the honor to bring the following to Your Excellency’s attention:

Your Excellency is not unaware of the extent to which Iran has suffered innumerable losses after the last world war which brought us rack and ruin and great hardships towards the attainment of final victory. Your Excellency is not unaware to the extent to which Iran is in need of immediate economic and social reforms to enable her, in the light of the present world exigencies, to become reequipped and prepared in such a manner as to dispel, withstand and resist potential dangers.

Fortunately the official authorities of the American Government, too, are aware of the extraordinary importance of the present situation in Iran and have on various occasions made specific promises time and again that they will make every effort to meet our needs, comply with our requests and lend us support. Now, on the strength of these same official statements by the great Government of the US and the express promises they have made to render us necessary assistance, and with special reference to Article 4 of the speech by the President of the US relating to the necessity of lending technical and financial assistance for the improvement and betterment of the condition of backward countries, we expect your powerful nation which is the patron and protector of human liberty and culture to pay special attention to our imperative needs and lend us prompt assistance in meeting those needs.

The said needs which represent our barest necessities and minimum requirements (and which will be chiefly technical equipment and machinery and financial needs impossible to secure in Iran and with Iranian money) will total approximately $147,000,000 as follows: Industries and factories—$35,000,000.

Highways and railroads—$37,500,000.

Public hygiene—$20,280,000.

Posts and telegraphs and communications—$5,370,000.

Education—$9,550,000.

Agriculture and irrigation—$28,217,521.

Alimentation, tobacco, silo and excise taxes—$11,000,000. (Note: This presumably means equipment for food, tobacco and distilling industries. It is being checked.)

Total—$146,917,521.

The detailed and itemized list of said requirements include the minimum essential needs of the country at the present time which have no connection with the Seven-Year Plan of the Empire. This is what we need to be able in some measure to restore our country to its state before it was occupied by the Allied forces on August/September 1941 and to raise the living standard of the people of Iran who are confronted with the menace of Bolshevism and Communism. As you notice, this sum is partly needed for the railway and landing fields which were worn out or completely ruined during the sojourn of Allied forces in Iran, especially during the years when the Iranian railways were at the absolute disposal of, and being used by, the American troops. There is sound evidence to prove that the railway and the landing fields needed urgent repairs. It is for this reason that they should be classed with military needs of first class importance, and immediate aid be granted for their repair gratuitously.

In conclusion, I beg to add that during your stay in Iran and as a result of your study of Iran’s social condition, Your Excellency has definitely well realized the delicate position of this country because of its low standard of life. Your Excellency is well aware to what extent the national life of Iran is exposed to danger. In view of the foregoing circumstances and the promises made in this respect, I expect Your Excellency will be so kind as to invite the attention of the American Government authorities to the urgent necessity of granting this immediate aid, and in the light of the information which you have of the financial capacity of Iran, I hope you will be good enough to take prompt and efficacious steps which will be greatly appreciated by the Iranian Government.”

The enclosures to the note, which are very voluminous, are being translated and will be forwarded by pouch.1

The Department’s attention is particularly invited to the third paragraph of the note in which reference is made to “specific promises time and again that the US would make every effort to meet Iranian needs and comply with Iranian request. [”] There have been absolutely no specific promises of any kind made since my arrival here.

The situation in regard to getting as big a hand-out as possible from the US is reaching the utmost confusion, proceeding as it does from the lack of any agreement or cohesion of thought among the Iranians themselves. In another telegram, I have reported my second meeting with Mr. Ebtehaj.2 He maintains that Iran does not need economic assistance but in effect must be put on a parity with Turkey in the matter of military assistance. Further, he is obstinately op posed to any World Bank loan. The Shah on the other hand is in favor of a World Bank loan and also wants direct economic assistance besides very substantial direct military assistance. The Foreign Minister now presents what apparently is his own idea and which seems to, from first study, cover many items included in the Seven-Year Plan, although he states that his list has no connection with the Seven-Year Plan. There appears to have been little coordination between the gratuitous assistance envisaged in the Foreign Minister’s note and the projects mentioned in the Prime Minister’s letter to me, as reported Embtel 558, April 26, unless it is in the fact that both exaggerate Iran’s war damages and both lay the condition of the Iranian railways at the Allied doorstep. As a matter of information, the Prime Minister has on several occasions even brushed aside any attempt to discuss the substance of his letter. He apparently is working on the premise that he got his request in first and can obviously claim as much credit as any one else in connection with American assistance, if any, to Iran.

In view hurt feelings and resentment re direct military aid, suggest question direct economic aid be handled with greatest tact.

Wiley

1 The seven enclosures were transmitted to the Department by Tehran in despatch 199, July 30, not printed.

2 See footnote 5, p. 539 [Pg. 539 is part of Doc. 312].

Memorandum by Mr. Henry L. Deimel, Jr., of the Office of Near Eastern and African Affairs to the Assistant Chief of the Division of Greek, Turkish, and Iranian Affairs (Dunn) 891.20/7–1549

[Document 314]

Memorandum by Mr. Henry L. Deimel, Jr., of the Office of Near Eastern and African Affairs to the Assistant Chief of the Division of Greek, Turkish, and Iranian Affairs (Dunn)

secret [Washington,] July 15, 1949.

Subject: Iranian Attitude Regarding United States Aid

The following is offered pursuant to our conversation. For convenience it has been drafted as basis for a telegram to Tehran.

Preliminary specific replies Embtels 885, 886, 895, 9021 being separately transmitted. Attitude evidenced therein held by highest Iran authorities regarding bases US aid so extreme and unacceptable as to indicate drastic modification this attitude essential if aid is to be successfully arranged and implemented. Department realizes you aware this, and this telegram designed assist your endeavors this purpose, as evidenced by highly commendable Embassy explanations character purpose limitations military aid reported Embtels 886 and 902.

Nature of Iranian motives and thinking underlying extreme attitudes expressed is question diagnosis which Embassy best equipped perform. Specific manner providing response best designed achieve necessary purpose developing tolerably accurate and rational Iranian attitudes must be left your good judgement. Whether Iranian attitudes are products genuine sincere sense grievance or are staged pursuant bazaar techniques, they reveal same need for clear and firm responses conveying implicit and explicit reiteration essential reasons, purposes and spirit which motivate, justify and delimit US Govt and taxpayers willingness undertake burdens of foreign aid.

Most striking elements misapprehension evidenced in Iranian attitude are seen in contention US alone cannot determine amount aid it will offer but must determine jointly with recipient, and adequacy aid is to be judged by invidious comparison with other recipients irrespective specific needs or on basis some absolute concept such as quote total security unquote. Last point ably covered by General Evans as reported Embtels 886 and 902 but further analysis implications Iranian attitude essential.

Whether this attitude derives from view aid is obligatory largesse owed by rich to poor, or is due Iran in payment for alignment our side, it is based on complete misconception since no obligation rests on U.S. in matter. Readiness US extend aid friendly foreign peoples through their governments is strictly expression of voluntarily cooperative spirit in endeavor achieve mutual aims mutually beneficial by mutually cooperative action. Essence is therefore common purpose influencing grantor and recipient seek common objectives. In present situation these objectives have two-fold character. First and basic is desire preserve, promote, expedite widest and fullest development conditions freedom and economic welfare in interest achieving maximum benefit of peace, stability and broad welfare of people of U.S. and other countries. Second is recognition this aim threatened today by aggressive attitude and actions of Iran’s powerful neighbor and preservation existing above-mentioned human values as well as their further cultivation requires cooperative endeavors of like-minded peoples and governments for most effective resistance threats and discouragement outbreak more outright aggression.

For its part U.S. able provide, at definite cost and sacrifice of significant domestic needs, substantial aid in economic and military fields to other like-minded countries. Such aid is voluntary contribution to common purpose. It is not payment for value received nor to induce another country to align itself with US or act according US desires instead of pursuing alternative course. Admittedly US stands to benefit from realization objectives of aid programs. This is justification for sacrifices of domestic needs which extension aid to foreign countries imposes on people of US. Moreover, discomfort to US from failure achieve objectives aid programs would be far less than disastrous consequences to those situated closer to source of present-day aggression threat. Aid from US is not tendered as charity, nor as subject for bargaining, but it is definitely of more immediate and critical interest to recipients in advancement their essential interests as well as those of US. Cooperative nature aid programs for mutual objectives is paramount characteristic.

Necessary also to emphasize aid US can provide over widespread geographical area, substantial as it is, is limited to U.S. capacity and marginal in relation to overall size of task achieving full mutual objectives earlier described. Two important consequences follow. First, as so ably explained by General Evans, it must be carefully distributed according to actual need, wherefore invidious comparisons between countries’ shares have no place. Second, unless it is received and treated as marginal increment to necessary endeavors of recipient, it is largely wasted. Self-help on part recipient is therefore essential ingredient. U.S. aid is necessarily limited to providing indispensible needs otherwise not available to recipient, with major portion of task accomplished by recipients own efforts in its own interest in pursuit of broad common purposes by mutual cooperation.

It follows that U.S. aid, being neither charitable distribution largesse nor payment of obligation is not subject bargaining. Being voluntary contribution US effort at sacrifice other US needs, in furtherance essential common purposes for mutual benefit, US alone can determine amount and character such aid it is able to extend; distribution among recipients and application such aid must be calculated on basis actual needs and priority of urgencies in light of overall problem and purpose; and effectiveness of aid depends upon adequacy and efficiency of collateral self-help of recipient, which causes US to have necessary deep and direct interest in manner and efficiency utilization aid it renders.

Finally, importance of self-help points to importance, aside from aid granted in tangible financial, equipment and commodity form, of aid in nature of technical assistance designed to advance effective application of self-help to overall resources of recipient, including own resources as well as those received from US or others.

Department fully realizes how very alien conceptions of Iranians, as evident your reftels, are from those above outlined, and difficulty of task of enlightenment. Obviously this task not susceptible immediate accomplishment and manner handling subject must be left your tact, diplomacy and good judgment. Whatever degree and rate of success in enlightening Iranians is achieved, it is essential US representatives constantly be guided by clearest comprehension these considerations. Consequently Department hopes this restatement of what you of course already know will prove of some assistance in your difficult and important task.

1 Nos. 885 and 895, dated July 7 and 8, respectively, neither printed; No. 886, July 7, is printed on p. 536 [Pg. 536 is part of Doc. 312]; No. 902, dated July 11, is not printed but see footnote 5, p. 539 [Pg. 539 is part of Doc. 312].

Report of the National Security Council on the Position of the United States With Respect to Iran S/S–NSC Files, Lot 63 D 351, NSC 54 Series

1 [Document 315]

Report of the National Security Council on the Position of the United States With Respect to Iran 2

top secret [Washington,] July 21, 1949.

NSC 54

The Problem

1. To review, for the information of the National Security Council, the position of the United States with respect to Iran, with particular reference to possible future developments affecting U.S. security.

Analysis

Basic U.S. Position

2. Because of its resources, strategic location, vulnerability to armed attack and exposure to political subversion, Iran must be regarded as a continuing objective in the Soviet program of expansion. If Iran should come under Soviet domination, the independence of all other countries of the Middle East would be directly threatened. Specifically the USSR would (1) acquire advance bases for subversive activities or actual attack against a vast contiguous area including Turkey, Iraq, the Arabian Peninsula, Afghanistan, and Pakistan; (2) obtain a base hundreds of miles nearer to potential US-UK lines of defense in the Middle East than any held at present; (3) control part and threaten all of the Middle Eastern oil reservoir upon which the western community draws to conserve limited western hemisphere resources; (4) control continental air routes crossing Iran, threaten those traversing adjacent areas, and menace shipping in the Persian Gulf, and (5) undermine the will of all Middle Eastern countries to resist Soviet aggression.

3. This Government has concluded (November 1947)* that the security of the Eastern Mediterranean and of the Middle East is vital to the security of the United States; that the security of the whole Eastern Mediterranean and Middle East would be jeopardized if the Soviet Union should succeed in its efforts to obtain control of Iran; that the United States should assist in maintaining the territorial integrity and political independence of Iran; that in carrying out this policy the United States should be prepared to make full use of its political, economic and, if necessary, military power in such manner as may be found most effective; and that before resorting to the actual employment of force the United States should exhaust political and economic means, including recourse to the United Nations.3

4. Hence the primary objective of our policy toward Iran is to prevent the domination of that country by the USSR and to strengthen Iran’s orientation toward the West. Secondary objectives are (1) to encourage relations between Iran and other countries calculated to elicit United Nations support for its continued independence; (2) to maintain conditions of internal security, thereby increasing respect for Iranian sovereignty and avoiding a pretext for Soviet intervention, as well as making indirect Soviet aggression more difficult; (3) to foster an expanding economy with the purpose of alleviating economic discontent and strengthening allegiance to the central government; (4) to encourage the improvement of democratic institutions and processes in Iran so that Iranians may increasingly feel an affinity for the western world; and (5) to induce influential Iranians actively to support U.S. interests in Iran, the Middle East, and the United Nations.

Evaluation of Current Policy

5. Our objective of preventing domination of Iran by the USSR has so far been achieved, by means of diplomatic action. After first following a policy of procrastination, evasion and compromise when confronted by an aggressive Soviet attitude, Iran has for the past two years, with strong U.S. encouragement and support, stood up firmly for its independence in the face of persistent Soviet threats. The United States took the lead in restoring Iran’s full independence of foreign control following wartime occupation, particularly by supporting in the Security Council the Iranian complaint against Soviet interference in Iran’s internal affairs. We have informed Iranian authorities that we are prepared, so long as the Iranian Government demonstrates a willingness to stand up for its independence against external pressure, to support Iran not only by words but also by appropriate acts. We have suggested that Iran be prepared to communicate to the Security Council, at an appropriate time, recent instances of Soviet pressure. We have told the Iranians that we are not in a position to make any commitment as to our action if the Soviet Union should take aggressive measures against Iran, but have pointed out our obligations under the United Nations Charter. In response to Iranian inquiries, we have authorized the Embassy in Teheran to say that in the event of war with the Soviet Union involving both Iran and the United States, Iran may count on all assistance compatible with U.S. resources in a global conflict.

6. Current U.S. efforts to assist Iran internally include two military missions now advising the Iranian Army and the Gendarmerie, the willingness of the United States to support Iran’s efforts to secure financial aid through appropriate agencies (such as the World Bank) for well justified economic development projects, encouragement and advice in connection with the Iranian Government’s consideration of political and economic reforms designed to strengthen popular loyalty to the central government, and the provision of surplus light military equipment on credit for internal security purposes. Iran has been advised that before it could receive any assistance of the type granted Greece and Turkey, political, economic and military considerations must be weighed and Congressional approval obtained.

7. The support of Iranian independence by diplomatic means continues to be an important aim of U.S. foreign policy. In addition to the support and assistance now being accorded Iran, the United States should: a. Demonstrate by diplomatic and economic acts our interest in Iranian independence and our willingness to take appropriate action in support of Iran’s stand against Soviet threats to its independence;

b. Provide through all practicable means funds and technical assistance, upon request of the Iranian Government, for the execution of well justified economic development projects which would demonstrate to the Iranian people the advantages of close association with the western powers;

c. Exert every practicable effective pressure upon Iran to facilitate economic and social reform in view of the great importance of the latter as a means of increasing national loyalty;

d. Continue to examine, through the Foreign Assistance Correlation Committee4 and other appropriate channels, the question of furnishing direct military assistance to Iran.

Possible Future Developments

8. Although the USSR will continue to apply strong political and psychological pressures against Iran in an effort to force the government of that country into submission, it is considered unlikely that the Soviet Union would be willing to resort to direct armed intervention at this time. In the absence of such armed intervention, Iran is expected to maintain successful resistance to Soviet pressure and to strengthen its western alignment, provided it continues to have confidence in U.S. support. However, the Iranian Government must press its planned economic and social reforms or the internal stability of the country may be seriously threatened.

9. Nevertheless, the possibility of other developments which would dangerously alter the situation in Iran cannot be entirely ruled out. The effects which certain unexpected but possible contingencies would have on the security interests of the United States and our position in the event such possibilities materialize are analyzed in the following paragraphs.

10. First Contingency: The establishment of pro-Soviet provincial governments in Iran by subversive or other means not involving the use of military force.

a. There is no immediate likelihood of this occurring in the absence of some serious breakup of central authority such as might occur in the event of the death of the Shah or of some violent outbreak of dissension among highly placed people in the Iranian Government. The provincial administration in Iran is subject to a high degree of centralized control from Teheran. The local communist machine in northern Iran was largely broken up when Soviet forces retired in 1946,5 and many of its leaders are now in the Soviet Union. These people could hardly be reinstalled in any way in the provincial administration except by order of the Central Government in Teheran or by renewed entry of Soviet forces. Thus, the action which this Government might take would relate to one or the other of those contingencies, and will be discussed below.

b. If contrary to expectations this contingency, did occur we would be faced with the intensification of subversive Soviet activities in the remaining areas of Iran and in Near East areas contiguous thereto and with an increased tendency on the part of Middle East countries to seek strengthened security arrangements with the western powers. Should security arrangements considered satisfactory by them not be forthcoming from the western powers, the Middle Eastern countries might in time seek a compromise with the USSR.

c. Hence, if this contingency did occur, we would wish to review the priority accorded to Iran for the receipt of military equipment and consider what steps would be appropriate to counteract the adverse effects engendered in the surrounding areas. We might also wish to consider reference of the matter to the United Nations provided sufficient evidence of Soviet complicity were available to justify charges against the Russians.

11. Second Contingency: The overthrow of the present Iranian Government and the establishment of a pro-Soviet puppet government by subversive or other means not involving the use of military force.

a. Here, again, there is no immediate likelihood of this occurring. The Tudeh Party, now outlawed by the Iranian Government and functioning underground, does not have the capability of overthrowing the regime from within at this time. It is not likely to obtain that capability unless something should happen which would seriously Aveaken the strength and unity of the Iranian Government. The death of the Shah would not necessarily have this effect, but might possibly have it. The Government might also conceivably be weakened by rivalry between highly placed figures, of whom one or the other might be inclined to seek and use Soviet favor in order to fortify his position. In either of these contingencies, however, we would probably have ample warning before the course of events could lead to the complete establishment of a regime really subservient to Soviet interests. This means that we would have time to determine our policy in the light of the details of the prevailing situation, which cannot possibly be forecast before the contingency arises.

b. Presumably, the victory of pro-Soviet elements would not be immediate and complete, and for a long time some element of the old legitimate government would resist the communist uprising. If this element proved incapable of restoring its position in the country at large, our policy would presumably be to assist it to install itself in the south, preferably in the neighborhood of the oil fields, and to retain that whole area under its sovereign control. This we would have to do in conjunction with the British, since it would involve the cooperation of various of the local tribes, some of which could better be influenced by the British and some by ourselves.

c. Should this contingency result in the loss of all of Iran, in addition to the immediate effects of Soviet domination which are listed in paragraph 2 above, we would find ourselves faced with powerful secondary developments, the consequences of which could not be ignored. Denial of the oil output of the affected area would seriously jeopardize the ERP program, which under current estimates will in its last years depend on the Middle East for 80 percent of its oil. Furthermore, the loss of the output of the Anglo-Iranian Oil Company, in which the British Government owns the controlling interest, would have a crippling effect upon the economy of the UK, and would place increased demands upon the dollar area. At this point positive steps in collaboration with the UK to prevent the spread of Soviet domination to the remaining oil-producing areas of the Middle East would be necessary. We might also wish to consider reference of the matter to the United Nations provided sufficient evidence of Soviet complicity is available to justify charges against the Russians.

12. Third Contingency: Direct military invasion and occupation of Iran.

a. This is also regarded as highly unlikely unless the Soviet Government has really decided to unleash a new world war and the occupation of Iran should be a first step in the process. This would be an act of naked aggression, and all the implications of a third world war would be added to the consequences discussed in paragraph 2 and 11–c above.

b. The Iranian Government would undoubtedly appeal for our support under Article 51 of the United Nations Charter. Our Government would then be faced with the question of whether or not to go to the assistance of Iran and whether to do so immediately or to await action by the United Nations. This decision would have to take into account not only that the Soviet action was probably the beginning of a new world war, but that preliminary considerations by the United Nations would place us in a strong position before world opinion and would afford us a brief respite for preparations prior to actual entry into a state of war with the Soviet Union, … Therefore, unless there were overriding military considerations, it would be preferable that the matter first be referred to the Security Council of the United Nations, where action would presumably be vetoed by the Russians. Simultaneously with consideration in the Security Council or immediately following a veto in that body we might wish to pro pose consideration of the matter by the General Assembly or the Little Assembly. Meanwhile, we would probably desire consultation with the other members of the North Atlantic Pact.

c. We would probably also wish to consider continued recognition and support of the legitimate government of Iran even if it were forced into exile, and we might also wish to review the priority for the receipt of military equipment of such groups still resisting in Iran.

d. The final decision with regard to actual entry into a state of war with the Soviet Union would depend upon a number of variable factors, including the international situation at the moment, the pretext for Russian entry, the: state of international opinion as reflected in the United Nations, our own analysis of Russian motives, the state of our commitments elsewhere in the world at that particular moment, and the reactions of our closest allies. Therefore, no hard or fast course can be prescribed at the present time. Ultimately, of course, any decision involving war could be made only by Congress, in the light of recommendations from the Chief Executive. In framing such recommendations the President would have to make his decisions in the light of our over-all military and diplomatic strategy in anew world war.

e. The recommendation that final decision be deferred, if possible, pending United Nations action, assumes that Russian invasion of Iran would be unaccompanied by action elsewhere. However, Soviet invasion of Iran might be accompanied by other action which would require an immediate military reaction on the part of the United States and its allies prior to completion of consideration of the matter by the United Nations.

13. Fourth Contingency: The introduction of Soviet troops into Azerbaijan or other areas of Northern Iran under alleged 1921 Treaty rights.

a. While this eventuality is also not now regarded as likely, in the light of available intelligence, it is perhaps the one that would offer the greatest temptation to the USSR, and the one with which it would be the hardest to cope. The situation would be particularly difficult if the Russians should re-occupy the northern province of Iran swiftly and with very little bloodshed and then stop there and go no further. The matter would undoubtedly be referred to the Security Council, which is still seized of the Iranian case, and consideration there would probably revolve principally around the obligation of members of the United Nations to settle their differences by peaceful means, the validity of the 1921 Treaty and the existence or non-existence of conditions in Iran necessary to bring into effect the operative clauses of that Treaty. Action by the Security Council would presumably be vetoed by the Soviet Union. At the same time, the Iranian Government would probably be appealing for our support under Article 51 of the Charter. Following a veto in the Security Council, we might wash to propose reference of the matter to the General Assembly or the Little Assembly. If the opinion of this body confirmed the fact of Soviet aggression in defiance of United Nations principles, we would be faced with the question whether or not to go to the assistance of Iran under Article 51. This decision, of course, could be made only by the Congress, in the light of recommendations from the Chief Executive. In framing these recommendations, the President would have to take into account a number of variable factors, including the international situation at the moment, the state of international opinion as reflected in the United Nations, our own analysis of Russian motives, the state of our commitments elsewhere, and the reactions of our closest allies.6 Therefore, no hard and fast course can be prescribed at the present time.

b. Soviet occupation of Northern Iran might well be only a prelude to an attempt to overthrow the legitimate Iranian Government and we should, therefore, have plans capable of immediate implementation along the lines discussed in paragraph 11–5 of Contingency Number 2.

1 Lot 63 D 351 is a serial master file of the National Security Council documents and correspondence and related Department of State memoranda for the years 1947–1961, as maintained by the Executive Secretariat of the Department of State.

2 Prepared at the request of the Acting Secretary of the Army by the staff of the National Security Council with the advice and assistance of representatives of the Secretaries of State and Defense and of other high officials of the United States Government; transmitted by Admiral Souers to the National Security Council in his note of July 21, which recommended that “the Council, after discussion and agreement upon any proposed revisions, note the enclosed report as an integrated assessment and appraisal of the national security objectives, commitments and risks of the United States with respect to Iran, in relation to the four contingencies affecting U.S. security outlined therein.” The Council, on August 4, “Noted NSC 54, subject to the amendment of paragraph 13–a as proposed by the Secretary of State.” (Action 240, S/S–NSC (Miscellaneous) files, lot 66 D 95) Regarding the amendment proposed by the Secretary of State, see footnote 6, p. 551 [Pg. 551 is part of Doc. 315]. Lot 66 D 95 is a collection of administrative and miscellaneous National Security Council documentation for the years 1947–1963, as maintained by the Executive Secretariat of the Department of State.

*  NSC Action No. 13. [Footnote in the source text.]

3 These conclusions were arrived at during “The Pentagon Talks of 1947” between high officials of the United States and British Governments; see particularly, “The American Paper” and Acting Secretary Lovett’s memorandum of November 24, 1947, to President Truman, Foreign Relations, 1947, vol. v, pp. 575 and 623, respectively.

4 For a description of the composition and functions of this committee, see footnote 2, vol. i, p. 250.

5 For documentation on the withdrawal of Soviet forces from Iran, see Foreign Relations, 1946, vol. vii, pp. 289 ff.

6 At this point in the report as prepared on July 21 appeared the following: “(the latter probably obtained through consultation under Article 4 of the North Atlantic Pact)” (S/P–NSC Files, Lot 62 D 1). It is this material that was omitted at the request of the Secretary of State; see footnote 2, p. 545 [Pg. 545 includes portions of Doc. 314 and Doc. 315]. Lot 62 D 1 is a serial and subject master file of National Security Council documents and correspondence for the years 1948–1961, as maintained by the Policy Planning Staff of the Department of State.

The Ambassador in Iran (Wiley) to the Secretary of State 891.20/8–949: Telegram

[Document 316]

The Ambassador in Iran (Wiley) to the Secretary of State

top secret Tehran, August 9, 1949—2 p. m.

999. August 6 Wireless Bulletin announced that MAP legislation proposes allocation 27 million dollars for group three countries in which Iran linked with Korea and Philippines instead of Greece and Turkey. The funds proposed for former group much less than those for latter. Hence, except for possibilities of fund transfer clause, the limited funds and resultant materiel aid to Iran become readily evident.

During conversation yesterday evening, I gave Shah evil tidings. He was extremely upset. He spoke at once of cancelling his visit to the US.1 I calmed him down somewhat suggesting that if he would work with US representatives to improve efficiency Iranian Army he might possibly hope for some additional aid under 5 percent transfer provision. Shah remained most despondent and manifested greatest bewilderment US “lack of understanding” importance Iran in complex nations confronting USSR.

From fragmentary reports received here revised legislation does provide for some shift of funds from one area to another. Urgently recommend possibility increasing Iran’s share MAP be studied in light this provision. Although I understand no increase total MAP funds could be requested, and that less money than is currently proposed for total MAP will probably be forthcoming from Congress, I feel review of MAP objectives vis-à-vis Iran now essential.

If Iran considered important link in security chain, we are not exploiting to fullest extent possibilities for strengthening this link. I have no specific knowledge part Iran plays in US strategic concept. I assume our present policy toward Iran based on thorough analysis US security interests. We have endeavored, with almost surprising success, to bring Iranians to a feeling of solidarity with Western democracies. Revelation of the small amount of US aid to Iran and the apparently small strategic importance of Iran implied therefrom has, of course, come as a great shock to them. Fact Korea and Philippines both have received substantial military and economic aid from US since war does not make our present policy more palatable to Iran. For reasons well known to Department, military assistance to Iran has evolved slowly particularly in comparison with Greece and Turkey.

General Evans, Chief ArMish, has completed analysis matériel requirements Iranian Army based on absorptive capacities by time matériel might reasonably be expected to arrive. This analysis should be available in Washington.

General Evans estimates Iranian Army can usefully absorb under this program equipment roughly valued at between 25 and 30 million dollars. This matériel, even if provided in addition to equipment already on hand and equipment arriving under 10 million dollar surplus arms credit, would not meet full requirements present Iranian scale of equipment for force of 135,000. Funds required to meet all additional shortages can be computed from analysis submitted by General Evans.

Under revised MAP, according latest information available here, Iran would receive something less than 15 million. This program is presumably designed maintain resolute pro-Western political orientation Iran but in my opinion program this scale will fail to accomplish objectives.

Iranian leaders naturally think of themselves as having acted heroically in resisting Soviet aggression and subversive penetration since end of war. Further, they believe that inasmuch as US has spent and is still spending vast sums for military and economic aid throughout world, Iran has, perforce, acquired moral right to similar assistance. They consider Iran of strategic importance equal to Turkey, and that Iran has been equally stalwart in face of even stronger Soviet pressure. US assistance, military and economic, to Turkey is the yard stick against which they measure adequacy of assistance to Iran. Logical or not, this is background against which efficacy program to reinforce Iranian political orientation must be examined. In my judgment, proposed program will fail maintain Iranian confidence in US support, will strengthen suspicion Iranian leaders of existence of “secret policy” to sacrifice Iran in event of crisis, and will lend support to those who seek to convince Iranian leaders that such indeed is US policy. At this time I consider support Shah’s position cardinal point in maintaining internal stability and positive foreign policy. Shah, convinced of his control over Iranian Army, is determined to build up his military establishment. As previously reported Shah has primary interest in military affairs. His approach, although frequently extravagant in terms of materiel Iran forces can usefully employ, is reasonably sound with regard to basic strategy re Iran, If we provide Iranian Army what it can profitably use, US influence in development Iranian Army can be constructive, with promise real military dividends to both Iran and US. If assistance to Iran falls short of what is necessary to maintain US influence in evolution of Iranian military and economic development, increasing sums from Iran budget, which might otherwise be debited to essential economic and social purposes, may well be spent for military procurement without effective improvement of military potential. Department will recall in this regard Shah’s action in purchasing British six pounder artillery and arranging for procurement British jet aircraft without any consultation with US military advisers. To extent Iranian resources devoted fruitless and erratic military expenditures, possibilities economic development will be correspondingly reduced leaving Iran even more susceptible to subversive penetration with consequent peril all US interests in Middle East.

It is realized that military justification for substantial direct aid, as distinct from political justification, may be speculative. Some doubt exists as to Iranian Army’s will and ability to fight. Progress, though slow, has nevertheless been achieved under able direction US ArMish here. In event substantial US military aid is forthcoming, influence ArMish will increase, and solid basis exists for hope substantial progress could be made within foreseeable future. As available equipment increases, as training improves, Army morale and will to fight will consequently improve. All reports I have received indicate high degree maintenance of equipment within limits technical knowledge of personnel. There is no evidence equipment now arriving has been diverted to other than intended use.

No one imagines that now or in future Iranian Army could prevent Soviet invasion. As we understand it, object of MAP from military point of view is to insure internal security and to increase cost of invasion in terms of personnel and time required, and possibly to maintain with tribal assistance some form of prolonged resistance particularly in southern mountains. It is our feeling that over course of some years Iranian Army might be developed to point where it could make substantial contribution to US security interests in Middle East.

As we see it here, Soviet pressure against Western Europe, Greece and Turkey has, temporarily at least, diminished. Unless we assume USSR has abandoned for foreseeable future any idea seeking and exploiting soft spots along periphery, I consider Iran probable spot for new application Soviet technique as employed in Greece. With infiltration, Soviet intrusion into Azerbaijan could be at least as rewarding and even more confusing (Article 6, treaty 1921) than Soviet efforts in Greece and at no more expense to them. Unless we can accept with equanimity developments this nature it seems advantageous to provide Iran with equipment our military authorities believe can be usefully employed. In this connection reports indicate that as result economic deterioration in Azerbaijan, Mazanderan and Khorassan these vital northern areas are becoming increasingly vulnerable to subversive penetration. These areas constitute breadbasket of the nation. Inadequate assistance to Iran might be interpreted by Soviets as invitation to this type of enterprise. At moment Soviet restraint from incursions and vehement diplomatic moves is an indication, in so far as Soviet policy towards Iran may be gauged, of Soviet sensibility to strong US interest.

There exists no real national unity or cooperation among Iranian leaders. Without strong US inspiration and leadership there is little hope this situation will substantially improve. Time is of the essence in Iran. No one can say how much time we have. If we do nothing Iran will certainly remain a hole in the dyke. US interests in this area are of such importance we cannot afford to neglect any possibility which might tend to improve the stability of Iranian Government, and which might give Iranian people stake in their country and a cause for which they would be willing to fight.

In summary, I believe present MAP program will result in chagrin, disappointment, and even resentment in Iran while nevertheless provoking USSR. Our policy here should be to strengthen the Iranian position while not provoking USSR needlessly. Our announced program will undermine status elements in Iran friendly to us, resulting in decline of US influence. Iran’s international position will be trolled by Shah and government with less confidence in basic sincerity US policy toward Iran.

Please pass to Armed Forces.

Wiley

1 President Truman’s invitation of July 5 to the Shah to visit the United States was sent to Tehran in instruction 51, July 8. The Shah’s, acceptance, by letter, was sent to the Department by Tehran in telegram 962, July 28 (891.001/7–849,/7–2849).

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in Iran 891.20/8–949: Telegram

[Document 317]

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in Iran

top secret Washington, August 30, 1949—6 p. m.

754. Urtel 999, Aug 9. Dept concurs your view essential review objectives MAP in Iran and is undertaking with National Mil Establishment thorough examination Iranian mil needs in light General Evans analysis.

Dept considers it important that it be made clear that allocation of assistance under proposed MAP of necessity based upon distribution available supplies in amounts and kinds proportionate to need for assistance, ability to utilize and maintain equipment and immediacy and extent of threat to security of nations involved. Important in this connection to note that Iran only nation to which it is proposed to provide assistance on a grant basis which has a favorable dollar balance. Comparison of amounts of assistance on dollar basis misleading since equipment priced for purposes of program on different bases dependent upon its availability from either excess, war reserves or new production. Necessarily estimate had to be unilateral and tentative in advance Congressional action to permit extension of assistance. These tentative estimates being restudied in view Evans data. Our expectation has been and continues to be that following enactment MAP and completion our studies we would undertake bilateral discussions with Iran to perfect program of assistance which wld be mutually beneficial. Legislation wld also permit the program of grant assistance to be supplemented by Iranian purchases of equipment if she so desires.

In view foregoing believe any conclusion that mil assistance program inadequate for Iranian needs premature. Dept trusts you will endeavor make this clear to Shah. For your info NME estimate re amount and character equipment justified for Iran on strictly mil grounds will have pol factor applied before US views as to Iranian program are finalized. If dollar costs of adequate program exceeds amount available under current year’s program plan, consideration will be given to extension of assistance over longer period or possibility transfer of additional sums from amounts allocated to other countries. No assurance can be given that either course would be feasible.

Dept somewhat disturbed your statement present MAP for Iran will result in “chagrin, disappointment and even resentment.” Any indication that Iran resents our freely offered help wld, of course, have serious effect on American public opinion and Congressional action. After consideration explanation given above, and such further discussion with Iranians as you think appropriate, pls give Dept your judgment as to whether program of type presently envisaged wld further achievement US objectives.

Hope you will be able to convince Shah that US mil aid planning for Iran will be based on our best estimate Iranian forces immediate needs and ability to absorb and on size and character army we believe Iran economically able support and train. (You might point out Turkish Army has been substantially reduced since beginning American aid and that such reduction was one of objectives of aid program.)

Know you will keep in mind and stress whenever appropriate that US Govt considers economic and social progress as first and most important line defense against USSR. Just as in Europe ERP is given first priority and nothing proposed in mil aid program which might interfere with economic recovery, we consider Iran will insure its own safety best by economic development and social reform and that a large mil estab, even with US aid in form of equipment, would add to danger rather than to security by adverse effect on economic program.

Wld like ur comments on foregoing together with ur estimate of course Iranian leaders might follow if in the end amount mil aid still falls short of meeting what they consider Iran’s minimum requirements and what they consider sufficient to prove continued American support.1

Acheson

1 In reply on September 5, Ambassador Wiley advised that he had orally outlined various aspects of the arms credit to the Shah the previous evening and that the Shah had seemed pleased. He concluded that “your 754 indicates that MAP will meet Shah’s minimum requirements provided we yield to Shah’s more than insistent demand for medium tanks. He wants 150. I suggest we let him have 50 to begin with.” (Telegram 1085, from Tehran, 891.20/9–549)

Memorandum by Major General L. L. Lemnitzer to the Coordinator for Military Assistance Programs (Berkner) 891.24/9–249

[Document 318]

Memorandum by Major General L. L. Lemnitzer 1 to the Coordinator for Military Assistance Programs (Berkner)

secret Washington, September 2, 1949.

Subject: List of Military Supply Requirements Submitted by Iran.

In your memorandum of July 27, 1949,2 subject as above, you re quested that I keep you advised of any developments concerning Iranian military requirements which might arise through military channels.

Several versions of Iranian military requirements have been received by the Department of Defense: The orginallist, dated 6 June 1949, calling for equipment valued at about $200,000,000; a modified list, dated 8 July 1949, prepared by the Iranian Government after discussion with Major General Vernon Evans, Chief of the U.S. Military Mission, and totaling $175,000,000; General Evans’ own recommendation for equipping the Iranian Army, which, together with appropriate instruction of Iranians in U.S. Service Schools would cost $30,000,000; and finally a recent supplement, prepared by the Iranian Government without consulting General Evans, which re quests sufficient additional equipment for an army of 300,000.

In general, the basic disagreement between Evans and the Iranians is on the size of the army. Evans favors training and equipping the present army of 113,000 men, while the Iranian General Staff is determined to have an army of 300,000 no matter how inadequately trained and equipped. We, of course, are inclined to support Evans’ view, and our Army logisticians are using his recommendations as a basis in reconciling requirements to the funds which are expected to be available.3

1 Special Assistant to the Secretary of Defense on Foreign Military Assistance.

2 Memorandum not found in Department of State files.

3 As recently as August 16, Iranian Military Attaché Mazhari presented the Iranian case for an army of 150,000 men to the Department of Defense, emphasizing that an army of the present size (113,000 men) would be sufficient only for purposes of internal security, whereas the Iranians must be prepared to defend themselves against external aggression (memorandum of August 25 by Mr. Jernegan to Mr. McGhee, 891.20/8–2549).

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in Iran 891.20/9–549: Telegram

[Document 319]

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in Iran

top secret Washington, September 15, 1949—8 p. m.

799. Urtel 1085 Sep 5.1 Highly gratified improved attitude of Shah.

Re second para you are correct in understanding US mil aid not intended supply locally procurable items.

Re fourth para past experience with Grk and Turk programs indicates it desirable confine discussions of requirements and procurement questions to foreign capital where experience and on-spot knowledge of US mil missions available. We have always insisted Grk and Turk requests be channelled through missions Athens and Ankara. Believe preferable establish this procedure for Iran program also.

While despatch special Iran mil rep to Wash might be useful in getting program started, provided he accompanied ranking officer of US mission Iran, we think this should be deferred at least until MAP approved by Congress, and State and NME have completed present re-study Iran needs. Until Iranian needs as set forth in Evans report can be re-examined in light funds ultimately appropriated by Congress for MAP, no realistic basis exists for conversation with any Iranian military rep who might come to Washington.

With reference desirability providing medium tanks, General Evans has recomended to Dept Army against provision such items. This recommendation is in accordance with JCS policy developed in connection surplus arms credit program. In view of General Evans previous recommendations, suggest you discuss matter with him. If finally determined no military justification exists, determination must be made whether tanks justified on political grounds as concession to Shah. Presumably question can best be answered after Shah’s visit and assessment his conversations with ranking officials in Washington. As practical matter doubtful whether surplus tanks will be available after requirements higher priority countries are met. Even 50 tanks from new procurement would require a major portion of funds likely to be available to Iranian program and would consequently involve elimination of other items already programmed.

Acheson

1 Not printed; but see footnote 1 to telegram 754, August 30, p. 557 [Pg. 557 includes portions of Doc. 317 and Doc. 318].

The Secretary of State to the Iranian Ambassador (Ala) 891.24/7–2949

[Document 320]

The Secretary of State to the Iranian Ambassador (Ala)

The Secretary of State presents his compliments to His Excellency the Ambassador of Iran and has the honor to refer to the Embassy’s Note No. 1405 of July 29, 1949,1 regarding conversations between the Ambassador and officers of the Department concerning the desire of Iran to obtain military and economic assistance.

As the Ambassador is aware, the President, in his recent message to the Congress, included Iran among those countries eligible for military assistance. The ability of this Government to provide military aid, therefore, depends upon the action taken by the Congress on the President’s proposal. The Department of State, along with the Department of Defense, is continuing to urge approval of the bill by the Congress and appropriation of the necessary funds. When and if the Congress makes this bill law, this Government will be in a position to provide certain essential needs of the Iranian military forces. It is to be noted that Iran is the only country with a favorable foreign exchange position for which military assistance has been recommended on a grant basis.

The United States Government has indicated its willingness, on several occasions, to extend technical assistance to Iran to the full extent possible under programs now in existence or contemplated in legislation now before the Congress. To this end, our two Governments have recently signed an agreement which will implement the Fulbright Act.2 The Department is also seeking at this time to obtain funds appropriated under the Smith–Mundt Act for use in paying the salaries of several technicians to assist the Iranian Government in such fields as agriculture, public health, and industrial training. When and if legislation designed to implement Point Four of the President’s inaugural speech is passed by the Congress, this Government hopes to make available to the Iranian Government a substantial number of technicians and to make possible the training abroad of considerable numbers of Iranians. The skilled individuals whom we hope to provide under both the Smith–Mundt and Point Four programs should make a valuable contribution to the Iranian Seven Year Program, provided that program has been developed to a point where their skills can be fully utilized. It is the opinion of this Government that early implementation of the Seven Year Program by the Government of Iran through the use of resources presently available to it is the best possible means of raising the standard of living of the Iranian people, thereby contributing to Iran’s resistance to the aggression mentioned in the Ambassador’s note under reference. The favorable foreign exchange position of Iran, plus the probability that Iran could supplement its own resources by obtaining credit from the International Bank, would appear to place Iran in a most advantageous position to implement fully its development program. The United States Government, as has been previously indicated to the Ambassador, would be willing to support an adequately documented Iranian application to the International Bank.

With reference to His Excellency’s mention of the note recently presented to the American Ambassador to Iran requesting economic assistance to a total of 147 million dollars,3 it should be noted that the Executive Branch of this Government does not, at this time, have the authority or funds to extend gratuitous economic assistance to the Government of Iran. Furthermore, in the light of Iran’s favor able foreign exchange position, it would be difficult to justify a request of the Congress for such authority and funds.

This Government understands that the Iranian State Railway has suffered considerable deterioration since responsibility for its operation was returned to the Iranian State Railway Administration fol lowing its wartime use by the Allies, and it would appear that one of the most important tasks which might be undertaken under the Seven Year Plan would be rehabilitation of the railway.

With regard to the possibility that this rehabilitation program might be linked to a military assistance program, the Congress in appropriating previous funds for military assistance, has clearly indicated its unwillingness that such funds be used for civil purposes such as railway rehabilitation. It, therefore, is the policy of this Government not to use Military Assistance Program funds, when and if appropriated by the Congress, for projects of the type suggested. In connection with His Excellency’s statements referring to the use of the railway by the Allies during the recent war, this Government considers that the railway was returned to the responsible authorities, following its operation and maintenance by the United States Army, in a condition at least equal to that in which it was received. This Government understands that an agreement has been reached between the Government of Iran and the Government of the United Kingdom for payment of an amount equal to 5,700,000 Pounds Sterling as final settlement for claims and depreciation said to have resulted from the use of the railway by the Allies during the War. The Ambassador will recall that the Government of the United States did not assume financial responsibility for the railway during its operation by the United States Army, but considered that such responsibility rested with the British Government. In this connection, the United States recently informed the United Kingdom that it did not intend to press the Government of Iran for payment for material improvements made on the railway during its operation by the United States Army.

The Ambassador may rest assured that this Government will continue to give sympathetic consideration to requests of the Iranian Government for assistance, and will endeavor to provide such assistance whenever the need is fully justified and cannot be met from other sources available to Iran.

Washington, September 22, 1949.

1 Not printed.

2 For the text of the agreement establishing the United States Commission for Cultural Exchange between Iran and the United States, see Department of State Treaties and Other International Acts Series (TIAS) 1973; or 63 Stat, (pt. 3) 2685. The agreement was signed at Tehran on September 1.

3 See telegram 907, July 12, from Tehran, p. 540 [Pg. 540 is part of Doc. 313].

The Acting Secretary of State to the Embassy in Iran 501.BD Europe/9–2849: Telegram

[Document 321]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Embassy in Iran

confidential Washington, September 28, 1949—7 p. m.

846. Past week Ebtehaj accompanied by Amb Ala engaged in series consultations with Dept officials. His gen line was that Iran not now in need econ grant or loan1 but in order to preserve Iran revenues for purpose econ development, US must supply minimum needs Iran Army as determined by joint US–Iran studies.

Dept informed Irans (including MA Mazhari) that determination of Iran share of Title Three MAP appropriation impossible until joint US–Iran high level mil talks take place. They were told Iran requirements may be supplied from fol classes of material; (a) new procurement priced at cost (b) army stocks requiring replacement priced at replacement cost (c) army stocks priced at 1945 levels approx 40–50 percent below current prices (d) equipment excess to US Army reserves provided gratis except for cost reconditioning and/or crating. On basis varied supply possibilities Dept pointed out discussion of dol figure wld be misleading as measure quantity assistance which Iran may receive.

Ebtehaj pressed issue of provision under MAP from US sources such locally procurable items as uniforms, shoes, etc. He was informed MAP legis intended supply only mil end items not otherwise available to recipient countries, and Dept pol is not to supply locally procurable items. Ebtehaj was told IranGov must plan accordingly in preparation its program and budget.

IranReps were informed mil aid under MAP designed provide essential items based on determination by joint US–Iran mil group. Amt such aid wld be limited by requirements of other nations, and limitation on funds and equipment available in US. They were reminded Iran is only nation with favorable fon exchange position recommended to Cong to receive mil aid from US, and US Govt is currently operating on budget deficit. Dept stated bilateral discussions re mil equipment to be programmed for Iran wld be carried on by US Amb in Tehran assisted by his mil advisers, and pointed out this desirable because IranGov cld thus more conveniently make decisions such as those calling for choice of several alternatives or affecting several ministries simultaneously. For ur info foregoing is without prejudice to any position we might take to prevent embarrassment Evans (such as sending Dept Defense personnel to Iran for negots).

Ebtehaj repeated disavowal Iran need for econ grant or loan at public mtg attended by some members Cong. Despite FonOff note which is matter of record, he repeated theme Iran will implement plan without assistance and thereby implied Iran has made no request to US for econ grant. He added, however, although Iran cld get along without Point Four aid, it will be welcomed if made available. In conversations with Dept Ebtehaj said Point Four wld be very useful to Iran, and at same time pointed out Iran development program wld be outstanding example self-development in line with Point Four concept and therefore useful to US. In conversation Asst Secy Thorp, Ebtehaj discussed possibility attracting US private capital to Iran, US Govt plans for guaranteeing investments, and restrictions which might be imposed by Iran limiting export annual earnings and repatriation capital.

Memos conversations fol.

Webb

1 Tehran, on October 19, reported information from Minister of Court Hajir that “Ebtehaj statement in Washington that Iran does not now need economic aid were contrary to Shah’s instructions and not statement of Iranian Government policy.” (Telegram 1340, 893.50/10–1949)

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in Iran 891.20/10–1949: Telegram

[Document 322]

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in Iran

secret Washington, October 19, 1949—5 p. m.

913. From Jernegan. Regret confusion re mil aid to Iran.1 Sequence developments connec Iran MAP presently expected evolve as fols: 1. Lt Col Brant, Dept Army, will leave in about ten days to inform you and Gen Evans latest MAP developments and discuss items tentatively proposed inclusion in Iran program. After discussion with you and Evans, list can be amended from Wash by cable and will then be ready for presentation to Iran at proper moment, either in Tehran or Wash. List carried by Brant will have tentative State–Def–ECA approval, but in view attitude US mil authorities tanks will probably not be included. However, Dept still considering possibilitity inclusion tanks on basis polit justification. If this question raised by Dept, final decision agencies concerned may not be taken immed.

2. Bilateral agmt between US and Iran, setting forth gen terms under which matériel will be supplied, must be concluded before matériel may be transferred. This negot will be conducted in Wash thru Iran Emb, as in case other participating countries. Ur comments on terms agmt will be requested soon as tentative draft completed here. No discussion with Iran re matériel to be transferred will be initiated prior to signing agmt. No transfer or shipment of matériel will be made prior to ratification of agmt if Majlis action required by Iranian law. Since substantial portion of equipment programmed for Iran will probably come from new procurement time required for ratification shld not result in serious delay to program.

3. Question of where and by whom negots on objectives and content of Iran program will be conducted still under study in Dept. It is hoped decision can be reached in this regard shortly. Present plan provides no discussion of specific items equipment in Iran program will be initiated prior to arrival of Shah. Opportunity will be presented Shah sell his bill of goods to top-level members USG during visit but without reference to specific bill matériel unless bilateral agmt has been signed. Ur comments requested.

4. As you will have noted from background material transmitted to you (MAP Document D–F2 ), contemplated you be provided with civilian Special Asst for MAP problems. Dept now seeking suitable candidate this position.

Acheson

1 Telegram 913 was the Department’s reply, presumably, to Tehran’s 1252, October 5, 8 a. m., not printed. The latter message indicated there was “some element of confusion” on technical elements concerning the question of military aid to Iran. (891.20/10–549)

2 Dated June 15; see vol i, p. 328

Memorandum by the Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern, South Asian, and African Affairs (McGhee ) to the Director of the Mutual Defense Assistance Program (Bruce) 891.24/10–2149

[Document 323]

Memorandum by the Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern, South Asian, and African Affairs (McGhee 1 ) to the Director of the Mutual Defense Assistance Program (Bruce)

secret [Washington,] October 21, 1949.

With reference to our discussion in your office on October 21, the following summarizes NEA’s views on the question of military assistance to Iran:

A. Present Status of Program

We are informed that the Department of the Army’s program, as now constituted, contemplates the provision of approximately 1000 trucks, 96 bazookas, a few miscellaneous tools and about $2,000,000 worth of spare parts. The total cost of the program would be $8.6 million, excluding transportation charges for items to be delivered after FY 50. (In addition, the Air Force portion of the program is understood to provide very roughly $2,000,000 in parts.) This sum, however, is computed on the basis of new production costs, it apparently being the intention that Iran will not be given the benefit of other types of items available under a lower pricing policy from reserve or excess stocks. The list as it now stands represents General Evans’ (Chief of our Military Mission to Iran) priorities. The Logistics Division in the Department of the Army had devised another program including a wider assortment of weapons and equipment and making liberal use of items which were available under a low-cost pricing policy. However, upon the recommendation of a Colonel recently returned from General Evans’ staff, this tentative program was abandoned. Although this action was taken in an attempt to reflect General Evans’ desires, it is by no means certain that General Evans himself would not revise the list when he learns that the high priority items which he recommended must come from new procurement, therefore absorbing all of the funds available.

It would appear from recent discussions of the FACC that the present tendency is to more or less crystallize the tentative supply list, making it difficult in the ultimate negotiations with the participating countries to permit any extensive flexibility in the selection of items. While it is recognized that first consideration must be given to the actual usefulness of the item provided, as well as to availability, in a meeting with Mr. Ebtehaj, Governor of the National Bank of Iran, the Iranians were assured that they would have an opportunity to sit down with our military authorities and to devise a list of equipment which reflected both Iranian and United States approval.

B. NEA’s Recommendations

(1) That General Evans and Ambassador Wiley will have an opportunity to comment on the list before it is crystallized;

(2) That no presentation of the tentative list be made to the Iranians prior to the arrival of the Shah on November 16, and an opportunity afforded for him to sell his bill of goods;

(3) That if it is decided that the negotiations should take place in Iran, a relatively imposing delegation including State Department officials and at least one military general officer be sent to Tehran to conduct the negotiations. In this connection both Ambassador Wiley and General Evans have strenuously objected to being made the scapegoats in Iranian eyes for what must inevitably be a disappointing program. We feel that this point is extremely well taken and that they should be protected, as much as possible, from the effects of the Iranians’ disappointment;

(4) That consideration be given to the possibility of expanding the Iranian program by adopting a more favorable pricing policy in lieu of the strictly disadvantageous policy which was used by the Department of the Army in the formulation of its present list. This apparently will be possible only if the order of priority of items to be supplied is somewhat modified to take advantage of lower cost goods which, although included in lists submitted by General Evans, occupy a lesser priority.

(5) That the Shah’s obsession on the question of medium tanks be kept in mind in arriving at a final list. Both General Evans and the Department of the Army feel that these are not justified on military grounds. However the psychological value of them would be consider able and the political repercussions of omitting them unfortunate, to put it mildly.2

1 Mr. McGhee’s title had been altered on October 3.

2 Mr. Bruce replied to Mr. McGhee in a memorandum of November 2, which stated in part: “Everything that you say sounds most sensible to me.… We wish to do everything we can to operate in conformity with it and shall follow your suggestions.” (891.24/10–2149)

The Ambassador in Iran (Wiley) to the Secretary of State 891.248/10–2249: Telegram

[Document 324]

The Ambassador in Iran (Wiley) to the Secretary of State

secret Tehran, October 22, 1949—4 p. m.

1355. British Ambassador informs me that through Iran Military Attaché London question jet planes has been reopened with request for 48 planes involving training program for ground force of 500, all on credit. British Ambassador indicated he is under instructions give negative response in most categorical fashion. He considers Iran jet program “lunatic”.

Please pass to Armed Forces.

Wiley

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in Iran 891.50 Seven Year Plan/10–2649: Telegram

[Document 325]

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in Iran

secret Washington, October 26, 1949—6 p. m.

940. Ltd Smith–Mundt funds recently made available for technical assistance activities NEA area for remaining months FY 1950. If justified, possible provide Iran 7 US technicians (techs) plus funds for 3 Iranians to be brought US for training. According usual Smith–Mundt procedure, Iran expected contribute local Services such as transportation, housing, office space, administrative and field assist ants, interpreting services in Iran, etc.

View availability funds, reply soonest your estimate (1) desire of IranGovt for such assistance and their willingness assume local costs, (2) need for US techs in addition OCI. If IranGovt not eager, techs urgently needed elsewhere. Believed operations these techs will aid arid reinforce OCI plans and work. At your discretion you may inform Iran officials of possibility of this technical assistance to give them opportunity make specific request.

In preliminary planning, Dept and USGovt agencies have assumed techs wld be most useful in Iran in fields health and sanitation, agric and industrial training, and other labor fields with some attention to statistical problems. This in view 7-Yr Plan and desirability of initiating activity in fields due to receive emphasis under Point 4. You shld realize, however, that these techs are just a beginning. Other fields will be activated under Point 4 to insure a balanced program. If you agree and IranGovt requests techs in above fields, selection can start immed, although it is doubtful whether techs cld arrive Iran before March 1950 because delay involved FBI clearance.

Training in US believed most useful in agric and private industry. Training grants provide USGovt furnish roundtrip transportation, $180 monthly stipend and travel within US. One grant proposed in agric and two private industry. If IranGovt cld provide roundtrip transportation for industry trainees three can be trained instead of two. Training agric lasts twelve months and industry six to twelve. If IranGovt interested, it shld begin thinking about types training Most urgently needed and preliminary selection candidates. Final selection shld be deferred until techs arrive and have opportunity confer with applicants.

Dept wld also like your reactions fol points: (1) USGovt agencies feel that their men cld work most effectively with IranGovt Ministries officials, while spending some portion their time in actual demonstration work. They oppose Foundation on theory that reform must come from top, otherwise work in villages has no lasting effect on Govt. This concept may have some merit in view objective using these techs to prepare ground for Point 4. USDA also observes that it has had poor experience in Latin America in attaching men to plan orgs, since those orgs were not always permanent or in high esteem, and since techs’ work cld be no better than the org to which they were attached. USDA thinks better to have them Work with Plan org thru ministries.

(2.) Agencies agree need coordination work of techs with Emb. It was suggested if techs are assigned Iran, you appoint officer with responsibility planning, arranging terms work techs, assembling them regularly for interchange info, and coordinating with OCI and Other programs. This responsibility wld probably require major portion time senior officer. In fact it may be desirable send out additional senior officer attached your staff for this and to become technical cooperation officer under Point 4 program. Geib could probably help such officer in view his experience tech assistance activities. Wld appreciate your full consideration this aspect problem.

Acheson

The Acting Secretary of State to the Embassy in Iran 891.51/11–749: Telegram

[Document 326]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Embassy in Iran

confidential Washington, November 9, 1949—7 p. m.

992. Embtel 1441.1 Portion Ala call Nov 7 devoted econ matters apparently based on instrs from Tehran, perhaps unofficial and private, to attempt repair any damage done by Ebtehaj to Iran case for US (presumably grant), assistance. Amb said Ebtehaj’s stress on adequate mil assistance was for purpose protecting Iran resources for econ development program; was not intended imply Iran did not want or need econ help. Stated ministries needed aid to carry out programs in addition projects being executed by Plan org. Referred present bad econ situation and pointed out beneficial effects development plan wld not be felt for several years. Hoped Dept. wld keep Iran’s needs in mind, especially when planning legislative programs for presentation Cong. Asked Dept to “keep door open” at time Shah’s visit.

Asst Sec McGhee replied Dept always Welcomed opportunity discuss matter assistance to Iran but that US Govt’s position outlined in Dept’s note of Sept 22 which shld be accepted as statement US pol on matter. McGhee said Dept cld not consider approaching Cong for aid for Iran when Iran had favorable fon exchange position and dol convertibility privileges and IranGov had access to its Own and other resources with which to develop its economy.

When Ala suggested Iran might experience difficulty in continuing convertibility privileges and IranGov had access to its own and other in London, McGhee said Dept wld watch situation and wld be prepared discuss in light any ensuing developments.

Ala also mentioned Helmand River,2 and was told Dept now com paring list neutral comm nominees recd in IranEmb note last week3 with those recd from Afghan Emb (over year ago); that Dept was sending note to Emb this week asking agreement on Malcolm Jones in lieu Morgan as factfinder, and that Dept hopeful Jones will be ready proceed field early 1950.4

Ala inquired re opportunity for Shah to speak at length with Pres and Secy re many important matters he wished discuss. Amb reassured opportunity wld exist for Shah converse with Pres during stay Blair House and on other occasions. Plan outlined to Ala whereby Secy, Deputy UnderSecy Rusk and Asst Secys Thorp and McGhee wld call on Shah at Prospect House afternoon Nov 18 (in place visit Natl Gallery) following which McGhee wld accompany Shah for meeting with Gen Bradley and JCS. Ala expressed satisfaction.

Webb

1 Dated November 7 not printed.

2 For information on the interest of the United States in resolving the dispute in 1948 and 1949 between Iran and Afghanistan regarding distribution of the waters of the Helmand River, see Foreign Relations, 1948, vol. v, Part 1, pp. 486 ff.

3 Note 2798, October 21, not printed.

4 Note of November 8, not printed. It indicated that Malcolm H. Jones was attached to the Bureau of Reclamation.

The Acting Secretary of State to the Embassy in Iran 891.20 Mission/9–2149: Telegram

[Document 327]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Embassy in Iran

confidential Washington, November 10, 1949—7 p. m.

1002. Embtel 1186 Sept 21.1 Emb shld send note FonOff indicating willingness US Gov extend ArMish contract additional year without change except for certain revisions made necessary by estab US Dept Defense which exercises in part auth formerly vested in War Dept, and by creation Dept Air Force. Emb shld point put US Gov does not desire introduce changes in contract but must request revisions to com ply with legal provisions, governing structure US Gov.

Revisions required are:

Preamble; insert “and US Air Force” after “Army”.

Art 5; Delete “Initially”. Insert “and United States Air Force” fol “Army”. Similar insertions shld be made in Art 10 (twice), and in Art 19 “Army” shld be deleted and “Air Force” inserted in its place in identifying Mission aircraft. Phrase “War Dept” shld be deleted and phrase “Dept of Defense” inserted in its place in Article 5 (twice) and in Art 19.

For ur info only we do not wish tie extension mission contract in any official manner with existence or operation MAP. This not intended preclude augmentation mission for purpose instr Irans re use equipment recd, but we desire avoid possible inference on part Irans that end MAP (even after two or three years, assuming extension program) wld be useful or convenient time eliminate mission.

Depcirins June 25, 1947 and supplementary instr Jan 10, 19492 entitled “Treaties and Agreements”, Dept requires original Iran FonOff notes and certified copies US Emb notes.

Webb

1 Not printed; it conveyed the text of a note just received from the Iranian Foreign Office requesting the extension of the agreement for the employment of the American Military Mission with the Iranian Army for a further one year period to March 20, 1951 (891.20 Mission/9–2149).

2 Neither printed.

Memorandum by the Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern, South Asian, and African Affairs (McGhee) to the Secretary of State 891.001 Pahlavi [,Reza Shah]/11–1749

[Document 328]

Memorandum by the Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern, South Asian, and African Affairs (McGhee) to the Secretary of State 1

secret [Washington,] November 17, 1949.

Discussion

The following briefly summarizes the subjects the Shah of Iran2 is likely to raise with you when you call on him at the Prospect House on November 18. The subjects are outlined in detail in the “Back ground Memorandum”3 on the visit:

1. Military Assistance

The Shah will probably describe his strategic plans in the event of a Soviet invasion and his consequent need for an army larger and more elaborately equipped than is possible under both Iran’s present budgetary position and our plans for military assistance. We feel the Shah should be listened to sympathetically but without commitment. If he asks concerning the present status of the list of military equipment, he might be told the program is not sufficiently far advanced for the presentation of any detailed lists at this time. It can be pointed out that our military assistance to Iran is limited by (a) The fact that effective use of military equipment depends on an army tailored to fit the military budget and any increase in Iran’s budget would have serious repercussions on its Seven Year Plan for economic development;

(b) Our own security considerations and the fact that our resources are hot unlimited;

(c) The fact that Iran is the only country with a favorable foreign exchange program to receive military assistance on a grant basis;

(d) The availability of trained personnel capable of handling and maintaining the more complex varieties of modern military equipment.

2. Economic Assistance

The Shah is likely to raise the question of economic assistance to his government. In this connection, Iran has embarked upon a Seven Year Program involving about $650 million. Financing of this program, which involves agricultural, irrigation, highway, railway, industrial, public health, and educational projects, depends primarily on oil royalties. The IBRD may also be asked for loans up to $250 million to provide additional funds. Immediate aims of the program include raising standards of education and public health, improving agricultural methods and transportation facilities, and reforming tax administration.

Last September, in answer to a specific Iranian request for an economic grant of $147 million, the Department replied that no authority existed for a grant, and that it would be impossible to obtain such authority from Congress since Iran has a favorable foreign exchange position (mainly because of an arrangement under which the British Government freely converts its sterling royalties to dollars) and has not yet exhausted other sources of financial assistance, i.e., the IBRD. We added that the U.S. would be willing to support an adequately documented Iranian application for a loan from the International Bank.

You may want to convey a general idea to the Shah of the part that the Point Four Program might play in assisting Iran in its Seven Year Plan, reiterating the program’s emphasis on technical rather than financial assistance and stressing the role that private capital must assume. You might also say that the first step that Iran could take in preparing the way for its Point Four participation should be the negotiation of a Treaty of Friendship, Commerce and Navigation with the United States, which would include suitable clauses on investment guarantees.

3. Extension of the Truman Doctrine to Include Iran

Since preparation of the Background Memorandum, Iranian Ambassador Ala has suggested that upon the departure of the Shah, a joint statement be issued reaffirming the principles of the Tehran Declaration on Iran, promising Iran further military and economic assistance and “extending the Truman Doctrine” to include Iran. If the Shah raises this pointy it might be pointed out that our position regarding the maintenance of the independence and territorial integrity of Iran is well known, that we will consider a public reiteration of it in connection with his visit here, but that we cannot make any commitments towards further financial, military, or other aid at this time.

4. Regional Defense Pacts

If the Shah suggests a regional Middle East defense pact, with or without a guarantee by the United States, he might be informed that this Government is not in a position to give consideration to any other pacts until the ramifications of the North Atlantic Pact become clear and can neither encourage nor discourage consideration of such pacts by the countries concerned. It is important, however, that any remarks on this subject be phrased in such a way as to avoid the impression that if Iran were attacked she would be left to her own resources.

5. General Line

Whether or not the Shah raises the question of military or economic aid or further American commitments to Iran, I believe it is desirable that you should make our position on these points and our general attitude toward Iran as clear as possible. He has probably heard all of these things before, but they have come to him through intermediaries in whom he does not appear to have complete confidence or who have not been able themselves to make the situation completely clear. One of the main objectives we should seek during the Shah’s visit to the United States is to demonstrate to him that our own Ambassador in Iran and his Ambassador here have in fact been correctly representing the policies and problems of the United States Government with regard to Iran.

The Shah must be convinced that we have a genuine interest in his country and that we are prepared to assist it within reasonable and practicable limits, and he must also be convinced that when we reject his requests we do so for sound logical reasons rather than out of any prejudice against Iran or in favor of other countries.

The two main lines which, I think, can be used to get this point across are: 1. That we must insist with Iran, as we do with all other countries, that she do everything she can to help herself before requesting American assistance; (this is especially applicable to the question of economic aid) and

2. That we must make haste slowly and not attempt over night to make up for the deficiencies developed over many years (i.e. even if our resources were unlimited, we could not renovate the Iranian Army in a year or two simply by pouring in great quantities of equipment).

1 Drafted by C. Vaughan Ferguson, Jr., Officer in Charge of Iranian Affairs.

2 The Shah arrived in the United States on November 16, aboard President Truman’s personal plane, the Independence; for press releases by the White House and the Department of State see Department of State Bulletin, November 28, 1949, pp. 831, 832.

3 This refers to a binder entitled “Background Memoranda on Visit to the United States of His Imperial Majesty Mohammad Reza Pahlavi Shahinshah of Iran November 1949.” The contents of the binder were prepared in the Department on November 1, 1949, and consisted of seven parts: the importance of the visit; a biographic sketch of the Shah; important events in Iran during the past two years; outstanding problems facing Iran; recent United States-Iranian relations; a guide for discussions with the Shah; and several appendices (891.001 Pahlavi, Reza [Shah]/11–149).

Memorandum by the Secretary of State Secretary’s Memoranda, Lot 53 D 444, Secretary’s Memos

1 [Document 329]

Memorandum by the Secretary of State 2

secret [Washington,] November 18, 1949.

Interview Between the President and the Shah of Iran

Present also was Ambassador Ala and the Secretary of State.

The interview opened by the President’s inquiring whether the Shah had enjoyed his visit to Annapolis, and saying that the young men, both at Annapolis and West Point, came from every Congressional District throughout the country and thus would give the Shah a good idea of what the young people of the United States were like. The Shah complimented the President on the Naval Academy and was looking forward to his visit to West Point. He spoke of the strong spirit of patriotism which existed in the United States and said that his own country also had a strong spirit of patriotism. He spoke of the long history of Iran, stating that it had had its ‘ups and downs’. He spoke of the extent of the Persian Empire under Darius the Great, and appeared to be much struck by the fact that the President was familiar with this history in detail. He then spoke of periods of foreign influence and of the present dangers which came from the Soviet Union. This led the Shah into the main theme of his talk.

He described the situation in the Near East vis-à-vis the Soviet Union as being that Greece constituted the left flank, Turkey the center, and Iran the right flank. He spoke of the interest which we had shown in developing the capacities of the countries which wished to resist foreign domination and of the sums which we had spent in strengthening the left flank and the center in the Middle East. He then pointed out that from a military point of view this effort would be largely wasted if the right flank remained so weak as to invite attack there.

He stated that he might be told that Iran was not ready at the present time to absorb military equipment. That might be true, but it was necessary to start now in order that Iran might be ready within a year or two years. He said he was looking forward to explaining in detail this afternoon at the Pentagon to General Bradley3 and the Chiefs of Staff the military situation as he saw it and the military needs of Iran.

The President said that this was the proper course to follow; that His Majesty’s ideas would receive the most respectful attention, and would be discussed by the President with his military advisers and with the Secretary of State. The President pointed out that he was necessarily operating under limitations. The Congress, which held the purse strings, had, after considerable debate and in the face of some opposition, passed a Military Assistance Bill. The funds provided were not as large as the President would have wished; however, in face of the difficulties with which the Administration was confronted, he was satisfied with the result. Under this bill, 27 million dollars was available for Iran, the Philippines, and Korea, and there remained the possibility of some transfers in case of necessity from one category to another. The Shah expressed complete familiarity with the terms of the Military Assistance Bill. The President then repeated that he would assure the Shah of the most careful consideration of his views and that both he and the Secretary of State were strong advocates of Iran. He hoped that all our friends appreciated that, with our responsibilities in this hemisphere, in Europe, the Far East, and the Middle East, it was often necessary to leave undone many things which we would wish to see accomplished when the purpose had to be to use the funds available in the wisest way.

The Shah then turned to the economic situation. He spoke of Iran’s desire to develop the very great natural resources of the country, of the 7-year plan, and of the bad harvest last year. He said that the income from the oil royalties was to be used for the 7-year plan and for certain other current necessities. This left the military requirements of which he had already spoken and certain other economic ones unprovided for. Among these other needs, he mentioned specifically the need for such items as wheat and of his hope that some way could be found, either through the barter of strategic materials which the United States needed or through some form of Lend-Lease, to provide current consumable items such as wheat.

He then mentioned the need of the railways for new equipment. He said that if the needs of the oil companies were subtracted, the capacity of the railroads for all other needs was only at the present time about 700 tons per day. This he wished to increase to 60,000 tons per day. He had placed orders in England and in Germany for loco motives and freight cars. He was informed that it would take 17 months to get the equipment ordered in Great Britain because of large prior orders placed by South Africa. The German orders, he under stood, could be delivered in approximately 10 months. However, he was anxious to obtain some locomotives and, if possible, cars from the United States at once. He asked whether this matter could be investigated.

The Secretary of State said that he was not quite clear as to just what the matter was which the Shah wished to have investigated. Was it the possibility of immediate availability of equipment in the United States, or was it the question of financing such purchases? The Shah indicated that it was both, and spoke of the possibility of providing this equipment under some sort of Lend-Lease. The Secretary of State observed that there was no present legislation under which this sort of financing could take place. The President remarked that he had only recently filed the last report under the Lend-Lease Act, but that authority under that Act had expired some time ago. The Shah then asked whether the Marshall Plan could be extended to Iran, and was told that under its terms it applied only to countries in Europe.

This led the Shah to observe that he did not think Turkey was a country in Europe. The President pointed out that Turkey had been considered to be in this capacity, partly for geographical reasons, but primarily because of the prior legislation providing aid for Greece and Turkey which arose out of special circumstances and which was incorporated into the Marshall Plan legislation.

The President concluded that if the Iranian representatives would present us specifically with the requests for these suggestions which they had in mind, we would give these careful and sympathetic consideration within the limits of the authority provided by law.

This concluded the interview which lasted a little over half hour.

1 Lot 53 D 444 is a comprehensive chronological collection of the Secretary of State’s memoranda and memoranda of conversation for the years 1947–1953, as maintained by the Executive Secretariat of the Department of State.

2 Drafted by Lucius D. Battle of the Executive Secretariat.

3 Gen. Omar N. Bradley, Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff.

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Secretary of State 891.001 Pahlavi [,Reza Shah]/11–1849

[Document 330]

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Secretary of State 1

secret [Washington,] November 18, 1949.

Subject: Exchange of Views Between the Shah of Iran and the Secretary of State Regarding Iran’s General Situation and Need for American Assistance

Participants: The Shah of Iran

Hussein Ala, Iranian Ambassador

The Secretary of State

Mr. Willard Thorp, Assistant Secretary for Economic Affairs

George C. McGhee, Assistant Secretary for Near Eastern, South Asian, and African Affairs

John D. Jernegan, Director, Office of Greek, Turkish, and Iranian Affairs

I called on His Majesty at Prospect House for the purpose of giving him an opportunity to discuss privately some of the major questions in which he was known to be especially interested. During the course of an hour and twenty minutes we touched on a number of subjects, including possible security arrangements and the emergency need for railroad equipment in Iran, both of which topics I reported in separate memoranda.2 The bulk of the conversation dealt with the Shah’s desire to obtain both economic and military assistance quickly and in substantial quantity. It may be summarized as follows:

His Majesty considered it vital to Iran that the military strength of the country should be promptly increased to prevent its being overrun or subverted before economic improvement plans could have their effect. He considered that the next three or four years were critical from this point of view, and that after that it would be easier to deal with Iranian economic problems. Therefore, he wanted to develop the military strength of Iran to approximately one-half that of Turkey. This would mean, he said, an Army of 150,000 plus 30,000 frontier guards. He did not consider that this was “shooting too high” since one-third of the number at any one time would consist of raw recruits of no use in combat and another 30,000 would be engaged in rear echelon activities, leaving a maximum of 70,000 fighting men. (He did not count the frontier guards in the combat strength because they would be eliminated by the enemy at the first onslaught.)

His Majesty argued that this force equipped and trained by the United States, was essential to enable Iran to put up a fight for her independence. If Iran could resist an attack for two or three months it would be a great help to the Western Powers in a general war, unless those powers were confident of being able to win a war quickly by the use of the Atomic Bomb. In the latter case, of course, Iran’s military strength or lack of it would not matter. But if Iran were attacked and lost her independence without a real fight, it might never be possible to re-establish the democratic form of government in Iran.

His Majesty hoped very much that the United States could increase the contemplated amount of military assistance to be given to Iran possibly by reallocating appropriated funds from another MAP country under the authority of the “5 per cent clause”.

I agreed with His Majesty that some increase in Iranian military strength was probably desirable, but I emphasized the fundamental necessity of giving priority to economic and social development. All nations in the free world face the same problem. If we attempted to build up our military establishments to a level comparable with that of the Soviet Union, we would wreck our economies and leave ourselves so weakened that we would collapse without even being subjected to military attack. The best way to prevent war, which was after all our real objective, was not by military preparations but by so developing our free economic and social structures that the Russians would be deterred from attacking. I pointed to Nationalist China as an example of the wrong policy. At the close of World War II, I said, Chiang Kai-shek was on top of the world; he had large and well-equipped forces enormously superior to the military forces of the Chinese Communists. The President and General Marshall had strongly advised him to concentrate on improving the economic and social condition of the Chinese people, but he had chosen to attempt a purely military solution. The result was that the Chinese people had lost all confidence in the Nationalist Government and even in the military field Chiang had been defeated because his soldiers would not fight. All the vast quantities of American military equipment poured into China had merely gone to arm the Chinese Communist armies as a result of the mass surrenders of the Nationalist forces.

Now, I said, it was Southeast Asia that faced Communist pressure. While the countries of that area would need some military equipment, we believed that our greatest effort there should be made in the field of economic progress so that the new national governments could gain the loyalty of their people. After all, our resources were really slight and we had to utilize them in the manner that would be most effective.

In reply to this line of argument, the Shah observed that China’s downfall was largely due to corruption and he asserted that Turkey was putting large resources into its military program and still was able to maintain its internal stability. Some Iranians had called him a Communist because he wanted social reforms. He was opposed to the absentee landlord system and to the exploitation of labor, but even if he took away all the wealth in the hands of the landlords and factory owners it still would not amount to very much in the light of Iran’s needs and, he implied, would not compensate for the misfortunes that would result from military unpreparedness. I said that I had not meant to suggest immediate sweeping social reforms of the sort he mentioned and I agreed with the necessity for a certain degree of military preparedness. What I wished to emphasize was the importance of striking a balance. With respect to the Shah’s specific request for increased military aid, I suggested that he should discuss this especially with General Bradley when he saw him later in the afternoon. We would see what adjustments, if any, could be made. It had been difficult to get the Military Aid Bill approved by Congress and the amount had been reduced twice by the legislative branch. Furthermore, new responsibilities had been thrust upon us since the program was first planned, which would make it still more difficult for us to increase the share of any one country. As an example I pointed to Austria; if an Austrian peace treaty were signed and Western troops withdrawn from the country, it would be essential to provide military aid to Austria to prevent its being subverted by the Communists.

Mr. McGhee observed that while it would be difficult to increase the Iranian share of military aid through use of the “5 per cent clause” or otherwise, such a possibility was not foreclosed. It was not impossible that some transfers could be made. He emphasized that our possibilities of action in this first year of the MAP were limited and said that if there were a new military program in the next fiscal year we would give most careful study to Iran’s needs.

On the subject of economic development, the Shah indicated his appreciation of the importance of the 7-Year Plan and said that this importance was fully appreciated also by the mass, of the people of Iran, even those in the villages. In this field, too, he hoped for direct American aid. Could we not find some way to extend financial assistance on the pattern of the European Recovery Program? Could not the President at this time make a public statement that he would request Congressional authority for such a move with regard to Iran?

I replied that this would be very difficult. We were beginning to terminate the ERP, not to extend it. This program had been developed to meet a particular problem, namely, the acute dollar shortage in Europe. It had not been designed for purposes of general economic development. Congress would not be receptive to new proposals.

Mr. Thorp, Mr. McGhee and I all pointed out that Iran had a favorable balance of payments which made it a good credit risk for loans from the International Bank. Congress would expect Iran to exhaust its credit at the bank before appealing for direct aid, since we had taken the lead in setting up the bank for the specific purpose of facilitating economic development. Mr. McGhee explained that we had to be consistent in our economic aid policies, and we had taken the position with all countries that they could not expect grant aid from the United States if they had a credit standing enabling them to obtain funds from other sources. Our National Advisory Council would not under present circumstances approve an economic grant policy for Iran.

His Majesty observed that Iran’s dollar resources were not, after all, so great as people seemed to think. The oil royalties, which were the primary source of dollars, presently amounted to only seven or eight million pounds yearly, around $20,000,000 at the present rate of exchange and even if doubled by the new agreement with the oil company would still not amount to any enormous sum. He added that Iran had already been in touch with the International Bank, which had indicated its willingness to extend a credit of some $35,000,000 for certain projects, including a cement factory. The bank was planning to send a mission to Iran in December to study these particular projects. However, $35,000,000 was a small amount in comparison with what was needed and the bank would have to take a broader view if it was really to be of help in the 7-Year Plan. Mr. Thorp remarked that the mission sent by the bank would probably study the whole situation and thus lay the basis for larger credits in the future.

Reverting to the oil royalties question, the Shah said that if all of this income were devoted to the Economic Development Program there would be nothing left in the Iranian budget to maintain the Army. Local currency was even harder for the government to obtain than dollars.

His Majesty and Ambassador Ala then raised the question of utilizing the Export-Import Bank in addition to the International Bank. Mr. Thorp and Mr. McGhee agreed that the Export-Import Bank might be interested in some phases of Iran’s needs, but they emphasized that in our opinion it is desirable for Iran first to exhaust the possibilities of the International Bank. The latter institution lacked flexibility, and the Export-Import Bank could deal with certain situations not within the sphere of operation of the International Bank. It would be wiser, therefore, to hold the Export-Import Bank in reserve to meet unforeseen emergencies. I emphasized that there seemed to us no reason to believe that Iran’s economic needs could not be met for the present by the International Bank and I assured His Majesty that the American representative on the bank would give full support to Iranian requests.

Toward the end of the conversation, the Shah explained that the Iranian public expected a great deal in the way of American assistance to result from his visit to this country. He could not return empty handed. Was there not something more that we could do, whether in the economic or military fields? Could we not issue a statement re-emphasizing our support for Iran and promising further assistance?

I replied that we could issue a communiqué, preferably in the form of a joint statement by the President and the Shah, reiterating the public statements of support for Iranian independence previously made. I did not think we could say anything new, however. In the economic field, we would carefully examine points which had been discussed in this conversation and see what could be done in the field of providing railroad equipment, bank credits, etc. With respect to direct aid outside MAP, we simply had no authority.

In conclusion, His Majesty said that so long as he could remember Iran had always been attempting to progress, had always had plans for economic development except during the period of wartime occupation. Iran had always faced the Russian menace and had, figuratively, “fought Russia with her bare hands” to protect her independence. With or without American help, if anything happened in Iran her course of action would be the same.

1 Drafted by Mr. Jernegan, who had become Director of the Office of Greek, Turkish, and Iranian Affairs on October 3.

2 Printed pp. 579 [Pg. 579 includes portions of Doc. 330 and Doc. 331] and 580 [Pg. 580 includes portions of Doc. 331 and Doc. 332], respectively.

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Secretary of State 891.20/11–1849

[Document 331]

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Secretary of State 1

top secret [Washington,] November 18, 1949.

Subject: Iranian Desire for Greater Security Assurances from the United States

Participants: The Shah of Iran

Hussein Ala, Iranian Ambassador

The Secretary of State

Willard Thorp, Ass’t Secretary of State for Economic Affairs

George C. McGhee, Ass’t Secretary of State for Near Eastern, South Asian, and African Affairs

John D. Jernegan, Director, Office of Greek, Turkish, and Iranian Affairs

During the course of a long conversation on various subjects, the Shah and Ambassador Ala brought up their view that it would be highly desirable for Iran to participate in a mutual defense pact including the U.S. or otherwise receive some form of direct security guarantee from the U.S. His Majesty pointed to the favorable position, as he put it, of Western European countries which were receiving direct military and economic assistance from America and also had the security assurances provided by the North Atlantic Treaty. He said that he had tried to interest the Turkish Government in an Irano-Turkish defense pact, but the Turks had replied, with justification, that such an arrangement would be useless without American association with it.2

I replied that I thought the U.S. had made its attitude toward Iran quite clear in the past. For the present I did not believe we could ex tend our treaty obligations. The President was very meticulous about never making commitments which he was not in a position to fulfill. Before we considered new treaties, we needed to see whether the North Atlantic Treaty would really fulfill its purpose of increasing the defensive strength of the European nations. If they were able to develop their own strength and so reduce the extent of their dependence upon the U.S. for protection, then our commitments would be reduced. Until we could be sure that this development would result from our present policies, we had to be very careful about extending our commitments.

I added, however, that our interest was not limited to the area of our formal treaty obligations. I was sure that our interest in Iran would be great indeed if trouble should come.

Later in the conversation, His Majesty suggested that it would be very helpful to him to have, during the course of his visit to the U.S., a public re-statement of our interest in Iranian independence. I agreed that we could issue a statement of this sort, provided it did not go beyond the sort of thing that had previously been said publicly by the U.S. Government. I suggested, and the Shah agreed, that this might take the form of a joint communiqué to be issued by the President and His Majesty at the time of the Shah’s departure from the U.S. It was agreed that Ambassador Ala and the appropriate officials of the Department would work together on the preparation of the communiqué.

1 Drafted by Mr. Jernegan.

2 Tehran, on December 8, suggested that the Embassy in Turkey might be requested to encourage military talks between Turkey and Iran, since such talks might prove very fruitful and contribute greatly to improving relations between the two countries (telegram 1639). The Department, the following day, questioned the advisability of the Embassy in Turkey encouraging Turkish-Iranian military talks, inasmuch as the Turks might interpret such action as indicating American intention to participate in a regional pact involving the two countries. (Telegram 470 to Ankara, repeated to Tehran. Both telegrams are filed under 891.00/12–849) Ankara, in reply on December 17, advised that “Turkish leaders have repeatedly told us they are not interested in any ‘mutual’ defense arrangements with neighboring states which were not in effect underwritten by US, believing there would be no resultant increase in Turkish security offset the inevitable hostile reaction of Soviet Union to such ‘provocation’.” (Telegram 521, 867.20/12–749)

Memorandum of Conversation by, the Secretary of State 891.77/11–1849

[Document 332]

Memorandum of Conversation by, the Secretary of State 1

confidential [Washington,] November 18, 1949.

Subject: Request by the Shah of Iran for Help in Obtaining Railroad Equipment

Participants: The Shah of Iran

Hussein Ala, Iranian Ambassador

The Secretary of State

Willard Thorp, Assistant Secretary for Economic Affairs

George C. McGhee, Assistant Secretary for Near Eastern, South Asian, and African Affairs

John D. Jernegan, Director, Office of Greek, Turkish, and Iranian Affairs

The Shah opened the conversation by saying that he was most anxious to obtain promptly locomotives, freight cars and rails to meet the immediate transport crisis in Iran. He was told that we had already made some inquiries with respect to locomotives and understood a large number in used condition were readily available. He replied that unfortunately these locomotives were not of the right type for use in Iran and, furthermore, they were not new. His Government had made inquiries in Germany and elsewhere and had found that new locomotives could be produced in Germany in about ten months, but Iran could not wait that long. He hoped that it would be possible to get quicker delivery in the United States. The rolling stock was needed in three or four months.

The Department’s representatives indicated that it would be very difficult to obtain new rolling stock in so short a time, especially in view of the fact that orders for steel were probably backing up as a result of the recent steel strike.

The Shah then asked whether it would be possible to obtain credit from the Export-Import Bank to finance whatever transaction might be arranged. In reply to a question he said that the Iranian authorities had not yet approached the bank. Mr. Thorp said that he saw no fundamental objection to an Export-Import Bank credit in this connection but he thought Iran would be well advised first to look to the International Bank for help. It was pointed out that the International Bank liked to make loans of this type and had in fact recently extended a credit to India for the precise purpose of buying railroad rolling stock. Mr. Thorp said that the Department of State would be able to give strong support to an Iranian request for an International Bank credit for purchase of the equipment in question. The Shah indicated that he would consider the suggestions regarding the means of financing the transaction but said that this was not the most important aspect of the question; the essential element was the time within which the equipment could be made available.

It was agreed that the Department would make every effort to locate locomotives, freight cars and rails of the sort which the Iranian Government wished to obtain.

1 Drafted by Mr. Jernegan.

Editorial Note [Document 333]

Editorial Note

The Shah, accompanied by General Mazhari, called on the Joint Chiefs of Staff at the Pentagon on November 18. They were accompanied by Messrs. McGhee and Jernegan. Mr. Jernegan’s memorandum of conversation recorded that the Shah discussed his strategic plans in the event of a full-fledged Soviet attack on Iran; Iranian needs for tanks, tank destroyers, trucks, and small-arms ammunition; and the training of Iranian military personnel in the United States.

General Bradley replied that the Joint Chiefs would be glad to consider what military equipment could be made available to Iran under the Military Aid Program. At another point he said that “the Shah, of course, knew the terrain and conditions in his country better than we could but that from what we knew, it appeared to him that the Shah’s plan was sound and probably the best that could be devised under the circumstances.” (891.20/11–1849)

The Ambassador in Iran (Wiley) to the Secretary of State 891.20/11–1849

[Document 334]

The Ambassador in Iran (Wiley) to the Secretary of State

secret Tehran, November 18, 1949.

No. 281

Sir: I have the honor to refer to the Department’s correspondence on the Mutual Defense Assistance Act of 1949 as it pertains to Iran and to forward herewith the program for Iran for M.D.A.P. fiscal year 1950 as recommended by the joint State–Defense Survey Group composed of Mr. Edward D. McLaughlin (State), Lt. Col. Phillip D. Brant (Army) and Lt. Col. Thomas E. Hutchinson (Air Force).1

This Group has arrived at a balanced program which meets military requirements to the extent possible by the limited funds available. To this extent and to this extent only, I heartily concur in its recommendations.

I strongly urge that the Director take such extraordinary measures as may be necessary to include in this first year’s program the six (6) 75 mm recoilless rifles requested. I realize that this weapon is in short supply and that we do not have sufficient numbers for our own forces. Its use by the Iranian Army, under the instruction of our Military Mission, will be of tremendous psychological value and will balance to some extent the bitter disappointment of the Shah and the Iranian Government in what both they and I regard as a totally inadequate program.

I have advised the Department of the Shah’s early ambitious plans and of my successful efforts to reduce them to something within reason. The Shah remains adamant, however, on the subject of tanks. His position amounts to an obsession. I believe he will be satisfied with 50 M4–83 medium tanks equipped with a 76 mm gun. It has been impossible to furnish these tanks within the present program. Therefore we should seek some means outside of the program to satisfy the Shah’s minimum desires for tanks. This should be justified on political grounds. I fear that we must take this question most seriously. A “token aid” approach is worse than no approach at all.

In submitting, with my approval, the recommendation of the Joint Survey Group, I request that the Director give special consideration to the situation of Iran and provide that additional assistance which will support our present investment and permit us to achieve our military and political objectives.2

Respectfully yours,

John C. Wiley

1 Mr. McLaughlin was attached to the staff of the Mutual Defense Assistance Program. He was scheduled to depart from New York on November 10 to coordinate with Ambassador Wiley and General Evans regarding problems of the Military Aid Program. Concurrently, the Department of Defense was to send Army and Air Force officers to Iran to consult regarding the lists of equipment under the program. All conversations were to be exploratory and to be held only with United States personnel (telegram 990, November 9, 7 p. m., to Tehran, 89120/11–949).

2 Enclosed with this despatch was the recommended list of the Survey Group covering Iranian aspects of the proposed Mutual Defense Assistance Program for fiscal year 1950. The list was divided into two parts. The Department of the Army list comprised some 28 items with a delivered cost of $9,732,635. From this amount, a deduction was made for items to be delivered after fiscal year 1950, leaving a total amount of $8,621,210 for the “present program.” Recommended additionally were six recoilless rifles and cartridges, whose cost was estimated at $73,915 and a miscellaneous item whose cost was unknown. The Department of the Air Force list contained some 42 items, whose costs were estimated at $1,719,780. In a letter of November 19 to James E. Bruce, Director of the Mutual Defense Assistance Program in the Department of State, Ambassador Wiley explained his position that “the original concept of extending ‘token aid’ to Iran was a mistake. Such aid would be as provocative to the Russians as real aid but ineffective to accomplish our purposes here from either a military or political point of view. However, I have approved of the programming of the Joint Survey Group but I make that reservation. The position of Iran is very special and in the mosaic of our military thinking it should occupy an important place.” (891.20/11–949)

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Director of the Office of Greek, Turkish, and Iranian Affairs (Jernegan) 891.0001 Pahlavi [, Reza Shah]/11–1949

[Document 335]

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Director of the Office of Greek, Turkish, and Iranian Affairs (Jernegan)

secret [Washington,] November 19, 1949.

On the Shah’s invitation, I had breakfast with him this morning at Prospect House. He opened the conversation by asking whether I thought his visit to the United States was serving a useful purpose for Iran. I replied that I did emphatically think so. First, from His Majesty’s speeches, from seeing him, and from the attendant publicity, the American people were probably learning more about Iran than they had ever learned in their lives before. This was very important because it had a bearing on the policies which the United States Government could follow in its relations with Iran. Most Americans knew very little indeed about Iran and the other countries in that general area. Secondly, it was useful that the high officials of the American Government were having the opportunity to meet the Shah personally. It was always easier to understand a foreign country and visualize its problems if one had had personal contact with its leader. Thirdly, the substance of the Shah’s conversations with the President, the Secretary, and the Joint Chiefs of Staff was extremely helpful in clarifying our understanding of Iran’s problems and in bringing the lines of operation and thought of the two Governments closer together. We had not yet achieved complete agreement and understanding but I thought these talks would bring such agreement very much closer.

His Majesty then asked me in what respect I thought we were not in agreement. I said I felt that it was mainly a question of degree and of timing. We were not ready to go so far or so fast as His Majesty wished. The Shah interrupted to say that he fully understood our position, especially the difficulties which we would face in asking Congress for new legislation and new foreign assistance. Although he did not say it in words, his tone and manner implied that he was not criticizing or complaining at our failure to give him more concrete and immediate assistance. He went on to say, however, that he also had public opinion to consider and that the Iranian people were constantly asking why the United States was aiding every other country in the world and not Iran. He very much wished that we could find some way to give direct help to Iran, if only to reassure the Iranian people.

In reply, I asked if His Majesty did not think that the Iranian people would be encouraged and reassured by the results to be anticipated from limited direct aid from America combined with the progress Iran could achieve through utilizing its own resources and utilizing its credit with the International and Export-Import Banks. Once material improvements began to appear in Iran through the combination of these factors, would not the Iranian people stop worrying about the lack of large-scale direct American assistance? His Majesty agreed that this was likely, but indicated that he still felt something needed to be done at the present time.

I remarked that we must recognize that the American Government necessarily moved slowly. Any major project took a long time to get under way. His Majesty answered by recalling the Persian legend of Sohrab and Rustam ill which the father, Rustam, mortally wounded his son, Sohrab, without knowing who he was, and then sought medicine to save his life when it was too late. The Shah urged that the United States not be too late in providing the medicine to save Iran. I said that I was optimistic about the general international situation and I believed that in the case of Iran the medicine would not arrive too late.

His Majesty said that one thing he hoped we could do to demonstrate our interest in Iran was to give quick help in the matter of the railroad equipment he had discussed with the Secretary and Mr. Thorp yesterday. Even a small number of items, say 20 Diesel locomotives and 200 freight cars, would have a great psychological effect if they could be provided quickly. I said that I had no technical knowledge whatever on this subject and had no idea whether or not it would be feasible to obtain such items quickly. However, we would certainly do our best. I would make this an item of first priority in our work in the Department. There was, of course, no question of policy involved, but merely the technical and practical question of whether the material could be produced and shipped in time.1

Referring to His Majesty’s opening question about his visit, I asked whether he himself believed that it was serving a useful purpose. He quickly replied that he did. Before coming here, he had formed the impression from newspapers and other things he had read that the United States was a superficial country with a people lacking in depth of character. He had now found that this was an erroneous impression. He found the American people warm and having great depth of character. The American people, he had discovered, had a “heart”.

As I was leaving, Ambassador Ala came in and the Shah said that he hoped the Ambassador and the Department would work closely together in preparing the joint communiqué to be issued by the President and His Majesty. I said that we would look forward to discussing this with the Ambassador next week.2

1 In a note of November 29, the Secretary of State informed Ambassador Ala that there were no reasons to expect that Iranian agents would have any appreciable difficulty in ordering rails and freight cars to be delivered within 4 months and diesel locomotives to be delivered within 6 months (891.77/11–2549).

2 The Department, on November 19, informed Tehran that the “Shah has talked with Pres, SecState, Joint Chiefs, and subordinate State officials. Was given adequate opportunity present his case, which he did satisfactorily and moderately. Believe general impression on him good, though obviously he is disappointed at lack of concrete assurances greater direct aid or aid in specific forms such as tanks.” (Telegram 1043, 891.001 Pahlavi [, Reza Shah]/11–1949)

The Iranian Embassy to the Department of State 891.20/11–2949

[Document 336]

The Iranian Embassy to the Department of State

Aide-Mémoire

Iran is deeply grateful to the Government of the United States for its concern for her independence and integrity, for its valuable support at a time of crisis and for the material assistance recently extended under the Military Aid Program—thus recognizing the importance of Iran’s strategic position and the vital role she has played and must continue to play in holding the line against Communist domination of the Middle East.

The people of Iran ardently desire that the visit of His Imperial Majesty The Shah may serve to draw closer the bonds of friendship between the two nations, to result in a complete understanding on all points of common interest and to bear fruit in all fields: political, military, economic and cultural to the mutual benefit of Iran and the United States.

Politically, Iran is under incessant pressure and is constantly under the threat of aggression. Pressure is not only overt but is also exercised insidiously through infiltration and by inciting dissatisfaction and disunity within the country with the object of weakening the State and paving the way for its disruption and eventual domination by the aggressor.

The Iranian Government is determined to resist overt attack with all the means in its power and to take firm and adequate measures against subversive activities.

It is naturally a matter of concern to the Iranian Government to know, as far as possible, to what extent moral and material support will be forthcoming from the Government of the United States in case of attack, whether incidental to a general conflict in which the United States is itself involved or whether directed solely against Iran: as a step towards further expansion in other directions.

In order to combat the aggression and the subversive activities it faces, the Iranian Government must possess a military force, not only for internal security, but powerful enough in defense to be a factor to be reckoned with by the aggressor. To enable it to become such a factor, it is necessary to give the Iranian army adequate equipment, suitable modern weapons of defense, and sufficient mobility.

Having assigned its entire oil royalties to the execution of the Seven Year Plan, Iran neither has the economic ability nor the foreign exchange to enable her to purchase the necessary arms and equipment herself. The Military Aid Program is therefore most timely and for that reason is doubly appreciated. To be effective, however, it must be substantial enough to fulfil its object and continue for some years. Needless to say, too little help will not achieve its objective and will therefore be useless and wasteful.

The limited amount allocated this year under the Military Aid Program to the three countries, of which Iran is one, would appear to be inadequate for the purpose. Iran therefore hopes that its share will be supplemented substantially from the $50 million credit left at the discretion of the President; also that the equipment to be delivered being in the main surplus, will be included in categories supplied at a nominal charge.

While the assistance given to rearm and reequip the Iranian army is most helpful, the Government of Iran wishes to point out that it is desirable for the Government of the United States to supplement that aid politically by extending the Truman Doctrine to Iran and by adopting a policy in the Middle East, as in Western Europe, of encouraging the creation of a union of peace-loving nations, strong enough collectively, to resist Communist domination and capable of serving as effective allies against aggression in the event of a general conflict.

The necessity for assistance to rehabilitate the railway, ports and industrial plants and to raise the standard of living of the Iranian people is so well known that it is superfluous to dilate on the economic needs of Iran. As far back as 1943 these were fully recognized in the Declaration of Tehran, which bears the signature of the late President Roosevelt. Unfortunately its promise of Economic Aid has so far remained unfulfilled. For obvious reasons referred to in this Embassy’s Memorandum of August Fourth 1948,1 the Iranian Government can only look to the Government of the United States for the implementation of the Aid promised and implied by that Declaration, and it would appear that the present visit of His Imperial Majesty The Shah would be a most suitable occasion for such a gesture.

It is suggested that Economic Aid might be extended by the United States Government in the following ways: 1. By the inclusion of Iran in the Act for Aid to Greece and Turkey and in future enactments for economic assistance to other countries.

2. By the extension of a line of credit of $100,000,000.—from the Export-Import Bank over a period of seven years at the rate of about $15 million a year, partly to guarantee American investments in Iran in terms of Point Four and partly to finance self-liquidating projects to be carried out by private Iranian enterprise.

3. By giving urgent and special consideration to a barter or lend-lease agreement to supply wheat to Iran to tide over the present scarcity and famine conditions in many parts of the country.

4. By the act implementing Point Four of the President’s inaugural speech. Special consideration should be given to Iran under this act because her development program is under way, whereas other beneficiaries have still to undertake their preliminary studies.

5. By the inclusion of Khouzistan in any development of the nature adumbrated by the President in a recent speech. It is to be noted that its geographical and strategic situation, its proximity to highlands, its fertility and its oil and mineral resources give Khouzistan potentialities far superior to any other area in the Middle East.

Promise of financial and economic aid within the scope of the above-mentioned suggestions will not only give moral strength to the Iranian Government but will also serve as the best answer to insidious communistic propaganda among the masses.2

Washington, November 29, 1949.

1 The editors are unable to identify this memorandum.

2 A memorandum of conversation of November 29 by Mr. Ferguson stated that this aide-mémoire was handed to Mr. Hare by Ambassador Ala with the hope that Iranian desires as set forth in the paper would be included in the joint communiqué. The memorandum also noted statements made by Messrs. Hare and Jernegan that the Secretary, in agreeing to the issuance of a joint communiqué, “had made it quite clear that the United States would not be in a position to go farther than it had in the past and that it would merely consist of a, restatement of past public statements regarding Irano-Ameriean relations. Mr. Ala replied he hoped the United States Government would go ‘much further’ in the proposed communiqué than it had in the past.” (891.20/11–2949)

Memorandum of Conversation, by Mr. C. Vaughan Ferguson, Jr., of the Office of Greek, Turkish, and Iranian Affairs 891.001 Pahlavi [, Reza Shah]/12–649

[Document 337]

Memorandum of Conversation, by Mr. C. Vaughan Ferguson, Jr., of the Office of Greek, Turkish, and Iranian Affairs

secret [Washington,] December 6, 1949.

Participants: Mr. Ala—Iranian Ambassador

G—Mr. Rusk1

GTI—Mr. Ferguson

The Iranian Ambassador called this afternoon at his request to appeal for some substantial commitment by the United States on the occasion of the Shah’s departure which would enable him to show the Iranian people some concrete result of his visit.

Mr. Ala mentioned a number of Iranian desiderata including a promise of increased military assistance, an Export-Import Bank loan, an extension of the Truman Doctrine to include Iran, a U.S. guarantee of a Mediterranean regional defense grouping including Iran, and U.S. assistance in development of the Iranian province of Khuzistan.

While Mr. Ala obviously called merely to restate previous requests and expected no detailed replies to the various subjects he touched on, Mr. Rusk said he knew he could speak informally and frankly to the Ambassador and wished to suggest without in any sense offering it as a definite principle, that the idea that the Shah must have something tangible to take back with him might set an undesirable precedent for future state visits. Mr. Ala said he understood.

Mr. Rusk asked the Ambassador if the inclusion of Iran in a defensive alliance of the sort he suggested would not be considered provocative by the Soviets. Mr. Ala said he thought not. Mr. Rusk also pointed out later in the conversation that a regional defense pact in an area remote from the United States which relied on American guarantees might do the countries concerned more harm than good.

The Ambassador also mentioned his Government’s concern over the granting of a $21,000,000 loan to Afghanistan for development projects in the Helmand River in which Iran, he stated, has definite rights under existing treaties and international law. He said he had received instructions from Tehran to draw this matter to the Department’s attention.

Mr. Ala left with Mr. Rusk copies of the Aides-Mémoires on both Iran’s requests for aid and the Helmand River question which he had previously handed officers of NEA.2

D[ean] R[usk]

1 Dean Rusk, Deputy Under Secretary of State.

2 The aide-mémorie on aid is printed supra; regarding the latter aide-mémorie, see footnote 3, p. 1779 [Pg. 1779 is part of Doc. 1234].

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in Iran 891.24/12–649: Telegram

[Document 338]

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in Iran

secret Washington, December 6, 1949—7 p. m.

1109. Urinfo while in Wash, Shah expressed his desire for MAP equipment including expressly (a) M–18 tank destroyers to bring total to 100 (b) 150 medium tanks for 3 battalions (c) 70,000,000 rounds 7.9 small arms ammo to bring total to 100,000,000, (d) motor transport.

Iran Emb now urges inclusion small arms ammo in program, saying best source supply is Canadian factory which may go out of production unless order placed shortly.

Dept is exploring problems all Shah’s requests and also recoilless rifles with Def and will cable further soonest obtain ur and Evans views light further aspects being developed. Though ur final views re program, in light desirability meeting some part Shah’s requests not included Emdes [281] Nov 18, shld await such further exploration pls tel now views Amb and Evans re (1) necessity supply level 7.9 ammo asked by Shah, and (2) extent to which needs this item can be met from local production.1

Acheson

1 In reply, on December 6, Ambassador Wiley stated that “Unless internal disorders develop, resulting in increased consumption rate, believe practicable for Iran to develop and utilize local capacity to build up, within reasonable time, the necessary stock level this ammunition. Hence do not recommend inclusion in MAP. Am confident Iranians do not agree.” (Telegram 1651, from Tehran, 891.20/12–1249)

Memorandum by the Deputy Director of Mutual Defense Assistance (Ohly) to Major General L. L. Lemnitzer 891.20/12–1449

[Document 339]

Memorandum by the Deputy Director of Mutual Defense Assistance (Ohly) to Major General L. L. Lemnitzer

top secret Washington, December 14, 1949.

Reference is made to your memorandum of November 17, 1949,1 subject, Iranian Military Assistance Program, in which you state that the Department of Defense cannot approve giving medium tanks to Iran, as these tanks will not serve to increase the military potential of Iran.

An officer of the Department of State who was present at the conference between the Shah and the Joint Chiefs of Staff has prepared a memorandum of conversation2 thereon, copy of which is attached. That officer is unable to state the extent to which General Bradley’s remarks with respect to the Shah’s plan, and with respect to late model medium tanks, were dictated by the amenities of the situation, and to what extent they represented basic conclusions.3 As a most important factor in pursuing the Iranian program will be detailed discussions with the Shah and his advisers concerning the type of equipment to be offered, clarification of this question is requested in order that the most convincing display of sincerity and sound logic on the part of the U.S. can be established.

The Department of State considers the development of the morale of the Shah, as Commander in Chief as well as Monarch of Iran, of primary importance. Iran’s will to resist Soviet pressures short of war, and her spirit to engage in delaying action in case of invasion, will depend almost conclusively on the Shah’s point of view. It is believed that every effort must therefore be made to include, if appropriate, medium tanks or other items desired by the Shah, in the program, for mixed political and military reasons which, in this case, appear inseparable.

It is therefore requested that the Department of Defense review the Iranian matter, and advise the Department of State with respect to the following: (1) Has the view that medium tanks would not add to the Iranian military potential changed in light of the meeting of the Shah with the JCS and the expressed views at that time of General Bradley; or in view of the military desirability of creating high morale on the part of the Commander in Chief?

(2) What are the availability, cost per tank, delivery date and relative advantages and disadvantages of (a) Medium tank with 75 mm. gun

(b) Medium tank with 76 mm. gun (1) from new procurement

(2) by modification of older models

(3) What supply of spare parts can be provided now and in the future for the above types? What cost and procurement problems are involved?

(4) If a battalion or less of either of the above is to be considered, what support equipment, such as heavy repair items and recovery vehicles, should also be contemplated, to obviate collapse of equipment or loss intact in enemy action? What cost and delivery problems exist with respect thereto?

(5) Are further tank destroyers or light tanks more appropriate for Iran, rather than medium tanks? If so, please supply cost and procurement data.

(6) Subsequent to the Shah’s visit the Iranian Embassy urged the Department of State to provide $5,000,000 worth of small arms ammunition (7.9); and the Department is confidentially advised by Remington that Iran is proposing to purchase 50,000,000 rounds of Canadian manufacture from them. Remington has requested the Department’s advice. In telegram 1651 of December 12, 1949, the Embassy at Teheran states its belief that a 59,000,000 round level is adequate for Iran, that there are 50,000,000 rounds on hand, and that the remainder should come from local production. Iran, of course, disagrees with this view. The comments of Defense are requested on this problem, particularly with respect to the desirability of pushing the local manufacture of small arms ammunition, the possible desirability of developing the Canadian-owned industry, and thus indirectly giving aid to Canada, and the question whether the funds proposed to be spent by Iran for this project should be spent otherwise in view of our contemplated program of aid for Iran. If some items not deemed militarily essential need to be given to Iran for politico-military purposes, should ammunition be considered as one of these items rather than to be dealt with by purchase? On the other hand, does the United States contemplate standardizing small arms weapons in Iran with U.S. weapons? This particular item is a matter of some urgency as it is reported that the Canadian factory may soon go out of production if a contract is not placed.

(7) The Ambassador and General Evans have strongly recommended including 6 recoilless 75 mm. rifles. Can this type weapon, of great psychological value, be released, and does Defense consider it practical?

(8) As the Department of State considers that some items be included, if possible, which will convince the Shah of our appreciation of his role, and so strengthen his morale, which of the above items, or other similar items, would Defense recommend, considering also (a) the desirability of obtaining the most psychological value for the least expenditure either within or, if imperative, beyond present program ceilings.

(b) the necessity of not entering upon projects which would constitute, over years to come, inescapable responsibilities to maintain, replace or augment items offered.

As this factor is of major importance, factual data concerning future projections of each of the items above listed is required.

After the development of this data, I am confident that we will both be in a far better position to consider the extent to which, and manner in which the Shah’s desires could and should be met, having due regard for present and projected cost and the utility of the items concerned, and consistent with paramount military and political considerations.

John H. Ohly

1 Not found in Department of State files.

2 Dated November 18, not printed; but see editorial note, p. 581 [Pg. 581 includes portions of Doc. 332 and Doc. 333].

3 Regarding General Bradley’s observations, see ibid [Pg. 581 includes portions of Doc. 332 and Doc. 333].

Joint Statement by President Truman and the Shahinshah of Iran (Mohammad Reza Shah Pahlavi) [Document 340]

Joint Statement by President Truman and the Shahinshah of Iran (Mohammad Reza Shah Pahlavi)1

December 30, 1949

His Imperial Majesty, the Shah of Iran, and the President of the United States have examined the relations between their two countries and the problems which they face in common. In the course of their conversations, it has been brought out that: 1. They believe the United Nations offers the best means of assuring a peaceful world. Both countries will continue to give the United Nations their unfaltering support and to work in close cooperation with it and its agencies.

2. A serious threat to international peace and security anywhere in the world is of direct concern to the United States. As long ago as December 1, 1943, when President Roosevelt, Prime Minister Churchill, and Marshal Stalin signed the three-power declaration at Tehran, the United States made clear its desire for the maintenance of the independence and integrity of Iran. The great interest of the United States in this regard has been repeatedly affirmed in its foreign policy declarations and the United States Government intends to continue that policy.

3. His Imperial Majesty believes, and the President concurs, that the ability of any country to maintain its independence is based on a sound and prosperous economy. For this reason, as far back as 1946, upon His Majesty’s advice, the Iranian Government took steps to pre pare a seven-year plan for economic and social progress which now, embodied into law, is being carried out with all the means at the Government’s disposal. The President appreciates the importance of this program to the economic development of Iran, and applications by the Iranian Government to the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development for economically justifiable loans to be used in the furtherance of the program will therefore receive the support of the United States. Subject to favorable Congressional action on the Point 4 program, the United States also stands ready to facilitate Iranian economic development through the provision under Point 4 and otherwise of technical advisory assistance if requested by Iran. His Majesty welcomes the assistance envisaged under the Point 4 program and is particularly aware of the desirability of increased investments of private capital in the Iranian economy. The Iranian Government will consider measures to be taken to encourage such investments.

4. It is the policy of the United States to help free peoples everywhere in the maintenance of their freedom wherever the aid which it is able to provide can be effective. As the result of recent Congressional authorization, and in response to the request of the Government of Iran, the Government of the United States is currently prepared to offer certain military assistance essential to enable Iran, as a nation dedicated to the purposes and principles of the United Nations Charter, to develop effective measures for its self-defense in support of those purposes and principles. The United States will continue to bear in mind Iran’s defense needs in connection with further foreign assistance which may be considered by the United States Government.

1 Released on December 30 as the major portion of a press release by the White House; reprinted from Department of State Bulletin, January 9, 1950, p. 54. The portion of the press release not herein reprinted commented on the ending of the visit of the Shah.

IsraelIsrael

Contents

Interest of the United States in the Arab-Israeli controversy over the future status of Palestine; armistice agreements between Israel and its Arab neighbors; unsuccessful attempts to attain a final peace settlement in the area (Documents 341-1095)

Interest of the United States in the Arab-Israeli controversy over the future status of Palestine; armistice agreements between Israel and its Arab neighbors; unsuccessful attempts to attain a final peace settlement in the areaInterest of the United States in the Arab-Israeli controversy over the future status of Palestine;1 armistice agreements between Israel and its Arab neighbors; unsuccessful attempts to attain a final peace settlement in the area

1 Continued from Foreign Relations, 1948, vol. v, Part 2, pp. 533 ff.

[341] The Special Representative of the United States in Israel (McDonald) to the Secretary of State

Tel Aviv, January 1, 1949—9 a. m.

501.BB Palestine/1–149: Telegram

[342] The Special Representative of the United States in Israel (McDonald) to the Secretary of State

Tel Aviv, January 1, 1949—11 a. m.

501.BB Palestine/1–149: Telegram

[343] The Acting Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom

Washington, January 2, 1949—2 p. m.

867N.2383/1–249: Telegram

[344] The Special Representative of the United States in Israel (McDonald) to the Secretary of State

Tel Aviv, January 2, 1949—4 p. m.

867N.01/1–249: Telegram

[345] The Special Representative of the United States in Israel (McDonald) to the Secretary of State

Tel Aviv, January 2, 1949—5 p. m.

867N.01/1–249: Telegram

[346] Memorandum of Conversation, by Mr. Eraser Wilkins of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs

[Washington,] January 3, 1949.

501.BB Palestine/1–349

[347] President Chaim Weizmann of the Provisional Government of Israel to President Truman

Tel Aviv, January 3, 1949.

501.BB Palestine/1–1149

[348] The Acting Secretary of State to the Special Representative in Israel (McDonald), at Tel Aviv

Washington, January 3, 1949—5 p. m.

501.BB Palestine/1–149: Telegram

[349] The Acting Secretary of State to the Embassy in Egypt

Washington, January 3, 1949—5 p. m.

501.BB Palestine/1–349: Telegram

[350] The Acting Secretary of State to Mr. Wells Stabler

Washington, January 3, 1949—5 p. m.

867N.01/12–2848: Telegram

[351] The Special Representative of the United States in Israel (McDonatd) to the Secretary of State

Tel Aviv, January 3, 1949—7 p. m.

501.BB Palestine/1–349: Telegram

[352] The Chargé in the United Kingdom (Holmes) to the Secretary of State

London, January 4, 1949—1 p. m.

501.BB Palestine/1–449: Telegram

[353] Mr. John C. Ross to the Secretary of State

New York, January 4, 1949—11:25 p. m.

501.BB Palestine/1–449: Telegram

[354] Memorandum of Conversation, by the Acting Secretary of State

[Washington,] January 5, 1949.

501.BB Palestine/1–549

[355] The Special Representative of the United States in Israel (McDonald) to the Secretary of State

Tel Aviv, January 5, 1949—11 a. m.

501.BB Palestine/1–549: Telegram

[356] The Acting Secretary of State to the Embassy in Egypt

Washington, January 5, 1949—6 p. m.

501.BB Palestine/1–549: Telegram

[357] The Secretary of State to the Special Representative of the United States in Israel (McDonald), at Tel Aviv

Washington, January 5, 1949—6 p. m.

501.BB Palestine/1–349: Telegram

[358] The Acting Secretary of State to the Consulate General at Jerusalem

Washington, January 5, 1949—6 p. m.

501.BB Palestine/1–349: Telegram

[359] The Chargé in Egypt (Patterson) to the Secretary of State

Cairo, January 5, 1949—7 p. m.

501.BB Palestine/1–549: Telegram

[360] Memorandum by the Director of the Office of Near Eastern and African Affairs (Satterthwaite) to the Under Secretary of State (Lovett)

[Washington,] January 6, 1949.

501.BB Palestine/1–649.

[361] Editorial Note

[362] Editorial Note

[363] The Acting Secretary of State to the United States Representative at the United Nations (Austin)

Washington, January 6, 1949—3 p. m.

501.BB Palestine/1–649: Telegram

[364] Memorandum of Conversation, by Mr. Samuel K. C. Kopper

[New York,] January 7, 1949.

501.BB Palestine/1–749

[365] The Minister in Saudi Arabia (Childs) to the Secretary of State

Jidda, January 7, 1949—noon.

867N.01/1–749: Telegram

[366] The Special Representative of the United States in Israel (McDonald) to the Secretary of State

Tel Aviv, January 7, 1949—8 p. m.

867N.01/1–749: Telegram

[367] Memorandum of Telephone Conversation, by the Director of the Office of Near Eastern and African Affairs (Satterthwaite)

[Washington,] January 8, 1949.

867N.01/1–849

[368] The Acting Secretary of State to the Special Representative of the United States in Israel (McDonald), at Tel Aviv

Washington, January 8, 1949—8 p. m.

501.BB Palestine/1–849: Telegram

[369] The Special Representative of the United States in Israel (McDonald) to the Secretary of State

Tel Aviv, January 8, 1949—11 p. m.

867N.2383/1–849: Telegram

[370] Mr. Wells Stabler to the Secretary of State

Amman, January 9, 1949—4 p. m.

867N.01/1–949: Telegram

[371] The Special Representative of the United States in Israel (McDonald) to the Secretary of State

Tel Aviv, January 9, 1949—10 p. m.

501.BB Palestine/1–949: Telegram

[372] Memorandum of Conversation, by Mr. Stuart W. Rockwell of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs

[Washington,] January 10, 1949.

867N.01/1–1049

[373] Memorandum of Conversation, by the Director of the Office of Near Eastern and African Affairs (Satterthwaite)

[Washington,] January 10, 1949.

501.BB Palestine/1–1049

[374] The Minister in Syria (Keeley) to the Secretary of State

Damascus, January 10, 1949.

867N.01/1–1049: Airgram

[375] The Special Representative of the United States in Israel (McDonald) to the Secretary of State

Tel Aviv, January 10, 1949—9 p. m.

867N.01/1–1049: Telegram

[376] Memorandum by Mr. Robert M. McClintock

[Washington,] January 11, 1949.

501.BB Palestine/1–1149

[377] The Minister in Lebanon (Pinkerton) to the Secretary of State

Beirut, January 11, 1949—noon.

501.BB Palestine/1–1149: Telegram

[378] The Minister in Lebanon (Pinkerton) to the Secretary of State

Beirut, January 11, 1949—3 p. m.

790E.00/1–1149: Telegram

[379] The Acting Secretary of State to the United States Representative at the United Nations (Austin)

Washington, January 11, 1949—5 p. m.

501.BB Palestine/1–1149: Telegram

[380] The Acting Secretary of State to the Special Representative of the United States in Israel (McDonald), at Tel Aviv

Washington, January 11, 1949—6 p. m.

501.BB Palestine/1–1149: Telegram

[381] Mr. Wells Stabler to the Secretary of State

Amman, January 11, 1949—6 p. m.

867N.01/1–1149: Telegram

[382] Memorandum of Conversation, by the Acting Secretary of State

[Washington,] January 12, 1949.

867N.00/1–1249

[383] Memorandum of Conversation, by the Acting Secretary of State

[Washington,] January 12, 1949.

8901.01/1–1249

[384] Message Released by the United Nations Security Council on January 13, 1949

January 13, 1949

IO Files

[385] Memorandum by the Acting Secretary of State to the President

Washington, January 13, 1949.

811.4611/1–1349

[386] Memorandum of Telephone Conversation, by Mr. Robert M. McClintock

[Washington,] January 13, 1949.

501.BB Palestine/1–1349

[387] Memorandum of Telephone Conversation, by the Director of the Office of Near Eastern and African Affairs (Satterthwaite)

[Washington,] January 13, 1949.

867N.01/1–1349

[388] Memorandum by the Director of the Office of United Nations Affairs (Rusk) to the Acting Secretary of State

[Washington,] January 13, 1949.

501.BB Palestine/1–1349

[389] Message Released by the United Nations Security Council on January 13, 1949

January 13, 1949

IO Files

[390] Editorial Note

[391] The Chargé in the Soviet Union (Kohler) to the Secretary of State

Moscow, January 13, 1949.

867N.01/1–1349: Airgram

[392] The Acting Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom

Washington, January 13, 1949—5 p. m.

501.BB Palestine/1–1349: Telegram

[393] The Consul at Jerusalem (Burdett) to the Secretary of State

Jerusalem, January 13, 1949—6 p. m.

867N.01/1–1349: Telegram

[394] The Acting Secretary of State to the President

Washington, January 14, 1949.

501.MA Palestine/1–1449

[395] Mr. Wells Stabler to the Secretary of State

Amman, January 14, 1949—4 p. m.

867N.01/1–1449: Telegram

[396] The Acting Secretary of State to the Embassy in France

Washington, January 14, 1949—7 p. m.

867N.01/1–1249: Telegram

[397] The Chargé in Egypt (Patterson) to the Secretary of State

Cairo, January 14, 1949—7 p. m.

501.BB Palestine/1–1449: Telegram

[398] Mr. Wells Stabler to the Secretary of State

Amman, January 15, 1949—8 a. m.

867N.01/1–1549: Telegram

[399] The Acting Secretary of State to the Legation in Switzerland

Washington, January 15, 1949—12 noon.

501.BB Palestine/1–1549: Telegram

[400] The Consul at Jerusalem (Burdett) to the Secretary of State

Jerusalem, January 15, 1949—1 p. m.

501.BB Palestine/1–1549: Telegram

[401] Draft Message by President Truman to President Chaim Weizmann of Israel, at Tel Aviv

[Washington, undated.]

501.BB Palestine/1–1749

[402] Memorandum of Conversation, by the Acting Secretary of State

[Washington,] January 18, 1949.

867N.01/1–1849

[403] The British Embassy to the Department of State

[Washington, undated.]

867N.01/1–1849

[404] The Acting Secretary of State to Certain Diplomatic Missions in the American Republics

Washington, January 18, 1949—2 p. m.

501.BB Palestine/1–1849: Circular telegram

[405] The Chargé in the United Kingdom (Holmes) to the Secretary of State

London, January 18, 1949—5 p. m.

501.BB Palestine/1–1849: Telegram

[406] The Acting Secretary of State to the Consulate General in Jerusalem

Washington, January 18, 1949—6 p. m.

501.BB Palestine/1–1749: Telegram

[407] Editorial Note

[408] The Acting Secretary of State to Mr. Mark F. Ethridge

Washington, January 19, 1949.

501.BB Palestine/1–2849

[409] The Acting Secretary of State to the Consulate General in Jerusalem

Washington, January 19, 1949—7 p. m.

501.BB Palestine/1–1849: Telegram

[410] The Chargé in the United Kingdom (Holmes) to the Secretary of State

London, January 19, 1949—7 p. m.

501.BB Palestine/1–1949: Telegram

[411] The United States Representative at the United Nations (Austin) to the Secretary of State

New York, January 19, 1949—11:41 p. m.

501.BB Palestine/1–1949: Telegram

[412] The United States Representative at the United Nations (Austin) to the Secretary of State

New York, January 19, 1949—11:41 p. m.

501.BB Palestine/1–1949: Telegram

[413] The United States Representative at the United Nations (Austin) to the Secretary of State

New York, January 19, 1949—11:41 p. m.

501.BB Palestine/1–1949: Telegram

[414] Mr. Wells Stabler to the Secretary of State

Amman, January 20, 1949—1 p. m.

867N.01/1–2049: Telegram

[415] Editorial Note

[416] The Ambassador in Greece (Grady) to the Secretary of State

Athens, January 23, 1949—1 a. m.

501.BB Palestine/1–2349: Telegram

[417] The United States Representative at the United Nations (Austin) to the Secretary of State

New York, January 23, 1949—5:20 p. m.

501.BB Palestine/1–2349: Telegram

[418] Draft of Proposed Statement by the Secretary of State on United States–United Kingdom Attitude Toward the Middle East

[Washington,] January 24, 1949.

867N.01/1–2449

[419] Memorandum of Conversation, by Mr. Stuart W. Rockwell of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs

[Washington,] January 24, 1949.

501.BB Palestine/1–2449

[420] The Chargé in the United Kingdom (Holmes) to the Secretary of State

London, January 24, 1949—6 p. m.

501.BB Palestine/1–2449: Telegram

[421] The Secretary of State to the Special Representative of the United States in Israel (McDonald), at Tel Aviv

Washington, January 24, 1949—7 p. m.

501.BB Palestine/1–2449: Telegram

[422] The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom

Washington, January 24, 1949—7 p. m.

501.BB Palestine/1–2449: Telegram

[423] The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom

Washington, January 24, 1949—7 p. m.

501.BB Palestine/1–2449: Telegram

[424] The Secretary of Defense (Forrestal) to the Chairman of the House Committee on Foreign Affairs (Bloom)

Washington, 25 January 1949.

501.MA Palestine/1–2549

[425] Message Released by the United Nations Security Council on January 25, 1949

January 25, 1949

IO Files

[426] Message Released by the United Nations Security Council on January 26, 1949

January 26, 1949

IO Files

[427] The Special Representative of the United States in Israel (McDonald) to the Secretary of State

Tel Aviv, January 26, 1949—10 a. m.

501.BB Palestine/1–2649: Telegram

[428] Memorandum by the Secretary of State to the President

Washington, January 27, 1949.

867N.01/2–1449

[429] Memorandum by Mr. Samuel K. C. Kopper to Mr. Mark F. Ethridge

[Washington,] January 27, 1949.

USUN Files

[430] The Secretary of State to the Embassy in Egypt

Washington, January 28, 1949—6 p. m.

501.BB Palestine/1–2849: Telegram

[431] The United States Representative at the United Nations (Austin) to the Secretary of State

New York, January 28, 1949—9:10 p. m.

501.BB Palestine/1–2849: Telegram

[432] Memorandum of Conversation, by Mr. Robert M. McClintock

[Washington,] January 29, 1949.

501.BB Palestine/1–2949

[433] The Consul at Jerusalem (Burdett) to the Secretary of State

Jerusalem, January 29, 1949—10 a. m.

501.BB Palestine/1–2949: Telegram

[434] The Chargé in the United Kingdom (Holmes) to the Secretary of State

London, January 29, 1949—1 p. m.

867N.01/1–2949: Telegram

[435] The Consul at Jerusalem (Burdett) to the Secretary of State

Jerusalem, January 29, 1949—3 p. m.

867N.01/1–2949: Telegram

[436] The Secretary of State to the Legation in Saudi Arabia

Washington, January 29, 1949—6 p. m.

867N.01/1–2649: Telegram

[437] Editorial Note

[438] The Secretary of State to the Embassy in Egypt

Washington, January 31, 1949—6 p. m.

501.BB Palestine/1–2949: Telegram

[439] The Chargé in the United Kingdom (Holmes) to the Secretary of State

London, February 1, 1949—7 p. m.

501.BB Palestine/2–149: Telegram

[440] The Special Representative of the United States in Israel (McDonald) to the Secretary of State

Tel Aviv, February 1, 1949—7 p. m.

501.BB Palestine/2–149: Telegram

[441] The Special Representative of the United States in Israel (McDonald) to the Secretary of State

Tel Aviv, February 1, 1949—7 p. m.

867N.01/2–149: Telegram

[442] The Consul at Jerusalem (Burdett) to the Secretary of State

Jerusalem, February 1, 1949—9 p. m.

867N.01/2–149: Telegram

[443] The Secretary of State to the Consulate General at Jerusalem

Washington, February 2, 1949—7 p. m.

501.BB Palestine/2–249: Telegram

[444] The Chargé in Egypt (Patterson) to the Secretary of State

Cairo, February 2, 1949—9 p. m.

501.BB Palestine/2–249: Telegram

[445] The Minister in Saudi Arabia (Childs) to the Secretary of State

Jidda, February 3, 1949—10 a.m.

867N.01/2–349: Telegram

[446] The Special Representative of the United States in Israel (McDonald) to the Secretary of State

Tel Aviv, February 3, 1949—11 a. m.

867N.01/2–349: Telegram

[447] The Secretary of State to the Special Representative of the United States in Israel (McDonald), at Tel Aviv

Washington, February 3, 1949—2 p. m.

501.BB Palestine/2–349: Telegram

[448] Memorandum by Mr. Robert M. McClintock to the Secretary of State

[Washington,] February 4, 1949.

501.BB Palestine/2–449

[449] The Secretary of State to the Consulate General at Jerusalem

Washington, February 4, 1949—7 p. m.

867N.00/1–3149: Telegram

[450] Memorandum of Conversation, by the Secretary of State

[Washington,] February 5, 1949.

501.BB Palestine/2–549

[451] Memorandum of Conversation, by the Secretary of State

[Washington,] February 5, 1949.

Truman Papers, President’s Secretary’s File

[452] The Consul in Jerusalem (Burdett) to the Secretary of State

Jerusalem, February 5, 1949—1 p. m.

501.BB Palestine/2–549: Telegram

[453] The Secretary of State to the Special Representative of the United States in Israel (McDonald), at Tel Aviv

Washington, February 5, 1949—5 p. m.

501.BB Palestine/2–549: Telegram

[454] The Special Representative of the United States in Israel (McDonald) to the Secretary of State

Tel Aviv, February 6, 1949—11 a. m.

501.BB Palestine/2–649: Telegram

[455] Mr. Wells Stabler to the Secretary of State

Amman, February 7, 1949—7 p. m.

867N.01/2–749: Telegram

[456] The Special Representative of the United States in Israel (McDonald) to the Secretary of State

Tel Aviv, February 7, 1949—7 p. m.

501.BB Palestine/2–749: Telegram

[457] The Consul at Jerusalem (Burdett) to the Secretary of State

Jerusalem, February 8, 1949—5 p. m.

501.BB Palestine/2–849: Telegram

[458] Memorandum by the Director of the Office of Near Eastern and African Affairs (Satterthwaite) to the Secretary of State

[Washington,] February 9, 1949.

501.BB Palestine/2–1049

[459] The Secretary of State to the Consulate General at Jerusalem

Washington, February 9, 1949—3 p. m.

501.BB Palestine/2–949: Telegram

[460] The Minister in Syria (Keeley) to the Secretary of State

Damascus, February 9, 1949—3 p. m.

890D.00/2–949: Telegram

[461] The Secretary of State to the United Nations Acting Mediator for Palestine (Bunche), at Rhodes

Washington, February 11, 1949—7 p. m.

501.BB Palestine/2–1149: Telegram

[462] Mr. Wells Stabler to the Secretary of State

Amman, February 12, 1949—9 a. m.

501.BB Palestine/2–1249: Telegram

[463] The Consul at Jerusalem (Burdett) to the Secretary of State

Jerusalem, February 12, 1949—10 a. m.

501.BB Palestine/2–1249: Telegram

[464] The Consul at Jerusalem (Burdett) to the Secretary of State

Jerusalem, February 12, 1949—2 p. m.

501.BB Palestine/2–1249: Telegram

[465] Ambassador Stanton Griffis to the Secretary of State

Cairo, February 13, 1949—4 p. m.

501.BB Palestine/2–1349: Telegram

[466] The Secretary of State to the Special Representative of the United States in Israel (McDonald), at Tel Aviv

Washington, February 14, 1949—8 p. m.

501.BB Palestine/2–1449: Telegram

[467] The Secretary of State to the Special Representative of the United States in Israel (McDonald), at Tel Aviv

Washington, February 15, 1949—4 p. m.

501.BB Palestine/2–1149: Telegram

[468] The Chargé in Egypt (Patterson) to the Secretary of State

Cairo, February 15, 1949—6 p. m.

501.BB Palestine/2–1549: Telegram

[469] The Special Representative of the United States in Israel (McDonald) to the Secretary of State

Tel Aviv, February 15, 1949—6 p. m.

501.BB Palestine/2–1549: Telegram

[470] Memorandum of Conversation, by the Director of the Office of Near Eastern and African Affairs (Satterthwaite)

Washington, February 17, 1949.

501.BB Palestine/2–1749

[471] The Secretary of State to the Special Representative of the United States in Israel (McDonald), at Tel Aviv

Washington, February 17, 1949—11 a. m.

867N.00/2–1749: Telegram

[472] The United States Representative at the United Nations (Austin) to the Secretary of State

New York, February 18, 1949—4 p. m.

501.BB Palestine/2–1849: Telegram

[473] The Secretary of State to the Consulate General in Jerusalem

Washington, February 18, 1949—7 p. m.

501.BB Palestine/2–349: Telegram

[474] The Chargé in Iraq (Dorsz) to the Secretary of State

Baghdad, February 19, 1949—8 a. m.

501.BB Palestine/2–1949: Telegram

[475] The Chargé in Iraq (Dorsz) to the Secretary of State

Baghdad, February 20, 1949—noon.

501.BB Palestine/2–2049: Telegram

[476] The Secretary of State to the Egyptian Ambassador (Rahim)

Washington, February 21, 1949.

501.BB Palestine/2–449

[477] The Special Representative of the United States in Israel (McDonald) to the Secretary of State

Tel Aviv, February 21, 1949—1 p. m.

501.BB Palestine/2–2149: Telegram

[478] The Secretary of State to the Embassy in Egypt

Washington, February 21, 1949—6 p. m.

501.BB Palestine/2–2149: Telegram

[479] The Special Representative of the United States in Israel (McDonald) to the Secretary of State

Tel Aviv, February 22, 1949.

501.MA Palestine/2–2249

[480] The Chargé in Egypt (Patterson) to the Secretary of State

Cairo, February 22, 1949—2 p. m.

501.BB Palestine/2–2249: Telegram

[481] Statement by the President

February 24, 1949

[482] Editorial Note

[483] Editorial Note

[484] The Minister in Lebanon (Pinkerton) to the Secretary of State

Beirut, February 24, 1949—11 a. m.

501.BB Palestine/2–2449: Telegram

[485] Mr. Wells Stabler to the Secretary of State

Amman, February 24, 1949—5 p. m.

501.BB Palestine/2–2449: Telegram

[486] The Chargé in Egypt (Patterson) to the Secretary of State

Cairo, February 24, 1949—9 p. m.

501.BB Palestine/2–2449: Telegram

[487] Editorial Note

[488] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Syria

Washington, February 25, 1949—6 p. m.

501.BB Palestine/2–949: Telegram

[489] The Secretary of State to Ambassador Stanton Griffis, at Beirut

Washington, February 25, 1949—8 p. m.

501.BB Palestine/2–2549: Telegram

[490] The Consul at Jerusalem (Burdett) to the Secretary of State

Jerusalem, February 26, 1949—11 a. m.

501.BB Palestine/2–2649: Telegram

[491] Memorandum of Conversation, Drafted by Mr. Robert M. McClintock

[Washington,] February 28, 1949.

501.AA/2–2849

[492] The Consul at Jerusalem (Burdett) to the Secretary of State

Jerusalem, February 28, 1949—9 a. m.

501.BB Palestine/2–2849: Telegram

[493] The Consul at Jerusalem (Burdett) to the Secretary of State

Jerusalem, February 28, 1949—10 a. m.

501.BB Palestine/2–2849: Telegram

[494] The Consul at Jerusalem (Burdett) to the Secretary of State

Jerusalem, February 28, 1949—11 a. m.

501.BB Palestine/2–2849: Telegram

[495] The Consul at Jerusalem (Burdett) to the Secretary of State

Jerusalem, February 28, 1949—noon.

501.BB Palestine/2–2849: Telegram

[496] Memorandum by the Director of the Office of Near Eastern and African Affairs (Satterthwaite) to the Secretary of State

[Washington,] March 1, 1949.

867N.48/3–149

[497] Memorandum of Conversation, by Mr. Stuart W. Rockwell of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs

[Washington,] March 1, 1949.

501.BB Palestine/3–149

[498] Editorial Note

[499] Message Released by the United Nations Security Council on March 1949

March 2, 1949

IO Files

[500] The Consul at Jerusalem (Burdett) to the Secretary of State

Jerusalem, March 2, 1949—2 p. m.

501.BB Palestine/3–249: Telegram

[501] The Consul at Jerusalem (Burdett) to the Secretary of State

Jerusalem, March 2, 1949—3 p. m.

501.BB Palestine/3–249: Telegram

[502] The United States Representative at the United Nations (Austin) to the Secretary of State

New York, March 2, 1949—11:04 p. m.

501.BB Palestine/3–249: Telegram

[503] Memorandum by the Assistant Secretary of State for United Nations Affairs (Rusk) to the Under Secretary of State (Webb)

[Washington,] March 3, 1949.

501.BB Palestine/3–349

[504] Editorial Note

[505] Memorandum of Conversation, by the Secretary of State

[Washington,] March 4, 1949.

890E.00/3–449

[506] Mr. John W. Halderman to the Acting Assistant Chief of the Division of Dependent Area Affairs (Cargo)

Jerusalem, March 5, 1949.

501.BB Palestine/3–1749

[507] The Minister in Syria (Keeley) to the Secretary of State

Damascus, March 5, 1949.

501.BB Palestine/3–549: Airgram

[508] The Consul at Jerusalem (Burdett) to the Secretary of State

Jerusalem, March 7, 1949—10 a. m.

501.BB Palestine/3–749: Telegram

[509] The Secretary of State to the Legation in Syria

Washington, March 7, 1949—6 p. m.

501.BB Palestine/3–549: Telegram

[510] The Acting Secretary of State to the Secretary of Defense (Forrestal)

Washington, March 8, 1949.

501.BB Palestine/3–849

[511] The Special Representative of the United States in Israel (McDonald) to the Secretary of State

Tel Aviv, March 8, 1949—9 a. m.

867N.01/3–849: Telegram

[512] The Secretary of State to the Special Representative of the United States in Israel (McDonald), at Tel Aviv

Washington, March 8, 1949—4 p. m.

501.BB Palestine/3–849: Telegram

[513] The Chargé in Egypt (Patterson) to the Secretary of State

Cairo, March 9, 1949.

867N.01/3–949: Airgram

[514] The Secretary of State to the Special Representative of the United States in Israel (McDonald), at Tel Aviv

Washington, March 9, 1949—5 p. m.

501.MA Palestine/3–949: Telegram

[515] The Secretary of State to the Consulate General at Jerusalem

Washington, March 9, 1949—5 p. m.

501.BB Balestine/2–2849: Telegram

[516] Mr. Wells Stabler to the Secretary of State

Amman, March 9, 1949—7 p. m.

501.BB Palestine/3–949: Telegram

[517] The United States Representative at the United Nations (Austin) to the Secretary of State

New York, March 9, 1949—7:55 p. m.

501.BB Palestine/3–949: Telegram

[518] Memorandum by the Secretary of State to the President

Washington, March 10, 1949.

867N.01/3–1049

[519] Memorandum by Mrs. Dorothy H. Morgret in the Office of the Secretary of State

[Washington,] March 10, 1949.

Secretary’s Memoranda, Lot 53 D 444, Secretary’s Memos

[520] The Consul at Jerusalem (Burdett) to the Secretary of State

Jerusalem, March 10, 1949—noon.

501.BB Palestine/3–1049: Telegram

[521] The Special Representative of the United States in Israel (McDonald) to the Secretary of State

Tel Aviv, March 10, 1949—3 p. m.

501.BB Palestine/3–1049: Telegram

[522] Message Released by the United Nations Security Council on March 11, 1949

March 11, 1949

IO Files

[523] The Consul at Jerusalem (Burdett) to the Secretary of State

Jerusalem, March 11, 1949.

501.BB Palestine/3–1149: Telegram

[524] The Secretary of State to the United States Representative at the United Nations (Austin), at New York

Washington, March 11, 1949—1 p. m.

501.BB Palestine/3–949: Telegram

[525] The Secretary of State to the Consulate General at Jerusalem

Washington, March 11, 1949—6 p. m.

501.BB Palestine/3–1149: Telegram

[526] The Secretary of State to the Special Representative of the United States in Israel (McDonald), at Tel Aviv

Washington, March 11, 1949—7 p. m.

501.BB Palestine/3–1049: Telegram

[527] The Secretary of State to the Consulate General at Jerusalem

Washington, March 11, 1949—7 p. m.

501.BB Palestine/3–249: Telegram

[528] The United States Representative at the United Nations (Austin) to the Secretary of State

New York, March 11, 1949—9:07 p. m.

501.BB Palestine/3–1149: Telegram

[529] The Special Representative of the United States in Israel (McDonald) to the Secretary of State

Tel Aviv, March 11, 1949—11 p. m.

867N.01/3–1149: Telegram

[530] Mr. Wells Stabler to the Secretary of State

Amman, March 12, 1949—4 p. m.

867N.01/3–1249: Telegram

[531] Mr. Wells Stabler to the Secretary of State

Amman, March 12, 1949—5 p. m.

501.BB Palestine/3–1249: Telegram

[532] The Consul at Jerusalem (Burdett) to the Secretary of State

Jerusalem, March 14, 1949—11 a. m.

501.BB Palestine/3–1449: Telegram

[533] Memorandum by the Coordinator on Palestine Refugee Matters (McGhee) to the Under Secretary of State (Webb)

[Washington,] March 15, 1949.

501.BB Palestine/3–1549

[534] The Consul at Jerusalem (Burdett) to the Secretary of State

Jerusalem, March 16, 1949—11 a. m.

501.BB Palestine/3–1649: Telegram

[535] The Secretary of State to the Embassy in Iraq

Washington, March 16, 1949—4 p. m.

867N.01/3–1049: Telegram

[536] Memorandum by the Director of the Office of Near Eastern and African Affairs (Satterthwaite) to the Secretary of State

[Washington,] March 17, 1949.

867N.01/3–1749

[537] Mr. Fraser Wilkins to the Secretary of State

Rhodes, March 17, 1949—12 noon.

501.BB Palestine/3–1849: Telegram

[538] The Consul at Jerusalem (Burdett) to the Secretary of State

Jerusalem, March 18, 1949—8 a. m.

501.BB Palestine/3–1849: Telegram

[539] The Consul at Jerusalem (Burdett) to the Secretary of State

Jerusalem, March 18, 1949—11 a. m.

501.BB Palestine/3–1849: Telegram

[540] The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom

Washington, March 18, 1949—8 p. m.

867N.113/3–1849: Telegram

[541] The Secretary of State to the Embassy in Israel

Washington, March 19, 1949—2 p. m.

867N.01/3–1949: Telegram

[542] The Chargé in Transjordan (Stabler) to the Secretary of State

Amman, March 20, 1949—9 p. m.

501.BB Palestine/3–2049: Telegram

[543] The Consul at Jerusalem (Burdett) to the Secretary of State

Jerusalem, March 21, 1949.

867N.01/3–2149: Airgram

[544] Memorandum of Conversation, by the Secretary of State

[Washington,] March 22, 1949.

501.BB Palestine/3–2249

[545] The Minister in Lebanon (Pinkerton) to the Secretary of State

Beirut, March 22, 1949—3 p. m.

501.BB Palestine/3–2249: Telegram

[546] The Minister in Lebanon (Pinkerton) to the Secretary of State

Beirut, March 22, 1949—6 p. m.

501.BB Palestine/3–2249: Telegram

[547] The Chargé in Transjordan (Stabler) to the Secretary of State

Amman, March 23, 1949—4 p. m.

501.BB Palestine/3–2349: Telegram

[548] The Chargé in Transjordan (Stabler) to the Secretary of State

Amman, March 23, 1949—7 p. m.

501. BB Palestine/3–2349: Telegram

[549] Statement by the President

March 24, 1949

[550] Memorandum by the Secretary of State

[Washington,] March 24, 1949.

867N.01/12–749

[551] Memorandum by the Director of the Office of Near Eastern and African Affairs (Satterthwaite) to the Secretary of State

[Washington,] March 24, 1949.

811.22767N/3–2449

[552] The Secretary of State to the Consulate General at Jerusalem

Washington, March 24, 1949.

501.BB Palestine/3–1549: Airgram

[553] The Chargé in Transjordan (Stabler) to the Secretary of State

Amman, March 24, 1949—4 p. m.

867N.01/3–2449: Telegram

[554] The Chargé in Transjordan (Stabler) to the Secretary of State

Amman, March 24, 1949—5 p. m.

867N.01/3–2449: Telegram

[555] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State

London, March 24, 1949—9 p. m.

867N.01/3–2449: Telegram

[556] Memorandum of Telephone Conversation, by Mr. Robert M. McClintock

[Washington,] March 25, 1949.

501.BB Palestine/3–2549

[557] The Secretary of State to the Legation in Lebanon

Washington, March 25, 1949—noon.

501.BB Palestine/3–2549: Telegram

[558] The Secretary of State to the Legation in Transjordan

Washington, March 25, 1949—5 p. m.

501.BB Palestine/3–2349: Telegram

[559] Editorial Note

[560] The Chargé in Transjordan (Stabler) to the Secretary of State

Amman, March 26, 1949—noon.

501.BB Palestine/3—2649: Telegram

[561] The Chargé in Transjordan (Stabler) to the Secretary of State

Amman, March 27, 1949—6 p. m.

867N.01/3–2749: Telegram

[562] Memorandum of Conversation, by the Director of the Executive Secretariat (Humelsine)

[Washington,] March 28, 1949.

Executive Secretariat Files, Lot 58 D 609

[563] The Minister in Lebanon (Pinkerton) to the Secretary of State

Beirut, March 28, 1949—5 p. m.

501.BB Palestine/3—2849: Telegram

[564] President Truman to King Abdullah Ibn el-Hussein of Transjordan

Washington, March 28, 1949—6 p. m.

867N.01/3–2349

[565] The Secretary of State to the Legation in Lebanon

Washington, March 28, 1949—6 p. m.

501.BB Palestine/3–2849: Telegram

[566] Memorandum by the Assistant Secretary of State for United Nations Affairs (Rusk) to the Secretary of State

[Washington,] March 29, 1949.

501.BB Palestine/3–2949

[567] The Secretary of State to the Legation in Transjordan

Washington, March 29, 1949.

890D.00/2–2349

[568] The Consul at Jerusalem (Burdett) to the Secretary of State

Jerusalem, March 29, 1949.

867N.002/3–2949: Telegram

[569] The Minister in Lebanon (Pinkerton) to the Secretary of State

Beirut, March 29, 1949—2 p. m.

501 BB Palestine/3–2949: Telegram

[570] The Secretary of State to the Legation in Lebanon

Washington, March 29, 1949—7 p. m.

501.BB Palestine/3–2449: Telegram

[571] The Secretary of State to Mr. Ralph J. Bunche

Washington, March 30, 1949—7 p. m.

501.BB Palestine/3–3049: Telegram

[572] Memorandum of Conversation, by the Secretary of State

[Washington,] March 31, 1949.

501.BB Palestine/3–3149

[573] The Chargé in Transjordan (Stabler) to the Secretary of State

Amman, March 31, 1949—2 p. m.

867N.01/3–3149: Telegram

[574] The Minister in Lebanon (Pinkerton) to the Secretary of State

Beirut, March 31, 1949—6 p. m.

501.BB Palestine/3–3149: Telegram

[575] Editorial Note

[576] Editorial Note

[577] Memorandum of Conversation, by the Secretary of State

New York, April 5, 1949.

867N.01/4–549

[578] The Minister in Lebanon (Pinkerton) to the Secretary of State

Beirut, April 5, 1949—1 p. m.

501.BB Palestine/4–549: Telegram

[579] Editorial Note

[580] The Consul at Jerusalem (Burdett) to the Secretary of State

Jerusalem, April 5, 1949—3 p. m.

501.BB Palestine/4–549: Telegram

[581] The Minister in Lebanon (Pinkerton) to the Secretary of State

Beirut, April 5, 1949—4 p. m.

501.MA Palestine/4–549: Telegram

[582] The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom

Washington, April 5, 1949—6 p. m.

867N.48/4–549: Telegram

[583] The Acting Secretary of State to the Secretary of Defense (Johnson)

Washington, April 6, 1949.

867N.20A/3–2949

[584] The President to the Secretary of State

Washington, April 6, 1949.

501.MA Palestine/4–649

[585] The Ambassador in Israel (McDonald) to the Secretary of State

Tel Aviv, April 8, 1949—noon.

501.BB Palestine/4–849: Telegram

[586] The Consul at Jerusalem (Burdett) to the Secretary of State

Jerusalem, April 8, 1949—1 p. m.

501.BB Palestine/4–849: Telegram

[587] The Consul at Jerusalem (Burdett) to the Secretary of State

Jerusalem, April 9, 1949—10 a. m.

501.BB Palestine/4–949: Telegram

[588] The Consul at Jerusalem (Burdett) to the Secretary of State

Jerusalem, April 9, 1949—2 p. m.

501.BB Palestine/4–949: Telegram

[589] Mr. Mark F. Ethridge to the President

Jerusalem, April 11, 1949.

501.BB Palestine/4–1149

[590] Memorandum of Conversation, Prepared Presumably by the First Secretary of Embassy in the United Kingdom (Jones)

[London,] April 13, 1949.

867N.48/4–2149

[591] The Secretary of State to the Consulate General at Jerusalem

Washington, April 13, 1949—11 a. m.

501.BB Palestine/4–949: Telegram

[592] Mr. Mark F. Ethridge to the Secretary of State

Jerusalem, April 13, 1949—1 p. m.

501.BB Palestine/4–1349: Telegram

[593] Editorial Note

[594] The Chargé in Transjordan (Stabler) to the Secretary of State

Amman, April 13, 1949—4 p. m.

867N.01/4–1349: Telegram

[595] Memorandum of Conversation, by the Director of the Executive Secretariat (Humelsine)

[Washington,] April 15, 1949.

Secretary’s Daily Meetings, Lot 58 D 609

[596] Message Released by the United Nations Security Council on April 16, 1949

April 16, 1949

IO Files

[597] The Chargé in Transjordan (Stabler) to the Secretary of State

Amman, April 16, 1949—8 a. m.

867N.01/4–1649: Telegram

[598] The Consul at Jerusalem (Burdett) to the Secretary of State

Jerusalem, April 16, 1949—noon.

[599] The Chargé in Transjordan (Stabler) to the Secretary of State

Amman, April 16, 1949—5 p. m.

867N.01/4–1649: Telegram

[600] The Consul at Jerusalem (Burdett) to the Secretary of State

Jerusalem, April 19, 1949—5 p. m.

501.BB Palestine/4–1949: Telegram

[601] The Consul at Jerusalem (Burdett) to the Secretary of State

Jerusalem, April 20, 1949—9 a. m.

501.BB Palestine/4–2049: Telegram

[602] The Consul at Jerusalem (Burdett) to the Secretary of State

Jerusalem, April 20, 1949—10 a. m.

501.BB Palestine/4–2049: Telegram

[603] Editorial Note

[604] The Consul at Jerusalem (Burdett) to the Secretary of State

Jerusalem, April 20, 1949—4 p. m.

867N.01/4–2049: Telegram

[605] The United States Representative at the United Nations (Austin) to the Secretary of State

New York, April 20, 1949—11:05 p. m.

501.BB Palestine/4–2049: Telegram

[606] President Truman to King Abdullah Ibn el-Hussein of Transjordan

[Washington, undated.]

867N.00/4–1349

[607] The United States Representative at the United Nations (Austin) to the Secretary of State

New York, April 21, 1949—12:30 p. m.

501.BB Palestine/4–2149: Telegram

[608] Memorandum by the Coordinator on Palestine Refugee Matters (McGhee) to the Secretary of State

[Washington,] April 22, 1949.

867N.48/4–2249

[609] Memorandum of Conversation, by the Secretary of State

[Washington,] April 25, 1949.

501.BB Palestine/5–449

[610] Memorandum of Conversation, by the Secretary of State

[Washington,] April 26, 1949.

501.AA/4–2649

[611] The President of Israel (Weizmann) to President Truman

Washington, April 26, 1949.

501.BB Palestine/4–2649

[612] Memorandum by the Director of the Office of Near Eastern and African Affairs (Satterthwaite) to the Deputy Under Secretary of State (Rusk)

[Washington,] April 26, 1949.

501.BB Palestine/4–2649

[613] The British Embassy to the Department of State

[Washington,] 27th April, 1949.

867N.113/5–1949

[614] Memorandum of Conversation With the President, by the Secretary of State

[Washington,] April 28, 1949.

501.BB Palestine/4–2849

[615] Mr. Mark F. Ethridge to the Secretary of State

Lausanne, April 28, 1949—11 a. m.

501.BB Palestine/4–2849: Telegram

[616] The Secretary of State to the Legation in Switzerland

Washington, April 28, 1949—7 p. m.

501.BB Palestine/4–2849: Telegram

[617] The President to Mr. Mark F. Ethridge, at Jerusalem

[Washington,] April 29, 1949.

501.BB Palestine/4–2949

[618] Memorandum of Conversation, by the Secretary of State

[Washington,] April 29, 1949.

867N.113/4–2949

[619] The Secretary of State to Certain Diplomatic and Consular Offices

Washington, April 29, 1949—5 p. m.

501.BB Palestine/4–2949: Circular telegram

[620] The Consul at Jerusalem (Burdett) to the Secretary of State

Jerusalem, April 30, 1949—1 p. m.

501.BB Palestine/4–3049: Telegram

[621] The Minister in Syria (Keeley) to the Secretary of State

Damascus, May 1, 1949—10 a. m.

867N.01/5–149: Telegram

[622] The Chargé in Transjordan (Stabler) to the Secretary of State

Amman, May 1, 1949—3 p. m.

501.BB Palestine/5–149: Telegram

[623] Memorandum Prepared Presumably in the Office of the Coordinator on Palestine Refugee Matters (McGhee)

[Washington,] May 2, 1949.

867N.48/4–2249

[624] Memorandum of Conversation With the President, by the Secretary of State

[Washington,] May 2, 1949.

867N.48/5–249

[625] The Minister in Syria (Keeley) to the Secretary of State

Damascus, May 2, 1949—8 a. m.

501.BB Palestine/5–249: Telegram

[626] The Ambassador in Israel (McDonald) to the Secretary of State

Tel Aviv, May 2, 1949—1 p. m.

501.BB Palestine/5–249: Telegram

[627] The Secretary of State to the Legation in Switzerland

Washington, May 2, 1949—8 p. m.

501.BB Palestine/5–249: Telegram

[628] The Minister in Switzerland (Vincent) to the Secretary of State

Bern, May 3, 1949—11 a. m.

501.BB Palestine/5–349: Telegram

[629] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State

London, May 3, 1949—5 p. m.

501.BB Palestine/5–349: Telegram

[630] Memorandum by the Secretary of State to the President

Washington, May 4, 1949.

867N.48/5–449

[631] The Secretary of State to the Secretary of Defense (Johnson)

Washington, May 4, 1949.

867N.48/5–449

[632] Memorandum by the Director of the Office of Near Eastern and African Affairs (Satterthwaite) to the Secretary of State

[Washington,] May 4, 1949.

501.MA Palestine/5–449

[633] Mr. Mark F. Ethridge to the Secretary of State

Bern, May 4, 1949—11 a. m.

501.BB Palestine/5–449: Telegram

[634] The Ambassador in Israel (McDonald) to the Secretary of State

Tel Aviv, May 4, 1949—2 p. m.

867N.01/5–449: Telegram

[635] The Consul at Jerusalem (Burdett) to the Secretary of State

Jerusalem, May 4, 1949—3 p. m.

867N.01/5–449: Telegram

[636] The Secretary of State to the Legation in Switzerland

Washington, May 4, 1949—6 p. m.

501.BB Palestine/5–449: Telegram

[637] The Minister in Syria (Keeley) to the Secretary of State

Damascus, May 5, 1949—10 a. m.

867N.01/5–549: Telegram

[638] The Chargé in Transjordan (Stabler) to the Secretary of State

Amman, May 7, 1949—2 p. m.

867N.01/5–749: Telegram

[639] The Secretary of State to the Legation in Lebanon

Washington, May 7, 1949—4 p. m.

501.BB Palestine/4–2949: Telegram

[640] Memorandum by the Secretary of State to the President

Washington, May 9, 1949.

867N.48/5–949

[641] The Minister in Switzerland (Vincent) to the Secretary of State

Bern, May 9, 1949—noon.

501.BB Palestine/5–949: Telegram

[642] The Secretary of State to the Embassy in Israel

Tel Aviv, May 9, 1949—7 p. m.

501.BB Palestine/5–949: Telegram

[643] The Department of State to the British Embassy

Washington, May 10, 1949.

867N.48/5–1049

[644] The Consul at Geneva (Troutman) to the Secretary of State

Geneva, May 10, 1949—11 a. m.

501.BB Palestine/5–1049: Telegram

[645] The Consul at Geneva (Troutman) to the Secretary of State

Geneva, May 10, 1949—11 a. m.

501.BB Palestine/5–1049: Telegram

[646] The Ambassador in Iraq (Crocker) to the Secretary of State

Baghdad, May 10, 1949—1 p. m.

867N.01/5–1049: Telegram

[647] Editorial Note

[648] The Israeli Ambassador (Elath) to the Secretary of State

Washington, May 11, 1949.

501.BB Palestine/5–1149

[649] Mr. Mark F. Ethridge to the Secretary of State

Lausanne, May 12, 1949—3 p. m.

501.BB Palestine/5–1249: Telegram

[650] The Consul at Jerusalem (Burdett) to the Secretary of State

Jerusalem, May 12, 1949—4 p. m.

867N.01/5–1249: Telegram

[651] The United States Representative at the United Nations (Austin) to the Secretary of State

New York, May 12, 1949—4:17 p. m.

501.BB Palestine/5–1249: Telegram

[652] The Secretary of State to the United States Representative at the United Nations (Austin)

Washington, May 12, 1949—6 p. m.

501.BB Palestine/5–1249: Telegram

[653] The Consul at Geneva (Troutman) to the Secretary of State

Geneva, May 12, 1949—6 p. m.

501.BB Palestine/5–1249: Telegram

[654] The Secretary of State to the Legation in Syria

Washington, May 12, 1949—7 p. m.

501.BB Palestine/5–1249: Telegram

[655] The Secretary of State to the Legation in Switzerland

Washington, May 12, 1949—7 p. m.

501.BB Palestine/5–1249: Telegram

[656] The United States Representative at the United Nations (Austin) to the Secretary of State

New York, May 13, 1949—1:55 a. m.

501.BB Palestine/5–1349: Telegram

[657] The Secretary of State to the Legation in Syria

Washington, May 13, 1949—4 p. m.

501.BB Palestine/5–249: Telegram

[658] The Minister in Syria (Keeley) to the Secretary of State

Damascus, May 13, 1949—8 p. m.

501.BB Palestine/5–1349: Telegram

[659] Memorandum by the Secretary of Defense (Johnson) to the Executive Secretary of the National Security Council (Souers)

Washington, 16 May 1949.

S/P–NSC Files, Lot 62 D 1

[660] The Minister in Switzerland (Vincent) to the Secretary of State

Bern, May 16, 1949—3 p. m.

501.BB Palestine/5–1649: Telegram

[661] Draft Letter From the President to Francis Cardinal Spellman, Roman Catholic Archbishop of New York

[Washington, undated.]

867N.01/5–449

[662] The British Embassy to the Department of State

[Washington,] 17th May 1949.

867N.113/5–1749

[663] Mr. Mark F. Ethridge to the Secretary of State

Lausanne, May 17, 1949—noon.

501.BB Palestine/5–1749: Telegram

[664] The Secretary of State to the Legation in Syria

Washington, May 17, 1949—7 p. m.

501.BB Palestine/5–1549: Telegram

[665] The Secretary of State to the Israeli Ambassador (Elath)

Washington, May 18, 1949.

501.BB Palestine/5–1149

[666] Memorandum by the Coordinator on Palestine Refugee Matters (McGhee) to the Secretary of State

[Washington,] May 18, 1949.

501.BB Palestine/5–1649

[667] Report Prepared by the Committee on Jerusalem of the Palestine Conciliation Commission

[Lausanne ?,] 18 May 1949.

IO Files, A/AC.25

[668] Mr. Mark F. Ethridge to the Secretary of State

Lausanne, May 18, 1949—3 p. m.

501.BB Palestine/5–1849: Telegram

[669] The Secretary of State to the Embassy in Saudi Arabia

Washington, May 18, 1949—7 p. m.

867N.48/5–949: Telegram

[670] The Department of State to the British Embassy

undated

867N.113/5–1949

[671] The Minister in Syria (Keeley) to the Secretary of State

Damascus, May 19, 1949—10 a. m.

501.BB Palestine/5–1949: Telegram

[672] The Secretary of State to the Legation in Switzerland

Washington, May 19, 1949—1 p. m.

501.BB Palestine/5–1949: Telegram

[673] The Secretary of State to the Embassy in Egypt

Washington, May 19, 1949—7 p. m.

501.BB Palestine/5–349: Telegram

[674] The Secretary of State to the Legation in Switzerland

Washington, May 19, 1949—7 p. m.

501.BB Palestine/5–1949: Telegram

[675] The Minister in Switzerland (Vincent) to the Secretary of State

Bern, May 20, 1949—10 a. m.

501.BB Palestine/5–2049: Telegram

[676] The Secretary of State to the Legation in Switzerland

Washington, May 20, 1949—1 p. m.

501.BB Palestine/5–2049: Telegram

[677] The Secretary of State to the Legation in Switzerland

Washington, May 20, 1949—1 p. m.

501.BB Palestine/5–2049: Telegram

[678] The Consul at Jerusalem (Burdett) to the Secretary of State

Jerusalem, May 20, 1949—2 p. m.

867N.01/5–2049: Telegram

[679] Memorandum by the Acting Secretary of State

[Washington, May 23, 1949.]

867N.01/5–2349

[680] The Consul at Jerusalem (Burdett) to the Secretary of State

Jerusalem, May 23, 1949—1 p. m.

867N.01/5–2349: Telegram

[681] Mr. Mark F. Ethridge to the Secretary of State

Lausanne, May 23, 1949—3 p. m.

501.BB Palestine/5–2349: Telegram

[682] Mr. Mark F. Ethridge to the Secretary of State

Lausanne, May 23, 1949—3 p. m.

501.BB Palestine/5–2349: Telegram

[683] The Chargé in Egypt (Patterson) to the Secretary of State

Cairo, May 23, 1949—5 p. m.

501.BB Palestine/5–2349: Telegram

[684] The United States Representative at the United Nations (Austin) to the Secretary of State

New York, May 23, 1949—6:35 p. m.

501.BB Palestine/5–2349: Telegram

[685] The Acting Secretary of State to the Legation in Switzerland

Washington, May 23, 1949—7 p. m.

501.BB Palestine/5–2349: Telegram

[686] The Acting Secretary of State to the Legation in Switzerland

Washington, May 23, 1949—7 p. m.

501.BB Palestine/5–1649: Telegram

[687] Memorandum by the Assistant Secretary of State for Congressional Relations (Gross) to the Acting Secretary of State

[Washington,] May 24, 1949.

867N.48/5–2449

[688] The Chargé in Transjordan (Stabler) to the Secretary of State

Amman, May 24, 1949—2 p. m.

867N.01/5–2449: Telegram

[689] The Acting Secretary of State to the Legation in Switzerland

Washington, May 24, 1949—6 p. m.

501.BB Palestine/5–2449: Telegram

[690] The United States Representative at the United Nations (Austin) to the Secretary of State

New York, May 25, 1949—1 p. m.

501.BB Palestine/5–2549: Telegram

[691] The United States Representative at the United Nations (Austin) to the Secretary of State

New York, May 25, 1949—7:05 p. m.

501.BB Palestine/5–2549: Telegram

[692] Memorandum by the Acting Secretary of State

[Washington, undated.]

501.BB Palestine (E)/11–2349

[693] The Chargé in Transjordan (Stabler) to the Secretary of State

Amman, May 26, 1949—noon.

867N.01/5–2649: Telegram

[694] Editorial Note

[695] The Secretary of State to the Acting Secretary of State

Paris, May 26, 1949—5 p. m.

865C.01/5–2649: Telegram

[696] Mr. Mark F. Ethridge to the Secretary of State

Lausanne, May 26, 1949—7 p. m.

501.BB Palestine/5–2649: Telegram

[697] Memorandum by the Acting Secretary of State to the President

Washington, May 27, 1949.

867N.01/5–2749

[698] The Acting Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom

Washington, May 27, 1949—2 p. m.

501.BB Palestine/5–2749: Telegram

[699] The Acting Secretary of State to the Legation in Switzerland

Washington, May 27, 1949—4 p. m.

501.BB Palestine/5–2749: Telegram

[700] The Minister in Switzerland (Vincent) to the Secretary of State

Bern, May 28, 1949—10 a. m.

501.BB Palestine/5–2849: Telegram

[701] The Minister in Switzerland (Vincent) to the Secretary of State

Bern, May 28, 1949—10 a. m.

501.BB Palestine/5–2849: Telegram

[702] The Minister in Switzerland (Vincent) to the Secretary of State

Bern, May 28, 1949—10 a. m.

501.BB Palestine/5–2849: Telegram

[703] The Minister in Switzerland (Vincent) to the Secretary of State

Bern, May 28, 1949—11 a. m.

501.BB Palestine/5–2849: Telegram

[704] Mr. Mark F. Ethridge to the Secretary of State

Bern, May 28, 1949—11 a. m.

501.BB Palestine/5–2849: Telegram

[705] The Acting Secretary of State to the Embassy in Israel

Washington, May 28, 1949—11 a. m.

501.BB Palestine/5–2849: Telegram

[706] The Ambassador in Israel (McDonald) to the Secretary of State

Tel Aviv, May 29, 1949—6 p. m.

501.BB Palestine/5–2949: Telegram

[707] Memorandum by the Acting Secretary of State

[Washington, May 31, 1949.]

501.BB Palestine/5–3149

[708] The Ambassador in Israel (McDonald) to the Secretary of State

Tel Aviv, May 31, 1949—noon.

501.BB Palestine/5–3149: Telegram

[709] The Consul at Jerusalem (Burdett) to the Secretary of State

Jerusalem, May 31, 1949—2 p. m.

867N.01/5–3149: Telegram

[710] The Secretary of State to the Acting Secretary of State

Paris, May 31, 1949—7 p. m.

501.BB Palestine/5–3149: Telegram

[711] The Acting Secretary of State to the Legation in Transjordan

Washington, May 31, 1949—7 p. m.

867N.01/5–2649: Telegram

[712] The Acting Secretary of State to the United States Representative at the United Nations (Austin)

Washington, May 31, 1949—7 p. m.

501.BB Palestine/5–3149: Telegram

[713] The Acting Secretary of State to the Legation in Switzerland

Washington, May 31, 1949—11 p. m.

867N.01/5–3149: Telegram

[714] Editorial Note

[715] The Secretary of State to the Acting Secretary of State

Paris, June 1, 1949—10 a. m.

501.BB Palestine/6–149: Telegram

[716] The Acting Secretary of State to the Secretary of State, at Paris

Washington, June 1, 1949—1 p. m.

501.BB Palestine/5–3149: Telegram

[717] The Acting Secretary of State to the Legation in Jordan

Amman, June 1, 1949—7 p. m.

867N.01/5–3049: Telegram

[718] Memorandum, Presumably Prepared by Ambassador at Large Philip C. Jessup

Paris, June 2, 1949.

867N.01/6–249

[719] The Consul at Jerusalem (Burdett) to the Secretary of State

Jerusalem, June 2, 1949—4 p. m.

501.BB Palestine/6–249: Telegram

[720] Mr. Mark F. Ethridge to the Secretary of State

Lausanne, June 2, 1949—4 p. m.

501.BB Palestine/6–249: Telegram

[721] Mr. Mark F. Ethridge to the Secretary of State

Lausanne, June 2, 1949—5 p. m.

501.BB Palestine/6–249: Telegram

[722] The Secretary of Defense (Johnson) to the Acting Secretary of State

Washington, 3 June 1949.

867N.20A/6–349

[723] The Acting Secretary of State to the Secretary of State, at Paris

Washington, June 3, 1949—7 p. m.

501.BB Palestine/6–249: Telegram

[724] The Acting Secretary of State to the Legation in Switzerland

Washington, June 4, 1949—2 p. m.

501.BB Palestine/5–2849: Telegram

[725] The Acting Secretary of State to the Legation in Switzerland

Washington, June 6, 1949—3 p. m.

501.BB Palestine/6–649: Telegram

[726] Memorandum by the Acting Secretary of State

[Washington,] June 7, 1949.

501.BB Palestine/6–749

[727] The Acting Secretary of State to Certain Diplomatic and Consular Offices

Washington, June 7, 1949—6 a. m.

711.00111 Armament Control/6–749: Circular telegram

[728] The Acting Secretary of State to the Legation in Switzerland

Washington, June 7, 1949—8 p. m.

501.BB Palestine/6–349: Telegram

[729] Memorandum of Telephone Conversation, by the Director of the Office of Near Eastern and African Affairs (Satterthwaite)

[Washington,] June 8, 1949.

501.BB Palestine/6–849

[730] The Acting Secretary of State to the Embassy in Israel

Washington, June 8, 1949—11 a. m.

501.BB Palestine/6–849: Telegram

[731] Mr. Mark F. Ethridge to the Secretary of State

Lausanne, June 8, 1949—11 a. m.

501.BB Palestine/6–849: Telegram

[732] The Chargé in Jordan (Stabler) to the Secretary of State

Amman, May 8 [June 8], 1949—11 a. m.

867N.01/6–849: Telegram

[733] The Chargé in the United Kingdom (Holmes) to the Secretary of State

London, June 8, 1949—1 p. m.

501.BB Palestine/6–849: Telegram

[734] The Ambassador in Israel (McDonald) to the Secretary of State

Tel Aviv, June 8, 1949—6 p. m.

867N.01/6–849: Telegram

[735] The Acting Secretary of State to the Embassy in Israel

Washington, June 8, 1949—7 p. m.

501.BB Palestine/6–849: Telegram

[736] The Government of Israel to the Government of the United States

[Tel Aviv,] June 8, 1949.

501.BB Palestine/6–849

[737] Memorandum by the Deputy Under Secretary of State (Rusk) to the Under Secretary of State (Webb)

[Washington,] June 9, 1949.

501.BB Palestine/6–949

[738] The Acting Secretary of State to Certain Diplomatic Offices

Washington, June 9, 1949—9:10 a. m.

501.BB Palestine/6–949: Circular airgram

[739] The Acting Secretary of State to the United States Delegation at Lausanne

Washington, June 9, 1949—7 p. m.

501.BB Palestine/6–949: Telegram

[740] Memorandum by the Acting Secretary of State

[Washington,] June 10, 1949.

501.BB Palestine/6–1049

[741] Memorandum by the Department of State to the President

Washington, June 10, 1949.

867N.01/6–1049

[742] The Ambassador in Israel (McDonald) to the Secretary of State

Tel Aviv, June 10, 1949—10 a. m.

501.BB Palestine/6–1049: Telegram

[743] The Minister in Switzerland (Vincent) to the Secretary of State

Bern, June 10, 1949—3 p. m.

501.BB Palestine/6–1049: Telegram

[744] The Minister in Switzerland (Vincent) to the Secretary of State

Bern, June 10, 1949—3 p. m.

501.BB Palestine/6–1049: Telegram

[745] Mr. John C. Ross to the Secretary of State

New York, June 10, 1949—3:04 p. m.

501.BB Palestine/6–1049: Telegram

[746] Editorial Note

[747] The Acting Secretary of State to the Embassy in Egypt

Washington, June 11, 1949—2 p. m.

887N.01/6–1149: Telegram

[748] The Consul at Jerusalem (Burdett) to the Secretary of State

Jerusalem, June 11, 1949—6 p. m.

867N.00/6–1149: Telegram

[749] The Minister in Syria (Keeley) to the Secretary of State

Damascus, June 11, 1949—7 p. m.

501.BB Palestine/6–1149: Telegram

[750] The Chargé in Jordan (Stabler) to the Secretary of State

Amman, June 12, 1949—11 a. m.

867N.01/6–1249: Telegram

[751] The Minister in Switzerland (Vincent) to the Secretary of State

Bern, June 12, 1949—noon.

501.BB Palestine/6–1249: Telegram

[752] The Acting Secretary of State to the United States Delegation at Lausanne

Washington, June 12, 1949—1 p. m.

501.BB Palestine/6–1249: Telegram

[753] The Ambassador in France (Bruce) to the Secretary of State

Paris, June 12, 1949—1 p. m.

501.BB Palestine/6–1249: Telegram

[754] The Acting Secretary of State to the Secretary of State, at Paris

Washington, June 12, 1949—10 p. m.

501.BB Palestine/6–1249: Telegram

[755] Editorial Note

[756] Mr. Raymond A. Hare to the Secretary of State

Lausanne, June 13, 1949—11 a. m.

501.BB Palestine/6–1349: Telegram

[757] Mr. Raymond A. Hare to the Secretary of State

Lausanne, June 13, 1949—4 p. m.

501.BB Palestine/6–1349: Telegram

[758] Mr. John C. Ross to the Secretary of State

New York, June 13, 1949—8:18 p. m.

501.BB Palestine/6–1349: Telegram

[759] Mr. John C. Ross to the Secretary of State

New York, June 13, 1949—11:30 p. m.

501.BB Palestine/6–1349: Telegram

[760] The Secretary of Defense (Johnson) to the Secretary of State

Washington, 14 June 1949.

867N.48/6–1449

[761] The Consul at Geneva (Troutman) to the Secretary of State

Geneva, June 14, 1949—4 p. m.

501.BB Palestine/6–1449: Telegram

[762] The Acting Secretary of State to the Embassy in Israel

Washington, June 14, 1949—7 p. m.

501.BB Palestine/6–1449: Telegram

[763] Memorandum by Mr. Mark F. Ethridge to the Deputy Under Secretary of State (Rusk)

[Washington,] June 15, 1949.

501.BB Palestine/6–1549

[764] The Ambassador in Israel (McDonald) to the Coordinator on Palestine Refugee Matters (McGhee)

Tel Aviv, June 15, 1949.

867N.48/6–1549

[765] The Chargé in Jordan (Stabler) to the Secretary of State

Amman, June 15, 1949—8 a. m.

867N.01/6–1549: Telegram

[766] The Minister in Switzerland (Vincent) to the Secretary of State

Bern, June 15, 1949—noon.

501.BB Palestine/6–1549: Telegram

[767] The Minister in Switzerland (Vincent) to the Secretary of State

Bern, June 15, 1949—noon.

501.BB Palestine/6–1549: Telegram

[768] The Secretary of State to the Acting Secretary of State

Paris, June 15, 1949—7 p. m.

501.BB Palestine/6–1549: Telegram

[769] Memorandum by the Acting Secretary of State

[Washington,] June 16, 1949.

501.BB Palestine/6–1649

[770] Memorandum by the Acting Secretary of State

[Washington,] June 16, 1949.

501.BB Palestine/6–1649

[771] The Consul at Jerusalem (Burdett) to the Secretary of State

Jerusalem, June 16, 1949—noon.

501.BB Palestine/6–1649: Telegram

[772] Memorandum of Conversation, by the Acting Secretary of State

[Washington,] June 17, 1949.

501.BB Palestine/6–2249

[773] The Acting Secretary of State to the Embassy in Israel

Washington, June 17, 1949—6 p. m.

867N.00/6–1149: Telegram

[774] The Consul at Geneva (Troutman) to the Secretary of State

Geneva, June 17, 1949—7 p. m.

501.BB Palestine/6–1749: Telegram

[775] The Acting Secretary of State to the Legation in Switzerland

Washington, June 18, 1949—11 a. m.

501.BB Palestine/6–1849: Telegram

[776] The Acting Secretary of State to the Legation in Syria

Washington, June 18, 1949—2 p. m.

767N.90D/6–1649: Telegram

[777] The Acting Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom

Washington, June 18, 1949—3 p. m.

501.MA Palestine/6–1849: Telegram

[778] The Acting Secretary of State to the Legation in Jordan

Washington, June 19, 1949—2 p. m.

867N.01/6–1849: Telegram

[779] The Chargé in Jordan (Stabler) to the Secretary of State

Amman, June 20, 1949—4 p. m.

867N.01/6–2049: Telegram

[780] The Acting Secretary of State to the Legation in Switzerland

Washington, June 20, 1949—8 p. m.

501.BB Palestine/6–1349: Telegram

[781] The Acting Secretary of State to the Legation in Switzerland

Washington, June 20, 1949—8 p. m.

501.BB Palestine/6–1449: Telegram

[782] The Acting Secretary of State to the Consulate General at Jerusalem

Washington, June 20, 1949—8 p. m.

501.BB Palestine/6–1649: Telegram

[783] The Ambassador in Israel (McDonald) to the Secretary of State

Tel Aviv, June 21, 1949—11 a. m.

867N.48/6–2149: Telegram

[784] The Acting Secretary of State to the Legation in Switzerland

Washington, June 21, 1949—3 p. m.

501.BB Palestine/6–2049: Telegram

[785] The Ambassador in Israel (McDonald) to the Secretary of State

Tel Aviv, June 22, 1949—noon.

501.BB Palestine/6–2249: Telegram

[786] Memorandum by the Deputy Under Secretary of State (Rusk) to Mr. Matthew J. Connelly, Secretary to the President

Washington, June 23, 1949.

501.BB Palestine/6–2349

[787] The Secretary of State to United States Mission at the United Nations

Washington, June 23, 1949—7 p. m.

501.BB Palestine/6–2249: Telegram

[788] President Chain Weizmann of Israel to President Truman

Rehovoth, Israel, 24 June 1949.

501.BB Palestine/7–949

[789] The Secretary of State to the Embassy in Israel

Washington, June 24, 1949—8 p. m.

501.BB Palestine/6–2249: Telegram

[790] The Secretary of State to the Embassy in Israel

Washington, June 24, 1949—8 p. m.

501.BB Palestine/6–2449: Telegram

[791] Memorandum of Conversation, by the Deputy Under Secretary of State (Rusk)

[Washington,] June 25, 1949.

867N.01/6–2549

[792] The Consul at Jerusalem (Burdett) to the Secretary of State

Jerusalem, June 25, 1949—noon.

501.BB Palestine/6–2549: Telegram

[793] The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom

Washington, June 25, 1949—2 p. m.

501.MA Palestine/6–2549: Telegram

[794] The Secretary of State to the Embassy in Egypt

Washington, June 25, 1949—2 p. m.

887N.01/6–1449: Telegram

[795] The Consul at Jerusalem (Burdett) to the Secretary of State

Jerusalem, June 25, 1949–—4 p. m.

501.BB Palestine/6–2549: Telegram

[796] The Ambassador in Israel (McDonald) to the Secretary of State

Tel Aviv, June 25, 1949—8 p. m.

501.BB Palestine/6–2549: Telegram

[797] Memorandum by the Acting Secretary of State to the President

Washington, June 27, 1949.

501.BB Palestine/6–2749

[798] The Secretary of State to Certain Diplomatic and Consular Offices

Washington, June 27, 1949—9 a. m.

501.MA Palestine/6–2749: Circular telegram

[799] Mr. Raymond A. Hare to the Secretary of State

Lausanne, June 27, 1949—3 p. m.

501.BB Palestine/6–3749: Telegram

[800] The Secretary of State to the Embassy in Israel

Washington, June 27, 1949—7 p. m.

501.BB Palestine/6–2749: Telegram

[801] The Chargé in Egypt (Patterson) to the Secretary of State

Cairo, June 27, 1949—8 p. m.

867N.48/6–2749: Telegram

[802] The Ambassador in Israel (McDonald) to the Secretary of State

Tel Aviv, June 28, 1949—noon.

501.BB Palestine/6–2849: Telegram

[803] The Secretary of State to the Embassy in Egypt

Washington, June 28, 1949—7 p. m.

867N.01/0–2849: Telegram

[804] The Secretary of State to the Embassy in London

Washington, June 30, 1949—7 p. m.

501.MA Palestine/6–2549: Telegram

[805] The Consul at Jerusalem (Burdett) to the Secretary of State

Jerusalem, July 1, 1949—2 p. m.

501.BB Palestine/7–149: Telegram

[806] The Chargé in the Soviet Union (Kohler) to the Secretary of State

Moscow, July 1, 1949—3 p. m.

867N.01/7–149: Telegram

[807] The Secretary of State to the Embassy in Egypt

Washington, July 1, 1949—8 p. m.

867N.01/7–149: Telegram

[808] The Secretary of State to the Embassy in Israel

Washington, July 1, 1949—8 p. m.

501.BB Palestine/7–149: Telegram

[809] The Ambassador in Israel (McDonald) to the Secretary of State

Tel Aviv, July 3, 1949—3 p. m.

867N.01/7–349: Telegram

[810] Memorandum by the Acting Director of the Office of United Nations Affairs (Sandifer) to Mr. James W. Barco

[Washington,] July 5, 1949.

501.BB Palestine/7–549

[811] The Ambassador in Israel (McDonald) to the Secretary of State

Tel Aviv, July 5, 1949—noon.

867N.01/7–549: Telegram

[812] The Secretary of State to the Secretary of Defense (Johnson)

Washington, July 6, 1949.

867N.48/7–149

[813] The Consul at Jerusalem (Burdett) to the Secretary of State

Jerusalem, July 6, 1949.

501.BB Palestine/7–649: Airgram

[814] The Ambassador in Israel (McDonald) to the Secretary of State

Tel Aviv, July 6, 1949—3:46 p. m.

501.BB Palestine/7–649: Telegram

[815] The Secretary of State to the Legation in Jordan

Washington, July 6, 1949—6 p. m.

867N.48/7–649: Telegram

[816] The Secretary of State to the Embassy in Israel

Washington, July 6, 1949—8 p. m.

867N.01/7–349: Telegram

[817] Memorandum of Conversation, by the Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern and African Affairs (Hare)

[Washington,] July 7, 1949.

501.BB Palestine/7–749

[818] The Secretary of State to the Chairman of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee (Connolly)

Washington, July 8, 1949.

501.BB Palestine/5–3149

[819] Memorandum of Conversation, by the Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern and African Affairs (McGhee)

[Washington,] July 8, 1949.

890B.00/7–849

[820] Editorial Note

[821] The Secretary of State to the United States Representative at the United Nations (Austin)

Washington, July 8, 1949—6 p. m.

501.BB Palestine/7–649: Telegram

[822] The Secretary of State to Certain Diplomatic and Consular Offices

Washington, July 9, 1949—1 a. m.

501.MA Palestine/7–949: Circular telegram

[823] The Ambassador in Israel (McDonald) to the Secretary of State

Tel Aviv, July 11, 1949—3 p. m.

501.BB Palestine/7–1149: Telegram

[824] The Secretary of State to the Embassy in Israel

Washington, July 11, 1949—6 p. m.

501.BB Palestine/7–649: Telegram

[825] The Secretary of State to the Embassy in France

Washington, July 12, 1949—7 p. m.

501.BB Palestine/7–1249: Telegram

[826] Memorandum by the Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern and African Affairs (McGhee) to the Secretary of State

[Washington,] July 13, 1949.

501.BB Palestine/7–1349

[827] The Ambassador in Israel (McDonald) to the Secretary of State

Tel Aviv, July 13, 1949.

501.BB Palestine/7–1349

[828] The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom

Washington, July 13, 1949—7 p. m.

501.BB Palestine/7–1349: Telegram

[829] The Secretary of State to the Embassy in Israel

Washington, July 13, 1949—7 p. m.

501.BB Palestine/7–1349: Telegram

[830] The Consul at Jerusalem (Burdett) to the Secretary of State

Jerusalem, July 14, 1949—11 a. m.

501.BB Palestine/7–1449: Telegram

[831] The Minister in Syria (Keeley) to the Secretary of State

Damascus, July 14, 1949—5 p. m.

867N.48/7–1449: Telegram

[832] The Secretary of State to the Embassy in Egypt

Washington, July 14, 1949—11 p. m.

501.MA Palestine/7–1349: Telegram

[833] Statement Released by the Department of State

undated

[834] The Secretary of State to Certain Diplomatic Offices

Washington, July 16, 1949—1 a. m.

501.BB Palestine/7–1649: Circular telegram

[835] The Secretary of State to the Legation in Syria

Washington, July 16, 1949—2 p. m.

301.BB Palestine/7–1649: Telegram

[836] The Secretary of State to the Legation in Syria

Washington, July 16, 1949—6 p. m.

501.MA Palestine/7–1349: Telegram

[837] The Minister in Syria (Keeley) to the Secretary of State

Damascus, July 17, 1949—7 p. m.

501.BB Palestine/7–1749: Telegram

[838] The Minister in Syria (Keeley) to the Secretary of State

Damascus, July 18, 1949—7 a. m.

501.BB Palestine/7–1849: Telegram

[839] Memorandum by the Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern and African Affairs (McGhee) to the Secretary of State

[Washington,] July 19, 1949.

501.BB Palestine/7–1949

[840] The Ambassador in Israel (McDonald) to the Secretary of State

Tel Aviv, July 19, 1949—noon.

501.BB Palestine/7–1949: Telegram

[841] The Minister in Lebanon (Pinkerton) to the Secretary of State

Beirut, July 19, 1949—3 p. m.

501.BB Palestine/7–1949: Telegram

[842] Mr. Stuart W. Rockwell to the Secretary of State

Lausanne, July 20, 1949—11 a. m.

501.BB Palestine/7–2049: Telegram

[843] The Secretary of State to the Legation in Syria

Washington, July 20, 1949—7 p. m.

767N.90D/7–2049: Telegram

[844] Editorial Note

[845] Editorial Note

[846] Annex

undated

[847] The Secretary of State to the Embassy in Israel

Washington, July 22, 1949—7 p. m.

501.BB Palestine/7–2249: Telegram

[848] The Secretary of State to the Legation in Switzerland

Washington, July 22, 1949—7 p. m.

501.MA Palestine/7–1949: Telegram

[849] The Secretary of State to the Legation in Switzerland

Washington, July 22, 1949—7 p. m.

501.BB Palestine/7–2249: Telegram

[850] The Secretary of State to the Legation in Syria

Washington, July 22, 1949—7 p. m.

501.MA Palestine/7–1849: Telegram

[851] The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom

Washington, July 23, 1949—2 p. m.

501.BB. Palestine/7–1549: Telegram

[852] The Chargé in Jordan (Stabler) to the Secretary of State

Amman, July 23, 1949—midnight.

867N.01/7–2349: Telegram

[853] Editorial Note

[854] Editorial Note

[855] Major General John H. Hilldring to the Secretary of State

Phoenix, Arizona, July 25, 1949.

501.BB Palestine/7–2549

[856] Preliminary Draft Declaration by the Committee on Jerusalem of the United Nations Conciliation Commission for Palestine

[Lausanne ?,] 26 July 1949.

IO Files, A/AC.25

[857] The United States Representative at the United Nations (Austin) to the Secretary of State

New York, July 26, 1949—1:21 p. m.

501.BB Palestine/7–2649: Telegram

[858] Mr. Paul A. Porter to the Secretary of State

Lausanne, July 26, 1949—4 p. m.

501.BB Palestine/7–2649: Telegram

[859] The Secretary of State to the United States Mission at the United Nations

Washington, July 26, 1949—5 p. m.

501.BB Palestine/6–949: Telegram

[860] Mr. Paul A. Porter to the Secretary of State

Lausanne, July 26, 1949—5 p. m.

501.BB Palestine/7–2649: Telegram

[861] The Secretary of State to the Embassy in Israel

Washington, July 26, 1949—7 p. m.

767N.90D/7–2149: Telegram

[862] The Secretary of State to the Legation in Switzerland

Washington, July 26, 1949—7 p. m.

501.BB Palestine/7–2649: Telegram

[863] The Consul at Jerusalem (Burdett) to the Secretary of State

Jerusalem, July 27, 1949—4 p. m.

501.BB Palestine/7–2749: Telegram

[864] The Secretary of State to the United States Delegation at Lausanne

Washington, July 27, 1949—7 p. m.

501.BB Palestine/7–2049: Telegram

[865] Memorandum of Telephone Conversation, by the Deputy Under Secretary of State (Rusk)

[Washington July 28, 1949.

501.BB Palestine/7–2849

[866] Memorandum of Conversation, by the Deputy Under Secretary of State (Rusk)

[Washington ], July 28, 1949.

501.BB Palestine/7–2849

[867] Mr. Paul A. Porter to the Secretary of State

Lausanne, July 28, 1949—11 a. m.

501.BB Palestine/7–2849: Telegram

[868] The Ambassador in Israel (McDonald) to the Secretary of State

Tel Aviv, July 28, 1949—noon.

501.BB Palestine/7–2849: Telegram

[869] Mr. Paul A. Porter to the Secretary of State

Lausanne, July 28, 1949—2 p. m.

501.BB Palestine/7–2849: Telegram

[870] The Secretary of State to the United States Delegation at Lausanne

Washington, July 28, 1949—9 p. m.

501.BB Palestine/7–2649: Telegram

[871] The Chargé in Jordan (Stabler) to the Secretary of State

Amman, July 28, 1949—10 p. m.

501.BB Palestine/7—2849: Telegram

[872] Memorandum by Mr. John C. Ross to the Deputy Under Secretary of State (Rusk)

[Washington ?,] July 29, 1949.

501.BB Palestine/7–2949

[873] Editorial Note

[874] Mr. Paul A. Porter to the Secretary of State

Lausanne, July 30, 1949—1 p. m.

501.BB Palestine/7–3049: Telegram

[875] Memorandum by the Secretary of State

[Washington,] August 1, 1949.

501.BB Palestine/8–549

[876] Mr. Paul A. Porter to the Secretary of State

Lausanne, August 1, 1949—10 a. m.

501.BB Palestine/8–149: Telegram

[877] The Consul at Jerusalem (Burdett) to the Secretary of State

Jerusalem, August 1, 1949—4 p. m.

867N.48/8–149: Telegram

[878] Mr. John C. Ross to the Secretary of State

New York, August 1, 1949—8:08 p. m.

501.BB Palestine/8–149: Telegram

[879] The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom

Washington, August 1, 1949—8 p. m.

501.BB Palestine/8–149: Telegram

[880] Mr. Paul A. Porter to the Secretary of State

Lausanne, August 2, 1949—3 p. m.

501.BB Palestine/8–249: Telegram

[881] The Consul at Jerusalem (Burdett) to the Secretary of State

Jerusalem, August 2, 1949—3 p. m.

501.MA Palestine/8–249: Telegram

[882] Memorandum by the Deputy Under Secretary of State (Rusk) to the Secretary of State

[Washington,] August 3, 1949.

501.BB Palestine/8–349

[883] Memorandum of Conversation, by the Secretary of State

[Washington,] August 3, 1949.

501.BB Palestine/8–349

[884] Mr. Paul A. Porter to the Secretary of State

Lausanne, August 3, 1949—4 p. m.

501.BB Palestine/8–349: Telegram

[885] Memorandum by the Secretary of State to the President

Washington, August 4, 1949.

501.BB Palestine/8–449

[886] Editorial Note

[887] The Secretary of State to the Legation in Jordan

Washington, August 4, 1949—6 p. m.

8901.001/7–549: Telegram

[888] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State

London, August 4, 1949—7 p. m.

501.BB Palestine/8–449: Telegram

[889] Mr. Paul A. Porter to the Secretary of State

Lausanne, August 5, 1949—5 p. m.

501.BB Palestine/8–549: Telegram

[890] Mr. Paul A. Porter to the Secretary of State

Lausanne, August 5, 1949—7 p. m.

501.BB Palestine/8–549: Telegram

[891] The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom

Washington, August 7, 1949—5 p. m.

501.BB Palestine/8–749: Telegram

[892] The United States Representative at the United Nations (Austin) to the Secretary of State

New York, August 8, 1949—7:54 p. m.

501.A Summaries/8–849: Telegram

[893] The Secretary of State to the United States Delegation at Lausanne

Washington, August 9, 1949—7 p. m.

501.BB Palestine/8–949: Telegram

[894] The Chargé in Israel (Ford) to the Secretary of State

Tel Aviv, August 9, 1949—9 p. m.

501.MA Palestine/8–949: Telegram

[895] The Secretary of State to Francis Cardinal Spellman, Roman Catholic Archbishop of New York

Washington, August 11, 1949.

867N.01/7–1349

[896] Memorandum by the Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for United Nations Affairs (Sandifer) to Mr. James W. Barco, at Lausanne

Washington, August 11, 1949.

501.BB Palestine/8–1149

[897] The Secretary of State to the United States Delegation at Lausanne

Washington, August 11, 1949, 12 noon.

501.BB Palestine/8–1149: Telegram

[898] Mr. Stuart W. Rockwell to the Secretary of State

Lausanne, August 11, 1949—3 p. m.

501.BB Palestine/8–1149: Telegram

[899] Mr. Stuart W. Rockwell to the Secretary of State

Lausanne, August 11, 1949—3 p. m.

501.BB Palestine/8–1149: Telegram

[900] The Secretary of State to the United States Delegation at Lausanne

Washington, August 11, 1949—9 p. m.

501.BB Palestine/8–1149: Telegram

[901] The United States Representative at the United Nations (Austin) to the Secretary of State

New York, August 11, 1949—9:15 p. m.

501.A Summaries/8–1149: Telegram

[902] Resolution 73 (1949) Adopted by the Security Council on August 11, 1949

August 11, 1949

[903] The Secretary of State to the Egyptian Chargé (Chiati)

Washington, August 12, 1949.

501.BB Palestine/7–2549

[904] President Truman to President Weizmann, at Rehovoth, Israel

Washington, August 13, 1949.

501.BB Palestine/8–1549

[905] The Acting Representative at Vatican City (Gowen) to the Secretary of State

Vatican City, August 13, 1949.

867N.01/8–1349

[906] Memorandum of Conversation, by Mr. Harlan B. Clark of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs

[Washington,] August 15, 1949.

501.BB Palestine/8–949

[907] Memorandum by the Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern and African Affairs (McGhee) to the Assistant Secretary of State for Economic Affairs(Thorp)

[Washington,] August 15, 1949.

811.516 Export-Import Bank/8–1549

[908] Mr. Stuart W. Rockwell to the Secretary of State

Lausanne, August 15, 1949.

501.BB Palestine/8–1549: Telegram

[909] The Consul at Jerusalem (Burdett) to the Secretary of State

Jerusalem, August 15, 1949—3 p. m.

501.BB Palestine/8–1549: Telegram

[910] Memorandum by the Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern and African Affairs (McGhee) to the Secretary of State

[Washington,] August 16, 1949.

501.BB Palestine/8–1649

[911] The Secretary of State to Certain Diplomatic and Consular Offices

Washington, August 16, 1949—6 a. m.

501.BB palestine/8–1649: circular telegram

[912] Mr. Stuart W. Rockwell to the Secretary of State

Lausanne, August 16, 1949—11 a. m.

501.BB Palestine/8–1649: Telegram

[913] The Consul at Jerusalem (Burdett) to the Secretary of State

Jerusalem, August 16, 1949—3 p. m.

867N.48/8–1649: Telegram

[914] The Secretary of State to the Embassy in Israel

Washington, August 16, 1949—7 p. m.

501.BB Palestine/8–849: Telegram

[915] Mr. Stuart W. Rockwell to the Secretary of State

Lausanne, August 17, 1949—4 p. m.

501.BB Palestine/8–1749: Telegram

[916] The Chargé in Egypt (Patterson) to the Secretary of State

Cairo, August 17, 1949—6 p. m.

501.BB Palestine/8–1749: Telegram

[917] Editorial Note

[918] Memorandum of Conversation, by the Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern and African Affairs (McGhee)

[Washington,] August 18, 1949.

501.BB Palestine/8–1849

[919] Editorial Note

[920] Memorandum by the Acting Secretary of State to the President

Washington, August 24, 1949.

501.BB Palestine (E)/8–2449

[921] The Chargé in Egypt (Patterson) to the Secretary of State

Cairo, August 24, 1949.

501.BB Palestine/8–2449: Airgram

[922] Memorandum of Conversation, by the Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern and African Affairs (Hare)

[Washington,] August 25, 1949.

501.BB Palestine/8–2549

[923] The Consul at Jerusalem (Burdett) to the Secretary of State

Jerusalem, August 25, 1949—noon.

501.BB Palestine/8–2549: Telegram

[924] Memorandum by William J. McWilliams , Assistant to the Director of the Executive Secretariat

[Washington,] August 26, 1949

Secretary’s Daily Meetings, Lot 58 D 609

[925] Memorandum by the Assistant Secretary of State for Congressional Relations (Gross) to the Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern and African Affairs (McGhee)

[Washington,] August 26, 1949.

501.BB Palestine (E)/8–2649

[926] The Secretary of State to the United States Mission at the United Nations

Washington, August 27, 1949—3 p. m.

501.MA Palestine/8–2449: Telegram

[927] The Chargé in Israel (Ford) to the Secretary of State

Tel Aviv, August 29, 1949.

501.BB Palestine/8–2949

[928] Mr. Stuart W. Rockwell to the Secretary of State

Lausanne, August 29, 1949—7 p. m.

501.BB Palestine/9–249: Telegram

[929] Mr. Stuart W. Rockwell to the Secretary of State

Lausanne, August 30, 1949—11 a. m.

501.BB Palestine/8–3049: Telegram

[930] The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom

Washington, August 30, 1949—6 p. m.

501.BB Palestine/8–3049: Telegram

[931] Editorial Note

[932] Memorandum by the Secretary of State to the President

[Washington,] September 1, 1949.

501.BB Palestine/9–149

[933] The British Embassy to the Department of State

Washington, 1st September 1949.

501.BB Palestine(E)/9–149

[934] Terms of Reference of the Economic Survey Mission

September 1, 1949

[935] The Secretary of State to the Acting Representative at Vatican City (Gowen)

Washington, September 1, 1949—1 p. m.

766A.67N/8–1249: Telegram

[936] Mr. Stuart W. Rockwell to the Secretary of State

Lausanne, September 1, 1949—5 p. m.

501.BB Palestine/9–149: Telegram

[937] Memorandum of Conversation, by Mr. Harlan B. Clark of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs

[Washington,] September 2, 1949.

501.BB Palestine(E)/9–249

[938] Mr. Stuart W. Rockwell to the Secretary of State

Lausanne, September 2, 1949—8 p. m.

501.BB Palestine/9–449: Telegram

[939] Mr. Stuart W. Rockwell to the Secretary of State

Lausanne, September 2, 1949—10 p. m.

501.BB Palestine/9–249: Telegram

[940] Editorial Note

[941] Memorandum by the Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern and African Affairs (McGhee) to the Assistant Secretary of State for Congressional Relations (Gross)

[Washington,] September 3, 1949.

501.BB Palestine(E)/9–349

[942] Mr. John C. Ross to the Secretary of State

New York, September 3, 1949—12:03 a. m.

501.BB Palestine/9–349: Telegram

[943] The Secretary of State to Certain Diplomatic Offices

Washington, September 3, 1949—3 a. m.

501.BB Palestine(E)/9–349: Circular telegram

[944] The Secretary of State to the Legation in Lebanon

Washington, September 3, 1949—2 p. m.

501.BB Palestine(E)/9–349: Telegram

[945] Mr. Stuart W. Rockwell to the Secretary of State

Lausanne, September 3, 1949—8 p. m.

501.BB Palestine/9–349: Telegram

[946] Mr. Stuart W. Rockwell to the Secretary of State

Lausanne, September 5, 1949—5 p. m.

501.BB Palestine/9–549: Telegram

[947] Memorandum Prepared in the Department of State

[Washington,] September 6, 1949.

IO Files: SD/A/C.1/261

[948] Editorial Note

[949] The Secretary of State to the United States Delegation at Lausanne

Washington, September 7, 1949—5 p. m.

501.BB Palestine(E)/9–749: Telegram

[950] Memorandum by the Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern and African Affairs (Hare) to the Deputy Under Secretary of State (Rusk)

[Washington,] September 8, 1949.

867N.01/9–849

[951] Memorandum of Conversation, by Mr. Edward B. McEnerney of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs

[Washington,] September 8, 1949.

501.BB Palestine(E)/9–849

[952] The Secretary of State to the United States Delegation at Lausanne

Washington, September 8, 1949—5 p. m.

501.BB Palestine/9–849: Telegram

[953] Memorandum by the Assistant Chief of the Division of International Organization Affairs (Halderman)

[Washington,] September 9, 1949.

501.BB Palestine/9–249

[954] The Chargé in Egypt (Patterson) to the Secretary of State

Cairo, September 10, 1949—9 a. m.

501.BB Palestine/9–1049: Telegram

[955] The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom

Washington, September 10, 1949—2 p. m.

501.BB Palestine(E)/9–949: Telegram

[956] Mr. Stuart W. Rockwell to the Secretary of State

Lausanne, September 10, 1949—2 p. m.

501.BB Palestine/9–1049: Telegram

[957] The Chargé in the United Kingdom (Holmes) to the Secretary of State

London, September 12, 1949—8 p. m.

501.BB Palestine/9–1249: Telegram

[958] Memorandum of Conversation, by the Secretary of State

[Washington,] September 13, 1949.

867N.01/9–1349

[959] The Department of State to the British Embassy

Washington, September 13, 1949.

501.BB Palestine(E)/9–1349

[960] The Consul at Jerusalem (Burdett) to the Secretary of State

Jerusalem, September 13, 1949—4 p. m.

501.BB Palestine/9–1349: Telegram

[961] The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom

Washington, September 13, 1949—9 p. m.

501.BB Palestine(E)/9–1349: Telegram

[962] Position Paper Prepared in the Department of State

[Washington,] September 14, 1949.

IO Files, Lot 71 D 440, SD/A/C.1/273

[963] Mr. Stuart W. Rockwell to the Secretary of State

Lausanne, September 14, 1949—noon.

501.BB Palestine/9–1449: Telegram

[964] Editorial Note

[965] The Secretary of State to the United States Delegation at Lausanne

Washington, September 15, 1949—8 p. m.

501.BB Palestine/8–849: Telegram

[966] The Secretary of State to the Legation in Lebanon

Washington, September 15, 1949—8 p. m.

501.BB Palestine(E)/9–749: Telegram

[967] The Consul at Jerusalem (Burdett) to the Secretary of State

Jerusalem, September 16, 1949.

501.BB Palestine/9–1649: Telegram

[968] The Secretary of State to the Embassy in France

Washington, September 17, 1949—6 p. m.

501.BB Palestine/9–1749: Telegram

[969] The Secretary of State to the Embassy in Israel

Washington, September 19, 1949—1 p. m.

501.BB Palestine/9–1949: Telegram

[970] The Minister in Lebanon (Pinkerton) to the Secretary of State

Beirut, September 19, 1949—5 p. m.

501.BB Palestine(E)/9–1949: Telegram

[971] Editorial Note

[972] The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom

Washington, September 21, 1949—3 p. m.

501.BB Palestine(E)/9–2149: Telegram

[973] Memorandum by the Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern and African Affairs (McGhee) to the Deputy Under Secretary of State (Rusk)

[Washington,] September 22, 1949.

501.BB Palestine/9–2249

[974] The Consul at Jerusalem (Burdett) to the Secretary of State

Jerusalem, September 22, 1949—noon.

501.BB Palestine/9–2249: Telegram

[975] Memorandum by the Assistant Chief of the Division of International Organization Affairs (Halderman)

[Washington,] September 23, 1949.

501.BB Palestine/9–2349

[976] Memorandum by the Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern and African Affairs (McGhee) to the Deputy Under Secretary of State (Rusk)

[Washington,] September 26, 1949.

501.BB Palestine/9–2649

[977] The Acting Secretary of State to the Embassy in Egypt

Washington, September 26, 1949—12 noon.

883.801/9–2149: Telegram

[978] Memorandum by the Assistant Chief of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs (Wilkins) to the Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern and African Affairs (McGhee)

[Washington,] September 26, 1949.

867N.00/9–2649

[979] Memorandum by the Assistant Chief of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs (Wilkins) to the Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern and African Affairs (McGhee)

[Washington,] September 27, 1949.

501.BB Palestine(E)/9–2749

[980] The Acting Secretary of State to Certain Diplomatic and Consular Offices

Washington, September 27, 1949—6 a. m.

501.BB Palestine(E)/9–2749: Circular telegram

[981] Memorandum of Conversation, by the Deputy Under Secretary of State (Rusk)

[Washington,] September 28, 1949.

501.BB Palestine/9–2849

[982] The Acting Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom

Washington, September 29, 1949—2 p. m.

501.MA Palestine/9–2949: Telegram

[983] The Acting Secretary of State to the Embassy in Saudi Arabia

Washington, September 29, 1949—7 p. m.

501.BB Palestine(E)/9–349: Telegram

[984] The Minister in Lebanon (Pinkerton) to the Secretary of State

Beirut, October 1, 1949—11 a. m.

501.BB Palestine(E)/10–149: Telegram

[985] Editorial Note

[986] The Acting Secretary of State to the Embassy in Egypt

Washington, October 4, 1949—7 p. m.

800.8890/10–449: Telegram

[987] The Chargé in Israel (Ford) to the Secretary of State

Tel Aviv, October 5, 1949—1 p. m.

501.BB Palestine/10–549: Telegram

[988] The Consul at Jerusalem (Burdett) to the Secretary of State

Jerusalem, October 5, 1949—4 p. m.

501.BB Palestine/10–549: Telegram

[989] The Acting Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom

Washington, October 5, 1949—6 p. m.

501.MA Palestine/10–149: Telegram

[990] The Acting Secretary of State to the Embassy in Saudi Arabia

Washington, October 7, 1949—7 p. m.

501.BB Palestine(E)/10–749: Telegram

[991] The Secretary of State to Certain Diplomatic Offices and the United States Mission at the United Nations

Washington, October 12, 1949—10 a. m.

501.BB Palestine/10–1249: Circular telegram

[992] The Chargé in Saudi Arabia (Hill) to the Secretary of State

Jidda, October 12, 1949—3 p. m.

501.BB Palestine(E)/10–1249: Telegram

[993] The Minister in Lebanon (Pinkerton) to the Secretary of State

Beirut, October 13, 1949—1 p. m.

501.BB Palestine(E)/10–1349: Telegram

[994] Memorandum of Conversation, by the Officer in Charge of Palestine–Israel–Jordan Affairs (Wilkins)

[Washington,] October 14, 1949.

867N.00/10–1449

[995] The Secretary of State to Certain Diplomatic and Consular Offices

Washington, October 14, 1949—2:15 p. m.

501.BB Palestine/10–1449: Circular airgram

[996] The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom

Washington, October 14, 1949—6 p. m.

501.MA Palestine/10–1249: Telegram

[997] Report by the National Security Council on United States Policy Toward Israel and the Arab States

Washington, October 17, 1949.

S/S–NSC Files, Lot 63 D 351

[998] Memorandum of Conversation, by the Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern, South Asian, and African Affairs (McGhee)

[Washington,] October 18, 1949.

501.BB Palestine/10–1849

[999] The Minister in Lebanon (Pinkerton) to the Secretary of State

Beirut, October 18, 1949—noon.

501.BB Palestine(E)/10–1849: Telegram

[1000] The Ambassador in Israel (McDonald) to the Secretary of State

Tel Aviv, October 18, 1949—1 p. m.

501.BB Palestine/10–1849: Telegram

[1001] The Consul at Jerusalem (Burdett) to the Secretary of State

Jerusalem, October 18, 1949—4 p. m.

501.BB Palestine/10–1849: Telegram

[1002] The United States Representative at the United Nations (Austin) to the Secretary of State

New York, October 19, 1949—7:51 p. m.

501.BB Palestine/10–1949: Telegram

[1003] The Secretary of State to the Embassy in Israel

Washington, October 20, 1949—8 p. m.

867N.00/10–1749: Telegram

[1004] The Acting United States Representative at the United Nations (Jessup) to the Secretary of State

New York, October 22, 1949—1:02 p. m.

501.BB Palestine/10–2249: Telegram

[1005] The Secretary of State to the Consulate General at Jerusalem

Washington, October 24, 1949—7 p. m.

501.BB Palestine/10–1849: Telegram

[1006] The United States Representative at the United Nations (Austin) to the Secretary of State

New York, October 24, 1949—11:59 p. m.

501.BB Palestine/10–2449: Telegram

[1007] The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom

Washington, October 25, 1949—5 p. m.

501.BB Palestine/10–2548: Telegram

[1008] The Secretary of State to the Legation in Lebanon

Washington, October 25, 1949—7 p. m.

501.BB Palestine(E)/10–2549: Telegram

[1009] The Secretary of State to the Legation in Lebanon

Washington, October 25, 1949—7 p. m.

501.BB Palestine(E)/10–2549: Telegram

[1010] The United States Representative at the United Nations (Austin) to the Secretary of State

New York, October 25, 1949—11:55 p. m.

501.A Summaries/10–2549: Telegram

[1011] Memorandum by the Acting Secretary of State to the President

Washington, October 26, 1949.

501.BB Palestine/10–2049

[1012] The Secretary of State to the Embassy in Israel

Washington, October 28, 1949—5 p. m.

811.516 Export-Import Bank/10–2849: Telegram

[1013] The Consul at Jerusalem (Burdett) to the Secretary of State

Jerusalem, October 29, 1949.

501.BB Palestine/10–2949: Airgram

[1014] The Secretary of State to the Legation in Lebanon

Washington, October 31, 1949.

501.BB Palestine(E)/10–2549: Telegram

[1015] Memorandum by the Acting Secretary of State to the President

Washington, November 1, 1949.

501.MA Palestine/11–149

[1016] The Chargé in Jordan (Fritzlan) to the Secretary of State

Amman, November 2, 1949—10 a.m.

867N.00/11–249: Telegram

[1017] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State

London, November 2, 1949—5 p. m.

501.BB Palestine(E)/11–249: Telegram

[1018] The Secretary of State to the Legation in Lebanon

Washington, November 2, 1949—7 p. m.

501.BB Palestine(E)/11–249: Telegram

[1019] Memorandum of Conversation, by Mr. Wells Stabler of the Office of African and Near Eastern Affairs

[Washington,] November 3, 1949.

501.BB Palestine/11–349

[1020] The Chargé in Jordan (Fritzlan) to the Secretary of State

Amman, November 4, 1949—1 p. m.

867N.00/11–449: Telegram

[1021] The Minister in Lebanon (Pinkerton) to the Secretary of State

Beirut, November 5, 1949—noon.

501.BB Palestine(E)/11–549: Telegram

[1022] Editorial Note

[1023] The Secretary of State to the Legation in Jordan

Washington, November 5, 1949—5 p. m.

867N.00/11–549: Telegram

[1024] The United States Representative at the United Nations (Austin) to the Secretary of State

New York, November 5, 1949—6:28 p. m.

501.BB Palestine(E)/11–549: Telegram

[1025] Editorial Note

[1026] Memorandum of Conversation, by the Second Secretary of the Embassy in the United Kingdom (Root)

[London,] November 9, 1949.

501.BB Palestine(E)/11–949

[1027] The Ambassador in Israel (McDonald) to the Secretary of State

Tel Aviv, November 10, 1949—noon.

867N.00/11–1049: Telegram

[1028] Memorandum of Conversation, by Mr. Lucius D. Battle, Special Assistant to the Secretary of State

Paris, November 11, 1949.

890.00/11–949

[1029] The Chargé in Jordan (Fritzlan) to the Secretary of State

Amman, November 11, 1949.

867N.01/11–1149

[1030] Memorandum of Conversation, by the Acting Secretary of State

[Washington,] November 14, 1949.

867N.01/11–1449

[1031] The Diplomatic Representatives of Various Arab States in the United States to the Secretary of State

Washington, November 14, 1949.

501.BB Palestine/11–1449

[1032] Memorandum of Conversation, by Mr. Robert N. Margrave of the Munitions Division

[Washington,] November 14, 1949.

501.BB Palestine/11–1149

[1033] The Acting Secretary of State to the Embassy in Egypt

Washington, November 14, 1949.

711.83/10–1249: Airgram

[1034] The Acting Secretary of State to the Legation in Syria

Washington, November 15, 1949—9 p. m.

890D.00/11–1549: Telegram

[1035] The Chargé in Jordan (Fritzlan) to the Secretary of State

Amman, November 16, 1949—10 p. m.

867N.01/11–1649: Telegram

[1036] Memorandum of Conversation, by Mr. Wells Stabler of the Office of African and Near Eastern Affairs

[Washington,] November 17, 1949.

501.BB Palestine/11–1749

[1037] Memorandum by the Secretary of State to the President

Washington, November 21, 1949.

501.BB Palestine/11–2149

[1038] Working Draft Resolution Prepared in the Department of State

[Washington,] November 21, 1949.

501.BB Palestine(E)/11–2349

[1039] The Consul at Jerusalem (Burdett) to the Secretary of State

Jerusalem, November 21, 1949—4 p. m.

867N.00/11–2149: Telegram

[1040] The Ambassador in Israel (McDonald) to the Secretary of State

Tel Aviv, November 22, 1949—4 p. m.

867N.014/11–2249: Telegram

[1041] Memorandum by the Department of State to the President

Washington, [undated].

501.BB Palestine(E)/11–2349

[1042] Draft Defensive Security Pact Among the States of the Arab League, Prepared by the Egyptian Ministry of Foreign Affairs

[Cairo ?, undated.]

890.20/11–2349

[1043] The Ambassador in Egypt (Caffery) to the Secretary of State

Cairo, November 23, 1949—1 p. m.

867N.00/11–2349: Telegram

[1044] Editorial Note

[1045] The Chargé in Israel (Ford) to the Secretary of State

Tel Aviv, November 24, 1949—1 p. m.

867N.01/11–2449: Telegram

[1046] Editorial Note

[1047] The Acting Secretary of State to the Consulate General at Istanbul

Washington, November 26, 1949—2 p. m.

501.BB Palestine(E)/11–2649: Telegram

[1048] The Vice Consul at Jerusalem (Roberts) to the Secretary of State

Jerusalem, November 29, 1949—4 p. m.

867N.01/11–2949: Telegram

[1049] Memorandum of Conversation, by Mr. Wells Stabler of the Office of African and Near Eastern Affairs

[Washington,] November 30, 1949.

767N.90i/11–3049

[1050] Editorial Note

[1051] Memorandum by the Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern, South Asian, and African Affairs (Hare) to the Secretary of State

[Washington,] December 1, 1949.

867N.01/12–149

[1052] The Secretary of State to Certain Diplomatic Offices

Washington, December 1, 1949—3 a. m.

800.00 Summaries/12–149: Circular telegram

[1053] The Chargé in Israel (Ford) to the Secretary of State

Tel Aviv, December 1, 1949—1 p. m.

867N.00/12–149: Telegram

[1054] Editorial Note

[1055] Memorandum of Conversation, by Mr. Wells Stabler of the Office of African and Near Eastern Affairs

[Washington,] December 5, 1949.

867N.01/12–549

[1056] Editorial Note

[1057] The Ambassador in Israel (McDonald) to the Secretary of State

Tel Aviv, December 5, 1949—1 p. m.

867N.00/12–549: Telegram

[1058] Memorandum of Telephone Conversation, by the Secretary of State

[Washington,] December 6, 1949.

501.BB Palestine/12–649

[1059] Memorandum of Conversation, by Mr. Wells Stabler of the Office of African and Near Eastern Affairs

[Washington,] December 6, 1949.

811.22767N/12–649

[1060] Memorandum of Conversation, by the Secretary of State

[Washington,] December 7, 1949.

501.BB Palestine/12–749

[1061] Editorial Note

[1062] The Ambassador in Israel (McDonald) to the Secretary of State

Tel Aviv, December 7, 1949—2 p. m.

867N.00/12–749: Telegram

[1063] Resolution 303 (IV) Adopted by the General Assembly on December 9, 1949

December 9, 1949

[1064] Editorial Note

[1065] Editorial Note

[1066] The Secretary of State to the Embassy in Israel

Washington, December 9, 1949—9 p. m.

501.BB Palestine/12–949: Telegram

[1067] The Ambassador in Israel (McDonald) to the Secretary of State

Tel Aviv, December 11, 1949—1 p. m.

501.BB Palestine/12–1149: Telegram

[1068] The Chargé in Jordan (Fritzlan) to the Secretary of State

Amman, December 12, 1949—7 p. m.

767N.90i/12–1249: Telegram

[1069] The Ambassador in Israel (McDonald) to the Secretary of State

Tel Aviv, December 12, 1949—9 p. m.

501.BB Palestine/12–1249: Telegram

[1070] The Secretary of State to the Egyptian Ambassador (Rahim)

Washington, December 13, 1949.

501.BB Palestine/11–1449

[1071] Memorandum of Conversation, by the Deputy Under Secretary of State (Rusk)

[Washington,] December 13, 1949.

501.BB Palestine/2–1349

[1072] The Secretary of State to the United States Mission at the United Nations

Washington, December 13, 1949—12 noon.

501.BB Palestine/12–1349: Telegram

[1073] Editorial Note

[1074] The Chargé in the United Kingdom (Holmes) to the Secretary of State

London, December 13, 1949—7 p. m.

767N.90i/12–1349: Telegram

[1075] Editorial Note

[1076] The Ambassador in Israel (McDonald) to the Secretary of State

Tel Aviv, December 14, 1949—11 a. m.

867N.01/12–1449: Telegram

[1077] The Ambassador in Egypt (Caffery) to the Secretary of State

Cairo, December 14, 1949—7 p. m.

867N.00/12–1449: Telegram

[1078] Memorandum of Conversation, by Mr. Stuart W. Rockwell of the Office of African and Near Eastern Affairs

[Washington,] December 15, 1949.

501.BB Palestine/12–1549

[1079] The Chargé in Jordan (Fritzlan) to the Secretary of State

Amman, December 15, 1949—10 a. m.

767N.901/12–1549: Telegram

[1080] Memorandum by the Acting Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern, South Asian, and African Affairs (Hare) to the Secretary of State

[Washington,] December 17, 1949.

501.BB Palestine/12–1749

[1081] Editorial Note

[1082] The Consul at Jerusalem (Burdett) to the Secretary of State

Jerusalem, December 18, 1949.

867N.002/12–1849: Telegram

[1083] Memorandum by the Secretary of State to the President

Washington, December 20, 1949.

501.BB Palestine/12–2049

[1084] The Secretary of State to the Embassy in Israel

Washington, December 20, 1949—1 p. m.

501.BB Palestine/12–1749: Telegram

[1085] The Chargé in the United Kingdom (Holmes) to the Secretary of State

London, December 22, 1949—6 p. m.

867N.01/12–2249: Telegram

[1086] The Secretary of State to the Secretary of Defense (Johnson)

Washington, December 23, 1949.

501.BB Palestine(E)/12–2349

[1087] The Ambassador in Egypt (Caffery) to the Secretary of State

Cairo, December 23, 1949—3 p. m.

883.00/12–2349: Telegram

[1088] The Chargé in Jordan (Fritzlan) to the Secretary of State

Amman, December 27, 1949—10 a. m.

767N.901/12–2749: Telegram

[1089] The Consul at Jerusalem (Burdett) to the Secretary of State

Jerusalem, December 27, 1949—4 p. m.

767N.901/12–2749: Telegram

[1090] The Ambassador in Israel (McDonald) to the Secretary of State

Tel Aviv, December 29, 1949—1 p. m.

867N.01/12–2949: Telegram

[1091] The Chargé in Jordan (Fritzlan) to the Secretary of State

Amman, December 29, 1949—1 p. m.

867N.01/12–2949: Telegram

[1092] The Chargé in the United Kingdom (Holmes) to the Secretary of State

London, December 29, 1949—7 p. m.

501.BB Palestine/12–2949: Telegram

[1093] Editorial Note

[1094] President Truman to King Abdullah Ibn el Hussein of the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan

Washington, December 30, 1949—6 p. m.

867N.01/12–3049: Telegram

[1095] The Ambassador in Israel (McDonald) to the Secretary of State

Tel Aviv, December 31, 1949—1 p. m.

867N.01/12–3149: Telegram

The Special Representative of the United States in Israel (McDonald) to the Secretary of State 501.BB Palestine/1–149: Telegram

[Document 341]

The Special Representative of the United States in Israel (McDonald) to the Secretary of State

top secret Tel Aviv, January 1, 1949—9 a. m.

us urgent

niact

1. For attention President and Acting Secretary.2 ReDeptel 281, December 30 and Mistel’s 350, 351, December 31.3 Returned from Tiberias 3:15 a. m. Had two hours with Ben Gurion.4 Knox5 present. I read Ben Gurion the same paraphrase I read Shertok.6 After considerable deliberation he replied as follows: (paragraph references are to Department’s 281). 1. “We have not invaded Egyptian territory nor do we have any intention of doing so. It is true some Israel Forces had to cross frontier into Egypt in course of tactical operations but they have already received orders to return to the Negev frontier.”

2. As regards British notification to US Government he said, “in note Great Britain threatens to take action against us under 1936 Treaty with Egypt and unless we obey the decisions of the SC. In this latter connection I am confused and surprised. Great Britain is a member of the SC with which we are dealing directly and cordially. Does Great Britain plan to take independent action to enforce decisions of SC?

3. “We are very grateful for the friendship of the US and value it. I note the italics on the phrase ‘peace-loving’ and am distressed. We are indeed peace-loving and have consistently shown it. We are last people in the world to want to break the peace in Middle East or elsewhere. We are a very small people and we can survive only in peace. What we are doing is in self-defense. We have been attacked. We must reserve our right to defend ourselves even if we go down fighting. I believe the American Government and people will recognize this right. We accepted the UN request for an armistice and peace. Egypt rejected it.”

4. Orders for the withdrawal of the Israel units have already been given.

5. “The reports communicated to your government about our negotiations with Trans Jordan are untrue and astonishing. Israel is now in the act of negotiating an armistice with Transjordan and is on the best terms with that government. There have been no threats on either side. We have met on very friendly terms and our next meeting is set for January 5.”

Prime Minister then commented “I am pained by the severe tone of this communication which might have been written by Bevin7 himself”. He then stated that a formal written reply would be prepared immediately after Cabinet meeting on Sunday.

He concluded by speaking of peace, negotiations with Lebanon which he said were also progressing encouragingly.

McDonald

2 Robert A. Lovett.

3 For Nos. 281 and 350, see Foreign Relations, 1948, vol. v, Part 2, pp. 1704 and 1705; No. 351 is not printed, but see footnote 1, ibid., p. 1706.

4 David Ben-Gurion, Israeli Prime Minister.

5 Charles F. Knox, Jr., Counselor of Mission at Tel Aviv.

6 Moshe Shertok, Israeli Minister for Foreign Affairs.

7 Ernest Bevin, British Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs.

The Special Representative of the United States in Israel (McDonald) to the Secretary of State 501.BB Palestine/1–149: Telegram

[Document 342]

The Special Representative of the United States in Israel (McDonald) to the Secretary of State

top secret
immediate
niact Tel Aviv, January 1, 1949—11 a. m.

2.1 Attention President and Acting Secretary. At approximately 2:30 a. m. January 1, two Egyptian vessels approached off coast to attack Tel Aviv. Air alert sounded and Israel coastal batteries replied to attack fire. No hits, no casualties. Israel military spokesmen issued following warning: “up to now the various arms of the defense army of Israel have refrained from taking any action outside the immediate battle areas in the south. If the Egyptians should repeat their last night’s attempt and direct attacks in whatever form against the civilian population of Israel, we shall take whatever action we deem appropriate against Egypt, and, in particular, against the Egyptian capital, Cairo.”

At New Year’s Day reception in our residence, President Weizmann2 stated to mission staff that the representations I made yesterday and last night (reDeptel 281, Dec. 303 ) had had profound effect on PGI. Apparently attitude Washington, which I faithfully presented in accordance text telegram under reference, is interpreted here as indicating reversal of attitude of Washington to old British line. In this small country, despite every attempt keep secrecy, my representations apparently already widely known in governmental circles and there is much resentment. For example, Attorney General asked what is legal difference between Israel attack on El Arish and repeated bombings in Tel Aviv and elsewhere in Israel by Egyptians. Weizmann stated: “Why this terrific pressure against Israel over attack El Arish when fact is Egyptian armies attacked Israel with purpose destroy Israel.” El Arish is Egyptian forward base for air attacks on Israel and latest Israel objectives were to neutralize but not to hold that base.

Weizmann stated he is writing President Truman directly as to facts in situation and sending letter by Eban4 who is leaving for states on Tuesday.

In obedience pressure USA so threatening[ly] expressed in Deptel 281, PGI has ordered withdrawal all forces Egyptian territory. Mission uncertain as to military effect this withdrawal but USA has now most certainly incurred serious responsibility if such withdrawal again jeopardizes Israel Forces in Negev and encourages Egypt continue attacks on Israel territory.

McDonald

1 This telegram was originally received as an unnumbered message.

2 Chaim Weizmann, President of the Provisional Government of Israel.

3  Foreign Relations, 1948, vol. v, Part 2, p. 1704.

4 Aubrey S. Eban, Israeli Representative at the United Nations.

The Acting Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom 867N.2383/1–249: Telegram

[Document 343]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom 1

top secret Washington, January 2, 1949—2 p. m.

us urgent

niact

7. Dept this morning requested Brit Emb inform FonOff that in view PGI order withdraw all Israeli forces from Egyptian territory as result our representations and in view info contained Tel Aviv’s unnumbered tel Jan 1, 11 a. m.2 (being repeated London) Dept strongly believes Brit should impress on Egyptians necessity their refraining from further attacks similar that on Tel Aviv. Otherwise chain of reprisals set off may well jeopardize progress toward final settlement so far made.

Lovett

1 This telegram was repeated to Tel Aviv for information.

2 See telegram 2 and footnote 1, supra.

The Special Representative of the United States in Israel (McDonald) to the Secretary of State 867N.01/1–249: Telegram

[Document 344]

The Special Representative of the United States in Israel (McDonald) to the Secretary of State

Tel Aviv, January 2, 1949—4 p. m.

3. Following verbatim text statement issued by Foreign Office on December 31:

“It is a month and a half since Egypt and Israel were ordered by the Security Council to enter into armistice negotiations. Israel accepted immediately, thus once more affirming its desire to make peace without delay. The Egyptian Government not only ignored the Security Council resolution, but renewed their military activities in the Negev. They shelled Nirim, Mivtachim and Imara, captured and occupied certain fresh heights, such as Tel-el-Jamah, Tel-el-Farah and Kirbet Kutshan, carried out widespread sabotage against roads and water installations in the area, and launched armored attacks on Israeli positions and settlements, using tanks which had newly arrived from Egypt. These were the subject repeated complaints by the Israeli authorities to UN observer to no avail. These Egyptian activities, covered by delaying tactics regarding an armistice, went on for weeks.

When Egypt finally indicated its acceptance in principle of the armistice resolution, it coupled this with conditions which the resolution did not justify. The Acting Mediator, Dr. Bunche,1 then made certain proposals whereby the Egyptian forces at Faluja could be evacuated in stages concurrently with armistice talks. Once again the Israeli Government accepted these proposals, and its attitude was officially described by Dr. Bunche as highly satisfactory. The Egyptian commanders pretended at first that they were willing to cooperate, but when General Riley2 went to Cairo to arrange a time and a place for an armistice meeting, and to obtain the name of the Egyptian representative, the Egyptian Government reverted to its earlier uncompromising attitude, thereby recreating the deadlock. It appears that the resolution on Palestine adopted in the meantime by the UN General Assembly, and the failure of the Security Council to approve Israel’s application for membership of the UN,3 had encouraged Egypt to revive its intransigence. The refusal of Egypt to enter into armistice negotiations could have no other meaning than that it was set on the prosecution of the war. Faced with the choice between embarking on a course leading to peace or pursuing further the line of aggressive invasion, Egypt chose the latter. Israel could not possibly acquiesce in a situation exposing its safety and territorial integrity to an ever present menace and compelling it to carry in definitely the burdens of war readiness. The attacks perpetrated by Egyptian forces against Israeli positions at every convenient opportunity as well as the flow from Egypt of fresh men and equipment left no doubt as to the intentions of the Egyptian Government. Under those circumstances, not only the release of the Egyptian brigade encircled at Faluja was inconceivable, but the Government of Israel found itself constrained to resume its freedom of action in order once and for all to put an end to the intolerable situation and stabilize Israel’s security. It was Egypt’s choice that determined Israel’s action. In the course of that action, as in any war, only military considerations decided the fixing of the establishment of positions. The new facts created in that regard need not determine the final territorial settlement which awaits the conclusion of permanent peace between Israel and her neighbors.

For such a final and lasting peace settlement the Government of Israel is ever ready, in the firm conviction that the sooner it is achieved, the better it will be for all concerned.”

McDonald

1 Ralph J. Bunche, United Nations Acting Mediator on Palestine.

2 Brig. Gen. William E. Riley, United Nations Chief of Staff charged with supervision of the truce in Palestine and senior United States military observer in Palestine.

3 See footnote 3, Foreign Relations, 1948, vol. 1, Part 2, p. 1677.

The Special Representative of the United States in Israel (McDonald) to the Secretary of State 867N.01/1–249: Telegram

[Document 345]

The Special Representative of the United States in Israel (McDonald) to the Secretary of State

top secret
immediate Tel Aviv, January 2, 1949—5 p. m.

4. For American eyes only. Shiloah1 officially informed mission night December 31 as follows:

Secret preliminary armistice negotiations with Abdullah el Tel2 initiated December 25 in atmosphere cordiality.

2. Meetings in complete secrecy owing (a) save King3 embarrassment and possible retaliation from other Arab countries and (b) prevent British interfering.

3. Second meeting was held December 30 in Arab Jerusalem with Shiloah and Day an4 representing Israel, and Tel representing King. Conversations very satisfactory according Shiloah and one two questions on subjects were listed as agenda for further secret meeting to be held January 5 in Jewish Jerusalem. On agenda are such items as delineation frontiers, renewal operations southern potash works, operations Palestine Corporation electric plant, etc.

4. Shiloah promised keep mission secretly informed progress talks.

5. Also stated satisfactory preliminary tentative discussions on military level have been initiated with Lebanese looking toward armistice. In addition Israeli have secretly approached Lebanon Prime Minister on political level and are hopeful.

6. Also Israel has sent secret message to new Prime Minister of Egypt offering negotiate, but Shiloah stated not certain that inter mediary “has courage to present offer to Prime Minister.”5

McDonald

1 Reuven Shiloah, Political Adviser in the Israeli Ministry for Foreign Affairs.

2 Lt. Col. Abdullah el Tel, Commander of Transjordan armed forces in Jerusalem.

3 Abdullah, King of Transjordan.

4 Col. Moshe Dayan, Commander of Israeli armed forces in Jerusalem.

5 Amman advised, on January 2, that the previous day Lieutenant Colonel Tel met at Jerusalem with Elias Sassoon, Colonel Dayan, and an unidentified Israeli Foreign Office representative and was said to have “informed Israelis that as personal representative of King he was prepared receive their suggestions re possible boundary settlements. It is understood Israelis endeavored ascertain for second time whether British are being kept advised of these developments. Tel is alleged to have replied he had forgotten to ask.” (Telegram 1, 867N.01/-1–249) It is possible that the meeting described in this message is the same as that summarized in Tel Aviv’s telegram 4. Mr. Sassoon was Director of the Middle East Department in the Israeli Foreign Office. His surname is rendered also as Sasson; his given name as Eliahu.

Memorandum of Conversation, by Mr. Eraser Wilkins of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs 501.BB Palestine/1–349

[Document 346]

Memorandum of Conversation, by Mr. Eraser Wilkins of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs

secret [Washington,] January 3, 1949.

Participants: Joseph B. Keenan—American Representative, Pales tine Conciliation Commission

Mr. Wilkins—NE

Mr. Halderman—UNP 1

While discussing current matters relating to Palestine, Mr. Keenan told me that, following his selection as American Representative on the Palestine Conciliation Commission he had seen the President and had had an opportunity to discuss the question of Palestine with him.

Mr. Keenan said that during this conversation the President had emphasized the urgent necessity of preventing further warfare in Palestine which, if it continued, might be the spark setting ablaze a greater conflagration. Mr. Keenan said the President hoped that the action which the United Nations had already taken through the General Assembly and the Security Council would prevent further conflict and that if such action was not effective, the Conciliation Commission would immediately attempt to persuade the parties to reach an agreement.

Mr. Keenan said that the President was strongly of the opinion that the orders of the Security Council should be obeyed and that no party to the Palestine dispute should be permitted to defy the United Nations. Recent action by Israel in Egypt was mentioned in this respect. Mr. Keenan reported the President as stating that he could count on his full support and that he would back him to the limit.

1 John W. Halderman, Assistant Chief of the Division of United Nations Political Affairs.

President Chaim Weizmann of the Provisional Government of Israel to President Truman 501.BB Palestine/1–1149

[Document 347]

President Chaim Weizmann of the Provisional Government of Israel to President Truman 1

Tel Aviv, January 3, 1949.

I have been informed by the Provisional Government of Israel of a communication addressed to them by your Special Envoy and of an official assurance given by them that the presence on Egyptian territory of Israeli forces which crossed the frontier in the course of hot pursuit of the Egyptian invaders signified no political or territorial claims by Israel at Egypt’s expense and that these forces would be speedily withdrawn.

I feel impelled to address you personally concerning certain basic aspects of this incident. The Egyptian army invaded Palestine with a view to destroying the State of Israel. Israeli forces which accidentally crossed the Egyptian frontier had no intention of destroying the Kingdom of Egypt. The presence of our forces in the Negev conforms to the resolution of the General Assembly of November 29, 1947.2 On the other hand, the presence of the Egyptian forces in the Negev represents a deliberate defiance of that resolution by the use of force. The Egyptian army on the 15th of May invaded Palestine, bombarded the civilian population of Tel Aviv, and destroyed Jewish villages and water installations in the Negev though the Jews had not touched a single Egyptian. Egyptian forces occupied and held positions in flagrant defiance of successive cease-fire orders of the Security Council at the end of May and in the middle of July. These indisputable facts clearly reveal which side started and consistently maintained a policy of aggression.

I feel deeply disturbed at the unequal reaction of a great power to Egyptian aggression and Jewish defense respectively. When your Government attempted to secure action by the Security Council for stopping the Egyptian and other Arab invasions, these resolutions were defeated by Great Britain which supplied practically all arms used by Egypt in its war of aggression against us. But when Jewish countermeasures repel the invaders, Great Britain comes to the aid of the aggressor in order to prevent Egyptian invaders from being ejected from territory where they had no right to be.

I deeply appreciate the great constructive contributions which you, Mr. President, made to the solution of this problem, indicating your refusal to follow British calculations and ill-advised policies. But I am unable to square the United States’ warning that they would review their support of Israel’s application for membership to the United Nations if our forces remained on Egyptian territory, with United States’ sponsorship of Egyptian election to the Security Council while Egyptian forces were actually invading and attacking Israel. As a result of such sponsorship, Egypt, which defied the authority of the United Nations and broke the peace in the Middle East, is now a member of the very Council whose function it is to suppress aggression and maintain international peace.

Finally, I should point out that Egypt, in addition to defying the resolution of November, 1947, also failed to comply with the Security Council’s resolution of November 163 and the Assembly’s resolution of December 11, 1948,4 which ordered both parties to enter into negotiations for armistice and peaceful settlement. I trust that the above sub missions may assist you in determining where the initiative, responsibilty, and guilt for the present unhappy situation properly lie.

I should reiterate that the Provisional Government of Israel is ready at any time to enter into negotiations toward the speediest possible attainment of peace.

Chaim Weizmann

1 Sent by the Israeli Mission in the United States to the White House, which transmitted the message to the Department of State by January 11 for preparation of a reply (memorandum of January 11 by Joseph C. Satterthwaite, Director of the Office of Near Eastern and African Affairs, to Mr. Lovett).

2 See telegram 1271, November 29, 1947, Foreign Relations, 1947, vol. v, p. 1291.

3 See telegram Delga 746, November 14, 1948, from Paris; footnote 2 to Delga 746; and editorial note, Foreign Relations, 1948, vol. v, Part 2, pp. 1582, 1583, and 1597.

4 See editorial note, ibid., p. 1661.

The Acting Secretary of State to the Special Representative in Israel (McDonald), at Tel Aviv 501.BB Palestine/1–149: Telegram

[Document 348]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Special Representative in Israel (McDonald), at Tel Aviv

top secret Washington, January 3, 1949—5 p. m.

us urgent

3. Re ur 1 Jan 1 and unnumbered Jan 1, 11 a. m.1 Dept surprised at comments made by Ben Gurion, Weizmann and others on your representations based on Deptel 281 Dec 30.2 Plse make it clear to them and others directly concerned that there should be no misconception in minds of Israelis as to purpose these representations. It was as indicated Deptel 281 to stop a move with most serious implications which Brit were contemplating. Another purpose was to avoid if possible Brit rearming of Arabs which Brit apparently determined carry out if all Israeli forces not promptly withdrawn from Egypt. It is clear from your two reftels as well as your Weeka No. 13 that Israeli forces had in fact advanced into Egypt in considerable force and to considerable distance.

US has great strategic and other interests at stake in NE and PGI therefore has no just grounds on which to resent fact that US should react strongly to any action either by Israelis or Arabs containing threat of enlargement of conflict.

You should in fact state that we are making strong representations Egyptians re Egyptian acts complained of in your unnumbered Jan 1, 11 a. m. and 6 Jan 3.4 Have also requested Brit make similar representations.

Israelis therefore should only draw simple conclusion that US representations are directed toward composing situation promptly.

Ref last sentence your Jan 1, 11 a. m. re “serious responsibility” US may have incurred through your representations Dept considers that full responsibility rests with parties who are engaging in military operations contrary to SC resolutions.5

Lovett

1 Regarding the latter, see telegram 2 and footnote 1, p. 595 [Pg. 595 includes portions of Doc. 341 and Doc. 342].

2  Foreign Relations, 1948, vol. v, Part 2, p. 1704.

3 Sent as telegram 5, January 2, not printed.

4 Latter not printed; it reported information from Foreign Minister Shertok that on the evening of January 2, an enemy plane, presumably Egyptian, dropped three bombs over Jewish Jerusalem. The message also stated that the Provisional Government of Israel expected the United States to make “very urgent and stern representations to Egypt” concerning this first bombing of Jerusalem (867N.01/1–349).

5 A marginal notation indicates that this telegram was cleared at the White House with Clark M. Clifford, Special Counsel to President Truman. It was repeated to London as 12. On the night of January 4, Mr. McDonald handed a paraphrase to Mr. Shertok who “expressed pleasure Dept’s explanation. He volunteered information that Israel troop withdrawal was ordered afternoon December 31, that officer in charge asked 24 hour leeway, that withdrawal began January 1 and by morning January 2 ‘not an Israeli hoof remained in Egypt’.” (telegram 10, January 5, noon, from Tel Aviv, 501.BB Palestine/1–549)

The Acting Secretary of State to the Embassy in Egypt 501.BB Palestine/1–349: Telegram

[Document 349]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Embassy in Egypt

top secret Washington, January 3, 1949—5 p. m.

us urgent

niact

2. Please seek immediate audience with King1 and make following oral representation, leaving memorandum in same sense: 1. Amer Govt has been deeply disturbed at recent renewed outbreak hostilities bet forces of Israel and Egypt in Negev, despite SC’s resolutions Nov 42 and Nov 16 and Council’s basic resolutions calling for cease-fire and truce in Palestine May 29 and July 15, 1948.3

2. Because serious nature recent fighting and continued neglect countries concerned to heed SC’s resolutions, Amer Govt has recently indicated to Provisional Govt of Israel its concern at course events and its belief that Israeli forces should under no circumstances invade territory of Egypt.

3. In same spirit Amer Govt because its long friendship with Egypt feels it must point out similar concern which it has lest attitude of Egypt should be stumbling block to prompt conclusion peace in Middle East. In particular we feel there should be compliance with SC resolution Nov 16, 1948 which called upon parties to Palestine conflict to negotiate armistice either directly or through good offices UN Mediator.

4. It would be most encouraging if Govt Egypt would promptly undertake negotiations looking toward armistice foreseen by SC in its resolution Nov. 16. Any word which King can give this Govt as to his intentions this respect will be appreciated.

5. In light friendly representations made to PGI which have in fact resulted in assurances of withdrawal Israeli forces from Egyptian territory, Amer Govt can expect no less than policy of wise retraint on part Egyptian Govt with respect to further hostilities against Israel. Such incidents as that Jan. 1, when two Egyptian vessels are reported to have approached Israeli coast to attack capital city of Tel Aviv, or recently reported bombing of Jerusalem, can only bring reprisal on part of Israel and will make it difficult for this or any other Govt to counsel PGI against extensive mil operations. Any as surances which King may be able to give as to Egypt’s peaceful intent will be awaited with great interest by this Govt.

6. Finally, it should be urged upon King in most serious terms that Amer Govt and people feel time has come to make peace in Palestine. It is essential that hostilities should cease and that statesmanship should be employed to establish lasting peace. We trust that King Farouk as a leader of Arab world will seize this opportunity.

Repeated to London as 11, Tel Aviv as 2.

Lovett

1 Farouk, King of Egypt.

2  Foreign Relations, 1948, vol. v, Part 2, p. 1546.

3 See ibid., pp. 1070 and 1224.

The Acting Secretary of State to Mr. Wells Stabler 867N.01/12–2848: Telegram

[Document 350]

The Acting Secretary of State to Mr. Wells Stabler 1

top secret Washington, January 3, 1949—5 p. m.

2. Dept has given careful consideration to Jerusalem tel No. 1550 Dec 232 rptd Amman 15 and to ur 173 Dec 28,3 172 Dec 284 and 176 Dec 29.5 Dept’s comment on points raised as follows.

Dept anxious see peace restored to Palestine and believes should be accomplished by negotiations, either directly between parties or through Conciliation Commission. Dept would naturally welcome any concrete steps by Israelis or Arabs to bring about such negotiations. In this connection Dept has found reasonable attitude shown by TJ re negotiations with Jews extremely hopeful sign.

US, however, naturally desires avoid becoming involved in inter-Arab jealousies and intrigues and Dept regards question of TJ relations with Arab League as essentially one for determination by TJ. As you point out in ur 176 Dec 29, determining factor seems to be the military one.6 Dept believes final attitude TJ re Israelis will be decided by military situation, particularly position of Arab Legion, and by stand taken by UK. Not essential, therefore, and certainly undesirable that US become involved in question TJ attitude re Arab League and other Arab States.

Dept believes that most satisfactory solution disposition greater part Arab Palestine would be incorporation in Transjordan. Therefore Dept approves principle underlying Jericho resolutions.7

To sum up, US would like to see TJ negotiate armistice and final peace with Israelis, and believes most of Arab Palestine could be incorporated in Transjordan as outcome such negotiations. However, US can not become involved in inter-Arab politics. If King and TJ officials seek views of US on question of Palestine settlement, you are authorized to state US approval of reasonable attitude so far shown by TJ and to express US hope that TJ, as well as other Arab States, will find way of entering armistice and peace negotiations with Israelis. You are also authorized, if queried re US views on disposition Arab Palestine, to state that US believes logical outcome negotiations between TJ and Israelis would be incorporation greater part Arab Palestine in TJ. You will know best how to do this without giving impression US supporting TJ against Arab League and without involving US in Arab politics.

Lovett

1 Vice consul at Jerusalem; detailed to Amman.

2  Foreign Relations, 1948, vol. v, Part 2, p. 1687.

3  Ibid., p. 1694.

4 Not printed, but see footnote 1, ibid., p. 1700.

5 Not printed.

6 In telegram 176, Mr. Stabler gave his opinion that the “King is now in most difficult position for he sees Jews will continue war against him or Iraqis or both unless he agrees in immediate future to peace negotiations. Also knows that if war is continued, Iraqi Army and Arab Legion can be easily defeated and he will lose everything.” (867N.01/12–2948)

7 Adopted at a meeting of Palestinian Arabs at Jericho on December 1, 1948. It called for the unity of Transjordan and Arab Palestine, with Abdullah as King; see telegram 140, December 4, 1948, from Amman, Foreign Relations, 1948, vol. v, Part 2, p. 1645.

The Special Representative of the United States in Israel (McDonatd) to the Secretary of State 501.BB Palestine/1–349: Telegram

[Document 351]

The Special Representative of the United States in Israel (McDonatd) to the Secretary of State

top secret Tel Aviv, January 3, 1949—7 p. m.

us urgent

niact

7. Reference Deptel 281.1 Attention President and Acting Secretary. I am transmitting below verbatim text of Foreign Office note received today as formal reply my representations of midnight December 31.

“Sir: 1. I have the honour to acknowledge receipt of the communication from the Government of the US of America which you conveyed to me orally on the afternoon of Friday, 31 December 1948. A copy of this communication, in the form in which it was made, is appended hereto for reference.

2. You have already been informed by the Prime Minister and myself that such Israel forces as entered Egyptian territory did so in hot pursuit of an enemy driven out from a territory he had invaded in the course of a war of aggression. All such forces were recalled without delay and no Israel troops now remain on Egyptian soil. The reports received by the US Government to the effect that Israel forces had ‘invaded’ Egyptian territory, not as an incidental military maneuver, but as an operation deliberately planned, are devoid of all foundation. The Government of Israel never had any intention to stage an invasion of Egypt or to occupy, let alone annex, any part of Egyptian territory.

3. The Government of Israel is not surprised that charges of such utterly unfounded character should be preferred against it by the Government of the UK. It was that government which in the spring of last year encouraged the invasion of Palestine by the armies of Egypt and the Arab states. It has consistently defended this aggression in open defiance of the Charter of the UN and of the law of nations. It has throughout demonstrated and made effective its hostility to the State and Government of Israel.

4. The Government of Israel must nevertheless register its profound resentment at the attitude of the Government of the UK as transmitted without comment by the US Government. In threatening to take action under the terms of the Anglo-Egyptian treaty of 1936, the British Government conjures up a contingency which, as will be evident from a study of the relevant provisions of that treaty, has by no means arisen. The British Government furthermore makes its abstention from a ‘conflict’—which in this context can only mean an armed conflict—with the Government of Israel contingent upon the acceptance by the latter of the decisions of the United Nations Security Council. It is thereby setting itself up, without any warrant whatsoever, as an arbiter and mandatory, not in any actual conflict between itself and the Government of Israel, but in a hypothetical dispute between Israel and the Security Council, and is seeking to justify its arrogation of such authority by invoking a treaty which in the given context is irrelevant. The Government of Israel presumes that your communication is not to be interpreted as identifying the US Government with the attitude adopted by the British Government in this matter.

5. You will recall that on May 15 last the Egyptian Army invaded Palestine with the declared intention of preventing the establishment of the State of Israel or, if prevention were no longer possible, of encompassing its destruction. This invasion, which the Government of the US did not find itself able to halt, was an open act of war, whereby Egypt forfeited all claim to be counted among the peace-loving nations of the world. Yet, this undeniable violation by Egypt of her obligations under the Charter of the United Nations did not deter the Government of the US from sponsoring Egypt’s candidature for membership in the SC, with the result that an aggressor state, which in collusion with other aggressor states has made itself responsible for a most flagrant breach of the international peace, now appears in the role of a custodian of world peace and is able to use that authority and cast its vote in furtherance of its aggressive designs. You will doubt less appreciate my government’s perplexity and sorrow at finding itself—the victim of Egyptian aggression—under suspicion by the US Government of having taken an action which might ‘place in jeopardy the peace of the Middle East’. I should be grateful if you would interpret to the US Government the feelings of the Government of Israel at finding itself, contrary to all rational expectations faced with a situation which appears so fundamentally to distort the true state of affairs prevailing in the Middle East.

6. As I have already had an opportunity of informing you, the report which the US Government has received from its representative in Transjordan is wholly without foundation. Not only has the Government of Israel not told the Government of Transjordan that the time has passed for the negotiation of an armistice’, but it is precisely an armistice which Israel is at present attempting to negotiate with Transjordan, in the hope that an armistice will soon lead to a permanent peace. I note your communication does not cite the Government of Transjordan as the source of this report.

7. I should like in conclusion to assure you, and to request you to convey this assurance to the US Government, that the Government of Israel has today in mind but one aim—peace. It nurtures no ambition to invade the territory of neighbouring states. Yet it feels bound to defend its territory and its people against aggression from whatever quarter that aggression may come and to take all legitimate measures dictated by considerations of self-defence. It will not regard that purpose as accomplished until the invading armies have withdrawn to their proper territories and peace has been established between Israel and her neighbours. It attaches the utmost importance to the retention by Israel of the friendship of the Government and people of the US and trusts that no conflict will arise between its paramount duty of self-defence and its vital interest in the retention of the friendship. It will always be sincerely appreciative of any help that the US Government can lend in restraining aggression and hastening the restoration of peace and hopes that the US Government may find it possible, as in the past, to exercise its good offices in this direction both with the Arab states and with the Government of the UK.

Accept, sir, the renewed expression of my highest consideration.” (Signed: Moshe Shertok, Minister for Foreign Affairs.)

Enclosure referred to in note is copy of the paraphrase of Deptel 281 of December 30 which I read to Shertok and Ben-Gurion as Shertok took it down in shorthand.

[Here follows enclosure.]

For American eyes only: Mission analysis of situation by the above development follows as part Two.2

McDonald

1  Foreign Relations, 1948, vol. v, Part 2, p. 1704.

2 See telegram 9, January 5, p. 614 [Pg. 614 is part of Doc. 355].

The Chargé in the United Kingdom (Holmes) to the Secretary of State 501.BB Palestine/1–449: Telegram

[Document 352]

The Chargé in the United Kingdom (Holmes) to the Secretary of State

top secret London, January 4, 1949—1 p. m.

20. Embassy having earlier asked regarding nature counsel being given Abdullah by UK (Dept’s repeat of Amman’s unnumbered, December 29, 4 p. m.1 ) Burrows2 January 3 stated that some time ago when Abdullah asked for advice UK made 3 points: (a) If possible Abdullah should not finalize any agreement reached with PGI before Conciliation Commission3 arrives (Burrows said accent is on finalize);

(b) There are great advantages in Abdullah and Egypt reconciling their differences and working together;

(c) UK made clear what it considers reasonable settlement with PGI along lines discussed earlier with Dept., i.e. GazA–Beersheba road as southern boundary Negev; Haifa and Lydda free ports, etc.

2. Upon learning of interview in which PGI representatives threatened Transjordan (paragraph 5, Dept’s 4819, December 304 ) Foreign Office telegraphed Kirkbride5 to tell Abdullah that it still considered its advice (paragraph 1 above) sound. In view HMG, Abdullah would be courting difficulties if he should continue to negotiate with PGI while Israeli forces still in Egypt. However, HMG aware serious responsibility involved for UK if it should advise Abdullah to refrain from any negotiations which Abdullah wished to undertake. Consequently, although HMG still hoped King would be able to “spin out” negotiations until CC arrives, Kirkbride “should not try to re strain Abdullah from any course of action upon which Abdullah decides in full knowledge facts.”

3. In same instruction Kirkbride was told to make clear that if Abdullah, acting upon Jericho resolution accepts formal union between Palestine and Transjordan without limiting this to Arab areas Palestine, UK would have to make clear that it does not recognize and cannot support any claims by Abdullah to areas which may be incorporated into Jewish state.

4. Burrows said that foregoing means Abdullah is free to act as he thinks best regarding negotiations and that he is not under any UK restraint.

5. Burrows said Foreign Office has just received report of January 1 meeting Jerusalem between Abdullah Tel for Abdullah and PGI representatives. Meeting “went rather well.” Israelis insisted confining “armistice” talks to Arab Legion area only and listed as points of interest to PGI access northern potash works and suggested re starting southern plant for which water would have to come from Transjordan.

Israelis suggested that boundaries should be defined between Arab Legion and Israeli forces, that prisoners should be exchanged and organization set up to handle claims. Israelis favored dividing Jerusalem and Tel replied this might be acceptable if Arab part Jerusalem included Arab quarters outside old city. Tel mentioned among Arab points of interest return Arabs of Lydda, Ramallah and Jaffa, and suggested he would like to discuss future of Galilee. Israelis made no comment.

6. Burrows asked classification should be observed regarding paragraph 5 above “since Abdullah is negotiating without knowledge Transjordan government” and should be protected from leaks.

7. Burrows commented that UK is pleased talks are continuing and that there have been “no more ultimata.” He thought it obvious that while talks are technically concerned with armistice, they have already gone well beyond this limit into field peace settlement. Burrows opined limiting talks to Arab Legion area “might be sinister,” since there is school of Arab thought (including Samir Pasha) which believes that as soon as some progress is made with Transjordan, Israeli forces will drive south from Baisan along Jordan valley thus cutting off Iraqis who at present show no signs of either negotiating or going home. Arab Legion is aleady spread thin and could not take over Iraqi front unless assured it would not have to meet Israeli attacks.

8. Asked regarding British ideas for road ahead, Burrows said Foreign Office still believes, and apparently Ambassador Griffis agrees, next move should be US and UK reaching understanding regarding territorial objectives (Embassy’s top secret despatch 2497 December 216 and A–23777 December 22). He said British Embassy Washington was instructed January 3 to suggest to Dept. that these talks should begin at once. Foreign Office was encouraged by British Embassy report December 28 that Department willing discuss with UK policy regarding Conciliation Commission which according Foreign Office logically should embrace territorial thinking.

9. Please keep Embassy fully informed.

Holmes

1 Presumably telegram 176, December 29, 1948, 5 p. m., not printed.

2 Bernard A. B. Burrows, Head of the Eastern Department of the British Foreign Office.

3 The United Nations Conciliation Commission for Palestine, hereinafter an notated as the Palestine Conciliation Commission.

4 This was a repeat of telegram 281 to Tel Aviv, Foreign Relations, 1948, vol. v, Part 2, p. 1704.

5 Sir Alec S. Kirkbride, British Minister in Transjordan.

6 Not printed (867N.01/12–2148); it transmitted a memorandum of December 17, 1948, prepared by the British War Office, which dealt “with the strategic significance of Palestine and in particular with the importance which the British War Office attaches to the location of Israel’s southern frontier.” This memorandum was a followup to the Douglas–Bevin meeting of December 14, as described in telegram 5244 from London of the same day, Foreign Relations, 1948, vol. v, Part 2, p. 1670.

7  Ibid., p. 1680.

Mr. John C. Ross to the Secretary of State 501.BB Palestine/1–449: Telegram

[Document 353]

Mr. John C. Ross 1 to the Secretary of State

secret New York, January 4, 1949—11:25 p. m.

3. For Rusk2 and Satterthwaite.3 Bunche informs that Azcarate4 phoned from Cairo this evening that Egyptians have confidentially notified him that they are ready to enter into talks with Israel on all outstanding questions under UN auspices provided Israelis will obey SC cease-fire order by 1400 GMT January 5.

Bunche describes this development as most encouraging in long time for there apparently are no strings attached. He has instructed Vigier5 to take up matter urgently in Tel Aviv pressing strongly in Bundle’s name for acceptance. Bunche has received no word from Tel Aviv regarding observance of SC cease-fire order to date. He has instructed Vigier to sound out Israelis on holding a high level conference on Rhodes with civil and military authorities of both Israel and Egypt under UN chairmanship. He thinks Transjordan could relatively easily be persuaded to join such a conference.

Bunche feels strongly that Israel should grab this opportunity at once if they want a peaceful settlement. He feels certain that it is a bona fide offer.

Bunche requests us to find opportunities tomorrow to impress on Israelis urgent importance of accepting this offer by deadline. He feels that advice from appropriate US officials would tip the scales at this critical juncture. However, he emphasized that matter should be treated with the utmost secrecy during next twenty-four hours.6

Bunche commented in same conversation this evening that until above development he was seriously contemplating requesting withdrawal of UN observers on Israeli side of lines at SO Negev committee7 meeting Friday, January 7, since observers are bottled up in Haifa and Tel Aviv. He feels that unless the SC can make its cease-fire order stick with the Israelis he will have no course but to pull out the military observers which now give only a false sense of security.

Ross

1 Deputy to Senator Warren R. Austin, U.S. Representative at the United Nations.

2 Dean Rusk, Director of the Office of United Nations Affairs.

3 Joseph C. Satterthwaite, Director of the Office of Near Eastern and African Affairs.

4 Pablo Azcarate, Acting Mediator Bunche’s Representative at Cairo.

5 Henri Vigier, Mr. Bunche’s representative at Tel Aviv.

6 After consulting with Messrs. Rusk and Satterthwaite, Robert M. McClintock, Special Assistant to Mr. Rusk, telephoned Mr. Ross at 10 a. m., January 5 regarding telegram 3. He observed to Mr. Ross that “the Egyptian deadline for entering into talks with Israel on all outstanding questions, provided the Israelis would obey the Security Council cease fire order by 1400 GMT today, had already passed, since this hour was 9 a. m., EST. Since the suggested representations which Dr. Bunche thought would be useful if made by the United States to the Provisional Government of Israel would have to be cleared with the President and the deadline was already expired, it seemed impossible for us to act on Dr. Bunche’s suggestion. I said, however, that I thought it would be entirely appropriate for the Acting Mediator to telephone Mr. Shertok in Tel Aviv and give him the information which Mr. Azcarate had telephoned from Cairo, together with Dr. Bunche’s own estimate of the situation.” (memorandum of conversation by Mr. McClintock, 501.BB Palestine/1–549)

7 A loose usage for the Committee on the Palestinian Question of the Security Council. Messrs. Rusk and Satterthwaite, in a joint memorandum of January 5 to Mr. Lovett, began preparation of instructions to the United States representative on the Committee. The memorandum noted that the Committee “was appointed pursuant to the Security Council’s resolution of November 4, which required Israel and Egypt to stop fighting in the Negev and to withdraw their forces to the positions occupied as of October 14. The purpose of the Committee was to study the situation in the light of this resolution and to determine whether it should recommend to the Security Council possible action under Chapter VII in the event that the resolution had not been complied with.” (501.BB Palestine/1–549)

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Acting Secretary of State 501.BB Palestine/1–549

[Document 354]

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Acting Secretary of State 1

top secret [Washington,] January 5, 1949.

Participants: The Acting Secretary, Mr. Lovett

The British Ambassador, Sir Oliver Franks

Mr. Bromley, First Secretary of the British Embassy

Mr. Satterthwaite—NEA

Mr. Wilkins—NE

Mr. McClintock—UNA

Sir Oliver Franks said that he had been instructed personally to thank the Acting Secretary of State for the prompt and effective intervention which this Government had made with the Provisional Government of Israel and which had resulted in instructions being given by the Israeli Government for the withdrawal of its forces from Egypt.

The British Ambassador said that Mr. Bevin, in view of the very great strategic interests of both the United States and Great Britain in the Near East and in the light of the necessity for an adequate defense in depth of the Suez Canal, very much hoped that the American Government might find its way clear to exert pressure on the Israeli Government to withdraw to the lines in the Negev established by the Acting Mediator after the adoption by the Security Council of its resolution of November 4, 1948.

I told the British Ambassador that for a variety of reasons I did not feel that we could accede to Mr. Bevin’s request. While, in an exceptional case such as that when the incursion by Israeli forces into Egypt threatened a much more grave conflict outside the boundaries of Palestine, we had been willing to make strong representations, our general line of policy was to operate through the United Nations. It did not seem proper for the United States to take on itself the responsibilities of the Security Council and apply them unilaterally. Furthermore, we had found in practice that strong representations, to be effective, should be used sparingly; otherwise notes often were merely interesting documents for the archives but useful for no other purpose. Finally, we had our position on the Conciliation Commission to consider. The Israeli authorities already believed that two of the Members of the Commission were prejudiced in favor of the Arabs, since Turkey was a Moslem country and France not only had 25 million Mohammedans living under its jurisdiction but also had not voted for Israel in last month’s sessions of the Security Council. If we were to achieve anything as an impartial member of the Commission we could not jeopardize that position by taking a line which would cause the Israelis to feel that even the third Member was against them. Meanwhile, of course, we continued to share the British anxiety over the situation in Palestine and were not stinting our efforts to do the utmost to bring about a cessation of hostilities. In fact we were this afternoon addressing new representations to the Governments of Israel and Egypt, based on a report received last night from the Acting Mediator, to the effect that Egypt had said it was willing to undertake negotiations all across the board with Israel under United Nations auspices, provided Israel accepted a cease-fire by 1400 hours GMT today. The deadline was so short that we were inclined to be Suspicious whether the, offer was bonafide but we thought that a representation was warranted by our desire to do everything possible to facilitate a cessation of hostilities.

Sir Oliver said that the second main point which Mr. Bevin wished to make was that with the continued stress of warfare in the Near East conditions in the Arab countries would become, as he put it, deliquescent, or, to use the more graphic aphorism of the Foreign Secretary, “We should have another China on our hands”. Accordingly, it was of the utmost importance that the United States and Great Britain, whose strategic interests were so involved in that area, do their utmost to compose this dangerous situation. Mr. Bevin wondered if the American Member of the Conciliation Commission might not be instructed by his Government to keep in mind the strategic interests of the United States and the United Kingdom and to use his good influence to further those interests. I said that, while naturally we would give background information to Mr. Keenan, our Representative on the Commission, we had no choice but to do our utmost to play the role of a true conciliator. Mr. Keenan and his colleagues had the task of trying to find some common ground for agreement which would be acceptable to all the parties concerned. If they could get agreement between the parties we would be bound to accept such an arrangement. However, Mr. Keenan of course would comport his action to the main lines of policy which had already been made public to the world by Dr. Jessup in his speech before Committee 1 on November 20.2 I briefly recapitulated our main points, including the fact that if the Israeli Government desired to benefit by the territorial provisions of the resolution of November 29, 1947, it should be expected to relinquish such areas as were awarded to the Arabs by that resolution but were now occupied by Israel, as Jaffa and western Galilee. In other words, they could not have it both ways. As for the strategic implications of the situation, I said that Mr. Keenan would be briefed before he went. The British Ambassador seemed to to be satisfied with this answer.

Sir Oliver then said that he had received permission to tell us that shortly British reinforcements would be sent to the Gulf of Aqaba.3 He did not, however, wish to inform us officially of this fact if we had no desire for such intelligence from his Government. In response to questioning the Ambassador intimated that the British reinforcements would be sent from outside by sea and that they numbered three companies in strength. (Mr. Bromley, however, murmured that he thought something like a battalion was being sent to Aqaba.)

I said that we had already received similar reports from other sources, including the press. I did not think that this Government wished to be officially appraised of the Ambassador’s information. As a matter of friendly comment, however, we wished to raise a little red flag and point out that if the troops indeed came to Transjordan from outside the Near Eastern area their arrival would be construed in many quarters as a violation of the Security Council truce resolution of May 29, which explicitly forebade the movement of military personnel into Palestine or the neighboring countries.

The interview concluded with Sir Oliver handing me a written statement of his Government’s views on the situation in China and a memorandum of its views with respect to the IRO.4

1 Drafted by Mr. McClintock.

2 See editorial note, Foreign Relations, 1948, vol. v, Part 2, p. 1617. Philip C; Jessup was the spokesman of the United States on questions involving Palestine at the Third Session of the General Assembly at Paris.

3 The British Foreign Office communiqué on this matter, issued on January 8, read as follows: “His Majesty’s Government have received a request from the Transjordan Government under the terms of the Anglo-Transjordan treaty of March 1948, to send a British force to Aqaba. His Majesty’s Government have acceded to this request.” (telegram 91, January 8, from London, 841.2390i/1–849)

4 Chargé Holmes, on January 5, cabled the Department concerning the instructions sent to Ambassador Franks on January 3 for his conversation with Acting Secretary Lovett. He noted that Mr. Bevin had personally drafted the instructions, which in part called for the Ambassador “to refer to identical lines of policy regarding Middle East worked out between US and UK in fall 1947, and to say that all British actions Middle East are based on this policy and nothing else. British Government understood US views general Middle East problems have not altered since 1947. … Franks told to urge USG to participate in resolute effort with UK to arrive at firm conclusions which US and UK can support as Palestine solution. Instruction stated three things necessary to accomplish this:“(a) Fix frontiers Israel which US and UK could support;

“(b) UK recognition PGI;

“(c) Strong advice to Arabs if not to accept at least to acquiesce in agreed frontiers and to cease fighting.”

The Ambassador was instructed “to urge that US and UK come to ‘Very firm conclusions’ and fix definite boundaries and thus arrive at final settlement which will save Middle East’.” (Telegram 47, 867N.01/1–549)

Regarding the “identical lines of policy” agreed upon at the “Pentagon Talks of 1947,” see Foreign Relations, 1947, vol. v, pp. 485 ff.

The Special Representative of the United States in Israel (McDonald) to the Secretary of State 501.BB Palestine/1–549: Telegram

[Document 355]

The Special Representative of the United States in Israel (McDonald) to the Secretary of State

top secret Tel Aviv, January 5, 1949—11 a. m.

us urgent

9. Attention President and Acting Secretary. Part Two.1 Following is unanimous consensus Mission staff including Service Attaches. While Deptel 3 of January 3 is most helpful and explanatory and is being communicated Foreign Office soonest, the representations made Israel under instructions Deptel 281 of December 302 gave the effect of putting US in new role with relation to conflict between Israel and Egypt. Thus, irrespective of what the precise intent was in instructing me to make those representations in the form indicated, the deduction, of the PGI that, by forcing Israel abandon an obviously successful military action (which would have, in mind army and public here, neutralized a forward Egyptian base from which Egypt has during six months repeatedly launched destructive air and other attacks against Israel without occasioning any recorded direct complaint by US or GB), the US is now directly involved in results of action it has taken. If Egyptian attacks should continue, or if misunderstanding our action encourages Iraqi attack in north, the US position will be compared here to Britain as power whose repeated maneuvers are having effect of letting Israel bleed to death by forcing her into position where she is neither free to end the war militarily nor obtain peace by negotiation [as called for by?] Security Council UN.

The military facts as Mission now understands them are that, owing our representations, Israel forces have abruptly retreated from Egyptian territory, abandoning control roads. The tactics of Israel Army apparently were to have raided El Arish and attack Rafah and neutralize them, then withdraw to open path for estimated 18,000 Egyptian troops to escape home to Egypt. Now situation very confused but it appears that the new position of Israeli forces has blocked escape route of Egyptians while leaving Rafah as yet untouched but completely cut off from northeast and southeast. This is what Mission meant when it ascribed “serious responsibility” arising out of US representations.

The public here has only today become aware of US representations and as implications become clearer, I anticipate unfavorable reaction. Mission troubled by possible internal political effect our move particularly as affecting January 25 elections. During last six months, I believe owing intensive efforts this Mission cultivate friendship and to the changed policy of delegation in Paris, the domestic political tide was definitely swinging toward West. These latest developments have given extreme left and extreme right powerful political campaign issue to use against what now appears here to be new and definite Anglo-American alignment. If we cannot now stop Egypt’s attack or persuade British to change its consistently antagonistic attitude toward Israel, these reactions will weigh against us.

All evidence here of PGI plans and Israel’s self-interest negates existence any intention seize or hold Egyptian territory. Mission sees no inconsistency between US support independent strong Israel and all legitimate British interests in Egypt.

Mission hopes that US action already taken (Deptel 1, January 23 and Deptel 2, January 34 ) will be helpful restraining Egypt. Unfortunately substance US representations Israel (Deptel 281, December 305 ) have come through London and are already widely publicized press here thus giving impression marked US partiality.

In view foregoing and in light of danger reaction with reference election, Mission urgently reiterates its recommendations contained Mistel 323, December 206 that US immediately grant de jure recognition or at least ExIm Bank loan.

Mission has taken into account appointment Conciliation Committee and its terms of reference. Mission considers that situation now created does not permit postponement of actions suggested, and that such actions would facilitate work Conciliation Committee. (Part one sent as Mistel 7, January 3.)

McDonald

1 For part one, see telegram 7, January 3, p. 605 [Pg. 605 is part of Doc. 351].

2  Foreign Relations, 1948, vol. v, Part 2, p. 1704.

3 Not printed; it advised of the Department’s request to the British Embassy to inform the Foreign Office that “in view PGI order withdraw all Israeli forces from Egyptian territory as result our representations … Dept strongly believes Brit should impress on Egyptians necessity of their refraining from further attacks similar that on Tel Aviv. Otherwise chain of reprisals set off may well jeopardize progress toward final settlement so far made.” (867N.2383/1–249)

4 This was a repeat of No. 2 to Cairo, p. 602 [Pg. 602 includes portions of Doc. 348 and Doc. 349].

5  Foreign Relations, 1948, vol. v, Part 2, p. 1704.

6  Ibid., p. 1674.

The Acting Secretary of State to the Embassy in Egypt 501.BB Palestine/1–549: Telegram

[Document 356]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Embassy in Egypt 1

top secret Washington, January 5, 1949—6 p. m.

us urgent

niact

14. Please call on FonMin and make following representation: 1. Acting Palestine Mediator has informed us that his Representative in Cairo telephoned Jan. 4 that Egyptian Govt had confidentially notified him of its readiness to enter into talks with Israel on all outstanding questions under UN auspices provided PGI obeys SC cease-fire order by 1400 GMT Jan. 5.

2. This Govt regrets that reported deadline provided little time in which to make friendly representations to both Govts of Israel and Egypt expressing hope of US Govt that cease-fire would promptly be obeyed and that negotiations between Israel and Egypt under UN auspices would be immediately undertaken to settle all outstanding questions.

4. [sic] American Govt profoundly hopes that Egyptian Govt will not alter its peaceful intent because reported deadline has already expired. US feels that reasonable opportunity should be given PGI in which to accept a serious and bona fide offer. You may inform FonMin that your Govt is making representations at Tel Aviv in hope that both Israel and Egypt will observe immediate cease-fire and commence negotiations for armistice and peace.

Repeated for info only to Tel Aviv as 7, London as 44.

Lovett

1 This telegram and No. 8, infra, were cleared with Mr. Clifford.

The Secretary of State to the Special Representative of the United States in Israel (McDonald), at Tel Aviv 501.BB Palestine/1–349: Telegram

[Document 357]

The Secretary of State to the Special Representative of the United States in Israel (McDonald), at Tel Aviv

top secret Washington, January 5, 1949—6 p. m.

us urgent

niact

8. Please call on FonMin and express your Govt’s gratification on learning from FonMin’s note Jan. 3 transmitted your Niact 7, Jan. 3, that no Israeli troops now remain on Egyptian territory.

2. Please add that this Govt is relieved that danger of much more serious conflict in Middle East has been averted. FonMin must realize representations of this Govt by you Dec. 31, pursuant to Deptel 281, Dec. 30,1 were motivated by sincere friendship of US Govt for Israel and its desire to see PGI avoid course of action which might have led to grave consequences.

3. Dept has been informed by Acting Mediator that his Representative in Cairo Jan. 4 informed him that Egyptian Govt had confidentially notified UN Representative it was willing to enter into talks with Israel under UN auspices on all outstanding questions, provided PGI will obey SC cease-fire order by 1400 GMT Jan. 5. Although this info reached Dept after this deadline had expired, this Govt in friendly spirit desires to acquaint PGI of foregoing info with trust that it may still be possible for PGI and Egypt to enter into negotiations following a prompt and effective cease-fire.

4. Inform FonMin that similar representations are being made to Egyptian Govt, and we are informing that Govt of our belief that a reasonable opportunity should be given PGI in which to accept a serious and bona fide offer.

Repeated to London as 45 and Cairo as 15 for info only.

Lovett

1  Foreign Relations, 1948, vol. v, Part 2, p. 1704.

The Acting Secretary of State to the Consulate General at Jerusalem 501.BB Palestine/1–349: Telegram

[Document 358]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Consulate General at Jerusalem

confidential Washington, January 5, 1949—6 p. m.

8. GA res 11 Dec 1948 provides inter alia that Conciliation Comm will undertake upon request SC functions now assigned UN Mediator or UN Truce Comm by SC resolutions. (Contel 5 Jan 31 ) When SC makes such request, Dept believes TC should be dissolved. Meanwhile, TC should [in] Dept’s opinion, remain as now constituted. SC res 23 April 19482 establishing TC made no provision addition or re placement members (ref Deptel 917 Sep 213 ).

Lovett

1 Not printed; it advised of the belief of the French Foreign Office that the Truce Commission should discontinue functioning with the arrival of the Palestine Conciliation Commission (501.BB Palestine/1–349).

2 See editorial note, Foreign Relations, 1948, vol. v, Part 2, p. 852.

3 Not printed; it stated that “SC Resolution Apr 23 establishing Truce Commission makes no provision additional members Truce Commission. Dept considers possible establishment Soviet ConGen Jerusalem would not automatically entitle USSR become member Truce Commission. UK has not thus far raised question its participation as result establishment Brit ConGen Jerusalem.” (501.BB Palestine/9–1648)

The Chargé in Egypt (Patterson) to the Secretary of State 501.BB Palestine/1–549: Telegram

[Document 359]

The Chargé in Egypt (Patterson) to the Secretary of State

top secret Cairo, January 5, 1949—7 p. m.

12. ReDeptels 2, January 3 and 4 January 4.1 As communicated to Department by Embtel 7, January 4,2 I was granted audience by His Majesty at 4 p. m., Wednesday, fifth. I opened conversation by mentioning Ambassador Griffis3 appreciation of his recent reception by King (Embtel 1782, January 24 ) mentioning likewise former Ambassador Tuck’s5 presence in Cairo. His Majesty remarked that he had questioned Ambassador Griffis re somewhat anomalous situation Chargé of this Embassy which had not previously, to his knowledge, arisen in Cairo adding an expression of surprise that Ambassador Griffis had not elected to mention to him subject matter on which I was calling and of which he was ignorant. I responded stating that Mr. Griffis had not been informed prior to his departure which accounted for my soliciting an audience so soon after Ambassador meeting HM. On my mentioning that Ambassador Griffis had called to explain his plans for alleviating ravages of war and that I too came on a mission of peace, King remarked that he had guessed as much. I immediately thereafter emphasized that I had called by express instruction of my government on a matter of urgency. HM replied that he would have received me yesterday (that is, the very day of my application for audience) had that been possible. After thanking King for his helpful promptitude I orally developed points of Deptel 2 above-mentioned. King inquired very particularly as to whether American Government had already indicated its concern to Israelis (I purposely avoided reference to PGI by name) and appeared content on my assuring him to that effect.

Re content numbered paragraph four, HM stated that Egyptian Government desirous of concluding armistice recommended by Security Council November 16, but that implementation resolution November 4 must concurrently take place. On my inquiring if implementation of both SC resolutions might not be effected simultaneously, King supposed this might be the case. HM remarked emphatically, however, that he had no faith in Jews or the slightest confidence that they would keep their word in any agreement. At same time HM pointed out that Egypt was in the current hostilities the attacked and not the attacker. Said hostilities, which he stated were now continuing, were of the utmost intensity and carried on by all weapons available to the Israelis, including tear and irritant gases. HM hesitated to describe such gases as being actually poisonous, but stated that Egyptians, who had not yet used them, would do so if the Israelis continued their employment. HM, while not as jovial as described by Ambassador Griffis in Embtel 1782, seemed in good spirits and manifested confidence in outcome of current struggle which he stated was probably the hardest fought engagement in Middle East since El Alamein. HM repeated, as in his January 2 talk with Ambassador Griffis, that the Egyptians had captured Russians. On my inquiring if these were not Russian Jews he stated that some were, but that pure Russians had been taken and likewise Poles, Hungarians, Dutch, and even South Africans. He had had this last-named fact brought to the attention of the South African Chargé d’Affaires even though he had not been able to produce the South Africans alive.

On my suggesting restraint recommended in numbered paragraph five giving reported bombing Jerusalem as example, HM quickly replied that his military informants had assured him that bombing had been effected by unmarked Jewish planes flying high over city with intent to place blame on Egyptians. On my subsequently mentioned reported attack on Tel Aviv by Egyptian vessels, HM stated that this combat had been a running naval engagement wherein Egyptian warships pursued Jewish ditto which endeavored to find refuge Tel Aviv, with resultant cannonading of coast. King remarked that Tel Aviv was not the objective adding that if Egyptians wished to bomb Tel Aviv they could do so anytime from air. He asked from what source American Government credits information, to which I replied that insofar as I was aware the reports had not necessarily been verified. On my mentioning that journalists seemed to have better access to the front from Israeli than from Egyptian side, King remarked that he and his officers did not like journalists about so that their exclusion from the Egyptian lines represented conscious policy. HM added that he believed allied military commanders during last war had found journalists uncomfortable persons.

Nevertheless I stressed the probability of reprisals should Egyptian attacks on Zionist-held territory be made, emphasizing that in such case it would be difficult for US or any other government to persuade Israelis not to attack. Again the King indicated that Israelis were the attackers. In conclusion I reiterated the influence attributed by my government to King Farouk, who is regarded as a leader in the Arab world, pointing out that as a sovereign and statesman he had exceptional authority and opportunity to bring peace to Middle East.

To this King replied that while indeed he exercised authority his powers were not as great as my government might imagine. He appeared definitely pleased, however, with this tribute to his position but did not refrain from iterating the observation made to Ambassador Griffis on January 2 to effect that US had brought trouble to Middle East and should use its best endeavors to solve the problems it had created. To this I responded by remarking that US Government was basically interested in restoring peace as its efforts near Israeli authorities and its instruction to me evidenced.

On conclusion of audience I handed King memorandum based on Deptel of which a copy will be forwarded by despatch.6 In so doing I remarked that while the memorandum which was designed for his convenience did not contain allusions to his person my government, as I had already informed him, had in its instruction to me repeatedly emphasized the vitally important responsibility which HM in his position as sovereign of Egypt and leader in Arab world possessed to bring about a lasting peace.

Patterson

1 Latter not printed.

2 Not printed.

3 Stanton Griffis, Ambassador in Egypt.

4 Not printed; it advised that Ambassador Griffis, on January 2, held a long discussion with King Farouk on the Palestine problem. The King advised him that “he must represent the will of his people and that his people want this war to go on if it takes ten years to finish it.” He also stated that “in view of fact that Russian participations in Israel attack had become so obvious, he was constantly astounded at attitude of US in matter; that Palestine was rapidly becoming another Greece and that Russians, despite all American efforts in, and aid to, Turkey, were rapidly becoming entrenched in strategic positions in Palestine back of Turkish center frontier.” The Ambassador noted that the King “Certainly indirectly confirmed my constantly stated belief that little progress can be made in Palestine settlement without completely approved blueprint, by US and UK.” He concluded that the “Department should consider possibilities even if unilateral, of bringing strong pressure on Israel to stop aggression and respect toothless UN orders. While I have in past tended to minimize Egyptian cry of ‘Russian, Russian,’ I am not now so confident. One thing is certain here, British are becoming extremely jittery re dangers of their own position and involvements which might ensue under their treaties with Egypt and Transjordan.” (867N.01/1–249)

5 S. Pinkney Tuck, Minister in Egypt from 1944 to 1946 and Ambassador in Egypt from 1946 to 1948.

6 The memorandum was dated January 5; a copy was transmitted to the Department by Cairo on January 7 in despatch 25 (501.BB Palestine/1–749).

Memorandum by the Director of the Office of Near Eastern and African Affairs (Satterthwaite) to the Under Secretary of State (Lovett) 501.BB Palestine/1–649.

[Document 360]

Memorandum by the Director of the Office of Near Eastern and African Affairs (Satterthwaite) to the Under Secretary of State (Lovett)

secret [Washington,] January 6, 1949.

Subject: Developments concerning Palestine

Discussion:

An officer of the British Embassy informed us this afternoon that the Embassy had been instructed by Mr. Bevin to tell the State Department that on December 30 King Ibn Saud1 had stated to the British Minister in Jidda that in view of the General Assembly resolution of December 11 calling for negotiations between the parties to the Pales tine dispute, the time had come for the US and the UK to put pressure on both sides to reach a quick final settlement, under the threat of the most severe economic sanctions. The King asked that no other Arab leaders be informed of this statement on his part, as he had not informed any of them that he was going to take such action. In speaking thus to the British Minister the King said that he was motivated by the fear that the present conflict would facilitate the spread of Communism in the Near East.

Mr. Bevin’s comment on this was that it pointed out the necessity of a firm US–UK agreement on boundaries in Palestine and the use of the influence of the US and UK to persuade both parties to reach a final agreement.

The British Embassy officer also stated that a RAF reconnaissance on January 4 showed a party of thirty Israeli troops still occupying a strong point within Egyptian territory six miles west of El Auja. Photographs taken on this reconnaissance revealed that an anti-tank ditch had been bulldozed across the road one mile west of the strong point and five miles inside Egypt. Three anti-tank guns were observed in position at the strong point.

1 Abdul Aziz ibn Saud, King of Saudi Arabia.

Editorial Note [Document 361]

Editorial Note

Cairo advised, on January 6 that Ibrahim Abdel Hady, the Egyptian Prime Minister, had telephoned the text of an aide-mémoire to Ambassador Rahim at Washington. The aide-mémoire was said to have expressed “appreciation for the friendly sentiments of US designed to reestablish peace in Palestine”; to have “insisted that Egypt had observed the Security Council’s resolutions in regards to Palestine while Zionist adversaries had not done so and had more over bombarded refugee camps and hospitals. Accordingly Egypt had been obliged to exercise legitimate defense against attacks”; and to have expressed astonishment at the accusation of bombarding Jerusalem, for “ever since May 15 [1948],” Egypt had “endeavored to spare Jerusalem and other holy places from the consequences of military action.” (telegram 15, 501.BB Palestine/1–649)

The aide-mémoire, an undated message from the Egyptian Embassy to the Department of State, was handed to Mr. Satterthwaite by Ambassador Rahim on January 7. (867N.01/1–749)

Editorial Note [Document 362]

Editorial Note

Acting Mediator Bunche, at Lake Success on January 6, made a report to the President of the Security Council, which advised that “the Government of Egypt and the Provisional Government of Israel have notified my representatives in Cairo and Tel Aviv, respectively, of their unconditional acceptance of a proposal providing for a cease-fire to be immediately followed by direct negotiations between representatives of the two Governments under United Nations chairmanship on the implementation of the Security Council resolutions of 4 and 16 November 1948.” The proposal provided that the cease-fire would be effective on January 5, but the date was postponed until the following day, “owing to unavoidable delays in cable communication with Haifa and Tel Aviv.” The effective date was finally fixed at 1200 hours GMT, January 7, “Owing to further communication delays.” The Security Council, on January 6, released the text of Mr. Bundle’s report as S/1187.

The Acting Mediator informed the Committee on the Palestinian Question of the Security Council on January 7 that he had “transmitted a formal proposal to the parties that since it was desirable for the negotiations to be held in the best possible atmosphere, they be conducted at Rhodes; He had also suggested they get under way Jan. 11 or 12.” (telegram 11, January 7, 8:22 p. m., from New York, 501.AJ Treaties/1–749)

The Acting Secretary of State to the United States Representative at the United Nations (Austin) 501.BB Palestine/1–649: Telegram

[Document 363]

The Acting Secretary of State to the United States Representative at the United Nations (Austin)

confidential Washington, January 6, 1949—3 p. m.

us urgent

niact

3. Confirming Rusk–Ross telephone conversation today, following is attitude to be adopted by USRep in SC Committee on Palestine scheduled for Fri., Jan. 7.

Principal objective is to get SC and its Committee to deal with Palestine in such way as not to impair possibility of success of Conciliation Commission. Inactivity Lebanese, Syrians, Iraqi, Saudi Arabians and negotiations now in process between Israel and Transjordan would make it unfortunate for an exaggeration of present Israeli-Egyptian difficulty to throw entire Palestine situation into fresh turmoil. US is exercising maximum influence on both Israel and Egypt to cease present hostilities.

SC Committee should give careful study to the reports of the Acting Mediator and his Chief of Staff on the actual fighting in the Negev and to the statements of PGI and Egypt before making Committee recommendations to SC as whole. If Bunche–Riley reports and statements of parties do not sufficiently clarify the picture, the Committee should, through its Chairman, request additional info from those having access to the facts.

If the facts are fully developed and lead members of the Committee to propose that Committee recommend further action under Chap. VII, USRep would have to state that he must refer such recommendation to his Govt for instructions. If, nevertheless, such proposals come to an immediate vote, USEep should abstain.1

In view of strength of recent US approaches to Cairo and Tel Aviv and of early departure Conciliation Commission, believe majority other members SC Committee would accept our position if approached privately.2

Lovett

1 The Chairman of the Committee on the Palestinian Question reported to the Security Council on January 7 that “the Committee was of the opinion that no further action by it was required at the moment.” The Council released the report of the Committee the same day as S/1191.

2 This telegram was cleared in substance with Mr. Clifford.

Memorandum of Conversation, by Mr. Samuel K. C. Kopper 501.BB Palestine/1–749

[Document 364]

Memorandum of Conversation, by Mr. Samuel K. C. Kopper 1

top secret [New York,] January 7, 1949.

Subject: Boundary Settlement in Palestine

Participants: Mahmoud Fawzi Bey, Permanent Egyptian Representative to the UN

Mr. John C. Ross, Deputy to the U.S. Representative to the UN

Mr. S. K. C. Kopper, Special Ass’t. to the Director, NEA, Department of State

Fawzi Bey asked Mr. Ross and myself to lunch today to discuss further the matter he had raised, in the first instance, with the Secretary last summer, and more recently, and in more detail, with Dr. Jessup and myself in Paris (Delgas 920 and 953, Nov. 24 and 26, 1948).2

This matter has to do with the Egyptian views on what should be the proper boundary settlement in Palestine and the desirability for an informal understanding at the earliest possible opportunity between the United States, United Kingdom and Egypt. The principal features of our conversation today dwelt upon the question of whether such conversations should be undertaken and if so where should they be held.

Fawzi Bey said that while he was in Cairo at the turn of the year he had taken this subject up with the Egyptian Government. He now had authority to enter in discrete informal conversations with the American and British Governments regarding the boundary lines which should be established in southern Palestine. He said that his position was one where the Government of Egypt would have to be able to denounce him if dire necessity required it to do so, i.e. if any informal understanding he worked out could not be put over in Egypt. Accordingly, he thought any informal private negotiations should be undertaken in New York. If they were undertaken in Cairo, London or Washington it would lend an official governmental air to the negotiations from which it would be almost impossible to deviate. Besides this some of the Egyptian officials were somewhat wary of under taking conversations in London because of the political atmosphere surrounding United Kingdom-Egyptian relations at the moment.

Mr. Ross and I pointed out that the establishment of the Palestine Conciliation Commission by the General Assembly on December 11th was a most important factor which we would have to take into consideration before deciding on whether informal conversations should be carried on behind the scene. We said that even assuming such conversations might take place they would have to be handled very carefully and could not in any way impede the work of the Conciliation Commission. Fawzi Bey seemed to understand this. He said that the objective of such informal conversations would be to facilitate the work of the Conciliation Commission.

I explained that following Fawzi Bey’s approach to Dr. Jessup in Paris which we of course had reported to the Department it had been agreed informally in Paris by Mr. Rusk, Mr. Ross, Mr. Wilkins and myself that Paris would not have been a suitable place or time to undertake the negotiations envisaged by Fawzi Bey. Mr. Rusk had indicated that it was a matter we would have to take up after the conclusion of the General Assembly. I explained to Fawzi Bey that the question had not been discussed since our return and, therefore, no decision had been taken. Mr. Ross suggested that we endeavor to obtain the views of the Department at an early date.

Mr. Ross then indicated that if the discussions were to be held his first reaction was that New York would be the most suitable location.

I inquired of Fawzi Bey what the position of Egypt was now regarding the boundary settlement. He replied that it was substantially the same as it had been when he spoke to Dr. Jessup. He reiterated that the Jewish bulge in the Negev should be rectified.

Fawzi Bey then repeated what he had indicated to the Secretary last summer and to us in Paris during the fall. There were many Egyptian leaders who were anxious to get the Palestine question settled so that they could get along with the development of the Egyptian economical and social system. He felt, however, that a pre requisite to this was the settlement of the Palestine situation. He repeated what he had told Dr. Jessup in response to the latter’s question regarding the possibility of Egypt and Transjordan working out their differences. Fawzi Bey said that it would be difficult to do this but it was by no means impossible.

Mr. Ross and I informed Fawzi Bey in a personal manner and with complete candor that we thought the more constructive role which Egypt had played in the last number of months was helpful toward gaining a solution to this problem. We promised to let him know the reaction of the American Government to his proposal at an early date.

This conversation took place at Lake Success.

1 Mr. Kopper was Special Assistant to the Director of the Office of Near Eastern and African Affairs; at this time, he was detailed as an Adviser to the U.S. Delegation at the United Nations.

2  Delga 920 is printed in Foreign Relations, 1948, vol. v, Part 2, p. 1625; No. 953 is not printed, but see footnote 2 to Delga 920, ibid., p. 1627.

The Minister in Saudi Arabia (Childs) to the Secretary of State 867N.01/1–749: Telegram

[Document 365]

The Minister in Saudi Arabia (Childs) to the Secretary of State

top secret Jidda, January 7, 1949—noon.

21. Legtel 20, January 7.1 British Ambassador and I received together [by] King 9 a. m. Legation Arab secretary says reception two representatives together to discuss political problems unprecedented SAG–US relations.

King began by saying he was faced by extremely critical situation. He loved Arabs above all else and his greatest enmity was directed towards Jews. He had been severely criticized other Arab states not giving greater support Arab cause. He had failed to heed Syrian pleas additional help. He had only sent originally thousand troops Palestine and would have sent no more but when Jews crossed into Egypt with which country he was bound by closest ties and when Jewish planes flew over Saudi territory (Legtel 92 ) he had no alternative but to send additional thousand troops as he had done in past few days in order to defend his friends and take action to insure respect his own territory. He said otherwise he would have been without honor.

King spoke use being made Jews by Russians and disorders which were bound to ensue unless effective measures taken by his friends and by him. He recalled strong ties which united him with British and US. He observed British Government had recently reaffirmed its treaty obligations Egypt, Transjordan and Iraq. This left only Lebanon, Syria and Saudi Arabia as Arab states whose friendship had not been publicly acknowledged by either Britain or US. He had repeatedly approached US Government for some assurances re US attitude toward him but had not obtained anything. He could not be left in this fashion and he had therefore taken the step to call together with him both British and US representatives in order stress his appreciation of critical situation and to request them to bring his viewpoints before their governments.

King observed that although Great Britain had committed itself re three Arab countries it had remained silent re Saudi Arabia which had been of unreserved assistance during both world wars. So far as US was concerned Americans partners in Saudi Arabia and he could not understand our silence particularly when he had been so severly attacked by other Arab states by reason of his failure to give greater assistance in Palestine while every protection had been afforded American interests in Saudi Arabia.

HM made reference during audience to request Russian Ambassador Cairo last year (presumably 1947) for resumption Soviet-SAG diplomatic relations. He said he had declined on grounds Soviet had no interests this country.

King concluded “you know my thoughts and you are at liberty state what you may choose in your message to your government expressive my point of view. It is requested viewpoints of your two governments be made known to me. Either you must say you are my friends and will support me or you must say no and then I will know what other means I must take.”3

Sent Department 21, repeated London 4.

Childs

1 Not printed; it conveyed the opinion expressed by King Ibn Sand to British Ambassador Trott that there was only one way to deal with the Palestine situation, namely for the “British and US Government[s] to propose economic sanctions against both Arabs and Jews unless they are prepared to put an end to fighting [in] Palestine.” (867N.00/1–749)

2 Dated January 4, not printed.

3 Saudi Arabian Deputy Foreign Minister Yusuf Yassin called Minister Childs to the Foreign Office on January 9 to convey a message “to be accepted as statement from King.” Mr. Childs summarized the message as follows:“1. Palestine situation was very critical and Jewish planes were repeatedly trespassing over Saudi territory.…

“2. Arabs will never accept Jewish Government in Palestine or Middle East.

“3. Problem is not one between Arabs and Jews but has gone much farther than that and involves much larger question, namely, one between world and Communism.

“4. Is it possible, I was asked, for US and British Governments jointly to take position of force against the two parties immediately involved in Palestine; namely Arabs and Jews. Could they bring force to separate two parties, a separation to be enforced by power?” (telegram 23, January 9, 11 p. m., from Jidda, 867N.01/1–949)

The Department replied to telegram 23 on January 28. In part, it suggested that the “King could be helpful in telling other Arab states that time has come to negotiate settlement and recommending to them that they work sincerely to achieve this end, either through direct negotiation or through Commission.… US Govt has appreciated King’s past advice and counsels of moderation to other Arab States. It earnestly hopes that King will find it possible to exhibit same moderation in counseling Arab States in manner outlined … above.” (telegram 30, 867N.01/1–949)

The Special Representative of the United States in Israel (McDonald) to the Secretary of State 867N.01/1–749: Telegram

[Document 366]

The Special Representative of the United States in Israel (McDonald) to the Secretary of State

top secret   urgent
niact Tel Aviv, January 7, 1949—8 p. m.

20. In absence Shertok and Ben Gurion but with Ben Gurion’s authority, Shiloah informs (6 p. m.) me of grave events today as follows: 1. At 5 local time, fighting had not ceased in south. Israeli forces were ordered to cease but, according Shiloah, something seems to have slipped on Egyptian side.

2. At 10:30 a. m. today, according incomplete data received by PGI, four British Spitfires “carrying bombs” strafed Israeli troops in Rafah 078079 area. Israel planes engaged combat and downed two, one at Imara 104081. One British pilot badly wounded and probably now dead. Other British is being brought as prisoner to Tel Aviv.

3. At 4 p. m. twelve Spitfires returned area presumably searching for previous flight. Israeli planes rose and shot down one and Spit fires apparently retired.

4. PGI considers attack by British planes as “unprovoked aggression” and declares situation extremely grave.

5. Israel Air Force has received instructions to avoid engagements with British.

[Here follows section numbered 6 dealing with the Israeli-Iraqi front.]

McDonald

Memorandum of Telephone Conversation, by the Director of the Office of Near Eastern and African Affairs (Satterthwaite) 867N.01/1–849

[Document 367]

Memorandum of Telephone Conversation, by the Director of the Office of Near Eastern and African Affairs (Satterthwaite)

confidential [Washington,] January 8, 1949.

Subject: Attack on RAF Planes by IAF Planes

Participants: Julius Holmes, Chargé d’Affaires, London

J. C. Satterthwaite, NEA

Mr. Holmes telephoned at 10:30 this morning to say that the news about the shooting down by the Israeli Air Force of five Royal Air Force planes was true and that Ambassador Franks had been instructed to see Mr. Lovett this morning to give him the facts. Mr. Holmes was sent for by Mr. Bevin who, however, was in a meeting by the time Mr. Holmes arrived at the Foreign Office and these facts were therefore given him by Michael Wright.1

To summarize the information given Mr. Holmes, the RAF planes were attacked over Egyptian territory, the attack was unprovoked, and the RAF planes were under orders not to cross the Palestinian frontier and to avoid combat. A total of five planes were shot down, four out of the first reconnaissance flight and one out of the second.

Much of the information which the British now have is based on a report from the leader of the first reconnaissance flight, who bailed out over Egyptian territory. Another important point that Mr. Holmes made was that the British assured him that the reconnaissance planes did not carry bombs and did not engage in any offensive action.

Mr. Holmes said that the British are on the point of issuing a rather lengthy press communiqué giving full details of the loss of these planes. The final paragraph reads as follows: “In view of these unprovoked attacks, our aircraft have now been instructed to regard as hostile any Jewish aircraft encountered over Egyptian territory.”

In reply to Mr. Holmes’ query whether the British expected to continue the reconnaissance flights, he was told that the commander of the Royal Air Force has been given discretion in this respect.

Mr. Holmes said that he had been shown a map based on both tactical and photographic reconnaissance which clearly shows a line of Jewish strong points well inside Egyptian territory.

He said also that all this information has been telegraphed to Sir Terence Shone2 with a request that he pass it on immediately to the Acting UN Conciliator. Furthermore, Mr. Marriott, the British Consul General in Haifa, has been instructed to go to Tel Aviv at once and give this information to the PGI.

Mr. Wright also told Mr. Holmes that Mr. Bevin views this situation in the most serious light, and considers the situation extremely grave. Mr. Holmes said the British are jittery and worked up about this development. He hoped that he would be successful in calming them down somewhat. Mr. Bevin asked Mr. Wright also to tell Mr. Holmes that the Chiefs of Staff and the Minister of Defense had been consulted concerning the orders that were issued and that they had been approved by Mr. Attlee.3

Mr. Holmes said that he was calling at once in order that we should have this information and know that it was being made public.

Note: The sense of the foregoing was telephoned to Mr. Clark Clifford at the White House at 11:05 a. m. I also told him that Mr. Lovett would appreciate it if he would pass this information on to the President as soon as possible, since the situation might become very serious.

1 Michael R. Wright, Superintending Under Secretary of the Eastern Department in the British Foreign Office.

2 Of the British Delegation at the United Nations.

3 Clement R. Attlee, British Prime Minister.

The Acting Secretary of State to the Special Representative of the United States in Israel (McDonald), at Tel Aviv 501.BB Palestine/1–849: Telegram

[Document 368]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Special Representative of the United States in Israel (McDonald), at Tel Aviv

secret Washington, January 8, 1949—8 p. m.

us urgent

niact

13. Re USUN telegram 13 Jan 81 repeated to you today call immediately on FonMin and state that this Govt profoundly hopes that reported continuance of military operations by Israeli forces after cease fire deadline has no basis in fact. You should add that this Govt was most gratified yesterday to hear PGI representative assure SC Palestine Committee of Israel’s pacific intent, its willingness to abide by cease fire and to negotiate across the board with Egypt under UN auspices. Conclude by saying that your Govt hopes immediate assurances can be given by PGI reaffirming this official statement.

Repeated London as 94, Cairo as 28, USUN 12.

Lovett

1 Not printed; it advised of information from Mr. Bunche concerning an Egyptian protest that the Israelis had moved into Egyptian territory after the cease-fire deadline and were still there. The telegram also transmitted the Acting Mediator’s request that the United States make representations to Tel Aviv to persuade the Israelis to make immediate withdrawal (501.BB Palestine/1–849).

The Special Representative of the United States in Israel (McDonald) to the Secretary of State 867N.2383/1–849: Telegram

[Document 369]

The Special Representative of the United States in Israel (McDonald) to the Secretary of State

secret
priority Tel Aviv, January 8, 1949—11 p. m.

21. Re Deptel 12, January 7.1 Talks with Shiloah and principal military liaison reveals UN observers left Tel Aviv for Negev on 7 January and are now able examine all positions. It was pointed out by Shiloah that area west of El Auja (El Aujar) is open desert without frontier markings. He offered investigate alleged position Israeli and report to mission.

Re Deptel 11, January 72 re Egyptian protest to UN, Shiloah asserts UN has not forwarded any such protest to PGI as of 4 p. m. today and there is no knowledge here of such actions by Israeli forces. With UN now in field both sides all fighting believed stopped except at Rafah where Israeli claim local Egyptian commander continues artillery fire.

Mission has no way of checking RAF report or the alleged Israeli violations cease-fire and service attaches strongly suggest such technical matters be left UN observers on spot and that mission not become involved.

McDonald

1 Not printed; it requested comment on information from the British Embassy that Royal Air Force reconnaissance on January 4 and 5 showed that Israeli troops, armed with three antitank guns, still occupied a strong point in Egyptian territory west of El Auja and that an antitank ditch had been bulldozed across a nearby road 5 miles inside Egypt (867N.2383/1–749).

2 Not printed; it repeated the text of the aide-mémoire left by the Egyptian Ambassador at 4 p. m. that afternoon stating that shortly after the ceasefire at 2 p. m., January 7, Zionist forces had advanced once more into Egyptian territory, had bombarded several civilian objectives at Deir el-Balah in the Egyptian zone in Palestine as well as refugee camps, and that the Egyptian Government could not hold itself responsible for the consequences of continued Zionist violation of the ceasefire (867N.2383/1–749). The Department, on January 7 sent the text of the Egyptian aide-mémoire to Mr. Ross at New York and directed him to bring the matter to Mr. Bunche for comment (telegram 8, 501.BB Palestine/1–749).Egyptian Prime Minister Hady called in Chargé Patterson at 7 p. m. on January 7 and conveyed to him the information contained in the aide-mémoire. The Chargé “expressed the hope that the apparent renewal of hostilities after a cease-fire … might be due to the short time available for notifying local commanders. I would hasten to apprise my government to [of] Egyptian view point since I was certain from Urgent instructions … of deep and serious concern of US Government in the importance not only of a cease-fire but also of attainment of general settlement in Palestine at earliest possible moment.… I urged upon Hady Pasha the importance of not allowing localized attacks to degenerate into general hostilities inimical to the reestablishment of the cease-fire.” (telegram 20, January 7, 9 p. m., from Cairo, 501.BB Palestine/1–749)

Mr. Wells Stabler to the Secretary of State 867N.01/1–949: Telegram

[Document 370]

Mr. Wells Stabler to the Secretary of State

secret Amman, January 9, 1949—4 p. m.

13. Mytel 5, January 4.1 Glubb Pasha2 gave following account this morning of meeting held January 5 between Abdullah El-Tel rep resenting King and Dayan and Shiloah representing Israelis:

During course of meeting Abdullah El-Tel said that Transjordan would wish return of Ramle and Lydda as they predominantly Arab areas. Israelis replied in connection this argument they claimed areas in Negev which were predominantly Jewish prior hostilities. Tel is alleged to have commented that these areas small, at which point Israelis asked him to delimit territories he had in mind. However Tel replied that he must refer this question to his government. Other points also raised but no progress made.

Glubb believed next meeting scheduled for January 12 or 13 in Jerusalem.

In Glubb’s opinion progress of meetings too slow due mainly to fact that Prime Minister and Transjordan Government are not supposed to be informed in matter. In final analysis government would have to decide question and sign any agreement and therefore present state of affairs prevents presentation concrete suggestions. Unless both parties are able to cease fencing and come down to point by point definitive discussion of what each one wants and what each is prepared to give other in compromise possible that existing cordiality will be jeopardized and only several more meetings can be held.3

Re Israel’s and Egypt’s agreement entered direct armistice talks under United Nations auspices, Glubb thought this might give impetus to King’s bringing out into open Transjordan’s present talks with Jews. Hoped Israel would not use these talks to play one Arab state off against another.

Sent Department 13, repeated Jerusalem 9.

Stabler

1 Not printed.

2 Maj. Gen. John Bagot Glubb, Commander of the Transjordanian Arab Legion.

3 In telegram 15, January 10, Amman advised further that the meeting between the Israelis and Abdullah el-Tel on January 5 were “inconclusive with topics still being discussed in preliminary manner. Israelis presented their credentials signed by Ben Gurion and Shertok. While they seemed dubious about telegram’s credentials signed by King only, they nevertheless accepted them. Kirkbride said atmosphere meeting had been described as cordial with Israelis making special effort.” (867N.01/1–1049)Tel Aviv, on January 6, reported on the same matter as follows: “At Foreign Ministry request Shiloah reported meeting last night PGI and Transjordan representatives Jewish Jerusalem on armistice went well. Transjordan representative, in reply question from Shiloah, confirmed there had been no threat of ‘peace or war’ in previous talks and had added ‘if there had been we would not now be talking.’ Shiloah added significantly that Transjordan representative stated British now cognizant negotiations.” (telegram 14, 501.BB Palestine/1–649)

London, on January 12, advised of information from the British Foreign Office on the meeting of January 5 (telegram 145, 501.BB Palestine/1–1249). This message read in part as follows:

“First point discussed was possibility division Jerusalem into Arab and Jewish areas with exchange isolated pockets of Arab and Jewish populations. Jews said Old City should be international zone in Arab area but insisted that Hebrew University and Hadassah hospital, although isolated, must remain Jewish and must be linked by corridors.

“2. Next topic was Negev in which Jews said they must have access to potash works southern end Dead Sea and access to Red Sea where they propose to build port. They added PGI quite agreeable to provide means to build port for joint use Israel and Transjordan.

“3. When Tel replied Transjordan must have access to Mediterranean it was recognized that all objections to this were difficult to reconcile and left at that.

“4. Transjordan representative again referred to Jaffa and Galilee (paragraph 5 Embassy’s 20, January 4) which he said must be returned to Arabs but Jews evaded this issue and repeated that any frontiers set would have to be based on present military situation.

“5. Jews offered to return six Arab Legion prisoners and all Egyptian prisoners in return for Jewish prisoners held by Transjordan and 200 Jews held by Egyptians.…

“6. Transjordan representatives referred to plight refugees, said they should return to their homes. Jews did not refuse to agree but argued it would be simpler for PGI to pay refugees compensation and to assist settlements refugees Transjordan.…”

The Special Representative of the United States in Israel (McDonald) to the Secretary of State 501.BB Palestine/1–949: Telegram

[Document 371]

The Special Representative of the United States in Israel (McDonald) to the Secretary of State

top secret
niact
urgent Tel Aviv, January 9, 1949—10 p. m.

24. ReDeptel unnumbered (Usun 13) 8 January 4 [3] p. m.,1 and Deptel 13, January 8, 8 p. m. Galled on Foreign Minister at 3:30 p. m. today accompanied by Knox and Archibald.2 Shertok replied as follows: 1. PGI fully confirms statement made [to] Palestine Committee SC by Israel representative and furthermore adds the “determination” of PGI to: (1) maintain ceasefire; (2) proceed full negotiations with Egypt.

I then stated, with reference allegations Israel units still remain Egyptian soil, that on basis information received from Ben Gurion and from Foreign Minister himself, I had positively assured my government of total withdrawal as of January 2. Shertok replied:

That as of time he made statement to me Israeli units were actually all out of Egypt but that subsequently, and before ceasefire, it may be that some Israeli units re-entered temporarily as a phase of operations covering a movement near Rafah. Foreign Minister stated that abruptness of withdrawal orders created great military confusion in area (re this assertion service attaches point put that withdrawal under combat conditions always difficult and complicated move to complete within limited time). He added categorically that orders have been issued all Israeli units that found themselves on Egyptian side frontier at time ceasefire to return to Israel side forthwith, and he is confident this being done. (Note: At 6 p. m. today Air Attaché personally asked ICS Dori3 to give him facts and reply was that all Israeli units were in fact out of Egypt on January 2 but that subsequently and before ceasefire hour arranged, Israeli units entered road to Egypt in order to cut it as a phase of attack on Rafah; Dori added that since the deadline hour of ceasefire all Israeli units have been ordered out of Egypt and are in process of coming out on direct orders ICS. This information corroborates Shertok’s explanation.)

Foreign Minister then referred to Egyptian allegations Israel violations ceasefire (reDeptel 11, January 74 ) and stated that PGI categorically denied them. In particular he stated there was no air attack on Arab refugee camp.5

New subject: Foreign Minister then stated his wish inform us that PGI considerably perturbed by presence British troops Akaba. He is not aware of any Israel threat to Transjordan territory. At secret meeting 5 January between Israel representatives and Abdullah Tel in Jewish Jerusalem, Israeli asked Tel if King had invoked Anglo-Transjordan treaty. Tel alleged to have at first denied that King had asked for British troops but later was evasive on grounds “military secrecy”. PGI formally asking Transjordan for what reason Anglo-Transjordan treaty was invoked. PGI feels only rational deduction is that presence British troops Akaba designed constitute threat to Israel territory in Negev.

New subject: Foreign Minister than referred to “astonishing news” that British Consul General Haifa unofficially advising British nationals leave Israel. Foreign Minister stated that several British nationals had asked PGI Foreign Office representative in Haifa what to do and that representative was urging them stay in Israel.

McDonald

1 Not printed, but see footnote 1 to telegram 13, January 8, p. 629 [Pg. 629 includes portions of Doc. 368 and Doc. 369].

2 Col. Edwin P. Archibald, Air Attaché in Israel.

3 Maj. Gen. Yaakov Dori, Israeli Chief of Staff.

4 Not printed; but see footnote 2, p. 629 [Pg. 629 includes portions of Doc. 368 and Doc. 369].

5 The four consecutive paragraphs concluding at this point were quoted in a night action telegram to Cairo on January 10. The Department informed Chargé Patterson that this excerpt indicated the intention of the Provisional Government of Israel to observe the cease-fire and to withdraw its forces from Egypt; it also authorized the Chargé to informally “communicate substance this telegram to Egyptian Prime Minister and emphasize hope that Egyptian Govt for its part will do nothing to disturb present tense situation. You should add that US is gratified at present intention of both Egypt and Israel to meet in Rhodes for discussions which we trust will result in establishment of permanent peace in Palestine. Re recent shooting down of RAF planes you should tell Prime Minister that we firmly believe this should be kept to confines of an Israeli-UK incident and should not be permitted to affect negotiations between Arab Govts and Israel looking toward settlement of Palestine conflict.” (telegram 33, 501.BB Palestine/1–949)

Memorandum of Conversation, by Mr. Stuart W. Rockwell of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs 867N.01/1–1049

[Document 372]

Memorandum of Conversation, by Mr. Stuart W. Rockwell of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs

[Washington,] January 10, 1949.

Participants: Mr. Eliahu Epstein, Special Representative of the Provisional Government of Israel

NEA—Mr. Satterthwaite

NE—Mr. Wilkins

Mr. Rockwell

Mr. Epstein called at his own request. During the course of the conversation he covered the following points. 1. He stated that he had just received a cable from Mr. Shertok to the effect that any Israeli soldiers who might have reentered Egyptian territory had now been withdrawn from Egypt. The Provisional Government of Israel desired to enter the negotiations with Egyptians at Rhodes with a completely clean slate.1

2. Although the military situation had been the primary factor inducing the Egyptians to agree to armistice negotiations, the Provisional Government of Israel realized that the representations made in Tel Aviv and Cairo by the United States had been of immense help. The representations had been made at just the right psychological moment and the Provisional Government of Israel was very grateful to the United States.

3. At a time when things seemed to be moving along so well between Egypt and Israel, it was extremely unfortunate that the British should have become involved. It was pure folly to send reconnaissance planes over a delicate military area where a battle was raging and where it was extremely difficult to determine the boundary line between Egyptian territory and Palestine. Israel sincerely hoped that the incident of the five airplanes shot down could be confined to Israel and Great Britain but foresaw that this incident had very serious implications as regards a general peace settlement. Mr. Epstein declared that he personally did not share the point of view of some Israeli pessimists that the British, by sending a force to Akaba, were preparing to invade Palestine and obtain what they had not been able to achieve through the Bernadotte report.2 However, the British action in connection with the airplane incident and in sending troops to Akaba certainly indicated that the British intended to carry on a war of nerves against Israel. Israel had no intention whatsoever of invading any of the Arab states and had only taken action against the Egyptians because the Provisional Government of Israel could no longer tolerate the menace of a large Egyptian force only thirty five miles from Tel Aviv. Not only did the British activities threaten a final peace settlement by encouraging the Arabs to intransigence, but they also would have an unfavorable effect on the Israeli elections in that they would induce people to believe that cooperation with the west was a wrong course to follow. Mr. Epstein pointed out that while, of course, the United States was not involved in this British attitude, there would be many people in Israel who would not distinguish between the United States and Great Britain when they went to the polls. Under the circumstances, Mr. Epstein very much hoped that just as the United States had made representations in Egypt and Israel, so it would undertake to point out to the British that the course of action they were following could only lead to further trouble. Later on in the conversation it developed that in making this suggestion Mr. Epstein was not acting under instructions from Tel Aviv but was expressing his own personal desire which he was confident would be supported by Tel Aviv.

4. Mr. Epstein took up the question of peace negotiations with the Arab states other than Egypt. He said that if the Israelis received a guarantee from the Lebanese that they were sincerely prepared to sit down to serious armistice and peace negotiations Israel would with draw its forces from the Lebanon. However, the Lebanese should not believe that they could get the Jewish troops out of their country by agreeing to peace negotiations but then stalling once the Israelis had left. Mr. Epstein did not appear to think there would be much difficulty in coming to an agreement with the Lebanese once the other Arab states started on the road to negotiations with Israel. As regards the Iraqi, Mr. Epstein said that Nuri es-Said Pasha3 was a moderate man but that he probably did not represent the attitude of the Iraqi Government. He had come to power through Force Majeure and his moderation would probably not have much influence as far as negotiations with Israel were concerned. Mr. Epstein did not think there would be difficulties with the Iraqi troops, who were further removed from Tel Aviv than the Egyptians. As regards Transjordan, Mr. Epstein believed that it would be entirely possible to enter peace negotiations with King Abdullah if the British would allow the latter to do so. He thought that the Transjordan Government, if left to its own devices, would not have requested the British to send troops to Akaba.

Mr. Epstein said that when he saw Mr. Lovett tomorrow4 at 2:30 he would develop the some trend of thought unless he had before that time received new instructions from Tel Aviv.

Mr. Satterthwaite told Mr. Epstein that the United States sincerely hoped that the incident of the five airplanes could be confined to the Israelis and the British and would not be permitted to hamper the course of peace negotiations. He said that naturally he understood the exuberance of military commanders, particularly when victorious, but pointed out that the Provisional Government of Israel should be careful not to permit a situation to develop which would force the United States to choose between Great Britain and Israel. Mr. Epstein said that he thoroughly agreed with Mr. Satterthwaite.

1 The Department instructed Cairo on January 11 to “informally state to FonOff that Israeli Rep here yesterday officially told Dept all Israeli troops had withdrawn from Egyptian territory. Very much hope therefore that Egyptian Govt will send top level officials to Rhodes conversations.” (telegram 38, repeated to Tel Aviv as 17, 501.BB Palestine/1–1049)

2 Dated September 16, 1948; see Foreign Relations, 1948, vol. v, Part 2, p. 1401. Count Bernadotte was the United Nations Mediator on Palestine.

3 Iraqi Prime Minister.

4 The meeting seems to have taken place on January 12; see Mr. Lovett’s memorandum of conversation, p. 645 [Pg. 645 is part of Doc. 382].

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Director of the Office of Near Eastern and African Affairs (Satterthwaite) 501.BB Palestine/1–1049

[Document 373]

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Director of the Office of Near Eastern and African Affairs (Satterthwaite)1

confidential [Washington,] January 10, 1949.

Subject: Interview with Ambassador of Egypt at 5 p. m.

Participants: Ambassador of Egypt

NEA—Mr. Satterthwaite

NE—Mr. W. L. Jenkins

The Ambassador said he had been informed that Israeli forces still held three posts in Egypt and that although his Government had agreed to send representatives to Rhodes to negotiate with the Acting Mediator of the UN for an Armistice, such representatives would not leave Egypt until all Israeli forces had left Egyptian Territory. His Government would also insist that the negotiations, if undertaken, should be based primarily on the UN Resolutions of November 4 and 16; that Egypt would participate in them with an open mind and a sincere desire for a permanent armistice and future peace.2 Kamel Bey expressed great appreciation of the splendid efforts recently made by the US to persuade the Israelis to withdraw their troops from Egypt and believed that without them Egypt would not have agreed to enter the prospective negotiations. He hoped that the US would continue to take the lead in effecting an armistice. He stressed the present dangers to the internal security of Egypt and felt that the hands of his Government had been strengthened in its efforts to maintain order by the strong representations recently made by the U.S. to both his and the Israeli Governments.

Mr. Satterthwaite said that he had been informed today that Israeli troops had left Egypt and stressed the fact that the efforts of his Government to effect a peaceful solution of the Palestinian problem would continue to be in close cooperation with the United Nations. He hoped that the Conciliation Committee would get under way this week.

[Here follow two paragraphs of discussion of possible changes in the Egyptian cabinet and of the arrival in Washington of two Transjordanian officials.]

In leaving, the Ambassador again emphasized the great importance of the role recently taken by the U.S., and offered to continue to keep the Department promptly informed of reports or instructions received from his Government.

1 Drafted by William L. Jenkins of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs.

2 New York, on January 11, reported information from Egyptian Representative at the United Nations Fawzi that “Position of Egyptian Government regarding Rhodes discussions is that said discussions comprehend resolutions of November 4 and 16 and December 29. Fawzi emphasized very strongly that these negotiations were not direct and not political although, he added, they are much more important than any previous discussions considering their extent and timing.” (Telegram 21, 501.BB Palestine/1–1149) For the resolution of December 29, 1948, see Foreign Relations, 1948, vol. v. Part 2, p. 1699.

The Minister in Syria (Keeley) to the Secretary of State 867N.01/1–1049: Airgram

[Document 374]

The Minister in Syria (Keeley) to the Secretary of State

confidential Damascus, January 10, 1949.

A–8. Following almost day-long Cabinet meeting PriMin Khalid al-’Azm sent for me at seven p. m. Sunday for hour’s “general exploration of situation with particular reference to Palestine.” Explaining that since upon US insistence Egypt had accepted Cease Fire and agreed to open armistice talks Palestine situation had taken on new aspect calling for reexamination Syria’s position, and it was therefore important to know UN and particularly US attitude toward further probable Zionist aggression such as feared along Lebanese-Syrian frontier where Zionists following Negeb attack pattern were now refusing access to UN observers. Israeli plane that had recently over flown Syrian lines had dropped tracts charging Syrian officials with misleading their people and promising independence to Druze, Circassian and other minorities if they would revolt. Everything seemed to indicate that Zionists instead of being peacefully inclined still threaten integrity Arab states by dream of empire and intend take each on in turn. As his predecessor had indicated (Legtels 666 Oct 23, 678 Oct 29 and 679 Oct 301 ) Syria has since beginning truce anxiously waited for UN to take effective action to curb Zionist expansion but on contrary has seen repeated aggression go unchecked while Zionists flagrantly flaunt [flout] truce and UN authority.

PriMin said British Minister had confirmed to him that after loss several planes through unprovoked Israeli attack in air over Egypt, UK has taken firm stand against Zionists’ attempt at aggrandizement and is moving troops by sea to Akaba. What did US proposed to do?

I took occasion to stress our opposition to aggression and our support of conciliation mentioning our recent representations to PGI and Egypt in favor of peaceful negotiations (Deptel 2 Jan 4 [3]2 ) sense of which had already been communicated to FonOff. He said that was good as far as it went and he hoped this latest démarche indicated change in our former marked pro-Zionist policy, but he wondered just how far US could be counted upon in the long run effectively to aid in checking Zionists’ pretensions. Heretofore US to disadvantage of Arabs had usually appeared to favor Zionists who cynically violated truce, whereas Arabs conscientiously endeavored to observe truce while working in UN for recognition of right of Palestine inhabitants to self-determination. Even when cautioning PGI about aggression in Negeb, US had coupled its representation with protest to Egypt on shelling of Tel Aviv which he said was only normal act of war in retaliation for Zionist attacks upon Egyptian territory.

Saying Palestine conflict colored all thinking, his Govt considered its solution necessarily matter first importance particularly as Soviets are using people’s disgruntlement over Palestine to undermine confidence in his Govt which Soviets label Anglo-American tool. In his opinion forthcoming Israeli elections would demonstrate strength of Commie influence in Israel and he hoped this would convince US of danger inherent in uncritical support of PGI. Although strict measures taken to prevent Commie-inspired demonstrations, failure his Govt to take firm action against Zionists, particularly if further feared aggression occurs in Lebanese-Syrian frontier area, might well precipitate widespread disorders that would play into Soviet-Zionist hands and further threaten peace.

I interjected to say that our concern was to serve cause of peace and suggested that distinguished record of our representative on the Conciliation Commission, The Honorable Joseph B. Keenan, should be an assurance to all parties in the Palestine conflict that our influence would be for peace without fear or favor. He asked me to report to my Govt his concern over Palestine developments and to keep him informed of my Govt’s attitude and probable course of action, particularly if Zionists continue their militant course.

Although PriMin did not mention Syrian and other Arab military weakness and disunion and their consequent inability forcibly to bring Israeli to terms, he referred to Abdullah’s aspirations and popular clamor for renewal hostilities to curb Zionist threat and indicated his hope that US would join with UK in taking firm position against further Zionist expansion and thus presumably create better atmosphere for Palestine solution that would save Arab face, implying that popular temper unlikely support peace negotiations with militant Zionists.

It is significant, I feel, that at no time during discussion did PriMin make usual Syrian assertion that they could never recognize Israel or even acknowledge its existence as would be implied by negotiations, When I suggested that any settlement seemed to me preferable to continued situation, he neither acquiesced nor objected, but I gained the impression that he personally would favor negotiations if given sufficient prior assurance, similar to UK’s recent stiffened attitude, that Israeli will be kept within reasonable bounds by western influence and force if necessary. He repeatedly said regretfully that Syrians had learned that they could not count upon UN alone whose authority the Zionists do not respect.

Dept may consider time now ripe to give informally assurances suggested in Legtel 618 Sept 24, 11 p m,3 which I respectfully repeat at this time, as inducement to Syrians to use facilities of Conciliation Commission to extricate themselves from present impasse and thus serve cause of peace.

In conclusion PriMin said his Govt believing Syria’s destiny lies in Anglo-American orbit hopes for closer collaboration with US not only in cultural and economic fields but in political and strategic which latter he considers very important in present state of world order.

Keeley

1 None printed.

2 This was a repeat of telegram 2 to Cairo, p. 602 [Pg. 602 includes portions of Doc. 348 and Doc. 349].

3  Foreign Relations, 1948, vol. v, Part 2, p. 1421.

The Special Representative of the United States in Israel (McDonald) to the Secretary of State 867N.01/1–1049: Telegram

[Document 375]

The Special Representative of the United States in Israel (McDonald) to the Secretary of State

secret
priority Tel Aviv, January 10, 1949—9 p. m.

27. Attention President and Acting Secretary. All political officers and service attaches of Mission are of opinion that British actions are destroying chances of peace. Official explanation RAF reconnaissance flights over battle area at moment Egypt accepted US-inspired UN order cease-fire and armistice negotiations and subsequent British troops landing Aqaba while Transjordan negotiations were proceeding satisfactorily are unconvincing. To us such provocative moves appear to be determined efforts forestall direct negotiations Israel–Egypt and Israel–Transjordan which might deprive Britain effective control Southern Negev. British policy is bitterly resented by PGI and people who regard it as direct continuation of persistent UK efforts sabotage establishment of independent and viable Israel.

We are convinced: 1. Current British press propaganda that PGI efforts in Negev are Communist-inspired in order prove vulnerability of Canal defenses is weird misconception of whole issue.

2. PGI, with support whole people, will resist no matter what cost all British attempts to deprive Israel opportunity negotiate directly under UN auspice with Egypt and Transjordan regarding Negev and peace.

3. Egypt’s and Transjordan’s fruitful participation will depend finally upon radical change Great Britain’s intransigent policy towards Israel and Negev.

4. US actions since December 30 and call for armistice negotiations have enhanced US prestige here and, if firmly pursued London and interested capitals in ME, hold promise of peace.

McDonald

Memorandum by Mr. Robert M. McClintock 501.BB Palestine/1–1149

[Document 376]

Memorandum by Mr. Robert M. McClintock

secret [Washington,] January 11, 1949.

UNA Contribution to Policy Problem Statement: Palestine

United States interest in the Palestine problem as it has developed in the United Nations is a corollary not only of this Nation’s role of leadership in the United Nations but also of the United States profound strategic interest in the Near East.

In the United Nations the United States has sought by three principal means to contribute to a solution of the Palestine problem and to the restoration of peace in the Middle East. Thus, in the General Assembly it has taken a leading part in endeavoring to reach a lasting political settlement. In the Security Council the United States has been active in supporting measures designed to maintain a truce in Palestine, to be superseded by an eventual armistice. Also, in the General Assembly the United States has sought to bring prompt relief to the more than half a million Arab refugees who constitute a grave social and political problem in the Near East.

The objectives of the United States regarding Palestine in the United Nations are to secure a prompt and lasting cessation of hostilities; the negotiation by means of the Palestine Conciliation Commission, of which this Government is a Member, of a permanent political settlement; and the relief and eventual rehabilitation of the Arab refugees, for which purpose the President will ask the Congress for an appropriation of $16 million.

[Here follows final paragraph setting forth the criteria which would guide the United States member of the Palestine Conciliation Commission; for the actual instruction, see page 681 [Pg. 681 includes portions of Doc. 407 and Doc. 408].]

The Minister in Lebanon (Pinkerton) to the Secretary of State 501.BB Palestine/1–1149: Telegram

[Document 377]

The Minister in Lebanon (Pinkerton) to the Secretary of State

restricted Beirut, January 11, 1949—noon.

19. Foreign Minister informed me negotiations are now being con ducted through UN mediator for evacuation of south Lebanon by Israeli troops. He believes they will be successful although on previous occasion when Lebanese and Israeli military met for consultations, Israeli officers said they were authorized to negotiate only on basis permanent armistice and Lebanese had no such authority. These negotiations therefore failed. Foreign Minister says Lebanon cannot consider negotiations for armistice so long as Israeli troops remain on Lebanese soil. After evacuation and completion Egyptian negotiations Lebanon expects to undertake similar negotiations. He expressed opinion that other Arab countries would do likewise. Lebanon is pre pared to go to almost any length short of signing document formally recognizing existence of state of Israel.

Pinkerton

The Minister in Lebanon (Pinkerton) to the Secretary of State 790E.00/1–1149: Telegram

[Document 378]

The Minister in Lebanon (Pinkerton) to the Secretary of State

top secret Beirut, January 11, 1949—3 p. m.

21. Foreign Minister informed me yesterday that Lebanon is now prepared to put Palestine episode to one side and consider its foreign policy on basis of friendship with Western Powers in possible future global war. He said Arab east would likely be one of several battle fronts and to prepare for such eventuality Lebanon would like to consider role which it would be expected to play. He added that public opinion here was not yet prepared to accept its responsibilities in this regard but it was rapidly approaching that point. He pointed out that Arab countries, except Syria and Lebanon, have arrangements either in force or temporarily in abeyance defining their positions. This policy of isolationism had been deliberately chosen by Syria and Lebanon but Lebanon had to definitely change its policy, and while Syria has not gone so far it also is changing. Use of port of Beirut and airfield at Rayak was mentioned as example of assistance Lebanon might be prepared to give. He indicated that Lebanon desired some sort of agreement regarding its role and did not exclude even defensive alliance although it was obvious he was not enthusiastic about treaty with Great Britain alone because of special privileges which would be involved. He said they would prefer multilateral treaty or some joint agreement short of treaty basis. At no time did he indicate possibility of renewal of relations with France and dismissed it casually from conversation.

From previous conversation I am convinced Foreign Minister brought this subject up with me under direction from President and Prime Minister and that it had been discussed with President of Syria.1

Pinkerton

1 The Department, on February 11, replied with an expression of warm appreciation for the “friendly attitude Leb Govt and its desire align itself with US and Western Powers in event possible future global war.” The remainder of the reply was broadly along the lines of telegram 57, February 25, to Damascus, p. 770 [Pg. 770 is part of Doc. 488]; except for the additional suggestion that the Lebanese Government give consideration to early resumption of discussions concerning a treaty of friendship, commerce, and navigation as a “long step forward in promoting development of US-Leb relations” (790E.00/1–1149).

The Acting Secretary of State to the United States Representative at the United Nations (Austin) 501.BB Palestine/1–1149: Telegram

[Document 379]

The Acting Secretary of State to the United States Representative at the United Nations (Austin)

secret Washington, January 11, 1949—5 p. m.

17. 1. In tel dated Jan 71 Griffis2 expresses strong hope Dept will incorporate into pending legislation re US contribution Palestine relief safeguard clause giving Director UNRPR or Dept full discretionary powers re expenditure US contribution. He states it is essential that US contribution be safeguarded and if necessary with held if relief operation emasculated due lack govt cooperation in NE.

2. Dept is studying possibility incorporating into legislation safeguard clause giving SecState discretionary powers over payment US contribution.

3. However, we have informed Griffis3 we believe SYG, acting through Director UNRPR, has unquestioned authority control all expenditures under terms UN resolution, and that we look to SYG and Griffis to assume, full discretionary powers this regard in order insure fulfillment objectives of resolution. In our opinion this applies not only to US funds but to all other contributions as well. Conversely, we believe SYG could not legitimately accord separate and special treatment to US contribution as distinguished from contributions of other govts to UN program.

4. Without making reference to paras 1 and 2, pls take early opportunity convey to SYG informally our interpretation his powers, with view to obtaining his assurances this regard as further safeguard US contribution. You many inform him such questions may arise when Congress takes up this legislation next week.

Lovett

1 Telegram 12 from Beirut, not printed.

2 Stanton Griffis, Director of United Nations Relief for Palestine Refugees, while on leave from his regular position as United States Ambassador to Egypt.

3 In telegram 22 to Beirut, January 11, not printed.

The Acting Secretary of State to the Special Representative of the United States in Israel (McDonald), at Tel Aviv 501.BB Palestine/1–1149: Telegram

[Document 380]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Special Representative of the United States in Israel (McDonald), at Tel Aviv

top secret Washington, January 11, 1949—6 p. m.

us urgent

niact

20. We are disturbed at press reports that Israel is allegedly pre paring official protest before SC against UK over recent developments resulting from RAF episode.

For your info following is first para niact tel sent Cairo yesterday, rptd London and all Arab capitals. This sets forth this Govt’s earnest hope that RAF-Israeli clash will be confined to framework of an incident and not allowed further to embitter passions in Near East.

You are authorized impart this info to FonMin and instructed to add friendly advice that this Govt would deplore any action by either UK or Israel tending to exacerbate situation because of RAF incident.

Herewith first para Deptel 33 to Cairo.1

Rptd London as 131, USUN as 18.

Lovett

1 Dated January 10, not printed. The bulk of the first paragraph is quoted in footnote 5, p. 633 [Pg. 633 includes portions of Doc. 371 and Doc. 372].Mr. Eban sent a letter dated January 11 to the President of the Security Council in which he set forth his instructions “to convey to the SC the grave concern of the Government of Israel at the menacing attitude adopted by the UK towards the State of Israel. The military, naval, aerial and political measures which the UK has taken in recent days appear likely to endanger the maintenance of international peace and security and to widen the limits of a local conflict which might otherwise respond to the processes of unprejudiced negotiations.” (Telegram 23 from New York) The Security Council released the text of Mr. Eban’s letter the same day as S/1201.

Mr. Ross discussed the letter with Mr. Eban on January 11, pointing out, that “No action should be taken by anyone which would impair chances of successful outcome of forthcoming negotiations at Rhodes.” As a result of the discussion, Mr. Eban indicated “that for the time being he would not press for an early meeting” of the Security Council. (Telegram 22 from New York) Telegrams 22 and 23 are both dated January 11 and are filed under 501.BB Palestine/1–1149.

Mr. Wells Stabler to the Secretary of State 867N.01/1–1149: Telegram

[Document 381]

Mr. Wells Stabler to the Secretary of State

secret Amman, January 11, 1949—6 p. m.

16. King indicated this morning that while Egypt–Israel talks going on at Rhodes, he does not propose make public fact that discussions now proceeding between Israeli and Transjordan representatives. Believed it preferable for Abdullah el Tel and Dayan to continue their talks in secrecy in order to determine area of agreement. King said his main points are: (1) Jews should not occupy territory between Transjordan and Egypt;

(2) Gaza should belong to Transjordan;

(3) Right of Arab refugees to go back to homes;

(4) Return of Ramie and Lydda to Arabs;

(5) Access for Arabs to Jaffa.

Re Jerusalem if internationalization not possible, King would be willing accept formula of autonomy under Transjordan administration of Arab areas, which he indicated should include Katamon and upper Bakaa, and autonomy under Israeli administration of Jewish areas. He would be prepared make concessions to Jews in southern potash works and guarantee protection. King reiterated his desire for peace and again expressed hope that Jews understood sincerity his intentions arrive at settlement. He reaffirmed full resolve negotiate peace but said it must be done slowly and carefully in order final result will “relieve me forever of Palestine headache”.

King remarked, with certain pride as if idea were original, that name of combined Transjordan and Arab Palestine would remain, “Hashemite Kingdom of the Jordan” (mytel 15 January 101 ). He made no comment about decree but it is understood it is now before Acting Prime Minister and Cabinet. No final decision taken and certain amendments are still being made.

Repeated Jerusalem as 11.

Stabler

1 Not printed; it reported that King Abdullah had prepared a draft decree to grant Transjordanian nationality to Palestinian Arabs living in or moving to areas controlled by the Arab Legion arid desiring it. The draft decree also provided for abolition of frontier controls between Transjordan and areas under its administration. (867N.01/1–1049)

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Acting Secretary of State 867N.00/1–1249

[Document 382]

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Acting Secretary of State 1

secret [Washington,] January 12, 1949.

Subject: Palestine Developments

Participants: Acting Secretary—Mr. Lovett

Mr. Eliahu Epstein, Special Representative of the Provisional Government of Israel

Mr. Aubrey Eban, Israeli Representative before the United Nations

NE—Mr. Rockwell

After presenting Mr. Eban, Mr. Epstein opened the conversation by expressing the thanks of the Provisional Government of Israel for the efforts recently made by the United States Government to promote armistice negotiations between Israel and Egypt and to bring calm to the tense situation in Palestine.

Mr. Epstein then stated that the diplomatic and press campaign being carried on by the British against Israel and British military activities such as the sending of troops to Aqaba and the alerting of the British Mediterranean naval forces were direct and prejudicial British intervention in the Palestine dispute which he feared would have an unfavorable effect on the Israeli elections. Furthermore, Mr. Epstein had just been informed that day by Mr. Shertok that the Provisional Government of Israel had reliable intelligence to the effect that the British were urging the Egyptians to stall during the Rhodes negotiations unless they could obtain terms which would further British objectives in the Negev. Mr. Epstein said that the Provisional Government of Israel hoped that the United States would continue to exert its good influence and would urge the British to cease their attacks on Israel and their intervention in the Arab-Israeli dispute.

Mr. Eban said that he had been instructed by Tel Aviv to present a complaint against the British to the Security Council and to request a Security Council meeting on British “intervention” in Palestine. He had done the first but as yet had not done the second. He desired my advice as to whether it would not be advisable to attempt to obtain from the Security Council a resolution calling upon all governments and authorities concerned to take no action likely to extend the scope of the conflict. He said that the Israeli public was alarmed lest the British be about to send military forces into Palestine and that the Provisional Government of Israel thought that some kind of Security Council action might be helpful in averting this possibility.

At this point, I interrupted and read to Messrs. Epstein and Eban the news ticker account of my press conference that morning quoting my description of the efforts the United States Government had been making to prevent the extension of the scope of the conflict in Palestine and to encourage the parties to enter armistice negotiations, and of discussions between the United States and United Kingdom Governments on the general subject.

I then reviewed the course of United States action on this matter since the Israeli incursion across the Egyptian frontier. I said that in my opinion it had been unfortunate of the British to send aircraft over a battle zone. I said that it was equally unfortunate that the Israelis should have fired upon these planes. However, regardless of who was right and who was wrong in the question of the airplanes, the whole trouble had started when the Israelis crossed the Egyptian frontier. I said that after having been reassured by Mr. Shertok that all Israeli troops had been withdrawn from Egypt and after having informed the British in this sense, the United States Government had been embarrassed by the fact that Israeli forces had subsequently returned to Egypt.

I said that I would look into the question of the alleged British interference with the Egyptian participation in the armistice negotiations at Rhodes but that I simply did not believe that the reports which the Provisional Government of Israel had received on this matter were true. I also said that the Department had received no indication whatsoever that the British were planning aggressive action against Israel and that while of course the United States Government could give the Provisional Government of Israel no assurances in this regard, I thought that it was highly unlikely that the British had any such plans. Although the United States Government had advised the British against sending a force to Aqaba, I thought that they were doing so merely as a safeguard against possible Israeli action similar to that taken against Egypt. I pointed out that Great Britain had treaties with Transjordan and Egypt and said that the Provisional Government of Israel should remember that the British were extremely angry over what had recently happened. I said that I believed the British would take no action if the Israeli forces stayed where they were but that if the Israelis crossed any of the Arab frontiers, Israel would have to realize that it might be getting into a war which would be very different from that which they had been waging against the Arabs.

Mr. Epstein said that the Provisional Government of Israel of course realized this. He added that it would be extremely unfortunate if the Rhodes negotiations should break down, since we were rapidly approaching the point of diminishing returns in peace talks and the Provisional Government could not much longer tolerate the menace of Arab armies so near to Tel Aviv. I said that as I believed Clemenceau one said, there are things which are too important to entrust to the generals. At this particular moment, those who had struggled all their lives for the establishment of a Jewish state were called upon to exercise the highest degree of restraint and statesman ship. In this connection, and in response to Mr. Eban’s question, I believed that it would be unwise for Israel to aggravate the situation by requesting Security Council action. I said that Israel had made its point by tabling a complaint against Great Britain and that this seemed sufficient, particularly in view of the fact that it seemed hardly likely that the British were preparing to take military action against the Jewish state. I stated that it seemed to me that some good progress might be made in the Rhodes conversations if the situation in Palestine remained static, and I reiterated my conviction that the Israelis must not engage in any more aggressive action.

As Messrs. Epstein and Eban were leaving Mr. Epstein told me that the Export-Import Bank had passed favorably on a project loan to Israel and that the matter was now before the National Advisory Council. He asked me to put in a good word with the Council. I said that I hoped to be able to do so within the next day or two.

1 Drafted by Mr. Rockwell.

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Acting Secretary of State 8901.01/1–1249

[Document 383]

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Acting Secretary of State

secret [Washington,] January 12, 1949.

Subject: Transjordan

Participants: Mr. Lovett—Acting Secretary

Samir Rifai Pasha—Former Prime Minister of Transjordan and Special Emissary of King Abdullah

Haidar Bey Shukri1

Mr. Satterthwaite—NEA

Mr. Wilkins—NE

Samir Pasha and Haidar Bey called on me today at their request following their recent arrival to the United States as special emissaries of King Abdullah of Transjordan.

Samir Pasha conveyed to me the greetings of King Abdullah and expressed the hope that the friendly relations which existed between Transjordan and the United States would grow stronger and stronger in the future.

I thanked Samir Pasha for the King’s greetings and told him that we appreciated the hospitality and confidence which the King and his Government had extended to the American representative in Amman. I also said that we admired the dignity and restraint with which the King and his Government had conducted themselves during the troublest [sic] times resulting from developments in Palestine.

Samir Pasha remarked that the King and his Government had long hoped the presently existing friendly relations between Transjordan and the United States might be formalized by recognition and expressed the view that Transjordan’s conduct would seem to justify American recognition.

Samir Pasha said he understood the United States might be in a position to extend recognition simultaneously or after the de jure recognition of Israel and argued that it would be of benefit not only to the United States but also to Transjordan if such recognition could precede action relating to Israel.

Samir Pasha pointed out that when Great Britain had stood alone in 1940 following the defeat of France, King Abdullah and his Government had stood by the British. Mr. Satterthwaite recalled that at this time King Abdullah’s Arab Legion had assisted in the relief of Baghdad in 1941 following the Rashid Ali Rebellion.2

I replied no one could deny that the attitude of King Abdullah and his Government during the war and, more particularly, during the past year in Palestine would justify the recognition of Transjordan by the United States. I said it was logical and long overdue. Recent developments had, however, affected this situation. I pointed out on a confidential and personal basis that I had recently appeared before the Senate Foreign Relations Committee and had there been questioned on Great Britain’s activities in the Near East. I said that I had been queried regarding the movement of British troops at Akaba and in Transjordan, on the incident of the RAF planes over the Palestine-Egyptian frontier and on British troop movements in the Mediterranean. I said it was unfortunate, that these activities—whatever their purpose—had cast a cloud over such favorable developments as the Transjordan-Israeli talks regarding Jerusalem and the scheduled Egyptian-Israeli talks at Rhodes. I added I hoped these peaceful developments would prevail.

Samir Pasha seemed to appreciate the problem which confronted this Government at this particular time and did not further press the question of immediate recognition.

Samir Pasha said planned personally to deliver a letter from King Abdullah to the President when he called on him on Friday, January 14 and asked if it would be possible for him personally to carry the President’s reply to King Abdullah when he returned to Amman in about a week or ten days. Mr. Satterthwaite said he would endeavor to make arrangements to this effect and that if the President’s reply was not ready prior to Samir Pasha’s departure from Washington he would see that it reached him in New York before he left the United States.3

1 Brother-in-law of the former Transjordanian Prime Minister.

2 For documentation on this subject, see Foreign Relations, 1941, vol. iii, pp. 486 ff.

3 One of the subjects discussed at the conversation (but not recorded in this memorandum) was King Abdullah’s aspiration for a Greater Syria; but see instruction 3, March 29, to Amman, p. 882 [Pg. 882 is part of Doc. 567]. Previous documentation on the interest of Transjordan in a Greater Syria is printed in Foreign Relations, 1947, vol. v, pp. 738 ff.

Message Released by the United Nations Security Council on January 13, 1949 IO Files

1 [Document 384]

Message Released by the United Nations Security Council on January 13, 1949

January 13, 1949

S/1205

Cablegram Dated 12 January 1949 From the Acting Mediator to the Secretary-General Transmitting a Report to the President of the Security Council Concerning the Opening of Negotiations Between Egypt and the Provisional Government of Israel

For transmission to President of Security Council:

I have the honour to inform you, pursuant to my Report of 6 January2 on the agreement of Egypt and Israel, to order a cease fire in the Negev and to undertake negotiations on the 4 and 16 November resolutions, that the first stage in the negotiations between representatives of the two Governments on the implementation of these resolutions was reached today, 12 January, with the arrival in Rhodes of both the Egyptian and Israeli delegations. The Egyptian delegation, headed by Colonel Mohamed Ibrahim Seif el Dine, arrived at Rhodes early in the afternoon and the Israeli delegation, headed by Dr. W. Eytan3 arrived later in the afternoon. Both delegations are empowered to negotiate, conclude and initial an armistice agreement, subject to its final ratification by their respective Governments.

I have today met each delegation separately and discussed with them questions of procedure and agenda for subsequent joint discussions. I shall hold further meetings with each delegation tomorrow morning, 13 January, and the first joint meeting under United Nations chairmanship is fixed for 3:30 p. m. on the same day. These preliminary meetings have been encouraging in that both delegations have evinced a sincere desire for a successful outcome of the discussions and a readiness to reach with as little delay as possible discussion of substantive matters.

1 Master files of the Reference and Documents Section of the Bureau of International Organization Affairs.

2 See editorial note, p. 621 [Pg. 621 is part of Doc. 360].

3 Walter Eytan, Director General of the Israeli Foreign Office.

Memorandum by the Acting Secretary of State to the President 811.4611/1–1349

[Document 385]

Memorandum by the Acting Secretary of State to the President

Washington, January 13, 1949.

Subject: Your appointment with Samir Rifai Pasha.

Samir Rifai Pasha, personal envoy of King Abdullah of Transjordan and former Prime Minister of that country, has an appointment with you at 11:45 on Friday, January 14. He is bearing a personal message to you from King Abdullah.1

Samir Rifai Pasha has informed us that the message conveys the King’s greetings to you and his wishes for the prosperity of the US, offers to you the King’s congratulations on the outcome of the elections and expresses the hope that the present cordial relations existing between our two countries can be formalized in the near future.

Samir Rifai Pasha has indicated that he would like to receive from your hands a message in reply which he could carry to King Abdullah. A proposed reply to the King2 based on the information which Samir Rifai Pasha has given us, is attached for your consideration.

[Annex]

Draft Communication by President Truman to King Abdullah ibn Hussein, King of the Hashemite Kingdom of Transjordan

[Washington, undated.]

Your Majesty: On behalf of the Government and people of the United States, I wish to express to Your Majesty my deep appreciation for your kind message of friendship which has been conveyed to me through your distinguished representative, His Excellency Samir Rifai Pasha. I am personally most grateful for your generous sentiments concerning the outcome of the American elections. May I also take this opportunity to express my appreciation to Your Majesty for the warm hospitality which has been extended to Americans in your country, and to reciprocate the friendly sentiments which inspired Your Majesty’s message.

I am confident that the relations of cordiality and friendship which prevail between the Transjordanian people and those of the United States will continue to be strengthened and extended to the mutual benefit of both our countries. The question of formalizing the present relations between our Governments is under active consideration, and it is hoped that this question can be resolved to the full satisfaction of both our Governments.

My Government and the American people share my fervent hope for the early return of conditions under which Your Majesty’s land and people may develop and prosper in peace, well being, and happiness.

I take pleasure in extending to Your Majesty my personal wishes for your continued good health and prosperity.

1 Dated December 18, 1948, not printed.

2 Below.

Memorandum of Telephone Conversation, by Mr. Robert M. McClintock 501.BB Palestine/1–1349

[Document 386]

Memorandum of Telephone Conversation, by Mr. Robert M. McClintock

secret [Washington,] January 13, 1949.

Participants: Mr. Bromley, First Secretary of British Embassy

Mr. McClintock, UNA

Mr. Bromley, First Secretary of the British Embassy, telephoned me at 12:15 p. m. today to say that I might be interested in the substance of a telegram just received from the British Embassy in Cairo. The British Ambassador on January 11 had seen the Secretary General of the Egyptian Foreign Office, who said that the Israeli Foreign Minister, Mr. Shertok, on the 10th had said that he planned to go to Rhodes for the present peace conversations. The Egyptian Secretary General expressed the fear that this was a trap to entice the Egyptian Government into over-all talks for a final settlement, whereas the Egyptian Government felt that military issues should first be worked out between the two governments.

The British Ambassador reported that he told the Egyptian Secretary General that it was of the highest importance for Egypt to maintain its decision to enter into direct conversations with the Jews. Even though the latter might wish more far-reaching discussions, the Egyptian Representatives at Rhodes could always refer these points back to their Government and need not enter into commitments.

I thanked Mr. Bromley for this information and said that I was sure Mr. Lovett would be glad to see this confirmation of his statement yesterday to the Israeli Representative that there could be no basis of fact for the rumor that the British were actually dissuading the Egyptians from going to Rhodes.

Mr. Bromley made several private and personal comments. He said he hoped we understood that Mr. Bevin was under a severe domestic pressure on the Palestine issue. In particular, he was under attack from Churchill and Eden.1

Mr. Bromley added the personal comment in response to my expression of hope that the British Ambassador’s conversations yesterday with Mr. Lovett and today with the President2 would serve to ease Mr. Bevin’s mind, that the Embassy in Washington was under a severe disadvantage vis-à-vis the Foreign Office. The British Embassy here had always been regarded in London as being “too weak” toward Zionist influences in the United States. In fact, Lord Inverchapel, when Ambassador, had been completely disregarded in his reports of the Zionist attitude. I gained the impression that Mr. Bromley was hopeful that his Chief would speak with greater authority, but that he was not entirely assured on this point.

Mr. Bromley said he wished me to know that he personally felt that the views expressed by Mr. Lovett yesterday were completely right, particularly with regard to how our real strategic advantage could be maintained in the Near East. He had in fact addressed a Minute along the same lines to his Ambassador not long ago.

Mr. Bromley said, in response to my question, that his Ambassador’s interview this morning with the President had been more general in character than the conversations last evening with the Acting Secretary. The President, said Mr. Bromley, had responded in terms almost identical with those used by Mr. Lovett, although not in such detail.

Mr. Bromley told me that orders had been issued to the RAF in Egypt to discontinue further reconnaissance. He said the recommendation for this order had come from British authorities in Egypt. I commented that this seemed useful since reconnaissance of the type recently attempted appeared to have reached the point of diminishing returns.

1 Winston Churchill and Anthony Eden, British Prime Minister and Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs, respectively, from 1940 to 1945.

2 The editors have been unable to find in the records of the Department of State any memoranda detailing the conversations of Ambassador Franks with Mr. Lovett and with President Truman. The conversation with Mr. Lovett is summarized in telegram 149, January 13, to London, p. 658 [Pg. 658 includes portions of Doc. 391 and Doc. 392]. Mr. McDonald’s version of the conversation with President Truman is presented in his book, My Mission in Israel, 1948–1951 (New York, Simon and Schuster, 1951), p. 126 [Pg. 126 is part of Doc. 34].

Memorandum of Telephone Conversation, by the Director of the Office of Near Eastern and African Affairs (Satterthwaite) 867N.01/1–1349

[Document 387]

Memorandum of Telephone Conversation, by the Director of the Office of Near Eastern and African Affairs (Satterthwaite)

confidential [Washington,] January 13, 1949.

Subject: Anglo-Israeli Difficulties

Participants: Mr. Eliahu Epstein, Special Representative of the Provisional Government of Israel

Mr. Joseph C. Satterthwaite, NEA

Mr. Epstein phoned to say that Mr. Lovett had requested him to repeat to me the message which he had just given him following the receipt of instructions to do so from Tel Aviv. He had, of course, at once telegraphed his Government the purport of Mr. Lovett’s suggestion to him yesterday that it would be unwise for the PGI to press the Security Council to act on its letter to the SC complaining against British actions in the Palestine area. Mr. Epstein had apparently recommended that the PGI would be wise to follow this suggestion.

The telegram which he has received from Tel Aviv is to the effect that the PGI agrees with Mr. Lovett’s proposal and will not press for the introduction of a resolution in the SC 1 unless some new British act of provocation should compel them to reconsider their present position. He added that his Government had full confidence in the course the State Department had been pursuing recently.

Mr. Epstein expressed his personal thanks for the contribution which he considered the State Department had been making during the past few days to a solution of this difficult problem.

1 The Department of State, on January 14, advised Tel Aviv of its gratification at being informed by Mr. Epstein that the Provisional Government of Israel had decided not to press the matter before the Security Council (telegram 31, 501.BB Palestine/1–1449).

Memorandum by the Director of the Office of United Nations Affairs (Rusk) to the Acting Secretary of State 501.BB Palestine/1–1349

[Document 388]

Memorandum by the Director of the Office of United Nations Affairs (Rusk) to the Acting Secretary of State

[Washington,] January 13, 1949.

Subject: United Nations Conciliation Commission for Palestine

Discussion

On December 11, 1948, at its Third Session the United Nations General Assembly adopted a resolution establishing a Conciliation Commission to assist the Arabs and Jews in reaching an agreement re Palestine. It is composed of three states Members of the United Nations: France, Turkey and the United States.

The Conciliation Commission in addition will undertake upon request of the Security Council any of the functions now assigned to the U.N. Mediator on Palestine or to the U.N. Truce Commission by resolutions of the Security Council. Upon such request the office of the Mediator shall be terminated. It is also instructed to present to the fourth regular session of the General Assembly detailed proposals for a permanent international regime for the Jerusalem area. It is further instructed to facilitate the rehabilitation of refugees, maintaining close relations with the Director of the U.N. Relief for Palestine Refugees.

The Conciliation Commission will have its headquarters in Jerusalem. It has been agreed that its preliminary meeting will be held in Geneva, Switzerland, about January 17, and that it will then proceed to Rhodes and Jerusalem. The President on December 29, 1948, appointed Mr. Joseph B. Keenan as the United States Representative. However, plans for his departure have been delayed. It is proposed that Fraser Wilkins (NEA) and John W. Halderman (UNP) be designated as Principal Adviser and Adviser respectively and that they depart immediately for Geneva. A supplemental memorandum will be submitted, setting forth the arrangements for security pro visions for the delegation.

[Here follow a discussion of personnel requirements, a recommendation that the designations1 of Messrs. Wilkins and Halderman be approved, concurrences, etc.]

1 Mr. Lovett gave his approval to the designations in a marginal notation on a subsequent but undated memorandum to him by Mr. Rusk.

Message Released by the United Nations Security Council on January 13, 1949 IO Files

[Document 389]

Message Released by the United Nations Security Council on January 13, 1949

January 13, 1949

Cablegram Dated 13 January 1949 From the Acting Mediator Addressed to the Secretary-General Transmitting a Report on Negotiations Between the Government of Egypt and the Provisional Government of Israel 1

To President of Security Council: Following my report of 12 January on the beginning of negotiations between representatives of the Government of Egypt and of the Provisional Government of Israel to seek agreement on the terms of an armistice I have the honour to present a further report on these negotiations.

I held informal meetings each delegations separately on morning of 13th at which agreement was reached on all points of procedure and on an agenda2 for the discussions.

This afternoon, 13 January, the first joint meeting was held. At this meeting the delegations were introduced. On the formal request of both delegations I assumed the role of Chairman of the meetings. The heads of the two delegations each made a formal declaration of his Government’s desire for the establishment of an armistice and pledging his delegation to work persistently and in a spirit of conciliation toward that end.

The agenda for future discussions is sufficiently broad to cover outstanding points with regard to the implementation of the resolutions of 4th and 16th November.

Meetings will now proceed on the substantive items on three levels as follows: 1. Preliminary discussions separately with each delegation;

2. Informal meetings between heads of delegations and United Nations;

3. Joint formal meetings of the two delegations.

The conciliatory spirit of both parties and the progress made in matters of procedure continue to inspire hope for successful results.

1 Released by the Security Council on January 13 as S/1209.

2 The editors have been unable to locate a copy of this document in the files of the Department of State or in those of the United States Mission at the United Nations.

Editorial Note [Document 390]

Editorial Note

Acting Mediator Bunche welcomed the Israeli and Egyptian armistice negotiators in his opening statement at Rhodes on January 13. He noted that “by the terms of the proposal agreed upon, negotiations are to be confined, subject always to the will of the 2 parties, to the means of implementing the SC resolutions of 4 and 16 November 1948. We are not holding a peace conference here. We are not expecting to settle the complicated political issues which bedevil this problem and to which the Conciliation Commission will soon direct its attention.”

Mr. Bunche recognzed that “there is a great and hopeful significance in your very presence here and your willingness to sit down together and attempt to find a basis of agreement for armistice in the conflict between the armed forces of the governments which you represent.

“Nor am I unware that this meeting marks the first time in this unfortunate conflict that representatives of the two sides have shown the statesmanship which enables them to sit down together in a common effort to look beyond a tenuous truce and to negotiate the armistice called for by the SC.”

Near the conclusion of his statement, Mr. Bunche appealed “most urgently that every precaution be taken by all governments to avoid any incidents or acts which might jeopardize the constructive progress of your delegations toward armistice accord. I have in mind not only governments directly involved in these negotiations or in the Palestine conflict, but those whose interests impel them to keep close surveillance on developments in the area.” (telegram 41, January 14, 3:30 p. m., from New York, 501 BB Palestine/1–1449)

The United Nations released the text of Mr. Bundle’s statement on January 14 as press release PAL/413.

The Chargé in the Soviet Union (Kohler) to the Secretary of State 867N.01/1–1349: Airgram

[Document 391]

The Chargé in the Soviet Union (Kohler) to the Secretary of State

secret Moscow, January 13, 1949.

A–35. In talks prior to his recent departure for home leave, Syrian Minister Farid Bey Zeineddine indicated that he had received further intimation from the Soviet authorities of a possible shift in Soviet policy toward Palestine and the Arab states, along lines reported in Embtel 2186, Sept. 29.1 While he did not so indicate, it is possible that, on these latter occasions, he did receive something more specific, though we doubt that it went so far at this stage as “an offer to reverse Soviet Palestine policy in return for a demonstration on the part of Syria and other Arab countries that they are not ‘instruments of Anglo-American policy’”, as alleged by the Acting Director-General of the Syrian Foreign Office (Damascus A–387, Dec. 13).2

The central element in Soviet policy toward Palestine is the question of the status therein of non-Soviet power and influence. In this region, as in all other “dependent, semi-dependent, or colonial areas”, the constant first objective of the Kremlin is the removal of the authority or influence of any rival or hostile powers, which in practice means, principally, the authority or influence of the United States or the United Kingdom. Any means which serves this end is acceptable until the objective has been achieved. During this period Moscow supports and uses such disparate and ideologically inappropriate forces as the Zionists in Palestine, the feudal rulers of Egypt, or the “Trotskyites” in Indonesia, as well as real Communists, as in Indochina. Once the first objective is gained, the next objective becomes the fostering of Communist control. At this stage, uncontrolled and ideologically in appropriate agencies are likely to find themselves neglected, under mined, sabotaged, infiltrated or even abruptly disowned and attacked, depending on the Kremlin’s estimate of the shortest direction toward this next objective.

Moscow apparently considers the first objectives satisfactorily attained in Palestine, insofar as the territory presently or potentially under control of the Jews is concerned, and will be likely henceforth to concentrate on securing the establishment of a weak independent Arab state in the remainder of Palestine, free from non-Soviet outside influences. This suggests that the Soviet government will now: (1) Decrease its support of the Israel government and revert to basic anti-Zionist policy it temporarily suspended but never abandoned (Embtel 1016, May 31).3 Signs of this reversion are already apparent in Ehrenburg’s4 attack, in Pravda Sept. 21, on the bourgeois nature of the government of Israel and subsequent less friendly tone Soviet propaganda, as well as in recent suppression of Jewish Anti-Fascist Committee and Jewish press in Moscow, the only Jewish agencies possibly available to Israeli legation as point of contact with Soviet Jewish population.

(2) Extend increasing support to Communists of Israel, encouraging and aiding them to penetrate Government, at same time infiltrating Communist agents into Eastern European emigration, which Israel desires and Kremlin controls. The Embassy recently learned from usually reliable sources that some half-dozen Soviet citizens have been authorized to leave the Soviet Union for Palestine; since normal emigration from the USSR is forbidden, these persons could only be Soviet agents.

(3) Seek to limit territory of State of Israel to that foreseen by GA resolution of November 29, 1947 and generally to curb power of Israel Government. This is indicated by attitude of Soviet UN Delegation at Paris and by practical cessation of direct military aid to Israel Government via Czechoslovakia. It seems clear independent strength and ambition shown by young Israel Government was as unexpected by Soviet Government as by others and that its further rapid extension is not regarded as desirable.

(4) Oppose by every means extension of Abdullah’s control or influence, i.e., in Soviet eyes, British control and influence, to Arab Palestine.

At appropriate time and occasion, foregoing measures will certainly be portrayed to Arab Governments as a change in Soviet policy favor able to them, and exploited by every means in order to lay basis for achievement in Arab countries of first objective already gained in Jewish Palestine. However, we do not believe there will be any sudden public shift in Kremlin’s Palestine policy. We should rather expect that the new line will be implemented somewhat later and gradually, with direct approaches to the Arab Governments timed to take advantage of developments connected with UN effort to effect a Palestine settlement.

Department please pass copies to London, Paris, Prague, Cairo, Beirut, Jidda, Baghdad, Tel Aviv, Jerusalem.

Kohler

1  Foreign Relations, 1948, vol. v, Part 2, p. 1432.

2 Not printed.

3  Foreign Relations, 1948, vol. v, Part 2, page 1081.

4 Ilya Grigoryevich Ehrenburg, a prominent Soviet author and journalist.

The Acting Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom 501.BB Palestine/1–1349: Telegram

[Document 392]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom

top secret   us urgent
niact Washington, January 13, 1949—5 p. m.

149. Brit Amb called yesterday under personal instructions of Bevin and asked Acting Secy to read two telegrams, first of which bore obvious imprint of Foreign Secys drafting.

Gist this tel was that Bevin desired clearcut statement US views on Palestine territorial settlement in light mutual and highly important strategic interests UK and US in Middle East. He referred to UK–US understanding as to strategic objectives and joint action in this area1 “subject to Israel”. Lovett confirmed to Sir Oliver Franks that Middle East understanding so far as this Govt is concerned is still very much in effect.

Bevin’s tel was couched in a series of questions. His next point was to ascertain precisely what US attitude was with respect to strategic land line of communications bet Egypt and other Arab States, specifically road from Gaza, Beersheba and Jericho, to Transjordan. Bevin referred to Douglas’ luncheon in Dec. with himself and Brit Chiefs of Staff.2

Lovett replied that importance this particular strategic road had been mentioned very late in the day. Attitude of US Govt had been clear since autumn 1947 and had been frequently reiterated by President and other officials; namely that Israel was entitled to boundaries (including all of Negev) assigned it by GA resolution Nov 29, 1947. However if Israel insisted on retaining Arab areas of Palestine such as Jaffa and western Galilee it should be expected to relinquish other territory, such as part of Negev, in compensation. Our most recent exposition of this policy had been Jessup’s speech before Committee 1 of GA Nov. 20, 1948.

Brit Amb in endeavoring explain his Govt’s overall concept from which its concern for specific strategic lines derived said he thought UK did not feel that for immediate future it could regard attitude of Israel with any confidence. It was therefore vitally necessary that southern boundaries of Israel should be north of Gaza, Beersheba, Jericho Road. To this Lovett said he thought real strategic security lay in encouraging development in Israel of a westward outlook. Confining Israel in a strait jacket and surrounding this new nation with a circle of a weak Arab enemies kept in ring only by Brit armed assistance, would inevitably result in creation of a hostile state which would turn almost automatically toward USSR. Experience had proved that it was far more difficult to deal with a state after it had turned Communist or pro-Soviet than to keep it friendly to the west before the capture took place. Real security therefore lay not in any particular road in Negev but in attitude of Israel, which would be conditioned by attitude of Great Powers.

Bevin’s next query was whether US backed SC resolutions and specifically those Nov. 4 and 16 and that of Dec. 29. We pointed out to Brit. Amb that apparently Foreign Secy was visualizing technical truce lines such as those provided for in Nov. 4 resolution as terms of a final political settlement. While SC resolutions certainly were valid in their limited application to momentary military situation and to problem of transferring truce into an armistice they did not seek to delineate final political settlement. This in fact had been left under GA res of Dec. 11 to Palestine Conciliation Comm. Our views on this final settlement were clear, since we had favored giving all Negev to Jewish State under res. Nov. 29, 1947 but now under formula expressed above contemplated that Israel might have to relinquish part of Negev if it desired to retain western Galilee and Jaffa. It therefore seemed difficult to comprehend why Foreign Secy displayed such excitement since Israel under this definition might get less territory in Negev than in Nov. 1947 when Brit. Govt. remained silent.

Next point in Bevin message was in effect “What is US prepared to do about Palestine situation?”. Message added that two govts ought to get together and “do something”. Acting Secy replied we had been doing a great deal and that perhaps UK had been doing too much in a non-constructive sense. For example, its sending of troops to Aqaba, the RAF incident, and threatening naval movements in Mediterranean certainly did not encourage Israelis at least to think UK was moving for peace. US for its part, as Brit. Govt. well knew, had worked with energy and no small degree of success in getting PGI to cease its campaign against Egypt and in influencing Egypt to offer cease-fire and negotiations to Israel under UN auspices. At this juncture when Israelis and Egyptians were on point of sitting down to peace talks on Rhodes, and when we had word of favorable conversations bet Israel and Lebanon and bet Israel and Transjordan looking toward permanent settlement, it would be in highest degree unfortunate if any action should prevent these developments from coming to fruition. Lovett added parenthetically that Israeli Rep had called that same afternoon and stated his Govt believed Brit. agents were seeking to dissuade Egyptian Govt from participating in Rhodes peace talks. Acting Secy told Israeli Rep. he thought there was no basis for this report. However, if Israel should bring its charges against UK before SC it could present eloquent case which would do neither US nor UK any good. Lovett told Brit. Amb he had used utmost endeavor with Israeli Rep. to persuade his Govt. not to bring its differences with Brit before SC.

Bevin’s tel was emotional in tone. It concluded with a challenge for US to choose bet supporting SC resolutions or Sov Union. Both Sir Oliver and Lovett disregarded this dramatic peroration.

Second Brit. note resumed threat to regain UK liberty of action (despite SC res. of May 29) to send arms and war material to Arab states. Lovett told Brit. Amb this would have instantaneous results of further exciting popular feeling in Israel, of placing Britain in position of violating SC res (despite Bevin’s protestation that these resolutions must be complied with) and also immediately raise question of causing this Govt to lift its scrupulous arms embargo. This would in turn result in sorry spectacle of Britain arming one side in Palestine conflict and US the other, with Russians sole permanent beneficiaries.

Basic difference in point of view UK and US Govts is that Brit are demanding rigid compliance with SC resolutions Nov. 4 and 16 because they wish to use these resolutions as means of enforcing a political settlement. Brit. Amb admitted as much when he said that lines of truce or armistice would undoubtedly foreshadow final territorial dispositions. We already know from McNeil’s3 blunt comment to Rep. of PGI in Paris last autumn that UK is frankly seeking to use SC action to oust Israelis from Negev. This Govt however has repeatedly been on record as stating that neither SC nor GA has constitutional power under UN Charter to enforce a political settlement. Efforts of SC are restricted to maintaining international peace and security. We feel that proper means for achievement of final political settlement in Palestine is by negotiations bet the parties either directly or through UN auspices. These negotiations are now in progress and Conciliation Comm is on point of undertaking its responsibilities under GA res. Dec. 11. We feel it would be useful in your conversations with high FonOff officials to make clear this basic difference in approach and to emphasize our view that Brit will be starting along path whose end is far from being in sight if they seek to use SC resolutions designed solely to meet specific threats to international security as a means of accomplishing political advantage. In fact Bevin’s heated admonition to this Govt to back up SC resolutions sounds queer in light his simultaneous willingness to violate SC res. May 29 by proceeding forthwith to arm Arab allies.4

Rptd USUN, eyes only, for Jessup.

Lovett

1 The understanding was attained at the “Pentagon Talks of 1947”; for documentation on these talks, see Foreign Relations, 1947, vol. v, pp. 485 ff.

2 The luncheon took place on December 20: see airgram 2377, December 22, 1948, from London, ibid., 1948, vol. v, Part 2, p. 1680.

3 Hector McNeil, British Minister of State.

4 A marginal notation indicates that this telegram was cleared with the White House.

The Consul at Jerusalem (Burdett) to the Secretary of State 867N.01/1–1349: Telegram

[Document 393]

The Consul at Jerusalem (Burdett) to the Secretary of State

secret Jerusalem, January 13, 1949—6 p. m.

us urgent

35. On instructions from PGI Colonel Dayan yesterday called on French Consul General in latter’s capacity as representative of “country most interested in future of Jerusalem” to urge strongly immediate settlement in Jerusalem by negotiations between Israel and Transjordan. Prefaced remarks by stating current talks with Abdullah Tel making no progress and offered no chance success. Asserted UK pre venting King Abdullah from reaching agreement and credentials given Abdullah Tel to negotiate worthless. Dayan requested French Government exert pressure on UK induce latter encourage or allow Transjordan reach immediate settlement re Jerusalem. Requested French Consul General communicate his statements to me with request US also attempt influence UK. Maintained PGI considers agreement in immediate future more important than possibility obtaining better terms in future.

Dayan proposed settlement Jerusalem question apart from question Palestine as whole. Stated because drain on PGI resources and continued deterioration economy Jewish Jerusalem, PGI could not afford indefinite continuation present mobilization particularly in Jerusalem. Asserted PGI not willing wait for arrival Conciliation Commission and inevitably long delays involved until it became familiar with problem and eventually made recommendations to next GA. PGI anxious to settle question by peaceful means, but capable if this not possible of solving problem by force.

Dayan next offered negotiate on basis following extraordinary con cessions made, he stated, in interest quick agreement: (1) Partition city into homogeneous Jewish and Arab sections. To achieve this, Jews willing relinquish former Arab quarters of Qatamon, German colony, upper and lower Bakka and Maliha which they now hold with boundary line to run west of Maliha. In addition would give up strong military positions of Mount Zion and Der Abu Tor together with Jewish fortified settlements of Ramat Rahel and Talpiyot and Jewish quarter of Mequor Haiyim. Division city on above lines would give Arabs far more than Consul General thought possible.

(2) In return and because of insistence of orthodox Jews, Mount of Ophel, Jewish cemetery on Mount of Olives and Jewish quarter Old City would be excluded from Arab sovereignty and placed under some type international control. Stated PGI might not insist on exclusive [exclusion] Jewish quarter Old City from Arab sovereignty.

(3) Hadassah hospital and Hebrew University on Mount Scopus would remain Jewish and be connected with Jewish Jerusalem by new road bypassing Arab residential quarters.

(4) Recognized above would place railroad station and electric power plant in Arab area but their uses would be supervised by international agency. Jewish use railroad would be discussed later in connection with final Palestine settlement and possible Jewish corridor.

French Consul General cabled above to Paris to London for Schuman1 in hopes latter could discuss with Bevin on current visit.

Consul General comments: (1) Settlement Jerusalem question would go far towards restoring peace and stability in Middle East which Consul General understands is primary objective US.

(2) Regardless whether UK discouraging Egypt and Transjordan from reaching agreement with PGI for strategic reasons related to Negev, UK would have no valid reasons for opposing settlement con fined to city Jerusalem.

(3) Settlement above basis might involve renunciation principle international city as called for by GA resolution but both French Consul General and I believe clause could be included in agreement between PGI and Transjordan to effect agreement would not prejudice any action by UN to internationalize entire area. Even if not accept able consider establishment peace by agreement more important than internationalization Jerusalem.

(4) Although PGI action may be motivated by hidden tactical reasons and wish to use troops elsewhere, both French Consul General and I believe reflects genuine PGI desire establish permanent peace Jerusalem (Contel 1550, December 232 ) avoiding further military action this area.

(5) Despite Jewish desire for peace, believe PGI will solve question by force if prospects immediate peaceful settlement fade.

(6) Proposed division city extremely favorable to Arabs and would meet their current demands as to demarcation line.

(7) Proposals made by Dayan would fit very well into suggestions for future Jerusalem contained in Contel 1530, December 13.3

Consul General therefore urges most strongly US seize present opportunity and press for settlement Jerusalem problem immediately. Conditions change very rapidly in Palestine and present opportunity should not be allowed escape by delay. Department may wish discuss question with UK with object obtaining full UK approval for settlement Jerusalem immediately and apart from Palestine problem as whole. Kirkbride in Amman could communicate UK views to King Abdullah and upon PGI receiving assurances through US of UK attitude Dayan and Abdullah El Tel could meet and work out details. Contribution to general stabilization in Middle East and contagious effect throughout Palestine of immediate Jerusalem settlement far outweigh probable advantages delaying in hope sustaining international city in future.4

Sent Department 35, repeated London, pouched Amman.

Burdett

1 Robert Schuman, French Minister for Foreign Affairs.

2  Foreign Relations, 1948, vol. v, Part 2, p. 1687.

3  Foreign Relations, 1948, vol. v, Part 2, p. 1665.

4 The Department, on January 14, informed Jerusalem that the subject matter of telegram 35 was discussed by officers at the working level with representatives of the British Embassy and it was agreed that the “matter presented possibilities which merited further urgent and very careful consideration.” (telegram 24, 867N.01/1–1349)On January 14, Jerusalem reported the thinking of the French Consul General that the “opportunity obtain real international city past and United Nations will prove unwilling furnish troops and other essentials for effective United Nations control. France’s primary objective should, therefore, shift to obtaining peace on terms acceptable to both sides. Consulate General agrees entirely with this reasoning. Extent Jewish concessions should be emphasized. PGI offering give up positions essential to defense Jewish Jerusalem thus indicating clearly is move for permanent peace. Areas involved such that considerable political opposition must be anticipated within Israel.” (telegram 36, 867N.01/1–1449)

The Acting Secretary of State to the President 501.MA Palestine/1–1449

[Document 394]

The Acting Secretary of State to the President

Washington, January 14, 1949.

The President: There is enclosed for your consideration and for transmission to the Congress, if you approve, a joint resolution1 to authorize an appropriation for a special contribution by the United States to the United Nations for the relief of Palestine refugees.

The purpose of this legislation is to give effect to a resolution of the General Assembly of the United Nations of November 19, 1948,2 a copy of which is enclosed. The action of the General Assembly was based primarily upon the report of the Acting United Nations Media tor for Palestine of October 18, 1948,3 which described the situation of the 500,000 Palestinian refugees as extremely critical and urged immediate assistance for them to avert a great human catastrophe. The General Assembly, taking this situation into account, declared in its resolution, “that the alleviation of conditions of starvation and distress among the Palestine refugees is one of the minimum conditions for the success of the effort of the United Nations to bring peace to that land”. The resolution further states that a sum of approximately $29,500,000 will be required to provide relief for 500,000 refugees for a period of nine months from December 1, 1948, to August 31, 1949, and that an additional amount of approximately $2,500,000 will be required for administrative and local operational expenses. To finance these requirements, the resolution “urges all States Members of the United Nations to make as soon as possible voluntary contributions in kind or in funds sufficient to insure that the amount of supplies and funds required” is obtained.

To provide immediate assistance pending the receipt of contributions, the General Assembly authorized the Secretary-General to advance $5,000,000 from the United Nations Working Capital Fund, this advance to be repaid from the voluntary contributions of governments.

The proposed legislation provides for a special contribution of $16,000,000 to the United Nations for the refugee relief program. This amount is deemed to be a fair share for the United States to contribute in order to support the efforts of the United Nations in restoring peace in Palestine and in view of the deep interest of the United States in restoring conditions of stability in that area. To date, fifteen countries have indicated that they will make contributions pursuant to the General Assembly resolution. Among these, the United Kingdom has announced a contribution of one million pounds sterling (approximately $4,000,000) and France, a contribution of 500,000,000 French francs (approximately $1,600,000).

The program will be administered by Mr. Stanton Griffis who is taking leave from his post as United States Ambassador to Egypt to serve as Director of United Nations Relief for Palestine Refugees. With a view to utilizing personnel and organizations experienced in disaster relief, arrangements are being made with the International Committee of the Red Cross, the League of Red Cross Societies, and the American Friends Service Committee to handle the distribution of supplies in the field as agents of the United Nations.

The provision for an advance of $8,000,000 from the Reconstruction Finance Corporation is designed to make a part of the United States contribution immediately available. Without this extraordinary pro vision, the normal delays in the appropriation process would make it impossible to meet the heaviest requirements of the relief program during the winter months.

Section 3 of the draft legislation is for the purpose of enabling the United Nations to procure material, supplies or services for the purposes of the resolution through the facilities of the United States Government agencies and to simplify the procedures for such procurement.

In view of the urgency of extending relief to these unfortunate peoples, and of the importance of the United States contribution to the United Nations program, I sincerely hope that the proposed legislation may be presented to the Congress for its consideration at the earliest opportunity.4

Robert A. Lovett

1 For text, see Department of State Bulletin, February 6, 1949, p. 204.

2 For information on this resolution, see circular telegram of November 19, 1948, Foreign Relations, 1948, vol. v, Part 2, p. 1614.

3 The text of this report is printed in United Nations, Official Records of the General Assembly, Third Session, Supplement No. 11A. The report is cited in an American draft resolution sent to the Department from Paris on October 20, 1948, in Delga 411, Foreign Relations, 1948, vol. v, Part 2, p. 1497.

4 President Truman transmitted Mr. Lovett’s letter to the Congress for its “favorable consideration” on January 29; the text of the President’s message is printed in Department of State Bulletin, February 6, 1949, p. 202.

Mr. Wells Stabler to the Secretary of State 867N.01/1–1449: Telegram

[Document 395]

Mr. Wells Stabler to the Secretary of State

secret Amman, January 14, 1949—4 p. m.

19. While it is understood that another of regular Abdullah el Tel–Dayan meetings is now scheduled for Saturday, January 15,1 doubtful whether Tel yet authorized discuss in definitive manner any of eleven points on agenda presented Jews at second meeting in series.

Repeated Jerusalem 14.

Stabler

1 Mr. Stabler, on January 17, advised he had learned “that due to absence in Rhodes of Shiloah no meeting between Tel and Dayan was held on January 15. As it appears likely that Transjordan will participate in Rhodes talks if present Egypt–Israel negotiations successful, probable that current series Tel–Dayan meetings will no longer be held.” (telegram 24 from Amman, 867N.01/1–1749)

The Acting Secretary of State to the Embassy in France 867N.01/1–1249: Telegram

[Document 396]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Embassy in France

secret Washington, January 14, 1949—7 p. m.

134. Benard of French Emb informed Dept Jan 12 that Syrian FonOff had expressed to Fr Minister Damascus its fears impending attempt by Abdullah carry out Greater Syria scheme.1 Benard said matter discussed with Maurice Fischer PGI spokesman Paris who stated PGI opposed formation Greater Syria and would be willing withdraw Israeli forces from Syrian front if Syrian forces menaced by Abdullah. Benard stated Fr Govt strongly opposed formation Greater Syria, was disturbed over Syrian fears this regard, and ex pressed hope US did not favor Abdullah’s project. (Embtel 146 Jan 12)2

Dept assured Benard US did not favor Greater Syria plan of Abdullah involving other Arab States but was not opposed to incorporation greater part Arab Palestine in Transjordan.

Dept has no info indicating any substance for Syrian concern impending move by Abdullah and it seems hardly likely latter would make move at this time which would cause further dissension among Arab States when they already hard pressed by Israelis. Dept would appreciate any info from field clarifying current situation.3

Lovett

1 For earlier documentation on this subject, see Foreign Relations, 1947, vol. v, pp. 738 ff.

2 Not printed.

3 This telegram was repeated to Arab capitals, London, Jerusalem, and Tel Aviv. Mr. Stabler, in reply on January 16, advised that “There are no indications at present that King has, or is even thinking of, any plans to take positive action at this stage toward realization greater Syria. His principal preoccupation now is settlement with Israelis and incorporation as much Arab Palestine as can be obtained in Transjordan. Little doubt exists however that he regards successful achievement these as first and important step in creation greater Syria.” (telegram 21, 867N.01/1–1649)

The Chargé in Egypt (Patterson) to the Secretary of State 501.BB Palestine/1–1449: Telegram

[Document 397]

The Chargé in Egypt (Patterson) to the Secretary of State

restricted Cairo, January 14, 1949—7 p. m.

59. ReEmbtels Rhodes conversations. Press morning 14th re Rhodes conversations describes them as having strictly military character and that in Egyptian view SC decisions November 4 and 16 must be made effective before studying decision December 29.

Text stresses conversations began 13th with Ralph Bunche, interim UN Mediator, and mentions influence of US in bringing about Rhodes talks as supplement to prior representations by Mediator’s Cairo representative Azcarate, with Prime Minister and Foreign Minister.

Further stressed that Rhodes conversations would not possess a political character and that the sole civilian member delegation Mohamed Saleh Foreign Office official who, however, has been detached to serve in office of Mediator.

Press item further states that conversations do not envisage recognition of “pseudo state of Israel” and that there will be neither direct talks with Zionists [n]or round-table conversations. These will be conducted in same manner as those held by late Count Bernadotte,1 likewise at Rhodes.

Patterson

1 The United Nations Mediator on Palestine was assassinated in September 1948.

Mr. Wells Stabler to the Secretary of State 867N.01/1–1549: Telegram

[Document 398]

Mr. Wells Stabler to the Secretary of State

secret
niact
urgent Amman, January 15, 1949—8 a. m.

20. Israeli peace offer re Jerusalem as contained in Jerusalem’s 35, January 13 and 36, January 141 appears to coincide in general terms with King’s views as outlined in mytel 16, January 11 and feel he would be willing discuss Jerusalem question with Jews in near future apart from more general problem of Transjordan–Israel peace, particularly since Jews seem ready grant number concessions.

Believe King would insist on complete sovereignty and control of Jewish quarter Old City and also of Katamon, upper and lower Bakaa, Mt. Zion, Deir Abu Tor, Maliha, Talpioth, Ramatrahel and Mekorhaim. He would probably also desire exchange of populations between Arab and Jewish pockets. However it is thought that he would be open to reasonable suggestions and negotiations on any or all of these points provided he could be sure of good faith of Israelis.

King’s present dilemma is due in large measure to lack of active and functioning government. Prime Minister is still ill and Acting Prime Minister appears unwilling take any responsibility on matters which he prefers should be handled by Prime Minister. Therefore King is impatiently awaiting return of Samir Rifai Pasha from US to appoint him as Prime Minister.

While preliminary discussions re Jerusalem could be held before formation new government, no definitive talks could take place now nor could Abdullah El Tel be issued with credentials more valid than ones he now holds. Unsatisfactory progress of Tel–Dayan talks resulting from absurd situation re government has been pointed out to King by certain advisers but he apparently feels himself unable remedy matters at moment.

As have regular weekly dinner engagement with King at Shuneh Sunday evening would Department consider it useful for plan in Jerusalem’s 35 and 36 to be outlined to King, as personal thoughts and without revealing source, in order obtain his reactions. While French Consulate General may have obtained some reaction through Abdullah El Tel and Musa Husseini (reports of whose interview will probably shortly reach British Foreign Office), it might be desirable to explore matter directly with King.2

Sent Department 20, repeated London 1, Jerusalem 15.

Stabler

1 Latter not printed, but see footnote 4, p. 663 [Pg. 663 includes portions of Doc. 393 and Doc. 394].

2 The Department, in reply on January 15, authorized Mr. Stabler to outline to the King the plan set forth in telegrams 35 and 36 from Jerusalem to obtain his reactions. It also cautioned him to “make absolutely clear you not acting in any way as mediator or extending good offices. You will of course recall that US remains on record as favoring internationalization of Jerusalem.” (telegram 9 to Amman, 867N.01/1–1449)Mr. Stabler replied, on January 17, that he had seen King Abdullah and the Transjordanian Defense Minister the previous evening and had advised them of the substance of telegram 9. The King stated that “if it did not seem possible to obtain internationalization of all Jerusalem, then autonomy of Arab and Jewish areas would be best solution to problem.” He also advanced the view that a “separate settlement Jerusalem ‘not a bad idea’” and that “he wanted to reach settlement with Jews which would be firm and durable and which would be based on mutual interests. Toward that end he always prepared adopt reasonable attitude on specific points under discussion. He hoped Jews would do same.” (telegram 22 from Amman, 867N.01/1–1749)

The Acting Secretary of State to the Legation in Switzerland 501.BB Palestine/1–1549: Telegram

[Document 399]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Legation in Switzerland

secret Washington, January 15, 1949—12 noon.

us urgent

niact

65. For Vincent.1 Deptel 54, Jan. 13,2 Keenan will not be able, for personal reasons, undertake duties as US Rep Pal Con Comm. His successor, however, has not yet been appointed. In this situation please be guided by following instructions: 1. You shld say to Fr and Turk Members Comm and to UN Secr that pending arrival US Commissioner Dept has requested you ex officio to represent this Govt and accordingly we hope Commission’s first meetings can be informal in character.

2. If foregoing acceptable to Fr and Turk members you may participate fully with them in discussing procedures to be adopted by Comm. Such wld include: a. Selection of Comm Chairmen. We wld suggest that Chairmanship rotate on monthly basis between three commissioners, following English alphabet. In this case France would be chair man first month, followed by Turkey, then US.

b. Itinerary of Comm. We wld have no objection if Fr propose that Comm proceed first Jerusalem to make acte de presence, later possibly going Rhodes if this is suggested by Mediator or if Comm shld feel such move necessary. We do not favor Comm meeting in Turkey since certain parties to Palestine dispute might not regard this as neutral ground.

3. If, contrary our expectation, Fr and Turk members insist on more formal treatment you must explain you will have to abstain from vote and that US to its regret will not be able participate in Commission’s formal deliberations pending arrival its Representative.

4. Since US Rep on Con Comm will be White House appointee we do not contemplate that you should undertake substantive discussions on Palestine problem.3

Repeat Geneva 37 Unpal 1.

Repeated USUN 26, Paris 136, Ankara 25.

Lovett

1 John Carter Vincent, Minister in Switzerland.

2 Not printed.

3 This message was cleared by the White House. The United Nations Conciliation Commission for Palestine held its first meeting at Geneva on January 17 with Mr. Vincent acting ex officio. The Commission “rendered homage memory Bernadotte; decided presidency would be exercised in rotation with Turkey as first president; decided establish headquarters Jerusalem beginning January 24; decided issue communiqués on committee work as occasion demanded; discussed with Azcarate practical questions including details establishment Jerusalem.” (telegram Palun 2, January 18, noon, from Bern, 501.BB Palestine/1–1849) Mr. Azcarate was Principal Secretary of the Commission.

The Consul at Jerusalem (Burdett) to the Secretary of State 501.BB Palestine/1–1549: Telegram

[Document 400]

The Consul at Jerusalem (Burdett) to the Secretary of State

secret Jerusalem, January 15, 1949—1 p. m.

42. Following comments made on 12th by British Consul Jerusalem:

Talks between Dayan and Tel not making satisfactory progress. Both sides merely presented demands which realized other could not accept and no attempt made to reconcile differences. UK advised King Abdullah obtain agreement Transjordan Government to talks. Main demands Transjordan included outlet to sea at Gaza, return of Ramie and Lydda, return of refugees and consideration future western Galilee at later date. Jews in general claimed right retain territory now held and specifically partition Jerusalem, mutual compensation for damages, resumption operation potash works at southern end Dead Sea, together with right use potash works at northern end, and rectification lines at Latrun. No mention made by Jews of refugees.

Regarding shooting down RAF planes, asserted careful interrogation personnel involved proved conclusively Jewish attacks occurred over Egyptian territory. Stated Egyptian Defense Minister approached UK Ambassador Cairo with request UK supply arms and munitions without Egypt’s invoking 1936 treaty. On instructions from E. Bevin Ambassador replied UK would not furnish assistance until Egypt invoked treaty and presence Jewish troops in Egypt definitely proved. Reconnaissance flights undertaken in effort obtain definite proof.

Consul emphasized importance to UK of overland communications between Egypt and Jordan and Iraq so that defense treaties with latter two countries could be implemented if necessary.

Considered at least corridor linking Transjordan and Egypt or Transjordan and Gaza vital for British defense needs. Expressed personal opinion UK would use force if necessary obtain route.

Sent Department 42, pouched Amman.

Burdett

Draft Message by President Truman to President Chaim Weizmann of Israel, at Tel Aviv 501.BB Palestine/1–1749

[Document 401]

Draft Message by President Truman to President Chaim Weizmann of Israel, at Tel Aviv 1

[Washington, undated.]

My Dear Dr. Weizmann: Your message of January 3 is in my hands. I deeply appreciate your courtesy in personally conveying to me the assurances which have been given to the United States Government by the Provisional Government of Israel concerning the circumstances surrounding the crossing of the Egyptian frontier by Israeli forces. I was gratified to learn that on January 11 [10] Mr. Eliahu Epstein officially notified the United States Government that all Israeli forces had been withdrawn from Egypt.2

I am happy to assure you personally, as the United States Government has assured the Provisional Government of Israel, that the representation which I directed Mr. McDonald to make in connection with this incident was made in the most friendly interest. I so instructed Mr. McDonald because I was convinced that a situation had arisen which threatened to extend the scope of the conflict. As you know, the United States Government also made strong representations in Cairo.

I am encouraged by recent developments looking toward armistice negotiations between Israel and Egypt. It is my earnest hope that these negotiations can be expanded from the military to the political field and that they can be broadened to include all the parties to the dispute.

It is essential that both Israel and the Arab states leave no stone unturned in their efforts to reach a final settlement. Neither party must permit side issues to distract it from the difficult task of attaining this goal, which will bring to Palestine the lasting peace so essential to the stabilization of the Near East and to the larger objective of international security.

With kind regards,

Sincerely yours,

1 Transmitted to the White House by Mr. Lovett with his memorandum of January 17. Presumably it was sent to the Israeli President as drafted.

2 See Mr. Rockwell’s memorandum of conversation, January 10, p. 633 [Pg. 633 includes portions of Doc. 371 and Doc. 372].

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Acting Secretary of State 867N.01/1–1849

[Document 402]

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Acting Secretary of State 1

top secret [Washington,] January 18, 1949.

Subject: Palestine

Participants: The Acting Secretary, Mr. Lovett

The British Ambassador, Sir Oliver Franks

First Secretary of British Embassy, Mr. Bromley

NEA—Mr. Hare2

UNA—Mr. McClintock

Sir Oliver Franks called at his request to leave an Aide-Mémoire 3 under instructions of the Foreign Secretary. He prefaced his official remarks with the personal comment that he felt the conversations with Mr. Lovett over the past several weeks had had a material effect on the British Government. For his own part, he had tried carefully to present not only a fair picture of the American point of view, but the arguments which supported that point of view. This he had done not only in official reports of his interviews (he asked Mr. Lovett to read the telegrams recounting his conversation with the Acting Secretary on January 12 and his subsequent talk with the President),4 but also in a personal letter to the Foreign Secretary in which he stressed the basic reasons for the Department’s attitude. Summing up, the Ambassador indicated that the Americans were looking to what to do about the future of Palestine while the British had perhaps been regarding the problem too much in the light of their unhappy experiences in the past. He was relieved to feel that the United States by its recent actions in restraining the Israeli attack on Egypt had shown clearly that it did not feel that Israel could act outside the territorial limits of the former Palestine mandate, although within those limits the American Government thought that final dispositions should be made by negotiation between the parties.

Sir Oliver said that, no doubt, the request of the British Cabinet for a statement from the United States in the sense that the United States Government and the British Government have a common policy relating to the Middle East was conditioned at least in part by considerations of domestic politics. Mr. Bevin had been under considerable attack and Mr. Eden had based his principal argument on the assertion that Palestine was forcing the two Anglo-Saxon Governments apart. However, Sir Oliver pointed out that the Cabinet telegram which he had received, and on which the Aide-Mémoire was based, made no reference to the domestic political situation or to the impending debate in the House of Commons on British Palestine policy. All his Government asked was that if possible the attitude of this Government toward making a statement be ascertained prior to the Cabinet meeting on Thursday, January 20.

I replied that there were two reasons why it would be difficult for this Government to make an across-the-board statement with respect to our unanimity of policy with the British Government in the Middle East. The first was a domestic problem—that of security in the Senate Foreign Relations Committee. I had already seen how top secret information had been leaked from that committee. Certainly, if a sweeping official statement were made, the Senate Committee would wish inside information and would probe into the basis of our current understanding on policy in the Middle East. I could offer no assurances that our top secret testimony before the Committee would not soon become public. The second consideration was that a statement along the lines which seemed to be contemplated, if it were very broad in scope, would arouse an instant Soviet reaction. The USSR saw the United States and the United Kingdom active in current conversations on the Atlantic Pact. There was a danger that a far-reaching statement on the Middle East would lead the USSR to the conclusion that a similar arrangement was being contemplated for that area. However, I did think it might be possible, if we could limit the statement strictly to the Palestine problem, for us to meet most of the requirements set forth in the Ambassador’s telegram.

On other points Sir Oliver said that his Government intended to announce on Friday, January 21, that the Jewish internees on Cyprus would be released. As for his Government’s contemplated de facto recognition of Israel, he was gratified to know that this Government planned to extend de jure recognition to Transjordan as well as Israel immediately after the Israeli elections provided, as was hoped, the Israeli Government returned by those elections was a moderate Government worthy of de jure recognition.

Although the Aide-Mémoire which Sir Oliver left offically embodied most of the points covered in his telegram of instructions which he said bore the earmaks of having been drafted by the Cabinet itself, it contained one paragraph for my own private information which was not paraphrased in the Aide-Mémoire. This referred to the recent conversations between the French Foreign Minister and the British Foreign Secretary. M. Schuman was represented as saying that France had a population which included 25 million Moslems and therefore had to be very careful in the attitude it adopted on Palestine. Nevertheless, the French Government had been on the point of extending de facto recognition to Israel when it stayed its hand because of Israeli defiance of Security Council resolutions.

On the main point—the desired United States statement of mutuality of view with the United Kingdom on Middle Eastern policy—it was pointed out to Sir Oliver that much would depend upon the attitude Mr. Bevin would take in the forthcoming debate in Commons. If he backed up the line which he had instructed Sir Oliver to present at our last interview, it would be difficult for this Government to make a statement in support of British policy. The Ambassador said that, as he construed his telegram just received, it indicated that the British Government was not going to harp on the old issues but was looking, as did the Department, toward what to do about the future.

I said that I thought it might be possible, provided that Mr. Bevin’s statements in the House of Commons did not seek to re-establish the line which he had taken last week with us, for either the new Secretary of State or possibly the President to make a statement which would indicate that both Governments were in complete agreement in pursuing a policy designed to restore peace in the Near East as quickly as possible. I thought that it might be possible to hang such a statement on a peg like the announcement of the British decision to release the Jews on Cyprus.

Another possibility, which I advanced merely as an off-the-cuff suggestion, was that perhaps the two Governments could extend recognition to Israel almost simultaneously. This would be convincing evidence of a concerted policy between Washington and London.

It was agreed that Mr. McClintock, in consultation with Mr. Hare and Mr. Rusk, would prepare a tentative draft of a possible statement and discuss it later today with Mr. Bromley of the British Embassy. If some draft could be developed on the working level, Sir Oliver might then send it to his Government with the caution that this was a purely tentative draft and without top level clearance. At the same time Sir Oliver would point out the difficulty which this Government would face in making a statement prior to the debate in Parliament unless it was assured that Mr. Bevin would not rake up old embers.5

I told the British Ambassador that Mr. Bevin seemed to have come an encouraging distance from his last position and that the decision to return the Jews from Cyprus and the intent of the British Government to extend de facto recognition to Israel would have an immense and beneficial effect on the Israeli elections, particularly if recognition should be given immediately before the elections.

1 Drafted by Mr. McClintock.

2 Raymond A. Hare, Deputy Director of the Office of Near Eastern and African Affairs.

3  Infra.

4 For information on these conversations, see Mr. McClintock’s memorandum of conversation of January 13 and telegram 149 to London of the same date, pp. 651 [Pg. 651 includes portions of Doc. 385 and Doc. 386] and 658 [Pg. 658 includes portions of Doc. 391 and Doc. 392].

5 The Department informed London on January 19 that “Such statement was worked out yesterday and telegraphed by Brit. Emb to FonOff. It has not been cleared at White House.” (telegram 219, 501.BB Palestine/1–1949) The editors are unable to identify in the Department of State files the proposed statement passed to the British Embassy. London, on January 21, reported information from Mr. Burrows that the Foreign Office had accepted the draft statement, suggesting solely some rewording of paragraph 2 “designed to lay more emphasis on Middle Eastern aspects [of] Palestine [problem].” (telegram 247, 501.BB Palestine/1–2149)There is in the files of the Department of State a draft statement dated January 21 (867N.01/1–2149). The wording of the latter portion of its second paragraph suggests to the editors, in the absence of the original draft, that the Department of State accepted the suggestion of the British Foreign Office. The draft of January 24, approved by President Truman, is printed on p. 691 [Pg. 691 includes portions of Doc. 417 and Doc. 418].

In telegram 247 (see first paragraph of this footnote), Mr. Burrows was said to have expressed Mr. Bevin’s hope that the statement would be made before the meeting of the British Cabinet scheduled for the morning of January 24. In its next numbered telegram, of the same date, London observed that “Foreign Office desire for some statement re US–UK agreement on long-term objectives in Middle East springs in part from internal political exigencies since one phase of most attacks on Bevin’s Palestine policy is that by his blundering he has managed to do harm to US–UK relations. There is belief here that such US statement in some form would go far to lessen difficulties British Government.” (867N.01/1–2149)

The British Embassy to the Department of State 867N.01/1–1849

[Document 403]

The British Embassy to the Department of State

top secret [Washington, undated.1 ]

Palestine

Mr. Bevin has asked the British Ambassador to inform Mr. Lovett that, as the United States Government knows, the British Government attaches the highest importance to Anglo-American agreement over Palestine. The British Government have worked unremittingly to this end.

2. The British Government particularly appreciates Mr. Lovett’s assurance that the United States Government stands firmly by its general views on the Middle East, as already explained to the British Government. Since the two Governments are in solid agreement on their long-range objectives affecting the Middle East, would it not be possible for a statement now to be made after this lapse of time in the sense that the United States Government and the British Government have a common policy relating to this area? Mr. Bevin has no desire to publish details now, but there is a view in the United Kingdom that there is no understanding between the two Governments on the Middle East and Mr. Bevin is most anxious to correct this misconception.

3. Mr. Bevin asks the British Ambassador to assure Mr. Lovett and the United States Government that the British Government has an equally earnest desire for peace and an accepted settlement of the Palestine problem, and that the British Government has been striving to that end. The British Government has now again urged the Arab Governments concerned both to settle their differences between themselves and to undertake negotiations, both at Rhodes and on a wider basis through the Conciliation Commission. It is hoped that the Conciliation Commission will soon be able to set to work. The British Government has studied, so far as reports allow, the talks at Rhodes, and is glad to note that progress is being made. The British Government believes that this is due to United States pressure on both sides and to British advice to the Arab Governments, coupled with the evidence of firmness combined with restraint which the British Government has recently shown. The British Government is however, up against a very great difficulty when Security Council decisions are not acted upon, and this seems to involve both Governments in an important point of principle. At the same time, the British Government is anxious that all parties in the Middle East shall look to the West and not to Russia, but it believes that the danger in the Arab States from Russia will grow very rapidly as they feel that they are deserted by the West.

4. Mr. Bevin is encouraged by the fact that the fighting appears to have stopped. The British Government is considering what other steps it could take to facilitate agreement and to encourage negotiations and to further the objectives which both Governments have. One thing which troubles the British Government is that the Transjordan Government, whom it wants to take a good deal of responsibility in the matter, and whose application to the United Nations has been vetoed by the Soviet Union, is not recognised by the United States Government. If the United States Government could immediately recognise Transjordan, even de facto, this would make it possible for the British Government to give simultaneous de facto recognition to Israel. De facto recognition of Transjordan is suggested as the appropriate step in view of possible changes of boundary.

5. Mr. Bevin feels that Mr. Lovett would appreciate that on many occasions the British Government have made concessions about Palestine in an attempt to be helpful and to avoid causing the State Department embarrassment. As will be seen from the above, the British Government wants to make yet another attempt to concert action and to make it clear that in the Middle East, as well as elsewhere in the world, the British and the Americans are working together. In the general setting of world affairs Mr. Bevin believes this to be all-important.

6. In short, Mr. Bevin suggests— (a) That some agreed statement should be released, to the effect that there is understanding between the two Governments regarding the Middle East.

(b) That Transjordan should be recognised by the United States Government, perhaps de facto, and

(c) That the British Government should simultaneously recognise de facto the Government of Israel.

Mr. Bevin hopes that these steps would be helpful in an attempt to clear up this disturbed area.

1 This communication was handed to Mr. Lovett by Ambassador Franks on January 18.

The Acting Secretary of State to Certain Diplomatic Missions in the American Republics 501.BB Palestine/1–1849: Circular telegram

[Document 404]

The Acting Secretary of State to Certain Diplomatic Missions in the American Republics 1

secret Washington, January 18, 1949—2 p. m.

As you aware from wireless bulletin, President has publicly stated interest this country in plight Palestine refugees and is asking Congress for $16 million appropriation to be this Govt’s share of $32 million relief program voted by UNGA Nov. 19. For your secret info Joint Chiefs of Staff and Secy National Defense concerned over grave threat to stability Middle East represented by more than half million Arab refugees living in conditions utmost destitution and squalor, whose fate if not promptly relieved will lead to further deterioration our strategic position in this important area.

Thus far US has been outstanding in its efforts to contribute to UN relief program, whose Director is Stanton Griffis, now on leave from post as Amb Cairo. Response of other Amer Republics has been distinctly disappointing and on whole can be classed as completely negative.

We understand Amb Griffis would like to send personal rep to explore possibilities securing contributions in kind from Brazil, Arg and possibly Chile. Although this is strictly UN enterprise, because US strategic interests involved you are requested tele your private estimate whether Govts concerned would be disposed make contribution and if accordingly it would be worthwhile for UN Director Relief Program send special rep.

Repeated to Cairo for Griffis, USUN.

Lovett

1 Sent to Rio de Janeiro, Buenos Aires, and Santiago.

The Chargé in the United Kingdom (Holmes) to the Secretary of State 501.BB Palestine/1–1849: Telegram

[Document 405]

The Chargé in the United Kingdom (Holmes) to the Secretary of State

top secret London, January 18, 1949—5 p. m.

214. 1. I am most grateful to Department for its 149, January 13 reporting conversation between Acting Secretary and British Ambassador. I believe that this frank, firm and friendly talk followed by talk of same character with President constitute genuine contriburtion to US–UK understanding which already have gone far to put US thinking before British Cabinet in a light clearer than ever before. Fact that US has reasoned point of view on Middle East problems as whole has begun to make its appearance in thoughtful British publications and conversations for first time without the overworked, and tendentious implication that US views re Palestine slavishly follow dictates of American Zionist pressure groups. It is source of surprise to some that underlying US policy there is hardboiled appraisal of elements of Middle East power and prospects for making best use of them in US–UK defense planning.

2. Impact of Franks’ reports of his conversations has derived more from fact spokesmen were President and Acting Secretary than from nature views they expressed. This Embassy at every opportunity has consistently made clear to Foreign Office officials, members of Parliament, military, etc., the trend of US thought on all major points made by Acting Secretary. However, British officials have been obsessed with rightness of their own views and this tempted them to hope wish fully that US attitude as expressed by US Representative SC during US political campaign would change in calmer atmosphere following elections. Bevin and his officials wanted to know on a government to government basis, apart from speeches made in charged Paris atmosphere, what US views really were. Now Bevin has received from both President and Acting Secretary restatement US policy tied up in a single unequivocable and comprehensible package and UK “knows where it stands” vis-à-vis US re Palestine. Embassy is inclined to believe that Bevin has now made his final attempt to sell US on UK Palestine policy. He now can go to no higher US authority and his hopes for UK–US cooperation on UK terms re Palestine have now vanished.

3. Embassy Officer has been shown texts of Franks’ telegrams reporting conversations with both Acting Secretary and President. While Franks did not deal in same order or with exactly same emphasis re points made by Acting Secretary in Department’s reference telegram he did present US views in clear light and in a context revealing a measure of personal agreement with their substance. Franks stressed friendliness of his reception on both occasions and US concept that Israel is the “most dynamic, efficient and vigorous state in Middle East”. Re President’s remarks Franks reported that former spoke of good and friendly relations existing between US and UK and ex pressed regret that in this matter US and UK “are not quite in agreement”. Franks reported that President was most friendly throughout interview but that he was also very positive and definite in expression of his views. Since these reports were undoubtedly discussed in detail at yesterday’s meetings British Cabinet attended by defence chiefs, not only their content but friendly tenor of Franks’ presentation may be of significance in deciding effect of US views on British Palestine policy.

4. Despite spate of comment and rumor neither British Government nor opposition appears to have decided on manner in which Palestine will be handled before Parliament. While Bevin is fully aware that he is in for rough time it would be erroneous to suppose that he will be ridden out of office on Palestine rail. Labour Party on party grounds will support him strongly and even Conservatives feel that there is point beyond which they would gain nothing by pressing Bevin re Palestine. Time is slightly in favor Bevin whose good points seem to be marshalling themselves in popular consciousness in mitigation of his lapses over Palestine.

5. British Government obviously now has choice re Palestine of going ahead, drawing back or maintaining unaggressively its present attitude and as of this moment there is no clear indication re line which will be adopted. Embassy’s guess is that for immediate future UK will do as little as possible re Palestine and as events can be found to give public justification UK will progressively but quietly unbend towards PGI. An abrupt change in policy seems unlikely. It is Embassy’s guess also that Bevin will attempt to play down US influence on Palestine events, but it is not unlikely that if he is hard pressed in debate he may bring US role more prominently into discussion with special reference to Bernadotte proposals.1

Holmes

1 The Department, on January 19, replied to the last sentence of telegram 214, stating in part: “you should bear in mind in discussions with Brit fact that Bernadotte plan was rejected in GA not because of lack of support by UK and US but because both Arab and Israeli influences united to deny necessary votes.… In view this voting situation inside Assembly, it would be most unfortunate if Bevin or FonOff should imply that US had forsaken its agreement to support Bernadotte plan.” (telegram 221, 501.BB Palestine/1–1949)The concluding paragraph of telegram 219 to London (see footnote 5, p. 674 [Pg. 674 is part of Doc. 402]) states that the British communication handed to the Department on January 18 “was drafted pursuant to tele which Brit. Amb said came from Cabinet itself. We believe in light your 214, Jan. 18 that Franks correctly interpreted changed situation by saying he thought Bevin has now abandoned views he expressed Jan. 12 through Amb here and that he is resolutely setting new course.” Regarding the conversation of January 12, see telegram 149, January 13, to London, p. 658 [Pg. 658 includes portions of Doc. 391 and Doc. 392].

London, on January 19, reported information from Mr. Burrows that a “circular message was sent to Arab capitals January 18 telling governments that advantage should be taken of present period comparative peace to make armistice agreements with PGI on all fronts and then to enter into final negotiations either through CC or directly.” (telegram 236, 867N.01/1–1949)

The Acting Secretary of State to the Consulate General in Jerusalem 501.BB Palestine/1–1749: Telegram

[Document 406]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Consulate General in Jerusalem 1

secret Washington, January 18, 1949—6 p. m.

30. Ur 47 Jan 172 and previous. Dept appreciates your commendable initiative and your recommendations re proposed Jerusalem settlement. However since GA resolution Dec 11 placed upon Conciliation Commission responsibility for recommendations concerning final Jerusalem regime and since Commission soon to arrive Palestine, Dept desires ConGen not assume active role in Israel–TJ negotiations (last para reftel 3 ). You should make absolutely clear to both sides US not acting as mediator in any way or extending good offices.

Dept’s position on Jerusalem settlement in light developments you have reported now under urgent consideration. You will be informed.

Lovett

1 This telegram was repeated to London and Amman and to Geneva for the American Delegation to the Palestine Conciliation Commission.

2 Not printed; it advised of discussions between Transjordanian and Israeli officials on proposals to settle the question of the administration of Jerusalem and of conversations by Consul Burdett and the French Consul General with those officials on the matter (867N.01/1–1749).

3 In this paragraph, Consul Burdett proposed “drawing up outline reconciling as far as possible Jewish-Arab positions and presenting it to Abdullah Tel and Dayan for further discussion.”

Editorial Note [Document 407]

Editorial Note

Secretary Bevin addressed the House of Commons concerning the Palestine problem on January 18. The Embassy took special cognizance of his conciliatory mood and his announcement that the British Government was prepared to release the Jews interned on Cyprus. It also noted that “even more important may be effect in Arab capitals of Bevin’s unequivocal public support direct Arab-PGI talks since such support goes somewhat beyond private British counsels to same effect through diplomatic channels. It seems likely that Bevin’s direct reference to ‘Government of Israel’ may be another step on road to British recognition PGI.” (telegram 223, January 18, 7 p. m., from London, 867N.01/1–1849)

The following day, Mr. Satterthwaite discussed with Uriel Heyd, First Secretary of the Israeli Mission in the United States, three matters concerning the British which were disturbing the Israelis. Mr. Satterthwaite suggested that “in my view Mr. Bevin’s statement in Parliament yesterday indicated that the British do not have hostile intentions toward the Israeli Government and that I hoped very much that they would before long have means of communicating with each other directly. The announcement of the release of the Jewish DP’s in Cyprus would, I hoped, be helpful in clearing the atmosphere before the elections.… I also mentioned the U.S. loan which the Export-Import Bank has approved today.” (memorandum of conversation by Mr. Satterthwaite, 501.BB Palestine/1–1949)

The Export-Import Bank, on January 19, announced authorization of a credit of $35 million to Israel to finance purchases in the United States of equipment, materials, and services in connection with agricultural projects and of a further credit of $65 million to finance projects in the fields of communications, transportation, manufacturing, housing, and public works. The latter group of credits was to be available until December 31, 1949. The text of the Bank’s press release on these credits is printed in Department of State Bulletin, February 6, 1949, page 173.

The Acting Secretary of State to Mr. Mark F. Ethridge 501.BB Palestine/1–2849

[Document 408]

The Acting Secretary of State to Mr. Mark F. Ethridge

top secret Washington, January 19, 1949.

Sir: Before you depart for Palestine to assume your duties as the American representative on the Palestine Conciliation Commission, I am setting forth the following basic positions for your guidance:1 A) A final settlement on all questions outstanding between the parties in Palestine should be achieved by negotiation as set forth in the General Assembly resolution of December 11, 1948. You should do everything possible as a member of the Conciliation Commission to assist the parties to reach an agreement by this means. You should consult the Department periodically during the course of these negotiations.

B) If it becomes necessary during the course of the negotiations for you to express the views of this Government, you should bear in mind that American policy is based on the following premises: 1. No modifications should be made in the boundaries of the State of Israel as established by the General Assembly resolution of November 29, 1947, without the full consent of the State of Israel.

2. If Israel desires additions to its territory as defined under the November 29 resolution, i.e., areas allotted by the General Assembly to the Arabs such as western Galilee and Jaffa, now under Israeli occupation, Israel should make territorial concessions elsewhere, i.e., the southern Negev. Israel is not entitled to keep both the Negev and western Galilee and Jaffa. If there is no agreement between the parties, the Israelis should relinquish western Galilee and Jaffa and the Arabs should relinquish the Israeli portion of the Negev.

3. If Israel desires to retain western Galilee and Jaffa, the southern border of Israel should not be drawn further south than the thirty-first parallel within the territory allotted to Israel under the resolution of November 29.

4. Status of Jerusalem—The resolution of December 11 states that the Jerusalem area should be accorded special and separate treatment from the rest of Palestine and should be placed under effective United Nations control. This could be accomplished by appointing a United Nations Commissioner for Jerusalem and by establishing machinery to enable him to supervise the administration of the area, to guarantee free access to the city and the Holy Places, and to insure adequate protection of the latter. The effective administration of the area of Jerusalem should be left to Arabs and Jews, the delineation of the parts of the area to be administered by each party to be determined by agreement.

It is not unlikely that Israel may call for a land corridor to connect the State of Israel with Jerusalem. Agreement to such a demand would not be in accord with the November 29 resolution, which provided only for freedom of access to Jerusalem; moreover, since such a corridor would bisect the territory which the November 29 resolution allotted to the Arabs, it would create a geographical anomaly. In the event, however, that the creation of such a land corridor appears to be essential to a final settlement, Israel should be prepared to make territorial concessions to the Arabs elsewhere.

5. The Port of Haifa—The State of Israel should give assurances of free access for the interested Arab countries to the port of Haifa. The Arab countries in turn should undertake to place no obstacle in the way of oil deliveries by pipeline to the Haifa refinery. The products of the refinery should continue to be distributed on the basis of the historical pattern.

6. Lydda airport—The airport of Lydda should be open to international air traffic without restrictions, and the interested Arab countries should be assured of access to its facilities.

7. Palestinian refugees—You should be guided by the provisions of the General Assembly resolution of December 11 concerning refugees.

8. Disposition of Arab Palestine—US favors incorporation of greater part of Arab Palestine in Transjordan. The remainder might be divided among other Arab states as seems desirable.

C) If negotiations, either directly between the parties or through the Commission, should fail, you will be authorized to join with the other members of the Commission in an effort to persuade the parties to agree upon frontiers between Israel and Arab Palestine as set forth in paragraph (3) above. At the same time, the United States Government will concert with the British Government to attempt to induce the parties to reach agreement on this basis.

Very truly yours,

Robert A. Lovett

1 Mr. Lovett had sent identical instructions to Mr. Keenan in a letter of January 5. The letter is filed under 501.BB Palestine/7–1949.

The Acting Secretary of State to the Consulate General in Jerusalem 501.BB Palestine/1–1849: Telegram

[Document 409]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Consulate General in Jerusalem 1

secret Washington, January 19, 1949—7 p. m.

35. Urtels 352 and 54.3 Herewith Dept general views re desirability direct Israeli-Transjordan negots on future administration Jerusalem: 1. Israel and Transjordan should be encouraged reach any agreement on future Arab and Jewish administrative responsibilities in Jerusalem compatible with para 8 of GA Palestine Res. of 11 Dec ’48. In particular, this might include agreement on areas of Jerusalem which Arabs and Jews will separately administer, either by local population alone or with assistance of Transjordan and Israel.

2. U.S. as Member of U.N. and Conciliation Comm can give support only to such arrangements for Jerusalem as fall within GA Resolution, requiring inter alia, that the Jerusalem area “be accorded special and separate treatment from the rest of Palestine” and that Conciliation Comm present next GA “detailed proposals for a permanent international regime for the Jerusalem area”. US cannot therefore support any arrangements which would purport to authorize estab of Israeli or TJ sovereignty over parts of Jerusalem area.

3. Dept does not consider that GA reference to “permanent international regime” requires direct administration by U.N. of Jerusalem area. Res. itself states objective of “maximum local autonomy for distinctive groups consistent with the special international status of the Jerusalem area”. However, while this would permit exercise of broad administrative responsibilities by Arabs and Jews in areas defined by mutual agreement, some clear representation of U.N. interest in Jerusalem area is required. Dept is considering various forms which latter might take.

4. Arrangements re Jerusalem agreed upon by Israel and Transjordan should be of provisional character and subject to approval by GA. However, GA could be expected view with much sympathy any proposal re Jerusalem mutually accepted by Arabs and Jews even though direct responsibility of U.N. thereunder might be less extensive than certain U.N. Delegations have thought necessary.

5. Conciliation Comm should be brought into any Israeli-Transjordan discussions re Jerusalem at any early stage. Suggestions advanced by Israel envisage area for direct U.N. administration and other U.N. responsibilities. Moreover, Comm has specific obligation make proposals to next GA on Jerusalem and Holy Places. Comm can advise parties on kind arrangements compatible with GA Res. and likely to be accepted by U.N.

View Deptel 30 Jan 18 Dept desires you not carry out plan outlined last para ur 54 Jan 18.

Communicate this tel to US Rep Palestine Conciliation Comm on arrival Jerusalem.

Lovett

1 This telegram was repeated to London and Amman.

2 Dated January 13, p. 661 [Pg. 661 includes portions of Doc. 392 and Doc. 393].

3 Dated January 18; it outlined a proposed agreement on the future administration of Jerusalem which had been prepared by Consul Burdett and the French Consul General. The last paragraph of the telegram read as follows: “French ConGen and I propose present above outline including suggestions as to demarcation line and international enclaves to both Dayan and Abdullah on twenty-[here follows garbled portion]. Will act in purely personal capacity but any indication Department may be able give of its approval of proposals in general would be most helpful.” (501.BB Palestine/1–1849)

The Chargé in the United Kingdom (Holmes) to the Secretary of State 501.BB Palestine/1–1949: Telegram

[Document 410]

The Chargé in the United Kingdom (Holmes) to the Secretary of State

top secret London, January 19, 1949—7 p. m.

237. Burrows today supplied following re continuation PGI Transjordan negotiations (Embassy’s 145, January 12).

1. Sassoon and Dayan on January 16 disguised as UN observers visited King Abdullah at his headquarters in Jordan Valley escorted by Abdullah Tel. PGI representatives took initiative re meeting which is not known to Transjordan Government.

2. Jews pressed for immediate settlement and Abdullah replied that he too anxious for settlement and wanted friendly relations with PGI. Abdullah said he was willing to extend cease-fire to whole front and to convert it into armistice. However, Transjordan must have exit to Mediterranean and he suggested this should be at Gaza. He re marked that if Egypt got Gaza this would mean control by Mufti.

3. Jews said they had no intention of discussing territorial adjustments with Egypt at present and would not do so without informing Transjordan beforehand.

4. Abdullah warned Jews that he would become permanent enemy PGI if Israel went Communist.

5. Jews spoke bitterly re British attitude toward Israel. To this Abdullah replied their blame UK undeserved since UK had helped PGI by withholding arms Arab Legion. UK is still withholding arms.1

6. King and PGI representatives agreed to hold another meeting as soon as “military situation with Egypt cleared up”. Burrows commented that Foreign Office was “very interested” in this meeting but that it was not particularly pleased that Abdullah had elected to play off PGI against the Egyptians (Embassy’s 236, January 19).2

Holmes

1  Mr. Stabler, on January 24, reported information from King Abdullah about the meeting at Shuneh on January 16. The latter was said to have stated that he had received Messrs. Sassoon and Dayan “to discuss with them present developments re armistice and peace negotiations. Meeting lasted half hour. Stated he had emphasized to Israelis his desire for peace and his hope Israel would work with him in reaching lasting peace based on mutual interests. Indicated Transjordan must have outlet to sea at Gaza and that Egyptians must be obliged leave that territory. (Re this His Majesty said if he had Gaza it would not be necessary to have sovereignty over Jaffa; however, if not possible have Gaza, then Transjordan must have Jaffa.) King stated he had not gone into precise details re his terms for peace, already generally known by Israelis. He described meeting as satisfactory” (telegram 31 from Amman, 867N.01/1–2449).

2 Not printed, but see footnote 1, p. 679 [Pg. 679 is part of Doc. 405].

The United States Representative at the United Nations (Austin) to the Secretary of State 501.BB Palestine/1–1949: Telegram

[Document 411]

The United States Representative at the United Nations (Austin) to the Secretary of State

confidential New York, January 19, 1949—11:41 p. m.

70. Following is text of agreement between Israeli and Lebanese officers signed at Ras-en-Naqura 14 January, in pursuance SC Resolution November 16, as obtained from UN SYG today:

“We, the undersigned, being duly accredited military observers of the Israeli and Lebanese Armies, on this day do hereby agree to the following: 1. The Israeli authorities will evacuate their troops and relinquish control over the following villages: Deir, Siriane, Aalmne, El Qoussacr, Qantara and Yardun. This evacuation will be completed not later than 0800 hours local time Sunday, January 16, 1949.

This evacuation is to be considered as a good-will gesture and a prelude to further discussion on the matters contained in the Resolutions of the SC of 16 November 1948.

2. It is agreed that discussions involving the requirements of the November 16, 1948 Resolution of the SC will be entered into by both parties not later than Wednesday, 19 January 1949.

3. It is agreed that during the present armistice talks no military act of aggression, in the form of air operations, ground operations, patrols, firing of weapons, or destructive missiles of any sort shall be directed across the frontier by either side against the personnel or equipment of the opposing force, or against the inhabitants, including public or personal property.

4. It is further agreed that movements of civilians, particularly refugees, shall not occur from one side to the other.

5. This agreement is drawn up in the presence of the UN Military Observers whose signatures appear below.”

Austin

The United States Representative at the United Nations (Austin) to the Secretary of State 501.BB Palestine/1–1949: Telegram

[Document 412]

The United States Representative at the United Nations (Austin) to the Secretary of State

confidential New York, January 19, 1949—11:41 p. m.

71. Following is text of declaration approved by Israeli and Egyptian representatives at Rhodes conference January 14 on agenda item “assurances as regards military offenses and national security” declaration will become preamble of armistice agreement. Text obtained from UN SYG:

“We, the undersigned, in full authority entrusted to us by our respective governments, desirous of promoting the return of permanent peace to Palestine, and recognizing the importance in this regard of mutual reassurances as regards the future military intentions of the parties, hereby affirm the following principles which will be fully observed by both parties during the armistice: 1. The injunction of the SC against resort to military force in the Palestine dispute shall be henceforth scrupulously respected by both parties.

2. No aggressive action by the military forces—land, sea or air—of either party shall be undertaken, planned (the use of the term ‘planned’ in this context has no bearing on normal staff planning as generally practiced in military organizations), or threatened against the people or the armed forces of the other.

3. The right of each party to its security and to freedom from fear of attack by the armed forces of the other shall be fully respected.

4. The establishment of an armistice between the armed forces of the two parties is accepted as an indispensable step towards the liquidation of armed conflict and the restoration of peace in Palestine.”

Austin

The United States Representative at the United Nations (Austin) to the Secretary of State 501.BB Palestine/1–1949: Telegram

[Document 413]

The United States Representative at the United Nations (Austin) to the Secretary of State 1

secret
priority New York, January 19, 1949—11:41 p. m.

72. SYG Lie through Cordier is making available USUN all important reports of Rhodes conversations submitted by Bunche in interests of keeping US Government and especially US representative on Conciliation Commission fully informed prior to convening of Commission. Reports in daily classified summaries since January 14 have covered highlights of negotiations to date. Text of Israeli-Lebanon agreement transmitted mytel 70, January 19, and text of declaration approved at Rhodes January 14 transmitted mytel 71, January 19.

In addition to information previously reported on Faluja with drawal, Bunche has reported that terms of agreement provide that heavy equipment to be evacuated to Egypt under UN supervision and control and held in UN custody until Chief-of-Staff satisfied anticipated armistice effective. UN staff plans for withdrawal approved by both parties with minor modifications. Bunche on January 17 noted that Israelis very conciliatory in discussing Faluja agreement.

In answer to SYG’s request for reports on downed RAF planes in Negev and Aqaba landings (mytel 44, January 142 ), Bunche has replied that in view of prospects for significant results from Rhodes talks he desired to avoid inciting SC debates leading to recriminatory exchanges between Egyptians and Israelis which might have unfavorable repercussions in Rhodes. Bunche reported that until full information available and carefully appraised, he did not feel able to present to SC a charge of breach of truce in Aqaba landings. He reported that as of January 15 his information was incomplete and also noted that SC President had not requested reports on either downed RAF planes or Aqaba landings. While personally deploring incidents, Bunche reported he would make full reports to SC only when full information available and SC decides to take up question.

Austin

1 This telegram was repeated to Athens.

2 Not printed.

Mr. Wells Stabler to the Secretary of State 867N.01/1–2049: Telegram

[Document 414]

Mr. Wells Stabler to the Secretary of State

confidential Amman, January 20, 1949—1 p. m.

26. Mytel 159, December 15.1 Apparently on suggestion of King Supreme Moslem Council for Palestine in Jerusalem decided on January 18 that his Majesty should be proclaimed King in all Mosques in Palestine on Friday January 21, Religious ceremony is planned at Dome of Rock Mosque in Jerusalem to be attended by new Mufti of Palestine, President Supreme Moslem Council, Military Governor and other high civil and religious dignitaries. Short invocation will be read which refers to King as “Our Lord Great King Abdullah Ibn Hussein”.

Sent Department, repeated Jerusalem 20.

Stabler

1 Not printed.

Editorial Note [Document 415]

Editorial Note

Various posts in the Arab countries, beginning on January 21, replied to the Department’s circular airgram of December 29, 1948 (see Foreign Relations, 1948, volume V, Part 2, page 1696), on the refugee problem. On that day, Jidda reported that “Up to the present, no Arabs from Palestine have sought refuge in Saudi Arabia” (despatch 15).

Cairo advised, on January 28, that the support given to roughly 8,000 refugees was a sizable drain on the Egyptian treasury “although percentage-wise not nearly as formidable as the expense borne by the Lebanese and Syrian Governments.” It noted additionally that “If the roughly 250,000 refugees now in the Egyptian occupied area of Palestine were driven into Egypt the result would be almost catastrophic for Egypt financially.” Cairo concluded that “There is ample evidence that the Egyptian Government has decided that the refugees are not in Egypt to stay. The refugees have been kept isolated in the desert on the far side of the Suez Canal where a strict guard is maintained over their camp. No new refugees have been allowed to come to Egypt since last May and the Government predicates its whole approach on forcing the refugee problem on the Jews and the United Nations to the greatest degree possible” (airgram 102).

Amman informed, on February 3, that the continued presence of 89,000 refugees in Transjordan and 302,000 in Arab Palestine would adversely affect both areas “in serious way through constant drain on almost nonexistent resources” and that the areas under Transjordanian control could only assimilate a “very small number refugees under existing conditions since money, jobs and other opportunities scarce” (telegram 46 and airgram 5).

Beirut, on February 4, stated that “The continued presence of some 90,000 Arab refugees in the Lebanon … would almost undoubtedly be considered unacceptable by the Government and an unbearable burden.” It also gave its opinion that “Prospects of permanently settling any large number of Palestine refugees in Lebanon are very poor,” inasmuch as “(1) Unemployment already exists and present economic conditions do not warrant consideration this possibility [; and] (2) Politically absorption of large number Moslems into Lebanon would upset present sensitive balance which exists between Christians and Moslems” (airgram 35 and telegram 55).

Damascus, on February 4, reported estimates of 80,000 to 100,000 refugees in Syria and that the small cash dole and foodstuffs supplied to them had resulted in “utter demoralization and impoverishment” of practically all of them. Damascus noted also that the “presence of refugees in Syria has constituted economic burden primarily on communities rather than on govt which as early as August, 1948 practically abandoned its relief expenditures as unsupportable budgetary drain” (airgram 30).

Baghdad, on February 5 and 7 noted the presence in Iraq of 5,000 refugees whose maintenance was possible despite the severe economic depression. However, the “Absence demand for labor makes impossible absorb any additional refugees now” (telegram 47 and airgram 54).

All messages cited above are filed under 501.MA Palestine, with the dates of the messages serving as dated enclosures, except for airgrams 35 from Beirut and 54 from Baghdad, which are filed under 501.BB Palestine.

The Ambassador in Greece (Grady) to the Secretary of State 501.BB Palestine/1–2349: Telegram

[Document 416]

The Ambassador in Greece (Grady) to the Secretary of State

secret
niact Athens, January 23, 1949—1 a. m.

152. Palun 7. Under Bundle’s instructions, John Reedman, senior political adviser [Acting] Mediator’s staff, arrived Athens from Rhodes afternoon January 22 for purpose confidentially acquainting USDel progress Egyptian-Israeli negotiations.

Egyptians and Israelis have agreed on preamble to armistice agreement and separately on Faluja pocket (Unpal 7).1

Differences on other points are as follows:

Israeli position: (1) Eytan informally proposed re coastal strip effective withdrawal Egyptian forces leaving such defense units as are agreed upon for administration and maintenance police control; (2) Israelis will accept principle withdrawal Israeli mobile and striking forces from area in northwest Negev as yet undefined which both sides would consider as threat to other. Bunche believes area might approximate that south of October 14 line; (3) Israelis will not agree to any armistice line which would result in advance Egyptian forces from present positions; (4) Israelis will not agree to return Egyptians in any form to Bir Asluj; (5) Israelis will not negotiate on basis of Egyptian civil governor in Beersheba; (6) Israelis hold firm position to retain El Auja but might not prevent agreement on this point alone. Israelis very probably would not permit Egyptians to return.

Egyptian position: (1) Egyptians expect adherence November 13 line under November 4 resolution; (2) Egyptians will accept present lines in coastal strip which coincide approximately with November 13 line; (3) Egyptians prepared withdraw (Israeli point 2) on basis agreement but are likely to press for Israeli withdrawal to November 13 line; (4) Egyptians will press for November 13 provisions re Bir Asluj and Beersheba except willing to modify claim to defense forces in Bir Asluj for civil administration and police; (5) El Auja must be held as defense outpost; (6) status quo requested for Egyptian forces in Hebron-Bethlehem area but will work out arrangements definitely to include [t]his group in armistice. Israelis accept this position.

Bunche believes agreement can be worked out for coastal strip and for principle of withdrawal in greater part northwest Negev but fears armistice may fail because no compromise can be reached on apparently (approximately five characters garbled) points of Bir Asluj and Beersheba and El Auja. Bunche feels it would be regrettable if armistice agreement should fail for these reasons and hopes US Government will consider what diplomatic action it could take at Tel Aviv and Cairo; had suggestion closeness agreement on major points should not be prevented by less important considerations. Bunche considers time factor important because negotiations have already lasted ten days, Israelis may modify views after January 25 election, Egyptians may modify views after January 26 meeting Arab League PolComm and present agreement re Faluja pocket might collapse if no armistice agreement.

It seems apparent Israeli military may be willing risk [the loss of?] political credit of agreement before election and possibility Bunche will report Israeli non-compliance SC November 4 resolution to UN in order to keep Egyptians out of Negev. It also seems apparent Egyptians hope to retain token positions in Bir Asluj and Beersheba and thus to score political victory in spite of military defeats. Egyptians undoubtedly consider such positions would be advantageous to Egypt at time of political and geographic settlement.

Reedman informed information re Israeli and Egyptian positions plus Bunche’s views would confidentially be reported Department for consideration as to what action, if any, could be taken. It was added that it might not be appropriate for US alone to approach Tel Aviv and Cairo in view US membership Conciliation Commission.

As Bunche has not yet reported to Lake Success re present stage negotiations Reedman requests substance not be repeated elsewhere for moment.

Sent Department 152, Jerusalem 2.

Grady

1 Also identified as telegram 92, January 21, 5 p. m., to Athens, not printed: it repeated the texts of telegrams 70, 71, and 72, all dated January 19 and printed ante, pp. 685 [Pg. 685 includes portions of Doc. 410 and Doc. 411] and 686 [Pg. 686 includes portions of Doc. 411, Doc. 412, and Doc. 413] (501.BB Palestine/1–1949).

The United States Representative at the United Nations (Austin) to the Secretary of State 501.BB Palestine/1–2349: Telegram

[Document 417]

The United States Representative at the United Nations (Austin) to the Secretary of State

secret New York, January 23, 1949—5:20 p. m.

85. In two cables from Rhodes dated January 22, Bunche expressed to the SYG great discouragement over Israeli-Egyptian negotiation. He did not give a detailed report of the negotiations and difficulties1 but stated he felt that his usefulness was nearly ended and urged that the SC at once hand over his function to the Conciliation Commission as he had recently requested. It was Bundle’s opinion that the current situation demands pressure i.e. governmental levels rather than per suasion by an individual.

In reply SYG Lie cabled on January 23 expressing complete confidence in Bunche, informing him that all had full confidence in his ability, and urging that he must carry on his functions through a completion of the current talks even if they became completely stalemated.

Bunche also expressed alarm to the SYG at reports which had reached him from newsmen that US was considering naming him as US representative on the Conciliation Commission.

Austin

1 In a telegram of January 24, 8:45 a. m., to Mr. Rusk, transmitted through the facilities of the United States Navy, Mr. Bunche advised that the previous evening he had been informed officially by the Israeli Delegation at Rhodes that the withdrawal of Egyptian forces at al-Faluja, scheduled to begin on the morning of January 25, had been postponed pending conclusion of an armistice agreement with Egypt. Mr. Bunche called this action a “flagrant breach” of the Egyptian-Israeli agreement on the subject and expressed the opinion that such “arbitrary and unilateral action,” unless rectified quickly, would result in termination of the negotiations. Mr. Bunche, to save the negotiations, proposed a 48–hour extension, hoping that the Egyptians would stay on and that the, Israelis would be induced to honor their agreement (501.BB Palestine/1–2449).

Draft of Proposed Statement by the Secretary of State on United States–United Kingdom Attitude Toward the Middle East 867N.01/1–2449

[Document 418]

Draft of Proposed Statement by the Secretary of State on United States–United Kingdom Attitude Toward the Middle East

top secret [Washington,] January 24, 1949.

Recent news about the Middle East has many encouraging aspects. The announcement today by the French Government of its de facto recognition of Israel is a major contribution to the settlement of the Palestine question. Similarly, the announcement by the British Government of its decision to accord de facto recognition of the Provisional Government of Israel at an early date is a welcome and constructive step, and follows closely upon its recent decision to release the Jewish internees on Cyprus for entry into Israel. The Department of State has closely followed the armistice conversations on Rhodes under the auspices of the United Nations Acting Mediator for Palestine and earnestly hopes that they will come to a successful conclusion. We trust also that the news of peace conversations between Israel and Lebanon, and between Israel and Transjordan, will be borne out by a statesmanlike decision among the Governments concerned to put a permanent end to the hostilities in the Holy Land. This Government, which with France and Turkey, is a Member of the United Nations Palestine Conciliation Commission, stands ready to do its utmost to assist the parties to compose their differences and to find lasting peace. I am delighted that the Honorable Mark Ethridge of Louisville, Kentucky, will serve as the United States Representative on the Conciliation Commission.1

There has recently been a good deal of speculation as to what were said to be differences of view as between the British Government and the American Government on the Palestine question. While at times there may have been differences of opinion in London and Washing ton as how best to deal with the Palestine problem, there has been no difference whatever in our main objective. This Government and the British Government have in fact long been united on the basic policy of increasing the economic well-being and sense of security of the Middle East and have sought to speed the return of lasting peace to Palestine.

Today’s events show that the three Governments have reached a common attitude on an important element of a Palestine settlement and lead us to believe that the close cooperation which marked the work of our Delegations in the General Assembly will be continued.

It is my hope that the work of conciliation will continue and that early in this new year we will find our friends, both in Israel and the Arab States, using their great talents and energy in the constructive work of peace.2

1 The White House, on January 24, announced the appointment of Mark F. Ethridge as the U.S. Member on the Palestine Conciliation Commission (telegram 40, January 24, 7 p. m., to Jerusalem, 501.BB Palestine/1–2449).

2 A marginal notation bears President Truman’s “OK.”

Memorandum of Conversation, by Mr. Stuart W. Rockwell of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs 501.BB Palestine/1–2449

[Document 419]

Memorandum of Conversation, by Mr. Stuart W. Rockwell of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs

confidential [Washington,] January 24, 1949.

Subject: Palestine

Participants: Mohamed Kamil Abdul Rahim, Egyptian Ambassador

NEA—Mr. Satterthwaite

NE—Mr. Jenkins

Mr. Rockwell

The Egyptian Ambassador called at his request. After discussing generalities, he mentioned the armistice negotiations going on at Rhodes between Egypt and Israel. He stated that the Israelis were maintaining an uncompromising position and refused to consider withdrawing to the October 14 military lines in accord with the Security Council resolution of November 4. The Ambassador was fearful least Israeli intransigence would cause the negotiations to break down and said that if the negotiations failed there would be very unpleasant results in Egypt. He said that no country could afford to allow the resolutions of the United Nations to be flouted and he called upon the United States to use its influence with the Israelis in order to persuade them to comply with the resolutions of November 4 and November 16. After all, he said, the Israelis have now received a loan, have practically achieved their territorial objectives, and are sure of obtaining de jure recognition. He thought that it was high time for the United States to do something for the other side, and to persuade the Israelis to abandon their uncompromising attitude.

Mr. Satterthwaite said that the United States Government was extremely interested in seeing a lasting peace come to Palestine and would do everything within its power and make every effort to urge upon both parties the necessity for moderation. He pointed out that the Conciliation Commission was on the point of departure for Palestine and that the impending arrival of the Commission seemed to bring the date of final peace negotiations nearer.

The Ambassador went on to say that Egypt had decided to cease paying so much attention to the Palestine dispute and “to turn its eyes” to the West. He wished every possible step to be taken to repair the damage in relations between the United States and Egypt which had been produced by the Palestine situation. He mentioned Egyptian plans for a request for technical advice and assistance from the United States. In conclusion, he once more referred to the necessity for compliance by the Israelis with the Security Council resolutions of November 4 and November 16 and emphasized the unfortunate effects which would be produced in Egypt if the Israelis failed to do so.

Mr. Satterthwaite said that the United States had always maintained that the Palestine dispute should be kept apart from United States-Arab relations and stated that he was pleased that Egypt had now decided to treat the question in this fashion.

The Chargé in the United Kingdom (Holmes) to the Secretary of State 501.BB Palestine/1–2449: Telegram

[Document 420]

The Chargé in the United Kingdom (Holmes) to the Secretary of State

top secret London, January 24, 1949—6 p. m.

us urgent

291. According to Burrows, British Cabinet this morning considered question Palestine (paragraph two, Embassy’s 247, January 211 ) and decided not to make any statement re British recognition Israel since Australia and New Zealand have urged UK to delay action until these dominions ready take same step simultaneously with UK. Australian cabinet meeting scheduled for January 27, Ceylon has asked UK not to recognize Israel at this stage; Pakistan has urged UK not to recognize at all and India has taken same line as Pakistan but less forcefully. Another factor leading to cabinet decision is that question should be discussed January 27–28 at London meeting Western Union consultative council. Re French recognition announced today, Burrows said Belgium and Netherlands are “furious with French”.

2. When I saw Bevin on other matters this morning it was evident that he is deeply preoccupied with Palestine. He referred to Moslem resentment toward the West generated by Palestine developments and expressed belief that USSR would “switch to the Arabs”. If it did so he thought this should be matter of grave concern to both US and UK. Bevin also mentioned need for Commonwealth consultation before UK can act.

Holmes

1 Not printed, but see footnote 5, p. 674 [Pg. 674 is part of Doc. 402].

The Secretary of State to the Special Representative of the United States in Israel (McDonald), at Tel Aviv 501.BB Palestine/1–2449: Telegram

[Document 421]

The Secretary of State to the Special Representative of the United States in Israel (McDonald), at Tel Aviv

top secret Washington, January 24, 1949—7 p. m.

us urgent

niact

42. We have today expressed to Epstein our apprehension at reports indicating Israeli Representatives have announced postponement with drawal Egyptian force from Al Faluja, which had been scheduled begin tomorrow morning, until after conclusion armistice agreement between Egypt and Israel. According to our info Israeli Delegation previously had agreed to unconditional release of this force. This voluntary agreement entered into by Representatives of Israel and Egypt was not made contingent upon conclusion armistice.

Epstein said he had just received instructions from Tel Aviv to call at Dept and say his Govt “in general” intended keep its forces on military lines as they now exist during period armistice in which military considerations were paramount. This armistice attitude however would not affect eventual political settlement. Epstein referred to divergent desires Egypt and Transjordan re disposition Arab coastal strip in Negev. He said Egyptians had been vanquished in war but wished return to Cairo in guise of victors, which was not easy achieve.

Epstein said however he would convey Dept’s view to his Govt that PGI might find it wise be generous, realizing as it did necessity providing Egyptian Govt with some means saving face. We thought prompt implementation agreement to release Faluja garrison might afford such a means. At same time we stressed our hope neither Govt would take a position which would cause armistice negotiations break down, as this Govt, a friend of both Israel and Egypt as well as member Conciliation Commission, very much desires see these negotiations brought to a prompt and successful conclusion. We added that representations in similar vein had been given to Egyptian Ambassador this morning, ref Cairo’s 93, Jan. 24.1

Please express similar views to Prime Minister and FonMin in your discretion. Repeated to Cairo for appropriate action as 90. Repeated for info to London as 261, Jerusalem 41 as Unpal 9.

Acheson

1 Not printed; it advised of information from Prime Minister Hady that the “Rhodes conversations had been virtually suspended due to refusal of Zionists to permit evacuation of positions by Faluja garrison.” It also stated that the “Prime Minister who expressed gratitude for US Good Offices in bringing about Rhodes conversations voiced confident conviction that a word from US or further interposition its Good Offices was again required in aid of UN in interests of implementation of SC’s resolutions which Egyptians had long ago agreed carry out.” (501.BB Palestine/1–2449)

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom 501.BB Palestine/1–2449: Telegram

[Document 422]

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom

top secret Washington, January 24, 1949—7 p. m.

us urgent

niact

259. When Sir Oliver Franks called on Secretary this morning we went over draft of proposed statement which Secretary would have made on US–UK attitude toward Middle East, which referred to such development as hoped-for UK decision to recognize PGI, French de facto recognition of Israel and appointment of Ethridge as USRep Palestine Conciliation Commission. Basic para, relating to UK–US policy in Middle East was as follows:

[Here follows second paragraph of draft statement, printed page 691 [Pg. 691 includes portions of Doc. 417 and Doc. 418].]

Premise on which statement was to be issued was announcement today of UK intention to accord de facto recognition to PGI at early date. However, British Ambassador following his meeting with Secretary informed us that Cabinet had decided not to make such announcement today. Accordingly Secretary’s statement will not be made.

Remaining problem was remarks which Bevin plans to address to House of Commons on Jan 26. Brit Emb has shown Dept text of For Sec’s proposed statement explaining this had crossed tel from Amb same subject. Dept on informal basis indicated certain deletions and alternative phraseology which would make it more acceptable from US point of view. It was stressed however that Dept had no intention “clearing” Bevin’s remarks, and that they had not been seen by Sec. Our action was impelled by friendly desire assist For Sec and particularly avoid his making statements which would encourage close questioning of Pres or Sec here who would be forced in making record clear to indicate that two Govts had not always seen eye to eye on how to approach Palestine problem. We told Brit Emb that if questions should ensue prompted by debate in Commons Wed we would probably reply in terms of para quoted above from proposed See’s statement.

Separate tel1 provides verbatim text of Bevin’s remarks as annotated on strictly informal basis in Dept after necessary elimination parts referring to See’s proposed statement.

Acheson

1  Infra.

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom 501.BB Palestine/1–2449: Telegram

[Document 423]

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom

top secret Washington, January 24, 1949—7 p. m.

us urgent

niact

260. Following is text of proposed Bevin statement referred to Deptel 259 today.

“His Majesty’s Government and the United States Government have long been united on the basic policy of increasing the economic wellbeing and sense of security of the Middle East and have sought to speed the return of lasting peace to Palestine. We are keeping in close touch with one another about these objectives. The fact that we and the Americans have similar interests and objectives in this vital area is a matter of great importance. There has been the constant danger that the Middle East might become a second Balkan area, torn by internal dissensions and international rivalry. We are determined to do all in our power to prevent this happening and believe that the Americans hold similar views.

This links in with the important declaration made by President Truman in his inauguration speech in favour of a bold new programme for assisting other countries in economic and social development. This declaration is in line with many discussions I have had with Mr. Byrnes and Mr. Marshall. President Truman’s aim and ours are the same. One of my first actions on taking office was to call home our representatives throughout the Middle East to discuss what contribution Britain could make in that area. The British Middle East Office has given valuable assistance, among others, in the fields of forestry, statistics and labour matters. I am glad to say that among others Iraq Government is preparing large scale plans for irrigation and flood-control which, if successfully applied, may nearly double the cultivable areas. The Persian Govt is about to embark on the first stage of their seven year development plan. In this and other projects we are willing to give all possible assistance. The Americans have also been interested in these projects and the World Bank is showing itself ready to help.

The basic policy on which we believe we and the Americans hold similar views is not merely a matter of words. I would remind the House of the common approach which we and the Americans have made to the problems of Turkey and Greece, and of the significance of this fact in the field of security. American aid and support to Turkey and Greece in close agreement with ourselves is an extremely important contribution to the stability and security of the whole area. American interest and help in Persia, also side by side with ourselves is equally important.”

Acheson

The Secretary of Defense (Forrestal) to the Chairman of the House Committee on Foreign Affairs (Bloom) 501.MA Palestine/1–2549

[Document 424]

The Secretary of Defense (Forrestal) to the Chairman of the House Committee on Foreign Affairs (Bloom)1

confidential Washington, 25 January 1949.

Dear Mr. Bloom: Your Committee has pending before it a legislative proposal recently submitted by the State Department with respect to Palestine refugees. On behalf of the National Military Establishment I should like to strongly recommended the enactment of this legislation.

Many reports from Brigadier General William Riley, U.S.M.C., who is the Senior U.S. Military Observer, as well as the Chief of Staff of the UN Mediator, Dr. Ralph Bunche, indicate that the situation of the refugee is a major obstacle in the path toward peace in Palestine. The presence of almost a half million refugees in various areas of the Middle East not only constitutes a serious threat to the political, economic and social stability of this important region, but seriously endangers the health and welfare of the peoples of the Arab States and Israel. This unhealthy condition also menaces American civilians and military personnel who are present in these countries.

Such a measure would be wholly consistent with the traditional humanitarian role of the United States in cases of major disaster and calamity among the peoples of other lands. Moreover, the Joint Chiefs of Staff are of the opinion that it is militarily important to provide timely and generous aid to these refugees in order to remove the serious threat to the stability of this area which their present plight creates.

To alleviate this dangerous situation our assistance must be prompt and generous and we have every reason to believe that it will be efficiently administered by our American Ambassador, Stanton Griffis, who has been appointed as the UN Director of Relief. I therefore urge early consideration and passage of the proposed legislation.

This office has been advised by the Bureau of the Budget that this legislation and this report are in accord with the program of the President.

Sincerely yours,

James Forrestal

1 Apparently Secretary Forrestal sent an identical letter to Tom Connally, Chairman of the Senate Committee on Foreign Relations. He transmitted a copy of his letter to Chairman Bloom on January 25 to the Secretary of State.

Message Released by the United Nations Security Council on January 25, 1949 IO Files

[Document 425]

Message Released by the United Nations Security Council on January 25, 1949

January 25, 1949

S/1225

Cablegram Dated 25 January 1949 From the Acting Mediator to the Secretary-General Transmitting a Cease Fire Agreement Approved by Egypt and the Provisional Government of Israel

To President of Security Council: I have the honour to inform you that the following cease-fire agreement was formally approved by the Delegations of Egypt and Israel at Rhodes for the armistice negotiations. Text of agreement follows:

“Egyptian Israeli General Cease Fire Agreement

We, the undersigned, do hereby agree that: 1. The general cease-fire agreement between the two parties which became effective on 7 January 1949 at 1200 GMT is hereby formally confirmed as a complete and enduring cease-fire between all elements of our military or para-military forces—land, sea and air—wherever located.

2. No element of the ground or air forces of either party shall advance beyond or pass over the line now held by foremost elements of its ground forces, and no element of naval or air forces of either party shall enter into or pass over the waters adjacent to the coastline now held by the other party for any purpose whatsoever.

3. In pursuance of the resolution of the Security Council of 29 December 1948, complete supervision of the truce by the United Nations observers shall be allowed and facilitated.

4. Movements of civilians shall not occur from one side to the other.

Done and signed in quadruplicate at Rhodes, Island of Rhodes, Greece, on the 24 January 1949, in the presence of the United Nations Acting Mediator on Palestine and the Chief of Staff of this United Nations Truce Supervision Organization. Signed for and on behalf of the Government of Egypt: Self El Dine, Colonel and M. K. El Rahmany, Colonel. For and on behalf of the Provisional Government of Israel: Walter Eytan and Yigael Yadin, Alouf.1 Rhodes, 24 January 1949.”

The negotiations on the armistice agreement made excellent progress in the early stages but severe divergencies in viewpoint have been en countered during the past few days. The negotiations are continuing, however, and it is still hoped that agreement can be reached.

I regret that I have not been in a position to keep the Security Council regularly informed as to the progress made and the difficulties encountered because of the formal agreement entered into by the two Delegations that the proceedings of the negotiations are not to be released in any way until the negotiations are concluded.

1 Hebrew equivalent of “Colonel”; Colonel Yadin was Chief of Operations in the Israeli Army.

Message Released by the United Nations Security Council on January 26, 1949 IO Files

[Document 426]

Message Released by the United Nations Security Council on January 26, 1949

January 26, 1949

S/1227

Cablegram Dated 25 January 1949 From the Acting Mediator to the Secretary-General Transmitting the Text of an Under taking on Food and Medical Convoys for Al Faluja

To the President of the Security Council: I have the honour to report the following text of an undertaking on food and medical convoys for Al Faluja entered into at Rhodes on 24 January 1949 by the delegation of Israel.

“Undertaking on Food and Medical Convoys for Al Faluja

The undersigned, on behalf of the Provisional Government of Israel, hereby undertakes that pending the evacuation of Al Faluja, and subject to review at the conclusion of the present Rhodes negotiations, food and medical supplies for the sustenance of the garrison and civilian population in Al Faluja, in such quantities as may be determined by the Chief of Staff of the Truce Supervision Organization, shall be granted unobstructed passage from present Egyptian lines to Al Faluja in convoys exclusively under United Nations supervision and escort. The Chief of Staff shall inform the designated representative of the Government of Israel of the quantities of supplies, the number of vehicles and the times of all such projected convoys, and shall take into account such recommendations relating thereto as said designated representative may deem it necessary to make.”1

1 Pursuant to this agreement four separate convoys, supervised and escorted by United Nations personnel, entered al-Faluja with food and medical supplies for Egyptian military forces and civilians resident there, on January 28 and February 4, 11, and 18. These operations were carried out without incident (cablegrams by Mr. Bunche to Secretary-General Lie, dated January 29 and February 4, 11, and 18, which were released by the Security Council as S/1236, S/1243, S/1255, and S/1262, respectively).

The Special Representative of the United States in Israel (McDonald) to the Secretary of State 501.BB Palestine/1–2649: Telegram

[Document 427]

The Special Representative of the United States in Israel (McDonald) to the Secretary of State

top secret
urgent Tel Aviv, January 26, 1949—10 a. m.

57. ReDeptel 42, January 24. At 9 p. m., I had conference with Shertok, Knox and Shiloah (latter returned January 25 from Rhodes) present. Shertok reviewed in detail the negotiations and contemplated procedures re Faluja evacuation as follows: 1. In discussions with Bunche and Riley it was made abundantly clear that evaluation of Faluja must be part of the whole armistice negotiation and not a separate operation; accordingly, Israeli delegation had it placed on the agenda as sub-item in “topic four”. Bunche argued strongly that it would be impossible because of face for Egyptians accept a document which specified in writing that evacuation of Faluja was contingent on armistice but that he and Riley would ex plain to Egyptians verbally that evacuation was conditional and warn Egyptians agree or be accused in SC of non-cooperation. Israel then agreed proceed on Bunche’s verbal promise which, according Shiloah, was fully understood by more than ten top UN and Israeli negotiators in round-table discussion. In effect Israelis compromised even further in agreeing that evacuation would begin on completion armistice or when armistice appeared very near to conclusion. Bunche finally countered, perhaps with undue optimism, by insistence on specific date of 24 January to start evacuation contingent, however, on armistice negotiations progress before that date. When on January 22 it became apparent armistice could not be concluded, nor was very near conclusion, Israelis asked him inform Egyptians of delay in evacuation and, for window dressing, provided in agreement with Bunche the “technical reason”: i.e., confusion re Egyptian request simultaneous evacuation of 2500 civilians from Faluja.

2. Shertok and Shiloah state Bunche fully admits the verbal understanding that implementation of evacuation must be contingent on, and considered in context of, whole armistice negotiations. Unfortunately, only the news of the written agreement is known to world press owing to text of operational memorandum to UN personnel in Tel Aviv which text was leaked to press.

The Egyptians have sent a note to Bunche accusing bad faith on part Israel for postponing evacuation. Israel replied January 25 in “stiff note” to Bunche, with copy for Egyptian delegates explaining exactly the verbal agreement in order avoid Egyptian accusation.

Shertok went on to say that for Israel agree evacuation Faluja with no armistice concluded or very near would be a farce; it is a misapprehension, as Bunche knows, to state that evacuation plan was unconditional.

In reply inquiry re expectations, Shertok stated he did not feel negotiations would break down over Faluja problem which is readily solvable as part of general settlement. He is most apprehensive, however, over following much more fundamental points: 1. Israel made Egypt proposal that it would guarantee stay out of Egypt if Egypt would get armies out of Israel partition area and guarantee not return. Israel furthermore guaranteed that if Egypt would take army out of GazA–Rafah strip Israel would not move forces in, thus allowing Egyptian civil administrators to stay there along with any arrangement that could be worked out with UN supervisors. This, in Shertok viewpoint, was maximum conciliatory position possible.

2. Now it appears that Egypt, while wanting Israel guarantee not enter Egypt again, is insisting that Egyptian forces be allowed re-enter Negev and occupy El Auja. Shertok says this is serious and Israel cannot agree.

3. While disturbed over Egyptian attitude on El Auja, Shertok states that with chief negotiators still in Rhodes parley begins again Thursday and he still has hope success.

Shertok says evidence desire continue negotiations Israel signed Rhodes January 24 firm agreement with Egyptian delegates allow another food and medical convoy to Faluja brigade, and a “sincere cease-fire” arrangement similar to the Jerusalem one.

Shertok reiterated instructions sent Epstein with hope that US Government could use good offices persuade Egyptians Government not insist (1) unconditional evacuation Faluja and (2) return Egypt forces to El Auja.1

Pass copy to Army CSGID.

McDonald

1 Mr. Rusk, on January 27, summarized telegram 57 in an unnumbered, eyes only telegram to Acting Mediator Bunche, at Rhodes. He concluded the message as follows: “We have been very much encouraged with your masterly direction of the Rhodes talks and even though auspices may not now seem bright we do hope you will stick by job until it is finished. While fully conversant your desire to return we feel that no one but yourself should shepherd these delicate negotiations at this time. Conciliation Commission can then build on foundations you have established.” (501.BB Palestine/1–2749)

Memorandum by the Secretary of State to the President 867N.01/2–1449

[Document 428]

Memorandum by the Secretary of State to the President

secret Washington, January 27, 1949.

Subject: De jure recognition of the Governments of Israel and Transjordan.

On August 30, 1948 you approved a policy of simultaneously ex tending de jure recognition to Israel and Transjordan, after the Israeli elections.1 On October 24, 1948, you declared in a public statement that when a permanent government was elected in Israel it would promptly be given de jure recognition.2

The Israeli elections took place on January 25. Reports so far received are that the moderate Mapai party of David Ben Gurion, which is now in control of the Provisional Government of Israel, has won enough votes to assure that it will remain in control of the administration, with the assistance of political groups sympathetic to it. Accordingly, I believe we should plan to extend full recognition to Transjordan and Israel in the very near future.

There are attached draft telegrams to our representatives in Tel Aviv (Tab A)3 and Amman (Tab B) instructing them to announce to representatives of the governments concerned the decision of the United States to extend full recognition, and suggested press releases to be issued here after the above notifications have been made (Tab C) and (Tab D).

Subject to your approval, it is suggested that our Mission in Tel Aviv become an Embassy and that Mr. James G. McDonald, who is your Special Representative, be named Ambassador to Israel. It is also suggested that Mr. Wells Stabler, a Foreign Service Officer who is at present in Amman in the capacity of liaison officer for the American Member of the Security Council Truce Commission in Palestine, be named Chargé d’Affaires a.i. of our Mission in Amman, which should be a Legation.

I should appreciate your advice as to the timing of this recognition. It seems to me that it might come as early as the latter part of this week and that shortly thereafter we could request agrement for Mr. McDonald as Ambassador to Israel.4

Dean Acheson

1 See memorandum of August 30, 1948, by the Secretary of State to President Truman, and footnote 1, Foreign Relations, 1948, vol. v, Part 2, p. 1359.

2 See telegram Telmar 97, October 24, 1948, to Paris, ibid., p. 1512.

3 The tabs cited in this memorandum are not printed.

4 President Truman gave his approval in an undated marginal notation. Regarding the telegrams sent to Tel Aviv and to Amman on January 31, see the editorial note, p. 713 [Pg. 713 includes portions of Doc. 436, Doc. 437, and Doc. 438].

Memorandum by Mr. Samuel K. C. Kopper to Mr. Mark F. Ethridge USUN Files

[Document 429]

Memorandum by Mr. Samuel K. C. Kopper to Mr. Mark F. Ethridge

secret [Washington,] January 27, 1949.

I. General—The attitude of the Arab states individually and collectively during United Nations consideration of the Palestine question has been marked by the following features: (a) At the outset of the General Assembly consideration of the question in April 1947 there was unanimous agreement among the Arab states who were members of the UN as well as the Arab Higher Committee that Palestine should become a unitary Arab state. On the surface this position has been officially maintained up to the present. Their opposition to the Partition of Palestine was based on historical, legal, ethnic and other grounds. That many of their contentions had merit cannot be denied.

(b) Arab governmental leaders have for the most part been prodded by the populace, particularly in the cities of the Arab states to liberate Palestine from the Jewish hold. With very few exceptions these Arab leaders have not only done little publicly to try and cool the ardor of the populace, but have more often taken positions which tended to fan the flames even though the governments possessed little or no power to back up their public position with effective action.

(c) Strong resentment existed among Arab leaders and peoples towards the U.S. particularly during the 1947 General Assembly and immediately there afterwards, and on May 14th when the US gave de facto recognition to the Government of the State of Israel. During the past six months there is evidence that this anti-American sentiment has subsided slightly. There is increasing evidence that a number of the Arab leaders would like to get out of the Palestine situation as gracefully as possible. Nevertheless, there still exists considerable unrest and agitation inspired by more extreme elements which makes the situation in several of the Arab states somewhat unsettled.

(d) The policy of the Arab Governments regarding a Palestine settlement was frequently characterized by a stubborn unwillingness to yield on points which might have created a more suitable solution from the Arab point of view that the situation which developed after their unwillingness to yield. Many of the points upon which they have failed to concede, have frequently seemed relatively insignificant in light of subsequent developments.

(e) In UN negotiations one is frequently confronted with a situation where Arab leaders are saying one thing publicly for home consumption yet at the same time privately are trying to find ways and means of settling the situation in a more moderate way.

(f) The unity of the Arab states in the Palestine situation was fairly well preserved until they undertook military action in Palestine. The failure of the governments to take effective action or no action at all has led to mutual recrimination and has all but shattered cooperation in the Arab League on the Palestine question. The position of Transjordan throughout the UN discussions was never exactly the same as the position taken by the other Arab states. There is increasing evidence that the Arab Governments would like to have the Palestine question settled so that they can get along with economic and social developments in their own individual countries.

(g) The problem of the 500,000 Arab refugees from Palestine created by the Jewish influx and Israeli military activity has placed a very heavy burden upon all of the Arab states excepting Saudi Arabia and Yemen. An adequate settlement of this potentially dangerous and electric situation is essential.

II. The attitudes of the individual Arab states may be summarized as follows:

[Here follow the attitudes of Egypt, Iraq, Lebanon, Saudi Arabia, Syria, Transjordan, and Yemen.]

III. Conclusion—Most of the Arab leaders seem to realize that their cause against the establishment of a Jewish state in Palestine is now hopeless. They are not, however, as yet able to take a position in public recognizing the state of Israel. Only time will permit them to take such a position. In spite of their aversion to the policy of the U.S. the great majority of the Arab leaders recognize the realities of the position of the U.S. in the world today and many of them hope that the situation in Palestine can be ended so that they can resume more normal relations toward the U.S. The position of the U.K. in the Arab world has not been enhanced by the policy pursued by that government during the past year and a half. Arab leaders are apprehensive of the intentions of the Soviet Union. They would probably prefer to get out of the present situation and into more normal relations with U.S. The tone and feeling of the Arab Delegations in the General Assembly of 1948 as compared with the previous session was much more friendly towards the U.S. in spite of all that transpired between November 1947 and September 1948. There is a feeling of some bitterness on the part of some of the Arab leaders over the willingness of the Security Council to take strong measures in July 1948 directed at the Arab states but absence of a similar willingness to do the same against the state of Israel in the fall of the same year. This feeling, however, does not permit them to indulge in the hope that there will be a change in the American policy. In spite of insinuations a year ago that the Arab states might leave the United Nations, they have not done so although they are undoubtedly quite cynical about the role of the UN. An economic boost to that area might well alleviate some of the bitter feeling in the Arab states.

When the General Assembly was considering the establishment of the Palestine Conciliation Commission during the latter part of November and early December of 1948 there was considerable speculation as to how the Arab states would vote. If the Arab states, the Soviet Bloc and the other Asiatic states had all voted against the proposal it would not have passed. However, since the particular objective seemed to be conciliation by peaceful means and there did not appear to be any strong reaffirmation of the November 29, 1947 resolution the Arab leaders were able to indicate to their Asiatic friends their willingness to have them abstain or vote in favor of the December 11, 1948 resolution. (This required some prodding by the United States Delegation, however!)

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in Egypt 501.BB Palestine/1–2849: Telegram

[Document 430]

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in Egypt

top secret Washington, January 28, 1949—6 p. m.

us urgent

niact

107. Epstein on instructions Shertok informed Dept Jan 28 PGI seriously disturbed by deadlock Rhodes and likelihood failure negos. Epstein said PGI sincerely desired reach agreement with Egyptians but that latter uncompromising, unwilling admit defeat, and encouraged in intransigent attitude by Bevin’s speech in Commons Jan 26.

Epstein said main stumbling block appeared to be El Auja which Egyptians stated was menace to Egypt as long as in Israeli hands. They desired Israelis withdraw from El Auja but for security reasons PGI unable effect complete withdrawal as long as prospects final peace negos not immed. Israeli reps Rhodes had informed Egyptians that PGI willing withdraw main body Israeli troops back from El Auja leaving only “military outpost” under UN supervision. Such outpost would in no way be strong enough to menace Egypt and yet would afford measure of protection to Israeli settlements in area.

Epstein said he saw no reason why PGI would not agree to sign armistice with Egyptians on basis this arrangement El Auja and that he certain that if agreement concerning El Auja could be reached PGI would release Faluja brigade.

Epstein reiterated PGI position that armistice should be based on present military lines with exception above arrangement El Auja and Faluja, Egypt to remain in occupation Gaza-Rafah coastal strip.

Epstein said proposal concerning El Auja had been decided in PGI Cabinet meeting and that Cabinet had also decided formally request USG’s good offices to attempt persuade Egyptians come to agreement this basis. Said despite deadlock PGI would not withdraw negotiators from Rhodes.

Pls call immed upon FonMin and give him above info. Add that USG earnestly hopes Egypt will see way clear to reaching armistice agreement with PGI. Point out that proposed UN supervision Israeli outpost El Auja seems offer assurance El Auja will not be menace Egypt nor Egyptian lines communication. Add that fact that Israeli proposal is result Cabinet decision and that PGI has formally requested US good offices seems indicate proposal sincere. State USG believes substantial progress already made toward Israeli-Egyptian armistice agreement and hopes both sides will make every effort remove final obstacles now standing in way.

Dept made representation Egypt Amb Jan 28 along same lines. Amb pointed out PGI made no mention of compliance with SC resolution Nov 4. Made personal suggestion that Egyptian observers might be stationed at proposed Israeli outpost El Auja in addition UN reps. Dept stated opinion this suggestion merited serious consideration Rhodes but pointed out proposed Israeli-Egyptian armistice comm would be in position to maintain surveillance El Auja outpost. Amb reporting Dept’s representation to Cairo.

For your info only Dept this morning also recd request from SYG requesting it endeavor persuade both Govts break deadlock.1

Acheson

1 This telegram was repeated to Tel Aviv for the American Delegation to the Palestine Conciliation Commission and to Jerusalem. It was transmitted separately to Acting Mediator Bunche, at Rhodes, in an unnumbered telegram of January 28 and to London in telegram 321 the same day (501.BB Palestine/1–2849). The message to London requested the Embassy to “Pls immed convey sense above to FonOff and state USG hopes UKG will make particular effort Cairo attempt persuade Egyptians reach compromise With Israelis at Rhodes. Add USG believes Israeli proposal could serve as effective basis for armistice without reference to dispositions final peace settlement, and that fact that proposal is result PGI Cabinet decision and that PGI has formally requested US good offices this basis seems indicate proposal sincere.”Chargé Patterson called on Prime Minister Ibrahim Abdel Hadi on January 29 and gave him the substance of the Department’s telegram. At the conclusion of the presentation, Hadi Pasha “expressed inability consider El Auja suggestion or other points raised by Israeli pending demonstration of Israeli good faith through prior unconditional release Faluja garrison…” The Prime Minister left the impression with the Chargé that the “Egyptians anxious continue Rhodes conversations but felt that token evidence of good faith by Israelis and face-saving device represented by unconditional release of Faluja garrison must be insisted upon as prerequisite to renewal of serious conversations at Rhodes.” (telegram 116, January 29, 4 p. m., from Cairo, 501.BB Palestine/1–2949)

The United States Representative at the United Nations (Austin) to the Secretary of State 501.BB Palestine/1–2849: Telegram

[Document 431]

The United States Representative at the United Nations (Austin) to the Secretary of State

secret
urgent New York, January 28, 1949—9:10 p. m.

107. SYG Lie handed USUN following telegram to him from Bunche dated Rhodes, 27 January. Lie stated he was giving us this confidentially and not to any other delegation although we assume he gave it to McNaughton as President SC. Lie hoped US could do something and surmised UK might be making more trouble.

Following verbatim text of telegram:

“Negotiations resumed afternoon 27th. Following separate talks with each delegation conclusion is inescapable that prospects for an armistice agreement are virtually nil. Each delegation is adamant on its previous position. Have exerted every possible effort to induce concessions from each side but to no avail.

Egyptian minimum demands are: a. Israeli withdrawal to 14 October lines as defined in 13 November memorandum except for defence forces in settlements;

b. Egyptian civil administrators in Beersheba and Bir-Asluj; they have dropped their original demand that Egyptian forces be permitted to return to Bir-Asluj and along Rafah Bir-Asluj road;

c. They claim right to advance only at El Auja which Israelis captured in late December and advanced from there into Egypt.

Egyptians therefore taken 13 November lines as basis for armistice lines and insist advantages gained under the truce should not be confirmed by armistice agreement.

Israelis have modified their original demand that Egyptian forces withdraw altogether from Gaza-Rafah coastal strip now strongly held by them and will accept Egyptians remaining there with defence forces only on basis of a reciprocal reduction agreement. Israelis insist on retention of their forces in El Auja at minimum in defensive strength and regard as unrealistic Egyptian emphasis on 4 November resolution and demands concerning Beersheba and Bir-Asluj. They will not consider any general withdrawal to 14 October lines or evacuation of Beersheba and Bir-Asluj.

Israeli position is that any withdrawal arrangement must be on reciprocal basis and will be controlled by distance of Egyptian forces from Palestine frontier. Egyptians embittered about postponement of Al Faluja evacuation. Egyptians urge that they do not have to sign an armistice agreement with Israelis to stay where they are and hold what they have and will not sign one unless Israelis make important concessions in direction indicated. Egyptians do not wish to sign away in an armistice agreement any interests of their own in Negev or custodial claims on behalf of Palestine Arabs there. They realize that as soon as they sign most other Arab states will quickly follow.

We have been officially informed that Lebanese will sign an armistice agreement within half an hour after notification that Egyptians have signed. Abdullah has communicated to me his interest in an invitation if Egypt signs.

It has been made clear to me today that despite a complete impasse neither delegation will wish to take responsibility for walking out on the negotiations. They will wish me to take responsibility for closing the negotiations by declaring no hope for agreement exists. I will be cautious about that. At worst I will try to persuade them to adjourn indefinitely and then I will report fully to SC. Present prospect is that negotiations will be completely stalemated by Sunday if not before. Urgent Council intervention in some form might be helpful even if only a cable from President of Council.1

If no agreement is signed here possibility of renewed fighting will be greatly increased.”

[Here follows final paragraph, dealing with a matter other than the armistice agreements.]

Austin

1 President McNaughton informed Acting Mediator Bunche that he could not “intervene officially in the Rhodes conversations unless he has a specific reason or specific point on which to comment. He advised Bunche in any event not to break off the discussions but, if necessary, adjourn them. If necessary to call adjournment, Bunche should request both parties to issue statements setting forth reasons therefor. McNaughton’s thought was that the SC could use such statements as a basis for intervention.” (telegram 110, January 29, 3:50 p. m. from New York, 501.BB Palestine/1–2949)

Memorandum of Conversation, by Mr. Robert M. McClintock 501.BB Palestine/1–2949

[Document 432]

Memorandum of Conversation, by Mr. Robert M. McClintock

secret [Washington,] January 29, 1949.

Subject: Palestine

Participants: Mr. Eliahu Epstein, Representative of the Provisional Government of Israel

Mr. Ethridge, U.S. Member of the U.N. Palestine Conciliation Commission

Mr. Satterthwaite, NEA

Mr. Rockwell, NE

Mr. McClintock, UNA

Mr. Epstein called on Mr. Ethridge at the Department at 11 a. m., January 29. He said that he had promptly reported to his Government the interview he had had on the preceding day with Mr. Satterthwaite but had not received any further word from Tel Aviv.

The Department’s Officers laid great stress on the evacuation of the Faluja garrison and said that on the basis of their talk with the Egyptian Ambassador it seemed that this was the key point which, if removed, would cause the diplomatic log jam to break. Mr. Epstein went into a long explanation that the Faluja agreement was merely one aspect of the over-all armistice agreement. He said, “We will let them out of Faluja if they will agree to our staying at El Auja.”

At this point Mr. McClintock read Mr. Epstein a private telegram from Dr. Bunche to Mr. Rusk, which made very clear that the Faluja agreement had been unconditional and was in no way dependent upon the conclusion of an over-all armistice. Mr. Epstein seemed considerably taken aback but stuck to his guns and reiterated his former thesis.

When it was suggested that possibly a token Egyptian force might also remain at El Auja, Mr. Epstein said vehemently that his Government would never agree to such terms.

(Mr. Ethridge remarked after the interview that he thought the Israelis were unduly rigid with regard to Faluja. He did not seem to have acquired a very good impression of the Israeli case from his talk with Mr. Epstein.)

Regarding the long-range aspects of the Arab refugee problem Mr. Epstein said that he was sure the Israeli Government would welcome back the Christian Arabs. He implied that such a welcome would not be accorded the Moslem Arabs but added that the Mohammedans would not wish to return in any event as they did not feel comfortable as a racial or religious minority group. He commented that it was an interesting facet of Arab character that the Mohammedan Arabs, when in the majority, treated other minorities very well but that they did not feel the same way when occupying the minority position themselves.

Mr. Epstein said that, in addition to these considerations, many of the Arab villages had been destroyed and there were no homes for the refugees to return to. He said that, from the humanitarian aspect, Israel would have to contribute something to the rehabilitation of the refugees but the problem was too vast for any single small government to handle and it could only be solved by the international community. He thought, however, that certain of the Arab States, such as Transjordan and Iraq, were in need of extra population and might be able to take a considerable portion of the refugees.

The Consul at Jerusalem (Burdett) to the Secretary of State 501.BB Palestine/1–2949: Telegram

[Document 433]

The Consul at Jerusalem (Burdett) to the Secretary of State

secret
urgent Jerusalem, January 29, 1949—10 a. m.

78. Palun 15. It is suggested Department discuss with Ethridge Deptel 35, nineteenth and previous Contels regarding possibility early settlement Jerusalem. In order capitalize on present opportunity achieving agreement, believe question should be raised by Commission with PGI and Transjordan immediately upon arrival Ethridge who will probably become chairman February 1. Commission could then proceed planned tour capital, leaving committee here to continue by negotiations pending return. Dayan’s proposals not yet discussed with Commission members. We plan informally discuss this subject with French representative shortly.

Believe agreement should follow lines Dayan suggestions, avoiding references sovereignty, and prefacing agreement with stipulation it is without prejudice international status city as provided GA resolution. Agreement would have object achieving peace and demilitarization city and would be signed directly between parties. It is recognized immediate agreement establishing demarcation line between Arab and Jewish areas and postponing question internationalization may result in intervening period being utilized to make ultimate agreement on internationalization more difficult. However, absence of any agreement now would have same result, present opportunity for peaceful settlement in city would be forfeited and permanent retention by Jews of Arab areas now held would become most likely. USDel and Consulate General, therefore, believe every effort should be exerted reach agreement now delineating Arab-Jewish area and demilitarizing city.

Department will undoubtedly realize Commission discussions regarding internationalization will probably precipitate adverse public reaction in Israel press which may stimulate dissident elements with complications security problem. For example, yesterday morning’s press alleged Israeli Cabinet decided to claim full sovereign rights except in Old City where internationalization might be accepted. Nevertheless USDel and Consulate General feel risk must be taken.

French representative is of opinion that PGI should not carry out intentions reported in press to hold constituent assembly Jerusalem nor set up proposed central administrative offices in Jerusalem. He may raise question in Commission, or may make informal representations to PGI or may report to his government for action.1

Burdett

1 The Department informed Jerusalem on January 30 that Mr. Ethridge had departed for Jerusalem before telegram 78 could be discussed with him. It noted also that Mr. Ethridge was acquainted with the general lines of the proposal (telegram 54, 501.BB Palestine/1–3049).

The Chargé in the United Kingdom (Holmes) to the Secretary of State 867N.01/1–2949: Telegram

[Document 434]

The Chargé in the United Kingdom (Holmes) to the Secretary of State

restricted
urgent London, January 29, 1949—1 p. m.

350. Foreign Office issued following communiqué 11 a. m. London time today:

“HMG in UK have decided to accord de facto recognition to the Government of Israel. They hope to arrange with that government for the early exchange of representatives.”

2. Final decision this connection was taken late January 28.

3. Bevin will receive Linton, Israel representative at 12:30 to inaugurate UK–Israel relations with “friendly words.” Marriott1 has been instructed to deliver same message to Shertok in Tel Aviv.

4. Fact de facto recognition does not in any way effect determination Israel frontiers is being made clear in Foreign Office spokesman guidance to press. Spokesman will refer to many outstanding questions arising from former British mandate which remained to be worked out with Israel and which UK hopes can be settled with Israel at early date. Re de jure recognition, spokesman will say that this will be considered in the light these discussions establishment of frontiers and general development of situation in Palestine.

Holmes

1 Cyril Marriott, British Consul General at Haifa.

The Consul at Jerusalem (Burdett) to the Secretary of State 867N.01/1–2949: Telegram

[Document 435]

The Consul at Jerusalem (Burdett) to the Secretary of State

confidential Jerusalem, January 29, 1949—3 p. m.

82. Dayan stated last night number new immigrants Jerusalem steadily increasing, now almost impossible find vacant room and Army requested vacate requisitioned houses and move into camps. First of Cyprus detainees, large number which scheduled settlement Jerusalem, expected thirtieth.

Admitted Arab quarters Jerusalem held by Jews completely settled by new immigrants and becoming thoroughly Jewish. Asserted PGI would have great difficulty forcing people move from homes now consider theirs and Army would probably be required use force with adverse political repercussions. Stated if return of certain sections to Arabs contemplated, agreement should be reached immediately.

According Dayan new immigrants now occupying Arab property throughout Israel and homes no longer exist to which Arab refugees could return. Stated PGI drawn up plans contemplating settlement Arab refugees in other Arab countries instead their return to Israel. Was vague as to details but said PGI estimated cost resettlement refugees at 150,000,000 pounds and prepared contribute considerable portion this amount. Claimed sources from which funds would come already determined. Maintained PGI would pay for Arab property taken over but not at fantastic prices prevailing during mandate.

To avoid possible embarrassment to Dayan, please protect source.

Sent Department 82, repeated Beirut 10, Amman 5.

Burdett

The Secretary of State to the Legation in Saudi Arabia 867N.01/1–2649: Telegram

[Document 436]

The Secretary of State to the Legation in Saudi Arabia

confidential Washington, January 29, 1949—6 p. m.

37. Dept now preparing instr to you for discussion overall relations US–SAG, but feels that certain questions raised your 68 Jan 261 shld be answered immediately as follows: 1) You shld unequivocally state to SAG officials that US Govt has brought no pressure whatever on UK to recognize Israel. Only representations to UK have been concerned with recent shooting down of RAF planes over Egyptian-Israeli border, and these were made to both Israel and UK in effort to avoid incident developing into major proportions. Greatest pressure on UK has been that of Brit public and parliamentary opinion.

2) US arms embargo has been rigidly maintained. While some war material has been successfully smuggled out of US, quantity has not been large, and wherever possible participants have been prosecuted and material confiscated.

3) US attitude re Israel was clearly stated in UN by Dr. Jessup on Nov. 20 to effect that US supported Israeli claims to boundaries set forth UNGA resolution Nov 29 but believed that if Israel sought retain additional territory in Palestine it shld give Arabs territorial compensation.

4) We would not support any attempt by Israel to occupy any Arab state and would fully support any measures taken by UN to protect territorial integrity such State.

5) With regard to allegation of incursions Israeli planes over SA territory, Dept interested know whether SAG has brought matter to attention of Acting Mediator.2

Acheson

1 Not printed; it transmitted an oral communication by Yusuf Yassin on behalf of King Ibn Saud. The communication stated that the United States was continually supporting and assisting the Israeli State; that under United States pressure, the British were starting to incline toward the Israelis; that the Soviet Union was openly extending military aid to Israel; and that the United States was also doing so, openly or secretly. The communication then queried concerning the attitude of the United States toward Israeli aggression (867N.01/1–2649).

2 Jidda, on February 1, answered in the negative concerning the Department’s query in paragraph 5 (telegram 80, 867N.01/2–149).

Editorial Note [Document 437]

Editorial Note

The White House, on January 31, released statements announcing as of that date the de jure recognition by the United States Government of the Governments of Transjordan and of Israel; for the texts of the statements, see Department of State Bulletin, February 6, 1949, page 205.

The Department of State sent appropriate telegrams to Amman (No. 16) and to Tel Aviv (No. 55) the same day (867N.01/1–3149).

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in Egypt 501.BB Palestine/1–2949: Telegram

[Document 438]

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in Egypt 1

top secret Washington, January 31, 1949—6 p. m.

117. Ur 116 Jan 29. On Jan 29 Dept informed Epstein of Egypt PrimMin’s response concerning Israeli proposal re El Auja. Epstein communicated substance to Tel Aviv and informed Dept Jan 31 that Shertok instructing Israeli reps Rhodes make following new proposal to Egyptians.

Village of El Auja to be seat of Israeli-Egyptian armistice commission and under control UN observers. Troops neither side to be present. Main body Israeli troops to be withdrawn “well back”. Israeli “strong points” to be maintained “north and south of El Auja” along Egyptian frontier for defensive purposes.

Epstein said PGI position on release Faluja brigade remains same.

According Epstein PGI considers above arrangement should remove Egyptian fears that El Auja would be menace to Egyptian lines communication. Shertok desired details be worked out in Rhodes instead of Washington and Cairo. Epstein said PGI anxious Rhodes negotiations not be broken off.

Acheson

1 This telegram was repeated to London, Jerusalem, and Tel Aviv.

The Chargé in the United Kingdom (Holmes) to the Secretary of State 501.BB Palestine/2–149: Telegram

[Document 439]

The Chargé in the United Kingdom (Holmes) to the Secretary of State

top secret London, February 1, 1949—7 p. m.

us urgent

379. 1. Burrows today gave Embassy considered Foreign Office reply Department’s 321, January 281 (Embassy’s 351, January 29).2 He said British views based on two important considerations.

2. First consideration is that Rhodes talks are being conducted in extreme privacy. Bunche made this clear in January 25 telegram to SYG (Doc No. S/1225) which mentioned formal agreement between Arabs and Jews that information re progress talks should not be made available in advance of their conclusion to anyone—not even SC. As result Burrows said it is impossible for anyone to have formal official notification of what is going on. PGI has approached USG in sense Depreftel, and Egyptians a few days earlier approached British Government re Israeli intransigence on Falluja garrison withdrawal but in Foreign Office view there is no official basis upon which advice can be given to either party.

3. Burrows said parenthetically that now UK has recognized Israel, latter is at liberty to put directly to it any points and that UK would be glad to consider such points. Israel has made no such approach.

4. Second consideration according Burrows is that intervention in favor Israeli’s ideas re Auja by a government would be in pursuit settlement on very different lines to that laid down by SC on November 4 and December 29. Consequently UK feels that any such action should be regarded with utmost caution because of possibility of it being taken as precedent in other cases such as Indonesia.

5. Burrows said UK has no objection to any agreement reached between parties which would help maintain cease-fire and lead to armistice and final settlement but that Foreign Office considers material difference arises if some outside power (not party to negotiation) should intervene to press one or other side to accept something quite different from SC views.

6. Burrows pointed out that UK has repeatedly told all Arab Governments (most recently on January 18) that their best course would be to conclude armistice with Israel followed by final settlement. However, Foreign Office for reasons given above does not find it possible to intervene with Egypt in favor of any particular concession re Auja as outlined by Epstein.

7. In conclusion Burrows said Foreign Office would like to make one positive suggestion: One main difficulty Rhodes is Egyptian fear of making agreement which would leave Egypt open to further Israel aggression. Consequently Foreign Office believes that anything USG can do towards removing this Egyptian fear would be most valuable contribution.

8. When Embassy pointed out Department’s 321 referred only to particular effort Cairo by UK to persuade Egyptians to reach com promise, Burrows said that in context outlined by Department this could only mean compromise re Auja and that UK for reasons given above is not prepared to advocate this compromise.

Holmes

1 Not printed, but see footnote 1, p. 706 [Pg. 706 is part of Doc. 430].

2 Not printed.

The Special Representative of the United States in Israel (McDonald) to the Secretary of State 501.BB Palestine/2–149: Telegram

[Document 440]

The Special Representative of the United States in Israel (McDonald) to the Secretary of State

confidential Tel Aviv, February 1, 1949—7 p. m.

79. ReMistel 77, February 1.1 Re broadening talks at Rhodes, Foreign Minister stated that PGI received letter 31 January from Bunche in capacity Acting UN Mediator, inviting Israel negotiate armistice with Transjordan, Syria, Lebanon, Iraq, Saudi Arabia and Yemen,2 on basis of November 16 resolution, place of conference to be Rhodes or elsewhere within ten days. PGI replied in letter to Bunche February 1, that it readily accepted as regards Transjordan, Syria, Lebanon, and Iraq, provided: (a) that Egyptian negotiations be concluded first; (b) and preferably that negotiations be concluded with others on bi-lateral basis in order handle problems one by one and avoid confusion. As regards Saudi Arabia and Yemen, PGI stated it had no quarrel with these states, desired to have friendly relations with them, and saw no reason negotiate armistice with them, because never considered itself in actual conflict with them.3

McDonald

1 Not printed; it reported that Ambassador McDonald had formally conveyed United States de jure recognition to the Israeli Foreign Minister at 12 noon, February 1, and that in the ensuing 95-minute conversation, the latter had volunteered important information, to be made the subjects of following telegrams (867N.01/2–149).

2 Mr. Bunche sent these invitations to the Governments of Israel and of the Arab States (except for Egypt) on January 30. The Security Council released the text of the latter group of invitations on February 3 as S/1241.Foreign Minister hopeful mood re progress Rhodes Egyptian talks, especially inasmuch as on January 31 Shiloah had first direct talk with Egyptian representative and latter expressed earnest desire conclude armistice.

3 According to a cablegram of February 8 from Mr. Bunche to Secretary-General Lie, the Governments of Israel, on January 31, and of Transjordan, on February 8, accepted Mr. Bunche’s invitation. The Security Council released the cablegram the same day as S/1245.Saudi Arabia, on February 8, declined the invitation, noting that the “armed Saudi Arabian troops participating in the Palestine campaign do not constitute an independent front, and there is no reason why the Saudi Arabian Government should enter into any negotiations to conclude a new truce while the truce Imposed in July is still effective. At any rate, the Saudi Arabian Government accepts the decisions which have already been adopted, or which may be adopted by the Arab League, in respect of the situation in Palestine.”

Iraq also declined the invitation, informing Mr. Bunche on February 13 that “the terms of armistice which will be agreed upon by the Arab States neighbours of Palestine … will be regarded as acceptable.” The texts of the Saudi Arabian and Iraqi replies were transmitted by Mr. Bunche to Secretary-General Lie on February 24 and were released the same day by the Security Council as S/1265.

The Special Representative of the United States in Israel (McDonald) to the Secretary of State 867N.01/2–149: Telegram

[Document 441]

The Special Representative of the United States in Israel (McDonald) to the Secretary of State

top secret Tel Aviv, February 1, 1949—7 p. m.

80. Re Mistel 77, February 1.1 With repeated emphasis need absolute secrecy FonMin informed that January 31 Israel representatives went Transjordan talk with King Abdullah at latter’s request. Interview was lengthy and although not yet in possession complete details conversation FonMin said his information main points were: 1. King stated he desired peace and that war was not really war but more like an unpleasant incident between “friends”.

2. British knew King was conferring with Israel representatives and had no objection and gave King free hand except on certain undisclosed points.

3. That if Bunche invited Transjordan Rhodes negotiate with Israel representatives there King would send envoy immediately. If invitation permitted delay of ten days or so King would again confer with Israel representatives during interim.

FonMin stated he very pleased King’s expression peaceful possibilities but somewhat baffled because King could not disclose points of possible disagreement. Bunche’s invitation and PGI requests delay until conclusion Egyptian talks (Mistel 79, February 1) allows possibility one or more meetings with King during ten days before possible Rhodes meeting.

McDonald

1 Not printed, but see footnote 1, p. 715 [Pg. 715 includes portions of Doc. 439 and Doc. 440].

The Consul at Jerusalem (Burdett) to the Secretary of State 867N.01/2–149: Telegram

[Document 442]

The Consul at Jerusalem (Burdett) to the Secretary of State

confidential
niact
urgent Jerusalem, February 1, 1949—9 p. m.

94. Following announcement issued by Public Information Office tonight:

At its meeting yesterday the Cabinet decided to terminate the military governorship of Jerusalem and to institute in that city governmental arrangements obtaining in other parts of the State of Israel.

“On the 2nd of August, 1948, the Government proclaimed that all laws of the State of Israel apply to the area of Jerusalem under Israeli occupation, and in view of the conditions prevailing at the time, the Government then deemed it necessary to establish the military governorship in the city.”

Initial local public reaction is that announcement tantamount to annexation Jewish sections city Jerusalem to State of Israel.1

Sent Department 94; repeated Amman 7.

Burdett

1 Foreign Minister Shertok informed Mr. McDonald of this action and explained, “to avoid international misunderstanding,” that it “was administrative and not annexation of Jerusalem.” (telegram 78, February 1, 6 p. m., from Tel Aviv, 867N.01/2–149)

The Secretary of State to the Consulate General at Jerusalem 501.BB Palestine/2–249: Telegram

[Document 443]

The Secretary of State to the Consulate General at Jerusalem

confidential Washington, February 2, 1949—7 p. m.

62. Unpal 14. [For Ethridge.] AmRep Tel Aviv, together with diplomatic and consular Corps Tel Aviv, invited attend opening Constituent Assembly Jewish Jerusalem Feb 14. Dept has serious doubts, view US position in support UNGA decision re internationalization Jerusalem, concerning advisability any American reps Palestine attending opening assembly. Dept has so informed AmRep Tel Aviv,1 stating further instructions to follow after matter fully considered here. (Ur 86 Jan 31.)2

Meanwhile, Dept would like receive indication views PCC re implications holding Constituent Assembly Jerusalem and Ethridge opinion re attendance US reps.

Acheson

1 In telegram 63, February 2, 7 p. m., not printed.

2 Not printed; it reported a notice published in the local press calling upon occupants of abandoned property in Jerusalem to establish their right to hold such property. To Consul Burdett, this action “appears to be direct application in Jerusalem area of Israeli law disposing of property in manner and on grounds not permitted to military occupant under international law.” The Consul cited Israeli plans to hold the Constituent Assembly in Jerusalem, to conduct municipal elections there in March, and to discontinue the military governship thereafter. He also noted the permanent establishment of the Israeli Supreme Court in Jerusalem. He then suggested that “appropriate representations soonest to PGI re these developments which seemed designed prejudice internationalization Jerusalem and are part current PGI policy treating Jerusalem as integral part Israel.” (867N.00/1–3149)Jerusalem, on February 3, reported that the first full meeting of the Conciliation Commission took place that day, with Mr. Ethridge in attendance. The Commission discussed the developments set forth in telegram 86. Mr. Ethridge asserted that the “Commission had clear mandate from UN in GA resolution December 11 and suggested Commission immediately make informal contact with Israeli Government for purpose of stating its position and ascertaining Israeli Government’s views.” The Commission agreed to do so and also decided “to arrange informal meeting between Commission and Israeli and Arab military commanders Jerusalem separately for purpose of expediting proposed military and administrative agreement.” (telegram 107, 501.BB Palestine/2–349)

The Chargé in Egypt (Patterson) to the Secretary of State 501.BB Palestine/2–249: Telegram

[Document 444]

The Chargé in Egypt (Patterson) to the Secretary of State

top secret
niact Cairo, February 2, 1949—9 p. m.

131. On responding at 6 p. m., February 2 to urgent request by Foreign Minister I was informed by Abaza Pasha of receipt today word from Rhodes of rejection by Israelis of a proposition devised by Dr. Bunche as Palestine Mediator with view to Egyptian-Israeli Palestine settlement (Embtel 126, February 1).

Egyptians had steadily refused Israeli efforts to change basis of Rhodes talks from SC November 4 and 16 resolutions along lines more acceptable to Israelis. However, when Bunche stating that he had been in touch with his government proposed a new basis for a Palestine settlement Egyptians although unhappy to do so assented in the interests of accelerating conclusion of an agreement.

Bunche had proposed that Bersheba (Bir Saba), El Auja and Bir Asluj should be neutralized with the Mediator or his successor, the Palestine Conciliation Commission sitting in one of the three places above-named. The Egyptians under Bunche’s proposition would remain at Gaza.1 (It was not clearly stated when Faluja garrison would be released.)

This proposal had been met by a refusal on the part Israelis or perhaps more precisely by counter-proposals which the Egyptians considered wholly unacceptable.

By such counter-proposals the Israelis stated: 1. Bersheba was necessary to them.

2. They required that an Israeli offensive and defensive force be stationed at Bersheba.

3. An Israeli defense force should be stationed at Bir Asluj.

4. On other hand Israeli would not occupy El Auja and would assent to the Egyptians fortifying that spot.

5. Israeli would assent to UN commission sitting at El Auja if desired.

Foreign Minister had learned that if this attitude were persisted in by the Israelis, Bunche, as acting Palestine Mediator, proposed to notify the SC of the attitude of Israeli’s delegates or their government.

Foreign Minister, who indicated a continuing belief in ability of US Government to influence PGI, expressed hope that I most urgently communicate foregoing to my government in order that it might use its influence with PGI to further progress of the Rhodes talks to a conclusion having some relationship to the foundation on which the conversations were built and initiated. Abaza Pasha pointed out that Egyptians had made every conceivable concession, having even departed from their insistence on the November 4 and 16 resolutions when Bunche informed them that his proposition above mentioned had been brought to the attention of the US Government.

I trust the Department may find its way clear to extend effective good offices in order to bring parties to an agreement since Abaza Pasha rather despairingly inquired if the only alternative might be another resort to arms. The Minister, despite my categoric assurances that to the best of my knowledge and belief my government was sincerely desirous that the parties to the Rhodes conversations might reach a prompt and just settlement, was inclined to hold that the US in extending de jure recognition to Israel2 at a sensitive point of the Rhodes negotiations had rendered PGI more than ever intransigent and so had indirectly intervened in the negotiations in a sense injurious to Egypt.

Please telegraph urgently any statement which the Department may desire me to communicate to Foreign Minister or other representative Egyptian Government.

Patterson

1 According to a telegram of February 3, sent presumably to Secretary-General Lie, Mr. Bunche stated that his compromise draft agreement had been presented on January 31 and that the Egyptian Delegation had formally notified him on the morning of February 3 that Egypt accepted his draft, with minor modifications not affecting the substance. New York transmitted the text of Mr. Bundle’s telegram to the Department in telegram 125, February 3, 1:18 p. m. (501.BB Palestine/2–349).

2 In a note of February 4, Egyptian Ambassador Rahim expressed to the Secretary of State the very deep regret of his Government that “certain powers” had recognized the “so-called State of Israel,” despite the failure to find a solution for the problems of Palestine. The Ambassador pointed out that while such recognition was not to be interpreted “as a definite stand in favor of Zionists,” yet the Zionists had exploited it in this sense (501.BB Palestine/2–449).

The Minister in Saudi Arabia (Childs) to the Secretary of State 867N.01/2–349: Telegram

[Document 445]

The Minister in Saudi Arabia (Childs) to the Secretary of State

confidential Jidda, February 3, 1949—10 a.m.

87. Deputy Foreign Minister after giving message conveyed Legtel 861 said if Legation’s assurances in Deptel 372 particularly paragraph 4 could be conveyed SAG in writing, this would very much facilitate and pave way for King use his moderating counsel with Arab States as suggested Deptel 30.3 Replied Legation without authority give assurances in writing but would refer Department possible authorization.

Yusuf added paragraph 4 assurances were good but did not go far enough in his opinion to create sense of security Arab States. He instanced violation by Jews truce and efforts made SC to vote economic sanctions with US opposition.

I remarked neither US Government nor any other government would wish bind itself to any particular course of action against Palestine aggression and Yusuf admitted this. What SAG is asking is some assurance which we may feel it possible offer that measures recommended SC against Jewish aggression would not be opposed by US Government by reason possible Jewish pressure on US Government but only by reason doubts re their efficacy.4

Sent Department 87, repeated London 30.

Childs

1 Dated February 3, not printed; it conveyed the text of a message from King Ibn Saud stating that he was making every effort for peace in Palestine but that what had happened there was the result of aggression and of injustice to its local inhabitants. The King expressed the hope that the United States would instruct its representative on the Conciliation Commission to make every effort to give the Arabs their rights and to help them regain their confidence in the justice and equity of the United States Government. The Department replied on February 7, directing Minister Childs to inform the King that the United States representative on the Conciliation Commission had been “instructed make every effort assist parties reach just and equitable solution Palestine problem.” (telegram 50) Both messages are filed under 867N.01/2–349.

2 Dated January 29, p. 712 [Pg. 712 includes portions of Doc. 435 and Doc. 436].

3 Dated January 28; not printed, but see footnote 3, p. 626 [Pg. 626 is part of Doc. 365].

4 The Departments reply on February 7 instructed that if Yusuf brought up the subject again, Minister Childs was to “state with appropriate expression regret that USG not in position unilaterally give written assurances since UN seized of Palestine problem and US working in concert with other members UN to achieve solution.” (telegram 49, 501.BB Palestine/2–349)

The Special Representative of the United States in Israel (McDonald) to the Secretary of State 867N.01/2–349: Telegram

[Document 446]

The Special Representative of the United States in Israel (McDonald) to the Secretary of State

top secret
priority Tel Aviv, February 3, 1949—11 a. m.

88. ReMistel 80, February 2 [1] and additional thereto. Morning February 2 at residence Sassoon, chief PGI negotiator with Arabs (Herlitz1 Foreign Office also present) reported on “frank and friendly” secret conference he had with Abdullah in Amman January 31 as follows: 1. Abdullah anxious speedy peace negotiations which should follow immediately after arrangement armistice which in his opinion should involve slight difficulty. Favors public peace negotiations in Jerusalem between Transjordan and Israel, initial meeting preferably in Amman. Has notified all Arab Governments this plan and has received assent from Yemen, Saudi Arabia, and Iraq. Egypt and Syria not pleased but “must follow since I (Abdullah) have decided”. Has been assured by two Iraqi high officials and expects soon receive similar from Regent that Transjordan difficulties with Iraq will disappear.

2. Abdullah attributes his hurry to fear that delay will involve loss. Britain he says is using delay in Israel–Transjordan negotiations to gain concessions from other Arab states, notably Syria. King quoted this alleged British argument: “If Abdullah is blocked, what will Syria pay?”

3. Abdullah declined indicate reservations which Britain had imposed on his negotiations with Israel. Will reveal them only after armistice and during peace talks. Inferentially he permitted conclusion that Aqaba and southern Negev were involved. Transjordan he said not interested in Negev, “has enough desert land”. Gaza, however, as outlet to sea now that Haifa has been lost is vital to Transjordan.

4. Abdullah is opposed to the internationalization of whole or part Jerusalem, favors partition, with old and portion of new city assigned Transjordan and rest to Israel, both portions remaining under some form United Nations supervision. No details such partition were discussed.

5. Arab refugees, Abdullah said, were now no important problem and after peace will solve itself.

6. Had accepted Bunche’s invitation armistice negotiations at Rhodes because all other Arab states had agreed. He is opposed, however, to pooled discussions and reiterated preference direct negotiations with Israel.

7. Abdullah thinks Conciliation Commission will waste time and delay settlement. Says peace should be possible before Commission has opportunity acquaint itself with problem and before it could report assembly in September.

8. Israel’s elections pleased Abdullah because disclosed such slight Communist strength. Transjordan he said does not need elections. He rules and Parliament carries out his will.

9. Interrupting his report of Abdullah’s views, Sassoon emphasized that from PGI’s viewpoint, armistice should suffice for many months with all the Arab states except Transjordan. With latter, peace necessary because partition of Palestine involved and many questions other than purely military ones that must be settled by formal treaty.

10. In answer my questions, Sassoon insisted that only “ultimatum” to Transjordan which might have been referred to in report to Department from Transjordan end December (Deptel 281, December 302 ) was his open telegram from Paris end November Transjordan Prime Minister asking that convoy be allowed, as previously agreed, to go Mount Scopus in order “to avoid incidents”. Reply within 24 hours was friendly and Amman issued orders to Jerusalem to permit convoy. Subsequent exchanges all friendly.

11. According Sassoon, Abdullah denied categorically knowing in advance or having been asked about sending British troops to Aqaba early January. After their arrival he was presented with paper asking for troops, for his signature.

12. King told Sassoon he deeply appreciative recognition as sign US friendship, adding that he hoped American Government would increasingly interest itself in Transjordan–Israel relations, intimated desire lessen degree British tutelage.

McDonald

1 Miss Esther Herlitz, Acting Director of the American Division of the Israeli Ministry for Foreign Affairs.

2  Foreign Relations, 1948, vol. v, Part 2, p. 1704.

The Secretary of State to the Special Representative of the United States in Israel (McDonald), at Tel Aviv 501.BB Palestine/2–349: Telegram

[Document 447]

The Secretary of State to the Special Representative of the United States in Israel (McDonald), at Tel Aviv 1

secret Washington, February 3, 1949—2 p. m.

64. Text USRep’s statement Nov 20 before Committee I of GA stated re refugees from Palestine hostilities “We believe that they should be permitted to return to their homes and that adequate compensation should be arranged for the property of those who choose not to return”. Pres on Jan 14 [13?] stated that Nov 20 speech represents US position with respect to Pal.2

GA Res of Dec 11, establishing PCC, calls for return of refugees so desiring, and payment compensation for property those choosing not return. USG strongly supported Dec 11 Res.

In light of this US position re refugee question, and in view fact PCC charged with facilitating disposition this problem, pls inform Dept your views re best means resolving question within framework final peaceful settlement Pal problem. Without approaching Israeli Govt, what is your estimate re its intentions permit repatriation and ability reabsorb refugees? What are your provisional recommendations for solution Arab refugee question?

Repeat reply to Jerusalem for PCC.

Acheson

1 This telegram was repeated to Jerusalem as No. 65 and as Unpal 15.

2 Such a statement was made by President Truman at his news conference of January 13; for text, see Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: Harry S. Truman, 1949 (Washington, Government Printing Office, 1964), p. 98.

Memorandum by Mr. Robert M. McClintock to the Secretary of State 501.BB Palestine/2–449

[Document 448]

Memorandum by Mr. Robert M. McClintock to the Secretary of State 1

[Washington,] February 4, 1949.

The Israeli-Egyptian Armistice Negotiations

On January 31 the Acting Palestine Mediator proposed a compromise solution to the Israeli and Egyptian Governments to serve as the basis for a possible armistice between the two countries. In essence, the Israeli striking forces would be withdrawn toward the North and the Egyptian forces would remain entirely outside of Palestine with the exception of a small coastal strip from Gaza southwest to the Egyptian frontier and minor forces in the vicinity of Hebron. Beer sheba, which is now held by the Israeli Government and a desert point in the Negev called Asluj, together with an important communications point near the Egyptian frontier called El Auja, would be the head quarters of the Israeli-Egyptian Armistice Commission under UN supervision.

The Israeli Government would keep defensive forces in the Jewish settlements in the Negev.

The Israeli Government has stressed to this Government that, from its point of view, the main stumbling block is who remains in force at El Auja, which is a stone’s throw from the Egyptian border. Countering this, the Egyptians have complained that an unconditional written agreement was entered into on Rhodes between the Egyptian and Israeli delegations providing for the evacuation from Faluja of an encircled Egyptian garrison numbering some 3,000 people.

It appears to us that if the Israeli Government can be persuaded to the demilitarization of El Auja, Beersheba and Asluj, and at least a token withdrawal of its striking forces northward in the Negev, there is a strong possibility of concluding an armistice agreement with Egypt. This is the keystone of a rather considerable arch. If an armistice is signed with Egypt, the Government of Israel will be in a position rapidly to conclude similar agreements with its other enemies, including Lebanon, Transjordan, Syria and Iraq. In fact, the Acting Palestine Mediator has officially extended invitations to the Governments of these four countries to come to Rhodes to participate in armistice conversations.

Solution, therefore, hinges upon a successful conclusion of the present Israeli-Egyptian talks and it would seem useful if this Government would express to the Government of Israel its profound hope that the Israeli Government will find its way clear to making certain states manlike concessions, without which it seems inevitable that the conversations will fail.

The Egyptian Government, with considerable reluctance, has informed the Acting Mediator that it will accept his proposals and the Mediator has informally requested us to do our utmost to persuade the Israeli Government to make those concessions which are essential to a final agreement.2

Dr. Jessup, in New York, has suggested the advisability of your seeing Mr. Epstein, the Representative in Washington of Israel. If the armistice negotiations break down Dr. Bunche will refer the entire matter to the Security Council, where the reasons for the breakdown will be publicly aired.

1 This memorandum was typewritten on the stationery of the Under Secretary of State. Mr. McClintock wrote, on February 7, that he had dictated the memorandum “for Mr. Webb in his office” and that it was the basis for the intervention by the Secretary, with the “President’s backing,” as evidenced in the telegram sent to Tel Aviv on February 5 (Mr. McClintock’s letter to G. Lewis Jones, First Secretary of Embassy in the United Kingdom, 501.BB Palestine/2–749). Regarding the telegram, see p. 730 [Pg. 730 is part of Doc. 453].James E. Webb was appointed Under Secretary of State on January 27.

2 Mr. Ethridge, on February 5, advised the Department that he “planned see McDonald February 6 and Shertok February 7 and would point out urgent necessity for favorable conclusion Israeli-Egyptian negotiations at early date in order make it possible for Commission to get on with its task of settling all outstanding problems re Palestine soonest.” (telegram 114 (Palun 27) from Jerusalem, 501.BB Palestine/2–549)

The Secretary of State to the Consulate General at Jerusalem 867N.00/1–3149: Telegram

[Document 449]

The Secretary of State to the Consulate General at Jerusalem

secret Washington, February 4, 1949—7 p. m.

70. Ur 86 Jan. 31.1 Dept’s preliminary consideration legal basis abandoned property ordinance, based English summary Palestine Post since translation Hebrew text not yet available, indicates there are probably not at present time grounds for USG representation Tel Aviv on legal basis re application ordinance in New Jerusalem. Dept desires be kept informed as to manner administration ordinance in Jerusalem and be notified of circumstances in any case where Administrator moves to vest property of USG or US nationals.

However, subject concurrence Ethridge, Dept believes appropriate for PCC, view its responsibilities re Arab refugees under GA Palestine resolution, to express its concern to Israeli Govt in light of absentee property ordinance that no party take unilateral action in advance of negotiations contemplated by GA resolution which would prejudice achievement of agreed settlement on such questions as return of refugees to their homes and return of property to refugee owners. View these considerations, PCC might inquire of Israeli authorities re arrangements Govt of Israel contemplates making to return vested property belonging to refugees who later return to their homes.2

Acheson

1 Not printed, but see footnote 2, p. 718 [Pg. 718 includes portions of Doc. 443 and Doc. 444].

2 Telegram 107, February 3, to Jerusalem, was possibly not seen by Mr. Rockwell when he drafted telegram 70. No. 107 was received in the Department on February 4 at 1:28 p. m. It is not printed, but see ibid [Pg. 718 includes portions of Doc. 443 and Doc. 444].

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Secretary of State 501.BB Palestine/2–549

[Document 450]

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Secretary of State 1

secret [Washington,] February 5, 1949.

Subject: Rhodes Negotiations on Palestine

Participants: The Secretary—Mr. Acheson

Egyptian Ambassador—Mohamed Kamil Abdul Rahim

Egyptian Minister—Anis Azer

NEA—Mr. Satterthwaite

After introductions and an exchange of amenities, the Ambassador reviewed, from the Egyptian standpoint, the course of the negotiations at Rhodes. He said that the Egyptian Government had accepted and was willing to carry out the Security Council resolutions of November 4, November 16, and December 29. Furthermore, in an effort to break the impasse and to succeed in reaching an armistice agreement with the Israeli Government, they had accepted the last compromise suggested by Mr. Bunche, U.N. Mediator, which involved a recession on their part from the November 4 resolution. Unfortunately the “other side” had consistently refused to accept any compromise and adhered to its original position. Notwithstanding this, the Egyptian Government was very anxious to reach an agreement and had instructed him to request me to “intervene” in the hope that the negotiations might not break down. It would be most unfortunate if the Rhodes negotiations were unsuccessful and hostilities were to break out again.

I told the Ambassador that I could not agree with him more fully. I had discussed this problem with the President and knew that he was most anxious that an agreement be reached. I had also discussed the problem with the Israeli Representative here and was glad to be able to tell the Ambassador that as a result I was somewhat more optimistic and felt that there was still a good possibility of reaching an agreement under the guidance of the Mediator. I could not, of course, go into details, as that was the duty of the Mediator. It was, however, important that negotiations not be broken off and that every effort be continued toward reaching an agreement on an armistice. While my government could not “intervene”, it would continue to use its good offices toward this end. At this point the Ambassador handed me an Aide-Mémoire 2 (copy attached) which I did not read at that time. (It sets forth the latest Bunche proposals and describes the concessions required of the Egyptians.)

After thanking me for my assurances the Ambassador said that he would like to bring up one more point. Once an armistice agreement had been signed, he felt that the time would have come to turn a new leaf in Arab-American relations. The United States has carried out all its commitments to the “other side” and perhaps it could now once more consider what assistance it could give the Arab world which, in spite of whatever might be said, does still exist and cannot be ignored. He mentioned the possibility of rendering financial, economic, cultural and technical assistance. He is, he said, in the process of preparing on his own responsibility a résumé of the possibilities in this field which he would like to discuss with me some time. He felt that if the United States could once more resume its former friendly relations with the Arab world and help to bind its wounds it would have a great moral effect and contribute toward the security of that region. He thought that the first step was already under way in the efforts being made to increase the U.S. quota on Egyptian long staple cotton.

I said that I agreed fully with the Ambassador with regard to the desirability of our getting back on closer and friendlier relations and that I would be glad to go over his résumé with him when he had completed it.

In the course of the conversation I also said that we were aware of the cooperative attitude displayed by the Egyptians at Rhodes and were most appreciative of it.

1 Drafted by Mr. Satterthwaite.

2 Dated February 4, not printed.

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Secretary of State Truman Papers, President’s Secretary’s File

1 [Document 451]

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Secretary of State 2

top secret [Washington,] February 5, 1949.

The Israeli Ambassador called at my request.

After an exchange of courtesies, I said to him that we had received yesterday messages from Mr. Ross and Mr. Jessup in New York and from the United Nations Mediator, Mr. Bunche, which caused us considerable concern. It was reported from New York that the armistice proposals put forward by the Mediator had been accepted practically in full, although with reluctance, by the Egyptians. On the other hand, however, Mr. Eban, the Israeli representative in New York, had told our representatives that the Israeli Government could not accept these proposals. We received the same information from Mr. Bunche who expressed grave fears that the negotiations would break down and that the matter would have to be reported to the Security Council by him. It appeared that in such a situation the responsibility for the collapse of the negotiations would rest on the Israeli Government.

I said that this situation caused the President a deep concern and that I was speaking to the Ambassador with the knowledge and approval of the President. The Ambassador knew that the Israeli Government had no more sympathetic friend than President Truman and that no one had done more to support them in trying days. The President believed that this was the psychological moment where an armistice could be brought about without injury to the vital interests of any of the parties, if the Israeli Government would approach these discussions in a spirit of broad statesmanship and make concessions which were wholly in accord with the moral position of Israel. I hoped therefore that his Government would not reject the proposals but would accept them as a basis for further discussion and work out an armistice along the lines proposed. I did not believe that the attitude of the Egyptian Government was brittle but did believe that there was sufficient flexibility so that with a conciliatory attitude on both sides, a solution could be reached. I said that if this were not done, if the negotiations failed, and if the matter was so reported to the Security Council, the position of Israel, both morally and otherwise, would be prejudiced. I spoke of the importance of reaching an armistice with Egypt as the key decision which would produce similar arrangements with the other Arab States and launch all of them in a favorable atmosphere on the discussions of permanent peace.

The Ambassador expressed his appreciation for what I had said and the spirit in which it was said. He stated that his Government knew that it had no more sympathetic friend than President Truman and that his views would be pondered with the greatest respect. He said that I could assure the President that in the Ambassador’s opinion the armistice negotiations would not break down and that as he understood it, his Government was not making a flat rejection of the Mediator’s proposal but was finding difficulty on security reasons to eliminating its forces from certain places.

We both agreed that we would not go into the details of the matter and he understood that what I had said did not mean that we believed that the proposal as made in all its details ought to be the one finally accepted.

I stressed again that it should not be in our opinion rejected but made the basis for further talks in which every possible effort should be made to bring about an armistice.

The Ambassador then spoke of some of the problems which his Government had as the government of a democratic country in carrying its own people with it. He then spoke at some length about the spiritual and moral forces which had enabled the Jews to survive their hardships and which lie at the basis of the state of Israel. I said to him that I hoped they would approach the proposals for an armistice from the point of view of these considerations and that what he had said assured me that they believed that reliance upon these forces were more effective than military strong points here and there, and that as I saw it the thing that his Government would wish to avoid more than anything else would be impairing in any way its moral position. He agreed that this was so and that considerations of noblesse oblige bore strongly upon the Jewish attitude. He told me again that I could assure the President that in his opinion the negotiations would not break down.

1 In the Harry S. Truman Library at Independence, Missouri.

2 Sent to the White House under cover of a memorandum of February 5 by Brig. Gen. Marshall S. Carter, Special Assistant to the Secretary, addressed to Matthew J. Connelly, Secretary to President Truman, which read as follows: “The Secretary requests that the attached memorandum of conversation be delivered to the President.” (Truman Papers, President’s Secretary’s File)

The Consul in Jerusalem (Burdett) to the Secretary of State 501.BB Palestine/2–549: Telegram

[Document 452]

The Consul in Jerusalem (Burdett) to the Secretary of State

secret Jerusalem, February 5, 1949—1 p. m.

116. Palun 29. [From Ethridge.] US and French Consul Generals met with Colonel Dayan February 4 at request PCC (Congentel 107, February 3)1 to express interest Commission in successful conclusion Israel–Transjordan agreement consistent with December 11 GA Resolution re Arab-Jewish zones Jersualem, demilitarization city, protection holy places. Dayan though this [his?] government would object his dealing with Commission directly but expressed no objection proposal Commission appoint informal group experts to attempt reconciliation divergent viewpoints without considering future status Jerusalem.

However he doubted anything could be accomplished because alleged Transjordan unwillingness reach separate agreement Jerusalem this time due its hope to use Jerusalem as bargaining point in overall settlement. Pointed to recent rejections at last moment of accords provisionally accepted both sides for complete or limited agreement Jerusalem and said general agreement exists as to where demarcation line should run (Congentels 35, January 13, 36 January 14,2 47 January 173 ). He considers Transjordan interested only in prestige, port of Gaza and Negev. Transjordan considers Israel financial condition deteriorating and that delay will force concessions. Dayan asserts to contrary and that by delay Arabs as in past will obtain less.

Dayan said PGI must take public position Jerusalem must be integral part Israel.

If following talk Abdullah Tel PCC considers Arabs sincerely anxious to sign agreement Dayan willing continue discussions. PGI not prepared present detailed plan and thinks PCC should do so.

PCC not considering Dayan reaction pending report discussion Abdullah Tel. [Ethridge.]

Burdett

1 Not printed, but see footnote 2, p. 718 [Pg. 718 includes portions of Doc. 443 and Doc. 444].

2 Latter not printed, but see footnote 4, p. 663 [Pg. 663 includes portions of Doc. 393 and Doc. 394].

3 Not printed, but see footnotes 2 and 3, p. 680 [Pg. 680 includes portions of Doc. 406 and Doc. 407].

The Secretary of State to the Special Representative of the United States in Israel (McDonald), at Tel Aviv 501.BB Palestine/2–549: Telegram

[Document 453]

The Secretary of State to the Special Representative of the United States in Israel (McDonald), at Tel Aviv 1

top secret Washington, February 5, 1949—5 p. m.

us urgent

niact

75. Pursuant to formal request of Israeli Govt Jan 282 for good offices this Govt in assisting Israel and Egypt to arrive at compromise in armistice negots Rhodes, this Govt approached Egyptian Govt with Israeli proposal related to El Auja.

Pls call on PriMin and leave memo in fol sense: 1) As member of UN PCC and as friendly govt which has been officially requested by Israel to use its good offices to end present impasse in armistice negots, US has approached Egypt in sense requested by Israel.

2) Although unaware of Israeli counter-proposals to Mediator’s suggested compromise of Jan 31, USG informed Egypt has accepted compromise in principle, subject only to minor modifications.

3) In same spirit of friendship with which it approached Egypt at Israeli request, USG now desires state earnest hope that Israeli Govt will be able make special effort at accommodation in order accept Bunche draft as possible basis of agreement, particularly in view of action apparently taken by Egypt in this sense. End memo.

On Feb 5, with knowledge and approval of President, I informed Epstein that Pres was deeply concerned by possibility breakdown Rhodes negotiations. I said we had been informed that Egypt had accepted Bunche proposal, with certain reservations, but that Eban had told USUN that Israeli Govt could not accept proposal. Pres believed this was psychological moment when armistice could be achieved without injury to vital interests of parties, if Israeli Govt would approach these discussions in spirit of broad statesmanship and make concessions which were wholly in accord with moral position of Israel. I hoped, therefore, that Israeli Govt would not reject Bunche proposals but would accept them as basis for further discussion and work out armistice along lines proposed. It seemed to me that with conciliatory attitude on both sides solution could be reached but if negotiations failed and matter reported to SC, position of Israel, both morally and otherwise, would be prejudiced.

Epstein said views of Pres would be pondered with great respect. I could assure Pres that in his opinion negotiations would not break down and that as he understood it Israeli Govt was not flatly refusing Mediator’s proposal but was finding difficulty for security reasons in agreeing to remove its forces from certain places.

[Here follows last paragraph concerning the call later that day by the Egyptian Ambassador.]

Acheson

1 This telegram was repeated to London, New York, Jerusalem (for Mr. Ethridge), and Cairo. The repeat to Jerusalem was in reply to Palun 27; see footnote 2, p. 724 [Pg. 724 is part of Doc. 448].

2 See telegram 107, January 28, to Cairo, p. 705 [Pg. 705 includes portions of Doc. 429 and Doc. 430].

The Special Representative of the United States in Israel (McDonald) to the Secretary of State 501.BB Palestine/2–649: Telegram

[Document 454]

The Special Representative of the United States in Israel (McDonald) to the Secretary of State

top secret
urgent Tel Aviv, February 6, 1949—11 a. m.

101. Re Deptel 75 February 5. At 3:45 p. m. February 6 I left memo with Foreign Minister as per instructions. In conversation with Foreign Minister he stated as follows re memo: 1. Deeply appreciative US efforts vis-à-vis Egypt.

2. Deeply deplored Bunche’s January 31 proposal as being far out of line Israel’s position, and hopes it has not had fatal effect negotiations. Shertok had distinct impression Egypt had been willing be more conciliatory, but that Egypt now standing firm on Bunche’s proposal re thorny problem of El Auja.

3. Israel has in course negotiations already compromised as follows: (a) Agreed to reduce Israeli Military forces in El Auja area to a few purely defensive units.

(b) Agreed completely evacuate town El Auja and place it under United Nations supervision.

(c) Agreed to having armistice commission sit on Israeli side line which for the “victor” is considered quite a concession.

(d) Agreed that if Egypt fears Israeli retention small units in neighborhood surrounding El Auja, Egypt free to build new defensives [defenses?] on Egypt frontier facing El Auja, this unusual concession in that while Israel binds herself not increase defenses during armistice Egypt may do so.

(e) While first Israeli position was insist complete Egypt evacuation Rafah-Gaza strip, Israel now has made major political and military concession allowing continuance light Egypt forces in strip area.

Bunche’s proposal, while admitting in writing that area is “gateway of invasion” and that El Auja controls crossroads, nevertheless insists that whole area comprising approximately 150 square kilometers must be evacuated by Israeli. From viewpoint military defense this apparently means Israel must abandon the most vital strong points in whole area and back up to indefensible positions leaving themselves wide open if Egypt should change mind and resume war.

Shertok’s viewpoint is that, while Egypt is the invader it is Israel who must, according to Bunche, withdraw her forces from wide area and this not fair or acceptable. The area which Bunche delineates and to which the Egyptians quite understandably agree is as follows:

“From a point on the Egypt–Palestine border 5 kilometers north of the Rafah-El Auja road (MR087–047), southeast to Khashm, El Memdud (MR096–041), thence southeast to El Beha (MR108–039), thence southwest intersecting the Egypt–Palestine border at a point 5 kilometers southeast of the intersection of the old railway track and the Egypt–Palestine border (MR099.5–014.5), thence returning north west along the Egypt–Palestine border to the border to the point of origin.”

Shertok, after receiving my memo departed attend regular Cabinet meeting and I presume our representations now being considered by Cabinet. However, I am not at all sure, in view Shertok’s viewpoint and concessions already made by Israel, what result will be. Shiloah told Knox after Shertok left room that Rhodes negotiations, although difficult, were by no means terminated and he still appeared hopeful.

In order appreciate Israeli position Knox, Military Attaché and I feel that consideration must be given to Israel’s basic fear of Egypt’s relative strength. While public feared Arab Legion, General Staff knew real threat was large Egyptian Army which moved methodically up coast within almost striking distance Tel Aviv attacking settlements en route. United Nations could not stop Egyptians and only Israeli Army, at grievous cost, managed stop and defeat them. British action and our intervention has left both armies “hanging in air” with Israel forces not in the best of defense positions owing sudden forced termination action. Egyptian forces, while defeated in field and in part disarmed, are largely intact and, according other armistice provisions, will be able return Egypt. Israeli intention destroy large arms depots at El Arish and Rafah frustrated by US-British intervention and thus Egyptian forces could, when safely across border, regroup, rearm and strike again. Israel, being unsure that UN can restrain Egypt in future any more effectively than in past, may be unwilling abandon its present defense positions in wide area demanded by Bunche.

McDonald

Mr. Wells Stabler to the Secretary of State 867N.01/2–749: Telegram

[Document 455]

Mr. Wells Stabler to the Secretary of State

secret Amman, February 7, 1949—7 p. m.

53. During long talks this afternoon King reviewed his relations with Jews prior and subsequent to end of mandate and said his principal desire now as before was to reach understanding with them on Palestine question. Still felt it was to Jews’ advantage to have only Transjordan and Lebanon on their borders. This could be accomplished if Egyptians were kept out of Palestine and if firm and lasting peace were made with Transjordan. Talks toward that end are still continuing between Transjordan and Israel and King said that up to this time he has had no cause for not being optimistic as to their outcome. While he admitted that mutual suspicion still exists, he hoped it would be possible to reach understanding directly with Jews prior to formal armistice talks, but if not, certainly prior to formal peace negotiations. Formal talks would be mere public confirmation of agreement. With this in mind he is anxious to remove any possible point of friction between himself and Jews. He assumed Conciliation Commission would sanction agreement reached directly.

His Majesty pointed out that status of Jerusalem is giving him cause for alarm since Jews apparently insisting their part should become capital of Israel. Such insistence can only create suspicion on part of Transjordan that Jews intend expand further. King said he would not object if Jews wished construct defenses along corridor from Tel Aviv up to Jerusalem and station any number of troops there but to permit them make Jerusalem capital would be permanent threat in direction Jericho. Best solution would be autonomy for Arab and Jewish areas of city with complete demilitarization and with neutral zone between. Both parties would retain specific number police. However Jews now propose settlement which through retention Scopus area would be constant threat to Transjordan’s position in city.

I inquired whether specific reference to Jerusalem problem alone suggested other points at issue agreed on or nearly so. King said no but most recent meeting with Sassoon and Dayan indicated contact closer. In view this, asked if reference to Jerusalem question suggested he was considering Jerusalem settlement apart from overall arrangement. King replied he thought Jerusalem key to whole problem and that it could not be treated separately.

His Majesty remarked his one wish was to finish Palestine question soonest and with honor and assured that if there was any break between himself and Jews, it would not be his fault. Added that in fact he had more to worry about from other Arab States than from Jews.

King finally expressed hope that United States use its influence to persuade Jews he is serious in his intent reach understanding and that they need have no fear from his side. He also hoped United States would not permit Jews to establish Jerusalem as Israel capital. Stated that in such matters he turned to United States and UK for guidance and support. Since United Nations involved others (Russia), he preferred not deal through that body of which he also not member.

Informed King that while his views would be conveyed to United States Government, must remember United States is member United Nations and Conciliation Commission and would work through those bodies for settlement Palestine problem. Re Jerusalem said that United States still on record as supporting internationalization city but thought that if Transjordan and Israel could reach understanding on question which was sanctioned by Conciliation Commission, probable it would be confirmed by United Nations.

Sent to Department 53, pouched Jerusalem.

Stabler

The Special Representative of the United States in Israel (McDonald) to the Secretary of State 501.BB Palestine/2–749: Telegram

[Document 456]

The Special Representative of the United States in Israel (McDonald) to the Secretary of State

top secret
urgent Tel Aviv, February 7, 1949—7 p. m.

109. ReEmbtel 101, February 6. Shiloah invited Knox confer this morning stating Foreign Minister and Prime Minister had studied our memo last night and he wished inform as follows: 1. Israeli delegate Rhodes had just advised that Egypt had introduced new highly disturbing conditions negotiations as follows: a. Egypt now insists Israel withdraw forces from Negev except defense forces in settlements (where there are no settlements now Israeli forces shall be retained) while, at same time, reserving complete freedom disposal Egypt forces in area (for example, Egypt insisting seven outposts in continuous line in Gaza-Rafah strip); this attitude based on November 4 resolution.

b. Egypt now claims Israel should not be allowed have even defensive forces in southern part Negev (south of Ein Hasb MR 173025) even though area not adjacent Egypt.

In comment Shiloah stated that tone Bunche draft proposal all in favor Egypt and that Israel (despite victory) willing ignore tone to help Egypt save face but that Israel position was as follows: 1. Egypt must in practice approach armistice on basis that there is equality of status between two armies.

2. Israel cannot admit that treatment of Negev area is different than any other area of Israel.

3. Israel will agree to tone of draft Bunche proposal (even though tone and formulation make it appear that Israel is the offending party) in order help Egypt Government save face.

4. Israel will not agree to any terms which jeopardize her security during this parlous period or which attempt to create a new military balance thus setting precedent which will make negotiations with Transjordan and Syria even more difficult.

At conclusion conference Shiloah commented on intervention of US and its adverse effect of forcing Israeli withdrawal at moment when decisive military victory was within sight; Knox pointed out, however, that Israeli position could conceivably be worse had Israel found itself in conflict with Great Britain. Shiloah then rather insistently offered mission copy Bunche draft proposal and all relevant papers so that mission could “properly advise the Department”. Knox demurred and doubted that mission was in position accept this responsibility. Probably Shiloah, speaking for both Prime Minister (who is ill) and Foreign Minister (who is absent in Jerus) would welcome US as super-arbitrator though he stressed that documents were for our information only.

Comment: I believe Knox acted correctly in avoiding acceptance documents because: 1. In view PGI feeling re US intervention, acceptance documents might be further step involving US in unilateral action;

2. Acceptance might give impression that US disposed bypass UN and PCC;

3. Acceptance might give PGI feeling of relieved responsibility;

4. Documents could not give mission all pertinent data and none from Egypt.

Would appreciate Department’s instructions.1

McDonald

1 The Department, on February 8, expressed its agreement with the comment in No. 109 (telegram 78 to Tel Aviv, 501.BB Palestine/2–749).

The Consul at Jerusalem (Burdett) to the Secretary of State 501.BB Palestine/2–849: Telegram

[Document 457]

The Consul at Jerusalem (Burdett) to the Secretary of State

secret
priority Jerusalem, February 8, 1949—5 p. m.

123. [From Ethridge.] Palun 32. On January 7, Shertok, Israeli Foreign Minister came to Jerusalem for informal meeting with Commission prior to its proposed departure on tour of near East capitals on February 12. During 4½-hour discussion following developments took place.

1. Boisanger, French delegate, opened by stating Commission wished to see Shertok to inform him of its intentions and manner in which it proposed to carry out task which UNGA had given it. Task essentially consisted of assisting parties to settle, if possible directly between them, conflict which now separates them. On other hand, Commission had received specific instructions from UNGA regarding Jerusalem, holy places, refugees, certain economic matters. Commission had decided, in order enlighten itself regarding intentions both sides, not only regarding general peace problem but also regarding specific points, to visit Near East capitals, thus permitting immediate discussion with all interested governments. Commission desired, however, to have preliminary exchange views with Shertok to ascertain PGI views which would facilitate Commission’s discussions at Arab capitals.

2. Ethridge, US delegate, continued for Commission stating Commission had decided raise question of Jerusalem in advance because of certain recent events. Commission had been informed PGI planned to open its constituent assembly in Jerusalem at which it was rumored a spontaneous resolution would be offered calling for annexation Jerusalem. Commission had also been informed PGI had extended Israeli civil law to Jerusalem and it had been reported in press PGI intends hold municipal elections in Jerusalem in March. Commission was apprehensive regarding these developments and considered them as regrettable in that they appeared to be contrary to the spirit, if not letter of GA resolution December 11. It was pointed out GA had given Commission specific task regarding Jerusalem and that it seemed both Arabs and Jews had duty to abstain from undertaking any initiative which would modify status quo.

3. Shertok replied that although it might seem presumptuous he would refer Commission to his statement of November 15 before first committee of 1948 GA at Paris which contained PGI views regarding various points and specifically Jerusalem. PGI had acquiesced in international status in 1947 but situation had subsequently changed because of failure of international community or any other authority to protect it except Jews themselves. PGI could not now entrust security of Jews in Jerusalem to any outside agency nor could their economic security be safeguarded except by integration in Israel. Shertok added PGI was aware international consciousness regarding Jerusalem and hoped reconciliation views would be achieved. Holding of constituent assembly would not result in fait accompli. On other hand, Israeli Jerusalem to all practical intent and purpose is now part of Israel. PGI does not deny its intent to keep it. PGI still maintained position it had stated on November 15. Commission was entrusted with task of presenting detailed proposals to September, 1949 GA and it was up to international community to decide.

4. Shertok continued constituent assembly signified merely expression Jewish people that Jerusalem was great national center its history. PGI did not intend to transfer its capital to Jerusalem. It was appropriate, however, first assembly should be held Jerusalem. While government could not control assembly it had decided on policy and would take no action to change status quo. Since government holds large majority unorthodox decisions are unlikely. Session will last only few days. Agenda consists of opening speech by Weizmann, introduction draft resolution, elections and swearing in of President. Decided not to adopt rules of procedure as it might involve protracted debate.

5. Shertok explained civil law had been extended last August and was now merely being [apparent garble] affect superseding military law. It was unreasonable expect one section Israel should be governed by different principles than another. It is only effective way deal with situation.

6. Shertok confirmed intention to sponsor municipal elections Jerusalem in March, justifying as necessary in any democratic community and based on normal evolution from military to civil status.

7. Ethridge, Boisanger and Yalcin1 [apparent garble] found some reassurance but great deal that was disturbing in Shertok’s views. It was pointed out that while each single development might be explained, all of them taken together represented trend which would appear to be contrary to intention of GA in December 11 resolution.

8. Shertok continued, in reply question from Boisanger, refugee problem can only be settled as part of peace settlement. There can be no significant return of refugees before and possibly after that event. Situation has totally changed. If refugees had stayed in Israel, PGI policy would have developed differently. Since they fled voluntarily and at British instigation PGI policy has been based on status quo. Exodus was primarily caused by aggression of Arab states. Return now would undermine security of Israel and would impose impossible economic burden on Israel to integrate refugees in Israeli economy. Arab refugees are essentially unassimilable in Jewish Israel. Efforts can now be made in direction radical sound solution, namely integration in neighboring Arab states, especially Iraq, Syria and Transjordan which Shertok claims are underpopulated and require more people and development to fill dangerous vacuum. Shertok recognized obligation to compensate for land left behind and suggested payment might be arranged direct to individual refugees or paid into general resettlement fund. Arab states could provide land wth assistance international financing. Shertok doubted capacity Israel to pay huge sum and at same time alleged responsibility Arab states for aggressive war and resulting loss would justify offsetting claim by Israel.

9. Shertok stated regarding general peace settlement that Israel desires to negotiate separate peace treaties and did not wish general conference. Shertok reasoned Israeli-Lebanese problems, for example, were of no concern to Egypt. Boisanger believed general problems could be handled at general conference. Specific problems could be handled separately.

10. Shertok explained, regarding territorial settlement, that Israel had accepted 1947 partition on basis Arab Palestine would become independent state. If it now became part of Transjordan situation was radically altered and Israel’s previous acceptance no longer valid and its result would be different. Israel believes there should be rectification of present lines in Palestine but did not press for an increase in total area. Israel claimed, for example, widening of 12-mile wide coastal strip between Haifa and Tel Aviv for security reasons. PGI had decided it would not consent to any foreign bases on its territory in foreseeable future. It would not agree to any foreign bases in Palestine section of an enlarged Transjordan on basis of present British treaty with Transjordan. Shertok gave no indication of any territorial concessions but indicated he would discuss Negev at later date. Shertok voluntarily disavowed intention of seizing non-Israeli Palestine unless provoked.

11. Shertok stated regarding Commission suggestion that discussions between Israeli and Arab Military Commission regarding Jerusalem should be encouraged to continue, that they were limited to demarcation of military areas and that he doubted whether Commission would be of assistance to them. Shertok, nevertheless, agreed to consider whether Commission observers would be helpful. Shertok stated demilitarization of Jerusalem was only possible if there was outside force or no need for protection. As neither condition existed demilitarization was not possible.

12. Tentative arrangements were made for further meeting between Commission and Shertok in Tel Aviv or Jerusalem on February 11. Shertok promised definite reply February 8. Ethridge spoke with Shertok privately after meeting expressing view that Middle East peace was dependent on early settlement of outstanding problems between Israel and Arab states and hoped Israel would approach in conciliatory spirit. Shertok stated PGI was working on alternative solutions to various problems. [Ethridge.]2

Burdett

1 Hüseyin Yalçın, Turkish Representative on the United Nations Conciliation Commission for Palestine.

2 Mr. Ethridge, the same day, expressed his view that “Shertok’s presentation of PGI views regarding Jerusalem appears to me to be unyielding. It is clear that PGI does not accept world opinion regarding internationalization Jerusalem.… It is also clear PGI intends continue to take steps looking toward eventual incorporation of Israeli Jerusalem in Israel.… It may be true PGI does not intend to transfer its capital from Tel Aviv to Jerusalem. On other hand facts that constituent assembly is opening here, that certain central administrative offices are operating here, that Israeli civil law applies here and that municipal elections under Israeli auspices will be held here seem to bear out my analysis.… It seems logical, however, present policies will continue and may only be counteracted by firmness on part of command [sic] governments there represented.”Mr. Ethridge also asserted that “Shertok’s statement PGI views regarding refugees offended Commission. It also astonished me in view imperative necessity for friendly relations between Israel and Arab States and importance of early establishment of economic connections with Arab hinterland.… It is my hope PGI may be persuaded to alter these views and to adopt more humanitarian measures which would redound to benefit of Israel and Arab States. It might be wise in long run to resettle greater portion Arab refugees in neighboring Arab States; nevertheless, it appears contrary to Israel’s best interests at outset to take inhuman position.” (Telegram 124, from Jerusalem, 501.BB Palestine/2–849)

Memorandum by the Director of the Office of Near Eastern and African Affairs (Satterthwaite) to the Secretary of State 501.BB Palestine/2–1049

[Document 458]

Memorandum by the Director of the Office of Near Eastern and African Affairs (Satterthwaite) to the Secretary of State

secret [Washington,] February 9, 1949.

Subject: Attendance of American Officials at Meeting of Israeli Constitutent Assembly in Jerusalem

Discussion:

The resolution of the General Assembly of November 29, 1947, which recommended the partition of Palestine, stated that the City of Jerusalem was to be established as a corpus separatum under a special international regime and was to be administered by the United Nations. The General Assembly resolution of December 11, 1948 on Palestine resolved that Jerusalem should be accorded special and separate treatment from the rest of Palestine and should be placed under effective United Nations control. The resolution also instructed the Palestine Conciliation Commission to present to the Fourth Regular Session of the General Assembly detailed proposals for a permanent international regime for the Jerusalem area. The United States voted in favor of both of these resolutions.

During the fighting which has taken place in Palestine, the Israelis have managed to carve out by military force a land corridor connecting New Jerusalem (Jewish Jerusalem) with the State of Israel. In various public statements Israeli officials have stated their determination that New Jerusalem shall become a part of Israel.

We believe that an agreement between Israel and Transjordan looking toward the division of Jerusalem into two areas to be administered by the two countries would be an appropriate solution of the problem. We feel, however, that the United States cannot support any arrangement which would purport to authorize the establishment of Israeli or Transjordan sovereignty over parts of the Jerusalem area, in view of the above cited United Nations resolutions and our support thereof. Our belief is that the Israelis and Transjordanians, should be supervised in their administration of the city by a United Nations Commissioner, the principle of the internationalization of Jerusalem, in favor of which the world community has voted, thus being maintained.

Our representative in Tel Aviv, Mr. James G. McDonald, has informed us that the Israelis have decided to open their Constituent Assembly in Jewish Jerusalem on February 14. They are inviting members of the Diplomatic and Consular Corps in Tel Aviv to attend and Mr. McDonald requests the Department’s authorization to do so. He feels that non-attendance would wound Jewish sensibilities and create an awkward situation for the United States in Israel if the Russian Minister in Tel Aviv should attend. Mr. McDonald advocates that he accompany his acceptance of the Israeli invitation with a formal statement that his attendance at the opening of the Assembly does not imply any change in the United States position on the status of Jerusalem. (Tab A, original only.)

Mr. Mark Ethridge, the American Representative on the Palestine Conciliation Commission, has cabled that it is clear that the Israeli Government does not accept the world opinion concerning the internationalization of Jerusalem and intends to take steps looking toward the eventual incorporation of Jewish Jerusalem in Israel. He says that the decision to open the Constituent Assembly, with its implications of sovereignty, in Jerusalem is an indication of this intention. In Mr. Ethridge’s opinion this Israeli policy can only be counter-acted by firmness on the part of the Commission and of the Governments represented on the Commission. He further states that in his opinion the decision the Department has to make is whether it will perform one more act of courtesy or whether by not doing so, the United States will dramatize its desire for peace in Palestine and its backing of General Assembly resolutions. He believes that the United States would seriously weaken the position of the Conciliation Commission by sending any United States officials to the opening of the Assembly and would strengthen the Commission’s hand by not doing so. Mr. Ethridge says that he is convinced that Israeli Foreign Minister Shertok feels that the United States will not back the United Nations and that Israel can get what it wants. (Tab B, original only.)

Our Consul in Jerusalem is in agreement with Mr. Ethridge and believes that attendance of United States officials at the opening of the Assembly will prejudice the Conciliation Commission’s task in drawing up a proposal for the internationalization of Jerusalem.

Recommendation:

It is recommended that our representative in Tel Aviv be instructed to point out in the most friendly fashion to the Israeli Foreign Minister the difficulties which may be caused by the plan to open the Constituent Assembly in Jerusalem. This would be done not in an effort to dissuade the Israelis from their present plan but as a matter of record should the plan have an adverse effect on the attitude of some Nations Members of the United Nations when the Israeli membership application is again considered by that body, and should the opening of the Assembly in Jerusalem, with its implications of sovereignty, prove to be a stumbling block in the course of Arab-Israeli negotiations. It is also recommended that no American official in Tel Aviv or Jerusalem attend this meeting, since for them to be present at such a ceremony, would run contrary to the position which the United States has taken in support of the internationalization of Jerusalem and, as Mr. Ethridge states, would weaken the position of the Conciliation Commission and lead the Israelis to believe that the United States will not back up a decision of the United Nations. The French Embassy has informed us that the French Government plans to instruct its representatives in Palestine not to attend the opening of the Assembly and hopes that the United States Government will take a similar decision. We have reason to believe that the British Government would like to send the same kind of instructions. Both countries are apparently waiting to see what we will do in order to concert their policy with ours.

A suggested telegram to Tel Aviv and Jerusalem is attached for your signature if you concur.1

1 Secretary Acheson reviewed this memorandum with President Truman on February 10, “giving him Mr. Ethridge’s views and also Mr. McDonald’s views and my own recommendation, which was that we should not attend. The President was very clear that this recommendation was correct and himself approved the telegram so stating.” (Memorandum by Mr. Acheson, 501.BB Palestine/2–1049) The telegram, No. 83, was sent to Tel Aviv on February 10. It reviewed the situation as set forth in Mr. Satterthwaite’s memorandum and concluded as follows: “Dept believes that in spirit of friendly counsel you should make above points to Shertok. View US position in support of UN position on Jerusalem, Dept unable authorize any Amer official from Tel Aviv or Jerusalem attend meeting Constituent Assembly if held Jerusalem. In declining invitation with appropriate expressions regret, pls inform FonOff that you understand assembly to be transferred Tel Aviv after opening Jerusalem and that you would be pleased attend first session in Tel Aviv.” (501.BB Palestine/2–1049)

The Secretary of State to the Consulate General at Jerusalem 501.BB Palestine/2–949: Telegram

[Document 459]

The Secretary of State to the Consulate General at Jerusalem

top secret Washington, February 9, 1949—3 p. m.

80. Unpal 21. For Ethridge. Re Palun 24 Feb. 4.1 President wrote Weizmann Nov. 29, 1948, re Negev. President said “I remember well our conversation about the Negev, to which you referred in your letter. I agree fully with your estimate of the importance of that area to Israel, and I deplore any attempt to take it away from Israel.” Letter then cited announcement by USDel in GA of “our firm intention to oppose any territorial changes in the November 29th Resolution which are not acceptable to the State of Israel”.

No mention was made of Jerusalem. In consequence report that President informed Weizmann that US had no objection to Israeli annexation new city is completely without foundation.

We do not feel that President’s comments to Weizmann re Negev are inconsistent with his instructions to you or with overall basic position so clearly set forth by Jessup in his speech to Committee One Nov. 20. President’s position still is that Israel is entitled to territory allotted by GA res. Nov. 29, 1947 and that no changes in frontiers set down by that res. can be made without free consent of Israel. However if Israel desires territory not allocated to it by Nov. 29 res. such as Arab areas in western Galilee and Jaffa or such as present corridor to Jerusalem, Israel must be expected to make territorial compensation elsewhere.

President’s letter to Weizmann was marked personal and confidential.2

This telegram has been approved by the President.3

Acheson

1 Identified also as telegram 108 from Jerusalem, not printed; it stated that a report was current at Jerusalem that President Truman had written to President Weizmann that “US had no objection Israeli annexation New City of Jerusalem or retention of all Negev.” (501.BB Palestine/2–449) A marginal notation on No. 108 by Mr. McClintock indicates that it was read to Mr. Clifford at 9:50 a. m., February 5.For the full text of President Truman’s communication of November 29, 1948, to President Weizmann, see Foreign Relations, 1948, vol. v, Part 2, p. 1633.

2 A marginal notation by Mr. McClintock on an information copy of this telegram states that this sentence was added by President Truman.

3 Telegram 80 was initialed by President Truman. The substance of the telegram was furnished to Ambassador Douglas by Mr. Rusk in a letter of February 11. The letter cited a message from G. Lewis Jones, First Secretary of Embassy in the United Kingdom, to Mr. Satterthwaite, not identified as to date, in which it was set forth that “Dick Crossman, M.P., who recently visited Dr. Weizmann in Tel Aviv, has been spreading the rumor in London that while he was with Dr. Weizmann the latter received a personal letter from President Truman to the effect that no matter what the United States Government might say officially, Weizmann ‘should not give up one inch of the Negev.’” Mr. Jones’ letter also mentioned that Mr. Bevin was upset by the story. Mr. Rusk suggested that Mr. Bevin be apprised of the true facts. Ambassador Douglas replied on February 28 that Mr. Jones “has passed on in strict confidence the facts in your letter to Michael Wright and Bernard Burrows for their information and such discreet use as seems desirable.” Mr. Rusk’s letter and Ambassador Douglas’ reply are filed under 501.BB Palestine/2–1149, /2–2849. The editors have been unable to find Mr. Jones’ letter in the files of the Department of State.

The Minister in Syria (Keeley) to the Secretary of State 890D.00/2–949: Telegram

[Document 460]

The Minister in Syria (Keeley) to the Secretary of State

confidential Damascus, February 9, 1949—3 p. m.

51. [On?] February 8, 5 p. m. [, ?] Prime Minister Azm, continuing conversation reported mytel 50, 8th [9th],1 said Syrians recognize their destiny is linked up with that of western democracies and feeling they have something worthwhile to contribute in providing strategic base for defense against Communism, they wish cooperate realistically and in positive sense. Believing that Turkey could not defend itself if its rear were insecure, he wished secure latter but this could be brought about only if western democracies (among whom he specifically mentioned US, UK and France) recognizing danger that threatens and useful part Syria and other Arab countries could play give timely assistance. As Syria lacks means for her own defense and thus for defense of interests of democratic powers, he could only hope situation would be accurately appraised and assistance furnished while there is still time for envisaged collaboration to be effective.

Mentioning Arabian oil which he said could play important role if defended, he said Council Ministers had approved “Tapline” agreement and would shortly place it before Parliament for ratification. He regarded this approval as symbolic desire his government to follow henceforth positive policy looking toward economic development and defense his country in which he hoped US by reason of Tapline and recognition Syria’s strategic importance would take greater interest. Department pass Army.

Sent Department 51, repeated London 7, Paris 3, pouched Amman, Baghdad, Beirut, Cairo, Jerusalem, Jidda, Ankara and Moscow.

Keeley

1 Not printed; it reported the Prime Minister’s observations that “Syria desires facilitate Palestine Conciliation Commission’s task in a very proper way and hopes this new approach to Palestine problem will result in some satisfactory settlement more in keeping with principles of right and justice than has heretofore been evident. However, before agreeing undertake armistice discussions in response Acting Mediator Bunche’s invitation Syrian Government in agreement certain other Arab Governments … desires to have assurances Zionists will carry out UNSC resolutions, particularly those of November 4 and 16.” He then noted the repeated flouting of UN authority by the Zionists without incurring UN punitive measures or censure. Syria felt that as a prerequisite to undertaking armistice talks, the Zionists must give “guarantees” to carry out Security Council resolutions faithfully. The Prime Minister was said to have “evaded” Minister Keeley’s request for clarification of the guarantees sought. (501.BB Palestine/2–949)

The Secretary of State to the United Nations Acting Mediator for Palestine (Bunche), at Rhodes 501.BB Palestine/2–1149: Telegram

[Document 461]

The Secretary of State to the United Nations Acting Mediator for Palestine (Bunche), at Rhodes 1

Washington, February 11, 1949—7 p. m.

Pursuant to communication from Mediator dated August 3, 1948 US Government sent directives to Commanding Generals US Zones Germany and Austria authorizing exit of men of military age destined Palestine only after prior clearance with Mediator. In view cessation of fighting in Middle East and difficulties arising from separation of families under this policy US Government feels this restriction on departure men of military age from its zones of occupation should be removed and plans do so on February 18, 1949, subject to Acting Mediator’s concurrence. No change in present policy prohibiting exit of fighting personnel is planned.

If Acting Mediator perceives any objection this action US Government will appreciate being so advised prior to date mentioned.2

Acheson

1 Transmitted to New York in telegram 74, with a note “Request fol message be given SYG for transmission Acting Mediator, Rhodes by cable:”.

2 Mr. Bunche replied on February 15, through United Nations channels, that he perceived no objection to the proposed change in policy in view of present conditions in Palestine under the truce (telegram 182 from New York, 501.BB Palestine/2–1549).

Mr. Wells Stabler to the Secretary of State 501.BB Palestine/2–1249: Telegram

[Document 462]

Mr. Wells Stabler to the Secretary of State

secret Amman, February 12, 1949—9 a. m.

58. Mytel 54, February 8.1 With acceptance by Transjordan of invitation to armistice talks would recommend that Department consider urgently representing to Bunche desirability holding Transjordan–Israel talks in Jerusalem. Both King and high government officials have expressed hope that Jerusalem would be site for talks and believe arguments they produce in support of this not without discernment. Transjordan has given evidence its desire for peace and it is not beyond realms possibility that armistice talks would lead to discussion peace settlement. Consequently any arrangement which would make attainment this objective more facile should, it is thought, be encouraged. Main feature change of venue is propinquity Transjordan delegation to King who must decide important points policy. Delegation as well as others concerned would have easy access to His Majesty at Shuneh or Amman.

This matter has been discussed with Ethridge who has indicated his agreement.2

Sent Department 58, repeated Jidda 6 for USDel Palestine Conciliation Commission, Jerusalem 32.

[ Stabler ]

1 Not printed; it advised of the official acceptance by Transjordan the same morning of Mr. Bunche’s invitation to armistice talks. The acceptance was said to include Iraq “which will be represented by Transjordan at talks”. (867N.01/2–849)

2 The Department, in reply on February 15, concurred in the suggestion made in telegram 58 “but feels it should be made to Bunche by Ethridge as US Rep PCC.” (Telegram 21, 501.BB Palestine/2–1249)

The Consul at Jerusalem (Burdett) to the Secretary of State 501.BB Palestine/2–1249: Telegram

[Document 463]

The Consul at Jerusalem (Burdett) to the Secretary of State

secret Jerusalem, February 12, 1949—10 a. m.

134. Palun 38. [From Ethridge.] Commission drove down to Jericho yesterday for a formal meeting and luncheon with Tawfik Pasha, Transjordan Prime Minister. After exchange greetings Boisanger as Commission Chairman explained UN GA had given Commission its task for general purposes of bringing parties to Pales tine conflict together and re-establish Palestine peace. Commission would be interested to ascertain Transjordan’s general views and specifically its attitude re Jerusalem holy places, refugees and certain economic matters.

General: Prime Minister replied Transjordan had always been careful to preserve peace. Since establishment Transjordan 27 years ago its objective had been peace. It had never expressed eccentric or fanatical views and even now wanted real peace settlement. Boisanger replied Commission’s goal was also peace and wondered whether Transjordan would support general peace conference between Israel and Arab states. Ethridge raised question whether general or separate peace conference would be preferable. Prime Minister believed past experience showed, based on previous cooperative meetings with Jews, separate peace conference would be more productive as to results. Yalcin inquired whether Transjordan would be free to conclude with Commission’s assistance separate peace arrangements even if one or more Arab states would object and if Commission extended its assistance would Transjordan follow through. Prime Minister strongly responded Transjordan desired pursue practical policy and stated Transjordan was ready in spite of any other states policy or influence it might exert to act freely and separately. Prime Minister did not think it even necessary to have general peace conference re such questions as refugees as Transjordan itself was willing, with outside assistance, to settle problem.

Jerusalem: Prime Minister stated Jews would try to keep those areas at present under their control. Arabs, on other hand, have in habited Jerusalem for 1300 years. If, however, Jews want to stay in Jerusalem, Arabs want to take back those Arab areas which Jews took without fighting prior to May 14. (Prime Minister as well as Colonel Abdullah Tel, Transjordan military commander Jerusalem, strongly stress this point, emphasizing Jews took wide areas Arab Jerusalem before termination British mandate without fighting.) Boisanger explained Commission has specific instructions from UN GA to prepare detailed proposals re internationalization Jerusalem, that Commission has recently established committee to study question and that it hoped Transjordan would cooperate. Prime Minister replied he had been expecting Commission express this desire re Jerusalem but wondered how internationalization would be implemented by UN. According to charter UN must send forces. If no forces, permanent members must consult and send forces but as other nations do not want Jews in Palestine no forces would be sent. Boisanger replied Commission was not persuaded international force was necessary because good will on both sides could accomplish same purpose. Prime Minister replied he could not contest this argument but that only time would show whether Jews would agree.

Holy places: Prime Minister explained these areas have always been under Arab protection and that many difficult problems arising among different religious sects have been solved by Arabs. Arabs desire and want to keep right to protect these areas. Arabs would give full guarantees if under their control. Boisanger replied Commission could not contest Arab record in safeguarding holy places.

Refugees: Prime Minister expressed hope every refugee would be able to return to his own home and to settle on his land. Those refugees in Syria and Lebanon should for example, be permitted to return but if their property was gone they could settle in Transjordan. If Jews refuse, refugees should be repatriated and indemnified. Other Arab states are not willing to keep refugees who themselves wish to return to Palestine. Transjordan will welcome refugees in Transjordan or in Arab Palestine, Transjordan is inclined believe indemnity for Arab property in Jewish territory should be paid into general fund for resettlement rather than to individuals who may squander it. Transjordan Government may require international loan to assist resettlement as government is not strong financially.

Negev: Prime Minister voluntarily stated Transjordan wanted very much to have port on eastern Mediterranean. It specifically wanted Gaza and land access thereto. Transjordan would use every influence to accomplish this purpose. Arab Legion had not yet finished war and might have to resort to war to obtain.

Armistice negotiations: Prime Minister stated Iraq has not yet reached stage discussing peace but inclined to conclude armistice. Nuri Pasha, Iraqi Prime Minister, has delegated Transjordan to act for Iraq in armistice talks. Iraqi Army would then be able to withdraw from central Palestine. Transjordan Prime Minister considered armistice negotiations concluded in this fashion would meet problem of Iraqi public opinion re Palestine conflict.

Commission thanked Prime Minister for frank expression Transjordan attitude observing that while not all his conditions appeared acceptable, his views in general were sound and had created favorable impression. Tentative plans were made for second meeting at Amman with King Abdullah following Commission’s return from Cairo and Jidda. Prime Minister hoped conclusion to Palestine question would be reached at that meeting.

Sent Department 134, repeated Amman 12. [Ethridge.]

Burdett

The Consul at Jerusalem (Burdett) to the Secretary of State 501.BB Palestine/2–1249: Telegram

[Document 464]

The Consul at Jerusalem (Burdett) to the Secretary of State

secret Jerusalem, February 12, 1949—2 p. m.

139. Palun 41. [From Ethridge.] At request PCC US and French Consulate [Consul] Generals met Abdullah Tel on fifth for conversation similar that held with Dayan (Contel 116 fifth) on fourth. Tel stated willing negotiate and sign immediate agreement in Jerusalem prior to conclusion general agreement through all Palestine and would welcome appointment on PCC group advisers assist two parties. Asserted Arabs have no objections inclusion clause stating agreement without prejudice to future statute of city and would accept inter nationalization provided could be effective.

Expressed following views re such agreement: (1) Arab sections now held by Jews should be returned to Arab owners; (2) Arabs always willing give any guarantees desired for safety holy places and when peace restored guarantee free access; (3) willing discuss de militarization by gradual separation two forces but believes Tel Aviv–Jerusalem corridors should be internationalized at same time since its control gives Jews great military advantage.

Stated had carried on informal exploratory talks with Dayan since conclusion cease-fire in order determine what concessions Jews willing make. [Ethridge.]

Burdett

Ambassador Stanton Griffis to the Secretary of State 501.BB Palestine/2–1349: Telegram

[Document 465]

Ambassador Stanton Griffis to the Secretary of State 1

secret Cairo, February 13, 1949—4 p. m.

From Griffis for Secretary Acheson. While I have been on leave for more than two months operating UN relief program I trust that you will permit me following my long meeting with Ethridge yesterday to express to you my feeling regarding Palestine settlement based on six months careful study here and personal contacts with substantially every Arab city ruler and high minister.

Innumerable telegrams on file in Department have carried my firm feeling that no final settlement of Palestine problem can be reached prior to high level agreement between US and UK regarding the three moot questions: borders, rehabilitation of refugees and internationalization Jerusalem. I have expressed and urged this opinion in personal conversation with President, Secretary Marshall, Lovett, all members NE Division, members USUNDel Paris and highest level British diplomats here. Everyone has agreed in substance but apparently little result. My complete argument is that matter must be settled first in London and Washington before it can be settled here.

The Arab states have not slightest interest in feelings of France, Turkey or Peru nor indeed in feelings and opinions of UN. They are bored, confused and without confidence in mediators, commissions and UN orders. They are interested in exactly one thing. What are the intents and desires of US and UK and will US and UK make such pronunciations in conjunction with UN as will give them face-saving device of stating that partition of Palestine was forced upon them by higher powers.

This morning Turkish delegate Yalcin in Cairo newspaper statement blazoned statement “We don’t wish to force our opinions on anyone”. This is exactly opposite of what Egyptians want. They wish to use excuse of coercion and thereby save a critically unstable government which fully realizes that other Arab states except Transjordan have little further interest in entire problem. In other words basically [we?] are dealing only with Israel, Transjordan and Egypt. Rightly or not all Arab states believe that Israel will do exactly what US dictates and Transjordan under complete British domination.

A strong and prompt publicly stated agreement by US and UK will go a great distance towards settlement and I believe quickly solve this potentially terribly dangerous situation but it must be backed up by the strongest US and British representations both to Israel and Egypt by respective US–UK highest levels. Otherwise believe UN settlement will drag out many months or years.

Have no intention or desire bypass UN. Of course final settlements should be made formally through them.

Ethridge has read this cable and states strongly concurs. High regards.

Sent Department 165, repeated London.

[ Griffis ]

1 Transmitted to the Department by Cairo in telegram 165.

The Secretary of State to the Special Representative of the United States in Israel (McDonald), at Tel Aviv 501.BB Palestine/2–1449: Telegram

[Document 466]

The Secretary of State to the Special Representative of the United States in Israel (McDonald), at Tel Aviv

secret
niact Washington, February 14, 1949—8 p. m.

us urgent

88. Please call at once on FonMin and make following oral communication:

Eban Feb. 11 at own request called on Deputy US Rep UN NY quoting Shertok to effect that armistice negotiations on Rhodes had narrowed down “to details” and that successful outcome could be expected. Eban told USRep re Auja that compromise being worked out to neutralize area with Jewish and Egyptian defensive forces in roughly equal strength outside area. Re Beersheba Eban understood Israel striking forces would withdraw, leaving defensive forces roughly equal to combined Egyptian-Arab Legion forces in that area.1

In contrast to this info officially communicated by Rep of PGI, US member PCC received memo Feb 11 from Bunche indicating that Israel Delegation was adamant in refusing withdrawal from Beer sheba and in not accepting UN neutral zone arrangement for Auja.2

Dept today inquired of Epstein if he could reconcile these conflicting reports. Epstein said he had heard of Eban’s conversation but had had no direct word from Tel Aviv.

Dept stressed earnest hope of this Govt that Eban’s report cited above is correct and that PGI has wisely decided make concessions re Beersheba and Auja which seemed to be principal stumbling blocks to successful agreement.

Please telegraph report your interview with FonMin and repeat to Ethridge.

Repeated to Cairo as Unpal 27 for Ethridge. Repeated USUN as 80.

Acheson

1 This information was based on telegram 166, February 11, 2 p. m., from New York (501.BB Palestine/2–1149).

2 This information was based on telegram 133 (identified also as Palun 37), February 11, 10 p. m., from Jerusalem. It quoted Mr. Bunche’s memorandum to Mr. Ethridge, which stated that Colonel Yadin had informed Mr. Bunche that the reason the Israelis insisted “on complete freedom in the eastern sector of the Negev is because of the bargaining they expect to be forced to do in order to reach an agreement with Abdullah.” (501.BB Palestine/2–1149)

The Secretary of State to the Special Representative of the United States in Israel (McDonald), at Tel Aviv 501.BB Palestine/2–1149: Telegram

[Document 467]

The Secretary of State to the Special Representative of the United States in Israel (McDonald), at Tel Aviv

confidential Washington, February 15, 1949—4 p. m.

90. AP despatch datelined Jerusalem Feb 13 quotes PriMin Ben Gurion as follows:

Verbatim text. “In a brief but fiery speech he said that the commission had one direct instruction from the United Nations—the internationalization of Jerusalem. Therefore, he said, it was his duty on this occasion to tell them that ‘judgment on Jerusalem would not be given by them.’”

Pls endeavor ascertain whether this report textually accurate. Appreciate comments in light urtel 120 Feb. 12.1

Acheson

1 Not printed; it reported that prior to receipt of Department’s telegram 83, February 10 (not printed, but see footnote 1 to memorandum of February 9, p. 741 [Pg. 741 includes portions of Doc. 458 and Doc. 459]), Mr. McDonald had called on Mr. Shertok to express his personal concern lest the Israeli Government take unilateral action affecting the status of Jerusalem at the inaugural meetings of the Constituent Assembly. Mr. Shertok, after informing him that the Provisional Government of Israel was opposed to such action, summarized “the PGI position as desire work out solution Jerusalem with UN.” (501.BB Palestine/2–1249) Tel Aviv replied, on February 18, that the Palestine Post of February 14 had quoted the Prime Minister as saying: “But with all respect to Conciliatory [Conciliation] Commission of UN decision with regard to Jerusalem was made 3,000 years ago when Bel Yishai (King David) made Jerusalem the Jewish centre.” (Telegram 140, 501.BB Palestine/2–1849) Jerusalem, on February 14, cited the same issue of the Palestine Post, which quoted Mr. Ben-Gurion as saying additionally that “the living Jerusalem will not again accept any rule but that of its own people, Israel.” (Telegram 144, 501.BB Palestine/2–1449)

The Chargé in Egypt (Patterson) to the Secretary of State 501.BB Palestine/2–1549: Telegram

[Document 468]

The Chargé in Egypt (Patterson) to the Secretary of State

confidential Cairo, February 15, 1949—6 p. m.

173. Palun 46. [From Ethridge.] During February 15 meeting between Egyptian Prime Minister accompanied by Foreign Minister and PCC. Prime Minister replied to Commission aide-mémoire on subjects of general negotiations, Commission assistance, Jerusalem, economic matters and refugees as set forth in GA resolution December 11 and on subject territorial questions.

Prime Minister reiterated previous view Egyptian Government as reported in Palun 431 that present negotiations at Rhodes should be concluded and solution for refugee problem should be achieved before considering other matters which Commission had raised. Egypt and Israel had embarked on Rhodes negotiations as basis SC resolutions. Although Egypt agreed respect these resolutions Israelis not satisfied and does not wish implement. Even Acting Mediator’s suggestions which have exceeded SC resolutions in some respects are not accept able to Jews. Successful conclusion either at Rhodes or for Commission seems impossible as long as Jews do not feel bound respect GA or SC.

Refugees:2 Principle of return to homes and respect for property and rights is fundamental and must be accepted in advance. Refugees who do not wish return should be compensated. GA considered this matter and instructed accordingly. Until appropriate measures taken UN has responsibility for refugees. Despite right Arab return as guaranteed by UN Jews may continue object. No single country, however, restricts residence on basis of religion. All countries have minorities which have full rights as citizens. If some Arab refugees return and some do not, latter category can be agreed between Israel and Arab states on basis of exchange for Jews now in Arab lands.

Jerusalem:3 Arabs have had long and good record in Jerusalem. No reason to take from Arabs and make international. Egypt’s attitude will, however, be based on GA resolution December 11.

Economic matters: Egyptian Government will be glad examine proposals at later date.

Territorial questions: Prime Minister did not discuss in reply at first but later indicated there was no use discussing pending conclusion Rhodes talks and concrete evidence of Jewish good faith and real wish live up to GA and SC resolutions.

Commission argued each of foregoing points with Prime Minister without avail. Ethridge pointed out as member Commission and as US representative interest in success at Rhodes and observed that if all Arab states had views similar those Egypt endless talk might result. If Rhodes talks should fail Commission might be requested assume responsibility for armistice negotiations. Such delays would be serious for refugees and might contribute to political unrest in Near East. It therefore seemed wise now have informal talks at least on all outstanding problems.

Prime Minister stated he had sincerely attempted give Egyptian attitude to fullest extent now possible and that he would continue cooperate with Commission. Egypt did not believe, however, it would be useful progress further at this stage until Jewish intentions were really known. Their reaction at Rhodes and to problem of refugees would be best demonstrations their good faith.4 [Ethridge.]

Patterson

1 Identified also as telegram 166, February 14, 10 a. m., from Cairo, not printed; it stated that the Commission arrived at Cairo on February 12 and that preliminary discussions with Egyptian officials began the next day. Egyptian Foreign Minister was said to have welcomed the Commission but to have denounced the “intransigent line” of the Israelis at Rhodes. He was also reported as saying that Egypt would not approve “historical injustice in Palestine.” (501.BB Palestine/2–1449)

2 In the discussions of February 13, Chairman Yalcin stated that the return of the refugees “was logical though difficult because conditions had changed on account Jewish immigration. If Arabs could not resettle in Egypt, perhaps other Arab states could accommodate?” The Foreign Minister retorted that the Arab States would “never admit no right to return.”

3 In the discussions of February 13, the Foreign Minister refused to commit himself on the question of the internationalization of Jerusalem, “pointing out Jerusalem had always been Arab but that this matter could be discussed after Israel had complied with SC resolutions and refugees solution had been found.” Telegram 166 also stated that Mr. Ethridge sought Egyptian views regarding “general or separate peace conferences or combination of both.” The Foreign Minister expressed his belief that “direct negotiations would be preferable but stated Egypt would have to wait and see if Israel wanted peace and would abide by SC resolutions.”

4 Mr. Ethridge concluded that “Talks here have convinced me that unless Rhodes negotiations are quickly successful Commission’s work will be greatly delayed while situation, particularly as to refugees, disintegrates and becomes more dangerous. In circumstances urge Department exert utmost pressure in addition to that already taken to make them successful and consider suggesting to very highest levels that this is time to intervene with Israel. The maul is badly needed.” (Telegram 172, February 15, 5 p. m., from Cairo, 501.BB Palestine/2–1549)

The Special Representative of the United States in Israel (McDonald) to the Secretary of State 501.BB Palestine/2–1549: Telegram

[Document 469]

The Special Representative of the United States in Israel (McDonald) to the Secretary of State

secret
niact Tel Aviv, February 15, 1949—6 p. m.

us urgent

129. ReDeptel 88, February 14. Foreign Minister in Jerusalem. Had extended conference with Acting Foreign Minister Shiloah 12th noon. Knox, Andrus,1 Van de Velde2 present. Shiloah informed as follows:

Eban’s comments February 11 erred on optimistic side. However, Yadin3 and Shiloah go Rhodes February 16 resume conference with compromise formula re Auja area. On Beersheba and Auja Israeli position is: 1. PGI agreeing evacuate town El Auja and withdraw forces from a surrounding area only slightly smaller than area Bunche proposed. Also offering withdraw all but three battalions from whole area south and west of Bunche “armistice” line of November 13.

2. PGI cannot agree withdraw forces Beersheba because (1) no armistice negotiations with Transjordan as yet (2) eastern front not politically related southern-western front (3) presence Trans Jordan Egyptian troops, plus British troops Akaba, plus irregulars, on eastern front constitute entirely different problem and must be dealt with later (presumably in negotiations between Transjordan and Israel). Shiloah opines Egypt realizes this and will concede different status Beersheba and eastern front.

3. Israel not accepting Bunche proposal put seats Armistice Commission in El Auja, Bir Asluj, Beersheba. This proposal not indicative of “equal status” both armies and PGI will insist seat Armistice Commission either on border, or in towns located equally in Egypt as well as Israel.

4. PGI will concede any reasonable formula meet Egypt half way but wherein concessions clearly involve political prejudice or military disadvantage Israel will not agree. Shiloah says he aware desirability help Egypt maintain prestige.

5. Shiloah’s cited clause in Bunche proposals stating provisions of armistice do not prejudice any “political, territorial; or custodial” claims will later be considered by appropriate international authority. In Shiloah’s opinion this clause should allay Egypt apprehension re PGI position re Auja or Beersheba.

6. PGI of definite opinion that negotiations Rhodes should not create new area of “international supervision” in Negev. Problem El Auja can be solved by Israel–Egypt Armistice Commission.

7. Shiloah stated that as proof sincerity PGI willing give details troops and arms to remain in western Negev and guarantee freely to facilitate inspection by Armistice Commission.

Comment: Mission believes that PGI has been withholding further compromise during last six days awaiting outcome Histadrut4 elections 13 February and opening of Assembly in order clear political atmosphere here. Shiloah’s arguments re Beersheba understandable. Mission opinion is that PGI latest proposals constitute reasonable basis compromise and will possibly elicit favorable Egyptian response. Likely these proposals are as far PGI can go.

Department pass Army, Navy, Air.

McDonald

1 Col. Burton C. Andrus, Military Attaché in Israel.

2 Lt. Col. Robert W. van de Velde, predecessor of Colonel Andrus as Military Attaché in Israel.

3 Yigal Yadin, Chief of Staff of the Israeli Army and participant for his Government at the Rhodes conference.

4 The Israeli Federation of Labor.

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Director of the Office of Near Eastern and African Affairs (Satterthwaite) 501.BB Palestine/2–1749

[Document 470]

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Director of the Office of Near Eastern and African Affairs (Satterthwaite)

Washington, February 17, 1949.

Subject: Israeli-Egyptian Negotiations on Rhodes.

Participants: Mohamed Kamil Abdul Rahim, Egyptian Ambassador

Mohamed El Kouny, First Secretary, Egyptian Embassy

J. C. Satterthwaite, NEA

Joseph Palmer, AF1

At the conclusion of a discussion on another subject, the Egyptian Ambassador expressed the hope that the United States would again use all its best influence to persuade the Israeli Government to reach an agreement at Rhodes. Upon my mentioning the fact that for the first time we understood that the Acting Mediator, Mr. Bunche, was optimistic and felt that the impasse had been broken, Abdul Rahim Bey indicated that the two sides were close to agreement. He felt sure that what progress had been made had been due to the efforts of the United States. He felt sure, however, that an additional push at this time from high levels was necessary in order to bring the armistice negotiations to a successful conclusion.

I told the Ambassador that the United States was using and would continue to use its best efforts with the Israeli Government to reach a reasonable compromise. On the other hand I wished to emphasize again the great importance which we attach to continued patience and good will on the part of the Egyptian Government. That Government had shown a commendable spirit and patience for several weeks now, but it was necessary that it continue to do so and make a genuine effort toward reaching a solution. If it did so I felt that there was every hope that an agreement might be reached. We both agreed that this was necessary in order to give the Conciliation Commission a good basis on which to carry on its work.

1 Joseph Palmer, 2d, Acting Chief of the Division of African Affairs.

The Secretary of State to the Special Representative of the United States in Israel (McDonald), at Tel Aviv 867N.00/2–1749: Telegram

[Document 471]

The Secretary of State to the Special Representative of the United States in Israel (McDonald), at Tel Aviv

secret Washington, February 17, 1949—11 a. m.

us urgent

98. Pls take earliest opportunity approach Israeli Govt re Dec. 12 absentee property ordinance along fol lines:

Dept has demonstrated its interest in protection Jewish minorities Arab lands and has taken appropriate occasions in past to remind Arab Govts their responsibilities this regard. Publication of ordinance, as shown by Syrian PriMins views (Damascus 2 to Tel Aviv Feb. 101 ), has already produced sharp official Arab reaction which might well lead to retaliatory measures against Jews’ property Arab countries. US Govt in most friendly spirit desires suggest advisability early action by Israeli Govt such as issuance official statement in order calm fears in Arab countries that property interests of absentee owners may not be safeguarded and in order avoid precipitating retaliatory action. US Govt concerned, in light of absentee property ordinance, that no Govt take unilateral action in advance negotiations contemplated by GA resolution Dec. 11 which would prejudice achievement of agreed settlement on such questions as return of refugees to their homes and return of property to refugee owners.

For your info Dept on Feb. 4 (Deptel 70 to Jerusalem) suggested to Ethridge advisability PCC approaching Israeli Govt on last point preceding para, and inquiring Israeli authorities re arrangements Govt Israel contemplates making to return vested property belonging to refugees who later return to their homes.2

Acheson

1 This was a repeat of Damascus’ telegram 55 to the Department, not printed; Prime Minister Azm was said to have expressed the hope to the Conciliation Commission that it would make the rescue of refugees a primary concern. In this connection he exhibited anxiety about the Israeli property law and intimated he wished to study its text before taking reciprocal measures against Jewish property in Syria. (501.BB Palestine/2–1049)

2 Mr. McDonald replied on March 11 that he had “discussed question several times with FonOff since February 18 and government studying question. Emphasis in law is on custodial function although one regulatory provision does permit sale with proceeds blocked.” (Telegram 198 from Tel Aviv, 867N.00/3–1149) Telegram 98 was repeated to Damascus the following day as No. 48.

The United States Representative at the United Nations (Austin) to the Secretary of State 501.BB Palestine/2–1849: Telegram

[Document 472]

The United States Representative at the United Nations (Austin) to the Secretary of State

secret
priority New York, February 18, 1949—4 p. m.

203. Confirming telephone call to McClintock, Reedman (secretariat) telephoned to report on cable received from Bunche this morning as follows.

Bunche would deeply appreciate any possible assistance he might be given on following issue.

Only remaining issue in current Rhodes discussions is Beersheba. Egyptians are pressing for withdrawal all Israeli forces from the town. They are not however pressing for withdrawal of Israeli forces from surrounding area. Bunche describes Egyptian motive as political rather than military. Egyptians argue (a) there must be some recognition by Israelis of November 4 resolution, (b) Beersheba is an Arab town and (c) Beersheba is included in territory allotted to Arab state by November 29 resolution.

Israeli negotiators are adamant in refusal to enter into any formal agreement to withdraw from town. They have informed Bunche, however, that they are in fact building camps outside the town. It might be inferred from this information that Israelis plan informally to withdraw their forces.

Bunche comments that while Egyptian position is perhaps technically correct he feels they would be making great mistake to stick to their present line, particularly in view of safeguard provision in armistice agreement protecting any political rights or claims. Bunche goes on to comment that Beersheba is more of an issue between the SC and Israel than between Egypt and Israel if it is an issue at all.

In response Reedman inquiry whether USG might take some action this point, Ross suggested (and subsequently confirmed suggestions after discussion McClintock) that best procedure at this juncture would be for SYG to see Fawzi and Eban here.

Text Bunche cable will be sent Department soon as received.

Austin

The Secretary of State to the Consulate General in Jerusalem 501.BB Palestine/2–349: Telegram

[Document 473]

The Secretary of State to the Consulate General in Jerusalem 1

confidential Washington, February 18, 1949—7 p. m.

99. Ur 107 Feb 3.2 Dept has explored possibility converting ConGen Jerusalem to Diplomatic Agency. Dept believes step inadvisable at present time since no international administrative authority, such as UN representatives mentioned UNGA resolution Dec 11, exists Jerusalem and no international regime as yet established.

Acheson

1 This telegram was repeated to Ankara, London, and Paris.

2 Not printed; Consul Burdett made the suggestion “in order to signify US attitude toward Jerusalem and to forestall further steps by Israel toward annexation.” (501.BB Palestine/2–349)

The Chargé in Iraq (Dorsz) to the Secretary of State 501.BB Palestine/2–1949: Telegram

[Document 474]

The Chargé in Iraq (Dorsz) to the Secretary of State

confidential Baghdad, February 19, 1949—8 a. m.

69. Palun 49. [From Ethridge.] 1. On February 17 Ibn Saud with informality and cordiality received Commission at Riyadh three times: Following arrival, before evening prayer and for dinner. King continually emphasized Saudi Arabia’s desire to cooperate in restoring peace but strongly stressed necessity for equal desire on part of Jews. At second meeting King cited three prerequisites to settlement: (1) Real guarantees by UN [and?] by larger powers making sure that settlement would be effective; (2) that immediate action would be taken by UN to make possible for Arab refugees to return to their homes; and (3) that present GA and SC resolutions re Palestine would be made effective and that those who did not comply would be made to do so or be penalized accordingly, [after?] which refugee question could be discussed first. Ibn Saud, following intervention by counsellors such as Sheikh Yussuf, and Hamza Bey, hedged somewhat on Prince Feisal’s previously indicated willingness actively to participate.1 King was ready, however, to cooperate providing other Arab states also agreeable to conference. In general, Saudi Arabia seems remote both geographically and operationally from Palestine but indicates deep and detailed interest in problem. Saudi Arabian officials manifest little faith in UN effectiveness but appear sincere and desirous of working with UN re Palestine.

2. For Department’s special information Saudi Arabian officials apparently accept without question and as fact unofficial reports and rumors via press and radio re continuing military aid from US to Israel in spite SC truce. Report Israel has four American destroyers cited by Saudi Arabian officials. US Delegate suggests it would be helpful American prestige SAG could be informally told of US measures to prevent military export from US and through third countries since Nov. 1947 and particularly since June 1948.

3. On February 18 Commission left Riyadh for Baghdad via Turkish plane, putting down briefly at Dhahran for quick visit with Saudi Arabian and American officials, thereafter arriving at Baghdad at 2:30 p. m.

4. Sent Department; please repeat to Near East capitals as seems appropriate. [Ethridge.]

Dorsz

1 The Amir Faisal, Saudi Arabian Foreign Minister, had indicated in his discussions with the Palestine Conciliation Commission at Jidda on February 16 that Saudi Arabia would participate at a general conference to discuss the refugee problem, if the other Arab States would (telegram 116, February 17, 10 a. m., from Jidda, 501.BB Palestine/2–1749).

The Chargé in Iraq (Dorsz) to the Secretary of State 501.BB Palestine/2–2049: Telegram

[Document 475]

The Chargé in Iraq (Dorsz) to the Secretary of State

secret
priority Baghdad, February 20, 1949—noon.

71. After delivering note verbale (Embtel 70, February 201 ) which he said Prime Minister asked him hand to me, Foreign Minister made comments along following lines: (1) UNPCC wanted Iraq Government express its views re conditions for Israel prepared go towards reaching settlement or what steps would be taken to make Israel abide by settlement; (2) before expressing its views, Iraq Government feels that some practical action designed enforce compliance by Israel of such settlement as may be reached must be worked out; (3) UN resolutions have time and again been violated by Israel. Instead taking measures to enforce resolutions, big powers and particularly US have looked aside and helped Jews through such acts as extension de jure recognition, sponsoring Israel admission to UN, granting of huge loan, etc; (4) in these circumstances, Arabs have lost confidence in US contention it sincerely desires create conditions in Middle East favorable to restoration of stability and security this area; (5) US could improve situation immeasurably by proving its “good faith towards Arabs” by putting pressure on Israel to accept principles re (a) right refugees return to Palestine and (b) Jerusalem remain Arab city; (6) unless US Government makes Israel accept these principles, Arab world will continue drifting towards chaos from which only Communists can profit; (7) Iraq Government therefore hopes US will give assurances desired as this would help Arab Governments in their efforts to overcome deep and intense feeling against US now prevailing Arab world and enable Arab Governments working constructively; (8) other Arab Governments are expected make similar representations to US and British Governments; and (9) identical note verbale would be delivered British Embassy.

I mentioned that UN resolution December 11 which created UNPCC contained principle that refugees who desire should have right return to their homes in Palestine. Foreign Minister said this was not good enough; Jews had previously violated other resolutions and had exhibited no intention accepting this principle in December 11 resolution. Iraq therefore wants US show good faith by giving desired assurances; otherwise Iraq must assume US trying avoid direct responsibility of seeing that Jews abide by resolutions.

Foreign Minister made it plain that any reference by US for Arabs to look to UN for enforcement of resolution would not be constructive suggestion but merely another indication of US unwillingness to assume necessary responsibility of trying rectify to some extent great injustice Arabs claim US has been chiefly instrumental in imposing upon them.2

Sent Department 71, repeated Amman for USDel PCC 3, Beirut 23, Damascus 13, London 28, Jerusalem 3, Tel Aviv 3, Cairo 21, Jidda 4.

Dorsz

1 Not printed; it stated that Foreign Minister Hafidh had handed the note to Chargé Dorsz on the morning of February 20 (501.BB Palestine/2–2049). The two main points of the note are embodied in comments numbered 5(a) and (b) in telegram 71. On February 23, Foreign Minister Hafidh handed a similar note verbale to the British Ambassador and expressed the hope that the United Kingdom, in concert with the United States, would do everything possible to force Israel to accept the return of the refugees. He noted that the Arab States had met at Cairo on February 5 and had agreed to ask for such British assurances. The point concerning Jerusalem as an Arab city was an Iraqi idea not cleared with the other Arab States. Little effort was made to “sell” this point, (telegram 72, February 24, 11 a. m., from Baghdad, 501.BB Palestine/2–2449)

2 Marginal notation in the handwriting of Mr. McClintock: “what responsibility?”.

The Secretary of State to the Egyptian Ambassador (Rahim) 501.BB Palestine/2–449

[Document 476]

The Secretary of State to the Egyptian Ambassador (Rahim)

The Secretary of State presents his compliments to His Excellency the Ambassador of Egypt, and has the honor to acknowledge the receipt of the Ambassador’s note of February 4, 1949,1 concerning the recognition of Israel.

The Government of the United States has granted full recognition to the Government of Israel since that Government, after the legislative elections of January 25, is now considered to be the legally constituted authority in the State of Israel. The Government of the United States recognized the existence of the State of Israel on May 14, 1948, when it recognized the Provisional Government of Israel as the de facto authority in Israel. It will therefore be seen that the existence of Israel as a state has been recognized by the United States for some time and is not a new development.

The Secretary of State desires at this time to reiterate the Department’s hope that the conversations now going on may lead to the establishment of permanent peace in Palestine. It is the Department’s conviction that all parties must bend every effort to remove any obstacles standing in the way of a final settlement and work to establish a normal atmosphere on questions relating to Palestine.

Washington, February 21, 1949.

1 Not printed; it expressed the “very deep regret” of the Egyptian Government that “certain powers” had recognized “the so-called State of Israel,” despite failure to find a solution for the problems of Palestine. It also stated that the Zionists had exploited the fact of recognition as a definite stand in their favor and had thereby been encouraged to persist “in their purely aggressive complicity against the Arabs.” It denounced the recent recognitions as “submission to force and acceptance of the accomplished fact even at the expense of the encouragement of aggression and the violation of the Law of Nations.” (501.BB Palestine/2–449) The Egyptian Ambassador handed the note to the Secretary of State on February 5.

The Special Representative of the United States in Israel (McDonald) to the Secretary of State 501.BB Palestine/2–2149: Telegram

[Document 477]

The Special Representative of the United States in Israel (McDonald) to the Secretary of State

top secret
niact Tel Aviv, February 21, 1949—1 p. m.

us urgent

149. Today 9:45 a. m. Foreign Minister asked me his office and stated as follows:

February 20, 4 p. m. “final” meeting held Rhodes. Israel accepted “in entirety without reservations” Bunche draft complete text agreement and appendices. Egyptians make two reservations, one “purely technical” other of “principle”. First referred to definition of “what constitutes defensive units” to be allowed within armistice area. Seemingly this reservation adjustable.

In second reservation Egyptians raise question Israel evacuation Beersheba, though no mention such evacuation Bunche final draft.

According information from Eytan late February 20, Egyptian delegation returning Cairo with divided opinion. The two foreign office representatives favor acceptance Bunche draft without insistence reservations. Military member, said “represent court and King”, is believed determined to urge insistence Beersheba reservation as matter Farouk prestige even if new crisis precipitated.

Foreign Minister explained that Bunche draft draws dividing line between western and eastern fronts midway between Transjordan and Egyptian-held territories. Basic idea Bunche text is that eastern front is “irrelevant” until armistice negotiations open with Transjordan. Only1 front involved in Israel-Egyptian negotiations. Beersheba well east dividing line. Hence, its non-inclusion in Israel evacuation zone.

Foreign Minister says that word from Washington to Egypt urging unqualified acceptance latest Bunche draft might result signature armistice Wednesday or Thursday this week. He pleads urgent action by Department.

McDonald

1 There is an apparent garble at this point. Presumably “western” was intended.

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in Egypt 501.BB Palestine/2–2149: Telegram

[Document 478]

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in Egypt 1

top secret Washington, February 21, 1949—6 p. m.

us urgent

niact

194. Pls call immediately upon FonMin and make representation following sense:

USG informed that Israeli Govt has accepted without reservations final Bunche draft complete text armistice agreement and appendices. USG further informed that Egyptian delegation Rhodes has made reservations to status proposed by Bunche for Beersheba.

USG understands that provision in Bunche draft agreement looks toward safeguarding of any political rights or claims. Status Beersheba will be determined at time of final peace settlement and USG believes question should not be permitted obstruct signing of armistice agreement.

As PrimMin aware, USG worked to persuade Israeli authorities modify their former adamant position, which was holding up negotiations. Tel Aviv subsequently made several accommodations in order meet Bunche proposals such as status El Auja and Bir Asluj. USG would deplore any action likely create further obstacles at time when armistice agreement seems near, after so much hard work by both sides. In spirit of friendship for Egypt and in its desire see peace return to NE, USG urges Egyptian Govt accept Bunche draft without insistence reservations.

Above representation of course not to be made if prior receipt this tel Egyptians have accepted Bunche draft.

Acheson

1 This telegram was repeated to Tel Aviv, London, and New York.

The Special Representative of the United States in Israel (McDonald) to the Secretary of State 501.MA Palestine/2–2249

[Document 479]

The Special Representative of the United States in Israel (McDonald) to the Secretary of State

secret Tel Aviv, February 22, 1949.

No. 46

Sir: In answer to the Department’s telegram 91 of February 15, 1949,1 in reference to Palestine war refugees, I have the honor to submit in this communication an analysis of the elements of the problem and some factors in its possible solution.

[Here follow sections on “Summary,” “Background,” and “Present Obstructive Tendencies.”]

The Israeli Official Position

There is no evidence that the Israeli Government through action by the Cabinet or the State Council has as yet defined an official position towards the problem of Palestine refugees. None of the few public or semipublic statements by the Foreign Minister have been comprehensive or authoritative. On several occasions, I have talked at length with Mr. Shertok (my last talk was today) and on two or three occasions with the Prime Minister, Mr. Ben Gurion, about the problem. The general impression I gather is that no one here has yet thought the matter through. Nonetheless, what is known of Israel’s position at this time I summarize as follows: 1. Sole responsibility for the creation of refugees rests upon the Arab states who, in violation of the UN November 29th recommendation on partition, began and continued an offensive war against Israel. All other factors which may have played a part in the exodus are secondary and comparatively unimportant. Had there been no Arab attack upon Israel there would have been no Arab refugees.

2. Israel will gladly make available technical assistance and personnel in planning the resettlement of refugees outside of its territory.

3. It will consider sympathetically financial contributions towards such resettlement either in the form of compensation for Arab properties left behind by the refugees or as direct governmental grants.

4. There can be no formal consideration of Israel’s role in such resettlement except as an integral part of peace negotiations and settlements with the several Arab states.

5. To allow any substantial return of refugees prior to peace would be to impose upon the Israeli military and police authorities an unbearable and wholly unacceptable responsibility.

6. Though the Israeli spokesmen do not say so, the unprecedentedly rapid influx of Jewish refugees during 1948 and the plan to admit a quarter of a million more in 1949 will, if carried out, fill all or almost all of the houses and business properties previously held by Arab refugees. Arab unoccupied farms will similarly, though not to quite the same degree, be occupied by the recent or expected Jewish refugees. Hence, there will be almost no residence or business property and only a limited number of farms to which the Arab refugees can hope to return.

Recommendations

On the basis of the above analysis of governmental attitudes in general and of those of the Israel and Arab governments in particular, I recommend: 1. The immediate supplying of Ambassador Griffis and his colleagues with the resources necessary to keep the refugees alive pending their resettlement. The appropriation by Congress of the full amount of $16,000,000 requested by President Truman as our Government’s contribution will, I trust, have been passed before this despatch is received by the Department, for without this American example of generosity, Mr. Griffis’ drive for essential relief funds must fail.

2. Constant and concerted pressure on both Israel and the Arab states to eschew politics in their thinking and planning about refugees and to take account of humanitarian considerations. Emphatically these governments should be told that in the long run the human approach will be the best policy.

3. Israel be urged to accept the principle that: a. The serious and sympathetic study of plans for the return of those refugees who wish to return be not postponed until formal peace has been made or peace negotiations begun;

b. Permission to return be not tied up with such extraneous problems as permission to Jews now living in Arab countries to leave in order to enter Israel.

4. The Arab states be urged to recognize that to make the prior return of the refugees a sine qua non of peace negotiations would be to destroy any chance of concession by Israel and instead would tend to protract indefinitely the present twilight which is neither peace nor war. It should be obvious to the Arab governments, if not to their peoples, that it is impracticable if not impossible for Israel to open its doors to the returning refugees before its enemies have agreed to begin peace negotiations.

5. Fundamental to any resettlement plan will be large capital funds. No estimate of the amount required can, however, be made until there has been a detailed study of the number to be resettled and where.

6. The required resettlement funds might be obtained from these sources: a. Compensation by Israel for refugee property taken over by the state or by private individuals or corporations.

b. Lands suitable for resettlement made available by the Arab governments.

c. An international loan similar to that which under League of Nations auspices made possible the transfer of more than a million Greeks from Smyrna and vicinity to their motherland.

7. Comprehensive but general recommendations by the Palestine Conciliation Commission of an Arab refugee resettlement program is the obvious next step. Any plan to be acceptable in Tel Aviv must make provision for resettlement of the larger proportion of the refugees outside of Israeli territory.

A Definite Plan Now?

Nothing would be easier—or less useful—than for me, or any other informed person, to attempt to draw up now a detailed plan of resettlement, including adequate financing. Any such plan might appear to be sound and just, but in reality it would be so theoretical as to be almost worthless. There are still too many unknown factors to permit the preparation of a sound program.

Here are some of the unknowns: 1. The number of refugees—the estimates still vary by hundreds of thousands.

2. The real attitudes of the governments directly concerned; a. How many refugees will be permitted to return to Israel? The sooner armistices with the neighboring states have been concluded, the sooner there can be an approximate answer to this question.

b. How many will be permitted to be resettled in the Arab states? I anticipate (despite present Arab public statements) that this number will be very large if adequate funds are made available.

3. The degree of unity of the states in UN in support of a resettlement program.

4. The degree of willingness of such states to make sacrifices toward a comprehensive solution.

This incomplete list of unknowns suggests that at most the Palestine Conciliation Commission can at the present time probably do no more than draft a very general outline of a possible program, or programs, for the refugees. The Commission’s present tour of all the capitals will have supplied it with political background against which a refugee scheme can be realistically envisaged. Perhaps the Commission might at the outset limit itself to the drawing up of a set of principles upon which basis a group of technicians could then be authorized to begin the preparation of a more definitive scheme.

Meantime—and this I regard as the essence of the matter—all possible friendly influence should be brought to bear upon all the states involved to study sympathetically ways in which each can make its maximum contribution to an agreed solution—a solution which would over the years be advantageous to all.2

Respectfully yours,

James G. McDonald

1 Not printed; it expressed the Department’s belief that prospects for early approval of the refugee bill were favorable (501.BB Palestine/2–1349).

2 The Department, in reply on April 1, stated that “This timely and objective report has had an important influence upon the formulation of the Department’s long-range policy towards the Palestine refugee question, particularly with regard to the definition of the objectives of this Government. The Department is in accord with your recommendations … and would welcome your more detailed comments on means by which your recommendations number 2, 3, and 4 can be implemented.” (airgram 55, 501.BB Palestine/2–2249)

The Chargé in Egypt (Patterson) to the Secretary of State 501.BB Palestine/2–2249: Telegram

[Document 480]

The Chargé in Egypt (Patterson) to the Secretary of State

top secret Cairo, February 22, 1949—2 p. m.

186. Deptel 194 February 21. Since my previous conversations concerning Rhodes negotiations were with Prime Minister I requested Abdul Hadi Pasha to receive me today which he did within the hour. I reviewed situation as understood by my government and repeatedly stressed US Government’s view that Beersheba should not prove obstacle to signature armistice agreement, especially since Bunche draft safeguards political rights or claims to that town for determination during final peace settlement.

In response to my exposition Prime Minister stated that he would use his best efforts in interest of a settlement. Although I urged him to be more definite he was not disposed to bind himself by precise promise, and probably indeed could not have done so.

Prime Minister emphasized that Egyptian attitude toward Beer sheba was not arbitrary, but was based on importance of town as symbol of UN November 4 resolution; as strategic point important for Egypt’s defense (although such importance now diminished by Zionist fortified villages in vicinity); and as communications center on an important highway. For these reasons Egypt had been anxious to maintain a civil administration at Beersheba without troops or fortifications.

My final impression gained from our talk was that Abdul Hadi Pasha would use his influence to remove Egyptian reservation respecting Beersheba.

Thereafter possibly with view of making a Palestine settlement more palatable to Egyptian public (since Prime Minister stated that it had been difficult for Egyptians to negotiate and to make concessions) Hadi Pasha urged at considerable length importance of US support for return of Palestine refugees to their homes since temporary relief would not suffice and also US economic aid to Egypt.

If a Marshall plan for the Middle East were not practicable at least the US Government should insist that Marshall Plan dollars supplied European countries should when such countries required Egyptian cotton be used to pay for at least a portion of such cotton in dollars.

The Prime Minister in response to my question stated that he stood by the thoughts contained in his recently published responses to questions propounded by Walter Collins, Cairo United Press correspondent.

Patterson

Statement by the President [Document 481]

Statement by the President 1

February 24, 1949

I am immensely gratified over the news from Rhodes that the Representatives of Egypt and Israel have signed an armistice agreement. This act is a tribute to the restraint and statesmanship of the two governments. I wish, also, to congratulate the United Nations Mediator, Dr. Ralph Bunche, whose untiring efforts have so greatly contributed to the success of these negotiations.

I hope that now a formal armistice has been agreed upon between Egypt and Israel, this pattern for peace will be followed rapidly in the conclusion of similar agreements between Israel and the other Arab States. The general armistice will then, I trust, lead to the attainment of permanent peace, thus freeing the talents of these Near Eastern peoples for constructive work in the development of their respective countries. As a Member of the Palestine Conciliation Commission, the United States stands ready to assist the parties to the rapid conclusion of a just and honorable peace.2

1 Released to the press by the White House on February 24; reprinted from Department of State Bulletin, March 6, 1949, p. 302.

2 The Department, on February 24, sent a joint telegram to Tel Aviv (No. 113) and to Cairo (No. 202), stating that it was “greatly encouraged by Egyptian-Israeli armistice concluded at Rhodes and particularly by the public and cordial association of Egyptian and Israeli delegations in normal negotiation relationship.” (501.BB Palestine/2–2449)

Editorial Note [Document 482]

Editorial Note

Israeli Representative Eban, on February 24, sent a letter to Secretary-General Lie requesting the Security Council to give renewed consideration to his country’s membership in the United Nations. The Council, on December 17, 1948, had failed to recommend such membership; see Mr. Lovett’s memorandum of conversation of December 21, 1948, Foreign Relations, 1948, volume V, Part 2, page 1676.

The text of Mr. Eban’s letter is printed in United Nations, Official Records of the Security Council, Fourth Tear, Supplement for March 1949, page 7.

Editorial Note [Document 483]

Editorial Note

The Governments of Israel and Egypt, at Rhodes on February 24, signed a General Armistice Agreement, the first agreement signed between Israel and an Arab neighbor. The text is published in United Nations, Official Records of the Security Council, Fourth Tear (hereinafter identified as SC, 4th yr., Special Supplement No. 3).

Cairo reported, on March 2, that “public reaction in Egypt hostile to the signature of the Israeli-Egyptian armistice signed at Rhodes on February 24 has been practically nil with no disturbances or demonstration[s] as originally feared by many informed persons and security officials. While criticism has been barred from the press by government directive no indirect criticism, even by the opposition press, has yet appeared. The press has, in fact, devoted itself to statements up holding the valor and honor of the Egyptian Army and calling attention to Egypt’s respect and support for international organizations working for peace. The view is taken that the military experience gained in the Palestinian affair has more than compensated for sacrifices involved.” (Airgram 260, 501.BB Palestine/3–249)

The Minister in Lebanon (Pinkerton) to the Secretary of State 501.BB Palestine/2–2449: Telegram

[Document 484]

The Minister in Lebanon (Pinkerton) to the Secretary of State

confidential Beirut, February 24, 1949—11 a. m.

83. Palun 52. [From Ethridge.] Department please pass appropriate Near East Missions. On February 21 Syria Prime Minister received Commission. Ethridge as chairman explained its general and specific tasks from UNGA and requested Syrian views.

Prime Minister replied Syrian views had been stated last UNGA and questioned whether Syria should now be urged to recognize Jewish state de facto which established contrary to justice. Jews are even now acting contrary to UN resolutions by importing arms, by other truce violations, by holding Constituent Assembly Jerusalem, and by other Jewish governmental action in Jerusalem.1 Syria has presented formal protest to ministers of all countries represented Damascus re Jewish assembly and Jewish capital Jerusalem. Syria protests to commission also Prime Minister continued. Arab states are confronted by establishment of state in Palestine on racial basis, Arab population being replaced by Jews. Refugees are first and most important problem. Why cannot Arabs return if Jews can immigrate? Syria requests implementation paragraph 11 GA resolution December 11 including indemnification. Solution lies between Jews and UN and not between Jews and Arabs.

Although commission pointed out its main task was conciliation and how specific problems were intertwined, Prime Minister maintained position emphasizing Syria was abiding by UN resolutions but Jews were not. Arab states therefore required guarantees re Jewish intentions and UN implementation.

Re meeting Arab states with Commission Prime Minister agreed could take places soon at Arab capital providing other Arab States concurred.2

Sent Department; repeated Jerusalem 13. [Ethridge.]

Pinkerton

1 Damascus, on February 25, reported Prime Minister Azm’s fear of a Zionist fait accompli at Jerusalem and his request that the United States counter such move. The Prime Minister was said to have contended that “as the Conciliation Commission was specifically charged by the UN resolution with the inter nationalization of Jerusalem, it should limit itself in its discussion of Jerusalem to means of carrying out this specific duty. As ’Azam said nothing to me [Minister Keeley] with respect to Arab claims upon Jerusalem, the inference was that the Arabs would not object to internationalization if the UN Resolution could be used as means of defeating Israeli pretensions.” Publicly, however, the Prime Minister was said to have expressed dissatisfaction with internationalization and to have insisted on the “Arabism of the city and its suburbs.” (Airgram 57, 867N.01/2–2549)

2 The Conciliation Commission saw the Lebanese Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs on February 23. Their views paralleled those of the Syrian spokesman as set forth in telegram 83. The Foreign Minister stressed the view that the “internationalization Jerusalem and solution refugee problem were test cases to determine whether Jews would abide or buck UN resolution.” (Telegram 84, identified also as Palun 53, February 24, noon, from Beirut, 501.BB Palestine/2–2449)

Mr. Wells Stabler to the Secretary of State 501.BB Palestine/2–2449: Telegram

[Document 485]

Mr. Wells Stabler to the Secretary of State

secret Amman, February 24, 1949—5 p. m.

72. Defense Minister confirmed this morning delay in departure of Transjordan armistice delegation to Rhodes. Said delegation has definite instructions to consider armistice questions only and to inform Israelis that any matter beyond scope armistice will have be referred back to Transjordan Government with view possible consideration later in connection PCC. Transjordan Government believes it would be mistake rush into peace settlement discussions at Rhodes and that more reasonable and lasting agreement could be reached by proceeding slowly toward ultimate objective under aegis PCC. Indicated again that Transjordan Government hoped PCC would soon be brought into discussions.

Re Iraqi position on armistice Defense Minister said Transjordan delegation prepared inform Israelis, if subject raised, that agreement reached by Transjordan Government will also extend to Iraqi areas but that Transjordan delegation unable commit itself in writing on this. Understanding re Iraqi areas will have to be in nature “gentleman’s agreement.” Fawzi Pasha believed Iraqis would abide by such agreement. Delimitation armistice lines in Iraqi area should not prove difficult as present front lines approximate desired lines of territorial settlement.1

Said PCC had proposed meeting of Arab states at Beirut March 21. Arab League Council also proposed hold meeting end of March at Cairo but felt this would be without practical result.

Sent Department 72; repeated Baghdad 15; pouched Jerusalem.

Stabler

1 Mr. Stabler, on February 25, reported information that the Iraqi Defense Minister had telephoned to the Iraqi Minister at Amman to inquire whether the latter had issued a denial that the Transjordanian Delegation at Rhodes would also speak for Iraq. The Minister was alleged to have “replied such not possible in view existing relationships with King and that matter would settle itself at Rhodes where Transjordan delegation will be unable present to Israelis, if they request it, written ‘power of attorney’ from Iraq Government.” (Telegram 73 from Amman, 501.BB Palestine/2–2549)

The Chargé in Egypt (Patterson) to the Secretary of State 501.BB Palestine/2–2449: Telegram

[Document 486]

The Chargé in Egypt (Patterson) to the Secretary of State

restricted Cairo, February 24, 1949—9 p. m.

193. Official communiqué announcing signature today at Rhodes armistice transforming cease-fire into permanent truce states “agreement has no political character. It deals exclusively with military questions and does not affect in any way the political destiny of Palestine.” Communiqué also declares military delegation sent January 12 to discuss with UN Mediator the application of SC resolutions of November 4 and 16 ran into many difficulties until Bunche established project bringing together the different points of view.

Press reproduction of agreement forbidden by censor although radio heard in Egypt carries full text. Security officials warned Embassy officer violent reaction possible when agreement is published.1

[Patterson]

1 Cairo transmitted the text of the official communiqué in airgram 239, February 26, which noted that censorship of the terms of the agreement “relented under orders, to the extent of permitting the publication of seven brief points which were ascribed to sources outside Egypt. These points as published in the local press of February 25 are as follows: “‘1. The coastal strip from the Egyptian frontier to a point 15 kilometres north of Gaza will remain under the control of the Egyptian forces.

“‘2. The Egyptian forces in Faluja will start evacuating the town today.

“‘3. El Auja becomes a headquarters of the United Nations observers enforcing the armistice.

“‘4. Prisoners of war will be exchanged within the next ten days.

“‘5. Both parties will hot undertake any military operations or bring in reinforcements in arms and equipment.

“‘6. Both parties will not build new airfields in Palestine.

“‘7. Both parties are to reduce their main forces within four weeks in compliance with the armistice.’”(501.BB Palestine/2–2649)

Editorial Note [Document 487]

Editorial Note

The Department of State announced, on February 25, that “The Government of the United States and the Government of Israel have agreed to the establishment of embassies in the respective capitals. The Government of Israel has informed the United States Government that His Excellency Eliahu Elath has been appointed first Israeli Ambassador to the United States.…

“The President announced on February 25 that he had nominated James Grover McDonald, of New York, to serve as the Ambassador of the United States to Israel.”

The Department’s Biographic Register, as of April 1, 1949, stated that Mr. McDonald became Ambassador on March 18, 1949.

The Department announced, on February 28, that “Pursuant to the formal recognition of the Hashemite Kingdom of Transjordan by the United States on January 31, 1949, the United States Government on February 28 established a Legation in Amman, the capital of Transjordan. The Government of Transjordan has notified the United States Government of its intention to establish a Legation in Washington.” Mr. Stabler was designated Chargé d’Affaires of the Legation, effective March 19, pending arrival of a Minister. Dr. Yousef Haikal presented his credentials as Minister of Jordan on June 1, 1949.

The Department’s press releases on these matters are printed in Department of State Bulletin, March 6, 1949, page 302, and March 13, 1949, page 332.

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Syria 501.BB Palestine/2–949: Telegram

[Document 488]

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Syria 1

secret Washington, February 25, 1949—6 p. m.

57. You may inform PriMin and FonOff as follows re ur A–8 Jan 10 and urtels 502 and 51 Feb 9: (1) This Govt warmly appreciates friendly attitude Syrian Govt and its desire align itself with US and Western Powers.

(2) Dept wishes reiterate that our support estab State of Israel in no sense lessens our basic policy of friendship toward Arab countries and our earnest hope they will prosper and develop.

(3) US has not assisted Israel in violation of truce but on contrary has rigidly maintained arms embargo impartially. Quantity war material smuggled despite embargo has not been large and whenever apprehended participants have been prosecuted and material confiscated.

(4) US attitude re Israel was clearly stated in UN by Dr. Jessup on Nov 20 to effect that US supported Israeli claims to boundaries set forth UNGA resolution Nov 29 but believed that if Israel sought retain additional territory in Palestine it shld give Arabs territorial compensation.

(5) We wld not support any attempt by Israel to occupy any Arab state and wld fully support any measures taken by UN to protect territorial integrity such State.

(6) US hopes its relations with Syria and other countries NE will develop constantly. However Syrian Govt will appreciate association of US with nations outside Western Hemisphere for defense purposes, as exemplified in proposed Atlantic Security Pact, constitutes radical departure from traditional peacetime policies. It is new concept and one with which we must proceed slowly. We have not as yet envisaged broadening defensive security relationship beyond Atlantic grouping. While it wld be premature pursue subject further at present time, Dept is gratified learn of Syrian Govt’s preoccupation with its basic relationship with Western Powers and its manifestation of friendship in this regard. Views of Syrian Govt will be kept well in mind.

(7) US Govt pleased that Arab states have endeavored observe truce under UN resolutions, and has urged utmost cooperation of Israeli Govt this same regard. US Govt hopes that all parties concerned will give full support General Assembly resolution of Dec 11 calling upon all parties seek agreement by negotiations either with Conciliation Commission or directly with view to final settlement of all questions outstanding between them.

Acheson

1 This telegram was repeated to London and the Arab capitals.

2 Latter not printed, but see footnote 1, p. 742 [Pg. 742 includes portions of Doc. 459 and Doc. 460].

The Secretary of State to Ambassador Stanton Griffis, at Beirut 501.BB Palestine/2–2549: Telegram

[Document 489]

The Secretary of State to Ambassador Stanton Griffis, at Beirut

top secret Washington, February 25, 1949—8 p. m.

89. Eyes only for Griffis. Greatly appreciate views expressed your personal telegram Feb. 13 from Cairo. We have been following negotiations at Rhodes with closest possible attention and will pay similar attention to negotiation phase PCC. Experience thus far has not convinced us that final solution Palestine lies primarily in strong joint US–UK position which we would attempt to impose by pressure upon parties. Joint US–UK effort in last GA to support Bernadotte Plan failed completely because Arabs and Jews would have none of it and united their votes against US–UK. Arabs even rejected those elements of plan which were specifically directed to Arab advantage rather than recognize Bernadotte solution. This despite earlier assurances we had been given that Arabs would “acquiesce” in Bernadotte plan if supported by US–UK and might even vote for it. Parties have had ample opportunities in past to accept diplomatic force majeure as explanation to their own peoples but have shown no inclination to do so. Result has been that we have been victimized by choice between accepting rebuffs (which we have done) or exerting pressures beyond limits imposed by maintenance friendly relations as well as by obligations under Charter. Despite tortuous course of Palestine problem we have consistently maintained position that solution must be (1) by peaceful means, (2) through the UN, and (3) without acceptance of unilateral responsibilities by US. If Rhodes armistice negotiations continue to produce successful results, new possibilities for settlement through normal processes may open up. Recent news on that is encouraging. In any event, we shall keep in close touch with Ethridge and British and do everything we can to bring about settlement by peaceful processes. We do not exclude line of approach you suggest but are inclined to view that for time being: processes of conciliation should develop much more precisely the positions of the parties.1

Acheson

1 This telegram was repeated to Jerusalem for Mr. Ethridge and to London. Additionally, the Department informed Mr. Ethridge that “Our thought has been that PCC should initially endeavor to find common ground for agreement among parties without regard to preconceived ideas of our own about final settlement. Only if impasse is reached would we, as PCC member, wish to put forward terms of settlement, in which event we would consult with other members PCC as well as British. Emphasis in US position has been upon any settlement which would be agreeable to parties or in which they would at least acquiesce without further fighting. UK position is inclined to be more precise as to specific territorial arrangements. “We note from Griffis’ telegram that you concur in his suggestion. Please feel free at any time to make recommendations on such joint US–UK action as you believe required by situation. Altho we are not sanguine about such approach at this time, you are closest to the problem and we would wish to give your views very great weight.” (Telegram 111, February 25, 8 p. m., to Jerusalem, also identified as Unpal 36, 501.BB Palestine/2–2549)

The Consul at Jerusalem (Burdett) to the Secretary of State 501.BB Palestine/2–2649: Telegram

[Document 490]

The Consul at Jerusalem (Burdett) to the Secretary of State

secret Jerusalem, February 26, 1949—11 a. m.

167. Palun 54. Commission arrived Tel Aviv from Beirut February 24 via Turkish plane. Shortly following arrival Commission conferred with Israeli Foreign Minister and aides. Shertok welcomed Commission, proffered utmost assistance and heralded February 24 armistice agreement between Israel and Egypt as long step forward and first Jewish agreement with Arabs since 30-year old Feisal–Weizmann agreement.1

Ethridge as chairman explained Commission had just completed tour Near Eastern capitals at which it had received strong impression that Arab states were primarily concerned re Arab refugees but not necessarily as condition precedent to final peace arrangements. Arab states appeared equally concerned re Israel’s general intentions. In view signature Israeli-Egyptian agreement, Commission hoped details of peace making could quickly be arranged. Under GA resolution December 11 Commission had certain principal tasks: (1) conciliation; (2) preparation of plan re internationalization Jerusalem; (3) refugees, and (4) various economic matters Commission had questioned Arab states re these matters and now requested frank expression Israeli views.

Foreign Minister replied recent success at Rhodes had resulted from direct negotiations between Israeli and Egyptian representatives. Direct negotiations force crystalization of governmental views. When two parties negotiate concessions are made. If Israel now indicates to Commission concessions it might make, other party may not cooperate.

Shertok continued that developments in Palestine since May 15, 1948 have taken different course than that envisaged on November 29, 1947 because of Arab aggression in Palestine and exodus of Arab refugees. Return of large mass of Arab refugees would require extensive integration and expense. Resettlement must therefore logically be considered. Israel would be unable to consider repatriation. Israel believes resettlement would eventually prove of greater benefit to both Israel and Arab states. Foreign Office had undertaken preliminary research on subject, as previously promised Commission and would submit document to Commission as working-paper about March 3.

Ethridge suggested Israel might indicate whether it accepted principles set forth in GA resolution December 11 re Jerusalem and Arab refugees after which complete range of plans for implementation, could be discussed.

Shertok replied Israel could not accept abstract principles as juridical rights but added that Israel did not wish to ride roughshod over Arab rights and was ready to discuss with Arabs.

Ethridge stated Commission had found genuine desire for peace at Arab capitals but that Arabs were sincerely apprehensive re Israeli intentions. If Israel could find some way of indicating its concern and demonstrate magnanimity, Arab fears might be allayed and new spirit might prevail which would permit progress. Commission had tentatively proposed that Arab states meet with Commission to consider refugee question. Plan might or might not result. Opportunity would be provided for discussion not only of refugee problem but other problems as well. Conciliatory statement by Israel re refugees might thereby facilitate peace settlement.

Shertok seemed impressed by argument Arabs genuinely desired peace and appreciated importance of conciliatory state in view Arab psychology. Shertok added possibility of affirmative statement would be discussed with Israeli Government officials. Commission might raise at February 25 meeting with Prime Minister. Shertok would support. Shertok believed resettlement elsewhere was essential but that some Arabs might return depending on conditions of peace settlement.

Shertok also agreed to designate Foreign Office official to consult with committee of Commission re plans for internationalization Jerusalem.

Shertok also indicated re question of exchange of populations with specific reference to Jews in Arab states that Israel would be happy to receive latter.

Commission proceeding to Jerusalem February 26.

Sent Department 167; repeated Beirut 19; Damascus 5; Baghdad 6; Cairo 9; Amman 9; Jidda 3.

Burdett

1 This agreement, dated January 3, 1919, Was signed at London by the Amir Faisal on behalf of the Arab Kingdom of Hejaz and Chaim Weizmann, representing the Zionist Organization. The text is available in David Hunter Miller’s My Diary at the Conference of Paris, with Documents, vol. iii, p. 188, and in George Antonius’ The Arab Awakening: The Story of the Arab National Movement (G. P. Putnam’s Sons, New York, 1946), p. 437. The Diary was printed for the author by the Appeal Printing Company, New York, presumably in 1924. The Antonius version gives a translation in English of a stipulation to the agreement by the Amir Faisal originally in Arabic. Mr. Antonius has concluded, based on the stipulation, that the agreement was actually signed no earlier than January 4, 1919.

Memorandum of Conversation, Drafted by Mr. Robert M. McClintock 501.AA/2–2849

[Document 491]

Memorandum of Conversation, Drafted by Mr. Robert M. McClintock

confidential [Washington,] February 28, 1949.

Subject: Admission of Israel into the United Nations.

Participants: Mr. Bromley, First Secretary, British Embassy.

Mr. Kaynor—EUR

Mr. Rockwell—NE

Mr. McClintock—UNA

I1 invited Mr. Bromley of the British Embassy to call on the afternoon of February 25 to receive the Department’s oral response to the memorandum which the British Embassy had left with the Department2 on the preceding day regarding the admission of Israel into the United Nations. I explained to Mr. Bromley that we did not feel it necessary to make a written reply to his Embassy’s memorandum.

The views expressed in the United Kingdom memorandum had been given careful consideration in the Department and it was generally felt that it would be wiser to let the application of Israel for admission to the United Nations be considered alone and on its own merits in the Security Council, rather than to attempt to link the Israeli application with those of Transjordan and Ceylon. We thought that Russian vetos of the latter two applications were almost a foregone conclusion. Furthermore, should the membership issue be broadened it would probably be necessary for this Government again to advance the claims of Italy. A probable result would be that the whole membership question would be reopened, with the USSR insisting on admission of Outer Mongolia, Albania, Hungary, Roumania, and Bulgaria. With respect to the last three countries, as Mr. Bromley knew, we were contemplating action with regard to their violation of treaty obligations for the maintenance of human rights. Accordingly, to go over the same acrimonious debate involving all these countries and instigate a very probable attempt by Secretary General Lie to arrange a deal whereby all applicants would be admitted, whether good, bad, or indifferent, seemed scarcely worth the qualms which the British Foreign Office expressed with regard to the admission of Israel.

Furthermore, it seemed apparent that, whether or not the United Kingdom should vote adversely on the procedural question of reconsidering the Israeli application, the Security Council would in any event vote favorably on that application. A list of probable affirmative votes indicated that perhaps nine of the Members of the Security Council would vote for the Israeli application, with only Egypt and the United Kingdom possibly abstaining.

Mr. Bromley took careful notes of the conversation and said he would report it to London.

1 It is not clear from the record copy of this memorandum whether the “I” refers to Mr. McClintock or to G. Hayden Raynor, Special Assistant to the Director of the Office of European Affairs.

2 Memorandum No. 412/11/49 is not printed. It was dated February 23 and was handed to Messrs. Hare and McClintock by Mr. Bromley on February 24. (501.AA/2–2349)

The Consul at Jerusalem (Burdett) to the Secretary of State 501.BB Palestine/2–2849: Telegram

[Document 492]

The Consul at Jerusalem (Burdett) to the Secretary of State

secret Jerusalem, February 28, 1949—9 a. m.

170. Palun 55. [From Ethridge?] Meeting with Ben Gurion February 25 opened by Ethridge as chairman Commission who stressed refugees were main concern Arab States and constitute such human and psychological problem to them that if Israel could make advance gesture regarding refugees, beyond concessions which might be made in negotiations, general settlement would be greatly facilitated. Ethridge also emphasized Israel needed and wanted peace.

Ben Gurion agreed but strongly stressed Israeli need for military security as well as peace. Security meant survival for Israel. Question of security more acute for its people than any other because Arab States through concerted action might be able exterminate them. Prime Minister repeated Shertok’s previous statement that no one raised finger to help Jews on termination mandate. When challenged by Ethridge, Ben Gurion explained no help had been given when efforts were made to destroy Israel. Ben Gurion conceded, however, that UN had been of substantial help. Ethridge said it would be great shock to people of US to hear that Shertok and Ben Gurion had said they had not helped in creation and survival of Israel.

Regarding Prime Minister’s insistence on security all three Commissioners commented Israel could not enjoy security on basis military strength. Peace and cooperation with neighbors were essential elements, Ethridge pointed out UN alone has potentiality of collective military force. Boisanger recalled Arab distrust of Israel’s intentions and need for relaxation of tension as prerequisite for peace. Ben Gurion believed security would rest on steady increase in country through immigration. Second element would be peace and cooperation with Arabs. Third element would be world peace. Yalcin questioned whether immigration would not result in expulsion of Arabs. Ben Gurion replied not one single person has been or would be expelled to make place for others. Development of country would provide adequate space.

Ben Gurion emphasized belief Israel and Arab States have common destiny in Middle East Expressed belief not only in peace but in full-sided cooperation with Arabs including help in mutual development. Promised all possible help in search for peace. If Arabs give up objective of throwing Jews into sea, peace will be easy. Israel has no claim on Arab States but for peace and friendship.

Ethridge pointed out that Arab distrust of Israeli intentions and Israeli insistence on military security might both be resolved through deposit of negotiated treaties with UN. UN represented best and only means of guarantees at present time. Ben Gurion agreed.

Commission plans remain Jerusalem week of February 28. Boisanger and Yalcin tentatively plan return Paris and Ankara respectively March 3 for consultation with their governments returning Jerusalem about March 13. Ethridge plans remain Jerusalem working out future plans and perhaps visiting various areas of Palestine such as Galilee and Negev for background.

Repeated Baghdad 7, Beirut 20, Damascus 6, Cairo 10, Jidda 4, pouched Amman. [Ethridge?]

Burdett

The Consul at Jerusalem (Burdett) to the Secretary of State 501.BB Palestine/2–2849: Telegram

[Document 493]

The Consul at Jerusalem (Burdett) to the Secretary of State

secret Jerusalem, February 28, 1949—10 a. m.

171. Palun 56. For Acheson from Ethridge. This is summary of my impressions after tour of Arab capitals: (1) Signing of Egyptian-Israeli armistice has greatly facilitated work of Commission. Despite Bunche’s skill and patience that would not have come about except for Department’s representations. Department can take satisfaction that armistice was warmly welcomed in Israel particularly in circles below officialdom. Dozens of people have told me how happy they are about it. Government is more cautious in its approach to peace than people since government has in mind touchy nature of refugee problem, Jerusalem, upon which it has committed itself pretty far, and in making any concessions of territorial nature because of army soreness.

(2) Immediate key to peace negotiations if not to peace, is refugee problem. Arab League is not dead intellectually even if militarily ineffective. There was complete concert of approach to us with almost open request for imposed peace, for guarantees accompanying it and for beginning of solution of refugee problem as sine qua non of discussions on other questions. To all Arab Governments Commission pointed out utter unrealism of that position and Lebanese Foreign Minister sent word to me through Delatour DuPin of French delegation that he had been convinced it was unrealistic and wrong and was sending a letter immediately to other Arab representatives urging change of policy. I believe Lebanon and Transjordan therefore are willing to go ahead in spite of concerted policy. Commission plans to set date for meeting with Arab representatives under its chairman to explore further refugee problem. Out of that meeting, providing Arab policy has changed in meantime and providing Israel has accepted in principle GA resolution as to refugees, will come discussion of other phases and also arrangements for negotiations between Israel and Arabs.

(3) I pressed strongly upon Shertok that key to peace negotiations lies in hands of Israeli Government. There can be no fruitful negotiations until Arab psychosis as to refugees has been wiped out and Arab public opinion prepared for fact that not all refugees will return. Both sides now regard refugees as political pawn with Arab agitation constantly directed toward inhumanity of Israel’s apparent indifference to them. Israeli Government strongly desirous of using refugee problem as bargaining point upon which it can give something in return perhaps for other concessions. Problem must of course be solved along with all others but generous gesture at moment on part of Israeli Government even if it be words that accept principle of GA resolution, would give Commission entry to other problems. Shertok was impressed with arguments in which I was strongly backed by French and Turkish and said he would lay it before Cabinet. He also urged that I take up with Ben Gurion with his (Shertok’s) support. That was done. I am sure that Israeli Government has under consideration some action or statement as gesture to Arabs if way could be found. Department could give help by encouraging that on part of Israeli Government and by encouraging favorable response on part of Arabs if it comes about. Will have further suggestion as to what Department can do when Commission decides formally on meeting with Arabs.

(4) Moves US has made to indicate to Israeli Government that it wants peace here have been effective. Shertok’s attitude in his latest meeting with Commission and Ben Gurion’s mild approach altogether different from first meeting when Shertok insulted intelligence of Commission with repetition of GA speeches. Maybe only technique but I am inclined to doubt that. I take it as part of natural process of cooling off, of feeling of greater stability on part of government as reaction to stiffened American attitude and also as Commission’s reaction to Shertok’s rantings in first meeting. Commission has shown no disposition to be terrorized by strong talk. [Ethridge.]

Burdett

The Consul at Jerusalem (Burdett) to the Secretary of State 501.BB Palestine/2–2849: Telegram

[Document 494]

The Consul at Jerusalem (Burdett) to the Secretary of State

secret Jerusalem, February 28, 1949—11 a. m.

172. Palun 57. For Acheson from Ethridge. Since refugee problem is key to peace negotiations, would like Department’s views on my tentative ideas of approach to question. (1) It must be considered for some time relief problem for which money must be forthcoming, even after present commitments have run out. Would be most useful if US would quickly make available its own appropriation and indicate in some other way additional concern for 700,000 homeless people living largely in tents under most distressing circumstances in this weather. My own feeling is that the United States has accumulated an enormous moral and even financial responsibility in the situation in our justifiable zeal for creation of a state. Nevertheless these people have been displaced either by force, or terrorism or have fled because of their own fear. Even if the American public has not been told about Deir Yassin massacre,1 all Arabs know about it and all Arabs with whom Commission has talked have either implicitly or directly blamed US and UN for displacing 700,000 persons. Personally I feel that important element in our friendly relations with Arab states is to indicate active concern with refugees as humanitarian, political and social problem in which US must be vitally interested. Not least of our concern should be political repercussions of having so many people homeless in an already politically shaky part of the world.

(2) From standpoint of work of Commission, first step in peace negotiations is to get from Israeli Government some gesture of agreement in principle [garble2 ] resolution re refugees and if possible even more specific commitment as to number Israel will take back and method of indemnification of others.

(3) Second step would be meeting with Arab states3 to make them realize: (a) That not all refugees will go back,

(b) That they must help find homes for those to be resettled outside Israel.

(4) Provide, through experts, plan for resettlement and proposal for financing resettlement which would involve indemnification from Israel to Arab Governments, rather than individuals, roughly on basis of number taken in by each Arab state with allowances, of course, for variations in value of property held by individual Arabs in Israel, and outside help either through loans or contributions, from UN member states or both Commission more than two weeks ago asked UN for qualified expert who would be able to work out plan with technical help of engineers but has received no reply. Vitally needed as soon as possible particularly since refugee problem will require long time in solution.

(5) Obviously when time comes for agreement on refugee settlement, all Arab Governments and perhaps Israel will ask: How can we finance resettlement? It is question Commission must face. Has Department any views on it or is the American Government prepared to make any commitment either of sponsoring loans or of making direct loans? It would be most helpful if I could have some commitment to be used at proper time in negotiations. Abdullah, for instance, has said he is willing to take all refugees. In view of his state’s bankruptcy that is fantastic financially even if it is feasible technically. But it may turn out that he will have to take most of them since all other Arab states have so far indicated unwillingness and inability to take any. Commission can press other states to absorb some refugees but Dept is aware through airgrams from Missions of reluctance of any state except Transjordan to add to its problems. I have impression beyond what has been reported in airgrams that part of reluctance is due to realization that Palestinian Arabs, having lived through 30 years of political strife and having enjoyed somewhat higher standard of living than most Arabs, are more politically aware and more demanding as to living standards and would, therefore, constitute core of agitation. In view of great reluctance to absorb refugees, Arab states must be compensated with loans for projects designed to raise all living standards rather than create new problems. [Ethridge.]

Burdett

1 For information on this subject, see telegram 431, April 13, 1948, from Jerusalem, Foreign Relations, 1948, vol. v, Part 2, p. 817.

2 Presumably the word “toward” was intended.

3 Mr. Ethridge, on February 28, advised the Department of State that “On February 27 Commission agreed to invite Arab States to send representatives to meeting at Beirut on March 21 with Commission. Invitations just going out but all states except Egypt indicated to us on our tour that they would accept.” (telegram 174, identified also as Palun 60, from Jerusalem, 501.BB Palestine/2–2849)

The Consul at Jerusalem (Burdett) to the Secretary of State 501.BB Palestine/2–2849: Telegram

[Document 495]

The Consul at Jerusalem (Burdett) to the Secretary of State

top secret Jerusalem, February 28, 1949—noon.

173. Palun 58. For Acheson from Ethridge. I am in agreement with principle of second paragraph of Deptel 111, February 25.1

Have considered that Commission has mandate only as to presentation of plan for internationalization of Jerusalem but believe that even on that Israel and Arab states should come as close to agreement as possible and Commission should take any agreement into consideration in making its own plan. Internationalization is noble ideal but Jerusalem must be made a going concern as city in which people live and need water and lights and garbage collection.

Only other rigid principle enunciated by GA is on refugees, but I do not regard it as nearly so specific as instruction on Jerusalem. Otherwise my position has been exactly that set out in first sentence of your second paragraph.

Have been at pains to talk to British. In Cairo had meeting with Sir Ronald Campbell, Chapman Andrews and Sir John Troutbeck; in Transjordan with Kirkbride and Glubb; in Baghdad with Sir Henry Mack and John Richmond. In all talks except at Cairo, British emphasized that their main desire was to liquidate bad and expensive situation. Campbell and Andrews, stressing fact they were not speaking for their governments, said, nevertheless, primary British concern had been for land access from Egypt through Transjordan up to north, presumably to Iraq [oil?] fields. Andrews contended that road could not be built across southern Negev without great expense and indicated British wanted to hold on to GazA–BeershebA–Jericho–Amman road. I pointed out that Jews hold great part of road and world hardly in negotiations give it up. British conceivably might urge Arabs in negotiation to hold out either for road or for free use. However, we have not got to territorial questions.

In general, it would be most useful if Department would concert its policy with British so that they would be constructive rather than obstructionist. However, I have given no encouragement anywhere, although strongly pressed by Arabs, that there would be any unilateral guarantee by US or bilateral guarantee by US and UK of peace terms. It is true that Arabs profess to have no confidence in UN but I believe their concerted insistence upon two-power guarantee is political move to place them in position to say to their people that peace has been imposed upon them by Big Powers. Prime Minister of Egypt said almost that to me. Ben Gurion in stressing need for security did not go so far but spoke of guarantees. I strongly countered that since UN had been the mother of Israel and perhaps its savior by giving Israel time to arm after first truce, he would have to rely upon moral, sanctionable and military force of UN. He dropped argument and as set out in telegram 170, twenty-eighth, reacted affirmatively to deposit of treaties with UN.

Further along in negotiations, we will need all the help we can get. It is, however, too early for any joint action by US–UK except for conferences that make clear each government’s position to each other and to me. [Ethridge.]

Burdett

1 For paragraph 2 of No. 111, see the quoted portion in the first paragraph of footnote 1 to telegram 89, February 25, p. 772 [Pg. 772 includes portions of Doc. 489 and Doc. 490].

Memorandum by the Director of the Office of Near Eastern and African Affairs (Satterthwaite) to the Secretary of State 867N.48/3–149

[Document 496]

Memorandum by the Director of the Office of Near Eastern and African Affairs (Satterthwaite) to the Secretary of State

secret [Washington,] March 1, 1949.

Subject: Necessity for early liquidation of Arab refugee problem.

Discussion:

It is the considered opinion of this office that measures for the solution of the Arab refugee problem must be well advanced prior to the termination of the United Nations relief program on August 31, 1949, if a political crisis in the Near East is to be averted. In view of the difficult economic position of the Arab states, and the impossibility of launching large-scale development projects in the near future as a means of assimilating large numbers of refugees, there are only two means of beginning to liquidate the problem during the coming months.

The first is the stimulation of “sample” development projects, limited in scope and in financing, which would provide work for some of the refugees and, in some cases, facilitate their gradual assimilation into the countries now harboring them. This approach is regarded as an interim measure, pending the realization of larger scale development projects. NEA, in conjunction with other interested offices, is engaged in drawing up plans for such limited projects.

The second means of liquidating the refugee problem is, of course, that of repatriation. Although Israel has made it clear that it will not take back the majority of the refugees, every effort should be made to persuade Israel, in the interests of its long range relations with the Arab states, to accept the return of a substantial number. (It will be recalled that the Arab population of the Jewish state as envisaged under the partition plan of November 29, 1947 was 500,000.)

In view of the expected return of peaceful conditions in Palestine in the near future, it is felt that every effort should be made to convince Israel of the necessity of contributing to the solution of the refugee problem by initiating a gradual repatriation program now. Attempts by Israel to defer action this problem pending the achievement of a formal peace will result in a fait accompli, since the present accelerated Jewish immigration into Israel will have totally preempted the lands and housing on which Arab repatriation depends.

We believe that failure to commence the liquidation of the refugee problem prior to termination of the relief program will have the gravest consequences upon the political and economic structure of the Arab states. The Arab states presently represent a highly vulnerable area for Soviet exploitation, and the presence of 700,000 destitute, idle refugees provides the likeliest channel for such exploitation. In addition, their continued presence will further undermine the weakened economy of the Arab states, and may well provide the motivation for the overthrow of certain of the Arab Governments. Moreover, unless Israel demonstrates its willingness to assist by repatriation in settling the refugee question, both the possibility of a permanent settlement in Palestine and the establishment of any basis for cooperative relations between Israel and the Arabs will be adversely affected. It is felt that the relative absence of agitation and disorders up to the present arising from the refugee situation can be explained only because the majority of the refugees confidently expected to be returned to their homes.

In the opinion of this office, there is little likelihood that the Conciliation Commission will succeed in implementing its instructions with respect to refugees under the December 11 resolution unless it has the strongest support from this Government from the very outset of its negotiations. (Tab A)1 Mr. Ethridge has expressed his concern over Israel’s attitude towards the refugee problem, and has indicated that he would welcome this Government’s support in carrying out his task. Such support will, moreover, have a favorable effect upon our relations with the Arab states, which strongly desire our assistance in this matter. (Tab B.) It is therefore recommended that you sign the attached draft telegram (Tab C), which is designed as a preliminary and exploratory approach to this question.

1 Tabbed material cited in this paragraph not found attached, but, for the telegram as actually sent, see telegram 144, March 9, at Tel Aviv, p. 804 [Pg. 804 includes portions of Doc. 513 and Doc. 514].

Memorandum of Conversation, by Mr. Stuart W. Rockwell of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs 501.BB Palestine/3–149

[Document 497]

Memorandum of Conversation, by Mr. Stuart W. Rockwell of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs

confidential [Washington,] March 1, 1949.

Subject: Status of Jerusalem

Participants: Mr. Tom Bromley, First Secretary, British Embassy

NEA—Mr. Satterthwaite

NE—Mr. Rockwell

Mr. Bromley called at his request to leave the attached self-explanatory memorandum concerning the status of Jerusalem.1

After reading the memorandum we told Mr. Bromley that it would not be possible for the Department at the present time to give the Foreign Office a definite statement of this Government’s final policy regarding the status of Jerusalem. We said that the primary responsibility for recommendations concerning the future status of the Holy City has been placed upon the Palestine Conciliation Commission by the United Nations, and that the Department was awaiting with interest the Commission’s recommendations in this regard. We said, however, that the Department could now assure the Foreign Office that the United States Government supported the principle of the internationalization of the whole Jerusalem area, as set forth in the General Assembly Resolution of December 11, 1948.

We informed Mr. Bromley that the present trend of thinking on the working level in the Department was that in view of the financial and administrative difficulties of establishing a fullfledged international regime in Jerusalem, it might be possible to set up an arrangement whereby Israelis and Arabs (the latter presumably Transjordanians) would separately administer sections of the City, the division to be agreed upon by them, under the general supervision of some representation of the United Nations. This representation might take the form of the Office of a United Nations Commissioner, which would see to such matters as protection of and free access to the Holy Places, and unimpeded access to the whole city. We also informed Mr. Bromley that current thinking in the Department did not incline to the idea of internationalization of the Old City only and the incorporation of Jewish Jerusalem in Israel, as mentioned in paragraph 3 of the attached memorandum.

We pointed out to Mr. Bromley that should Jerusalem be inter nationalized in a manner similar to the Department’s line of thought set forth above, there would be no question of Transjordan’s “losing the Old City” which would largely remain under Transjordan administration although Transjordan sovereignty would not apply.

In conclusion, we assured Mr. Bromley once more of the United States Government’s support of the principle of internationalization of the whole Jerusalem area, but reiterated our inability to make at the present time a definite statement of our own policy as regards the exact fashion in which the city might be internationalized, in view of the fact that the Palestine Conciliation Commission had not as yet made its recommendations. We stated that the Department would be pleased to receive any views that the British Foreign Office might have as to how the internationalization of Jerusalem might be achieved.

In reply to our query, Mr. Bromley said that our verbal exposition would serve as a satisfactory reply to the British memorandum.

1 Undated memorandum not printed. The Department of State summarized the memorandum in telegram 127, identified also as Unpal 44, March 3, 7 p. m., to Jerusalem, as follows: “FonOff has heard that US Rep PCC, reflecting US policy, taking strong line re internationalization Jerusalem. FonOff interested know how far US will seek pursue this policy even against Israeli wishes. General policy HMG support of internationalization but they do not feel it is for them to restrict Abdullah from seeking whatever arrangement he thinks best. If USG intends support internationalization firmly, above Brit attitude may lead to divergence from US-French policy. HMG also worried that view practical difficulties internationalization whole city, Israeli proposal will be adopted that new city be part Israel and old city international. This totally unfair to Transjordan and HMG could not accept. HMG could only support internationalization whole city.” (501.BB Palestine/3–349)

Editorial Note [Document 498]

Editorial Note

In a cablegram dated March 1, Mr. Bunche advised that the Egyptian garrison of 2,900 men at al-Faluja, with their military equipment and personal possessions, had been evacuated across the Egyptian border, pursuant to Article 3 of the Egyptian-Israeli armistice agreement. The text of his communication is printed in United Nations, Official Records of the Security Council, Fourth Tear, Supplement for March 1949, page 7. Hereinafter, these official records will be identified as SC, 4th yr., with indication of date of supplement.

Message Released by the United Nations Security Council on March 1949 IO Files

[Document 499]

Message Released by the United Nations Security Council on March 1949

March 2, 1949

S–1272

Cablegram Dated 2 March 1949 From the Acting Mediator to the Secretary-General Concerning Armistice Negotiations

For President of the Security Council: In pursuance of resolution of Security Council of 16 November 1948, armistice negotiations under the Chairmanship of the United Nations between representatives of Israel and Transjordan, and Israel and Lebanon are being held simultaneously at Rhodes and Ras en Nakoura (on the Lebanese Palestine border) respectively. In both of these negotiations the Delegations carry credentials from their respective governments authorizing them to negotiate and conclude an armistice agreement. Both negotiations began on 1 March.1

1 The Israeli Delegation, headed by Mr. Shiloah, arrived at Rhodes on March 1; the Transjordanian Delegation, headed by Col. Ahmed Sidgi el-Jundi had arrived the previous day (United Nations press releases PAL/449 and PAL/448, respectively, dated March 1 and February 28).

The Consul at Jerusalem (Burdett) to the Secretary of State 501.BB Palestine/3–249: Telegram

[Document 500]

The Consul at Jerusalem (Burdett) to the Secretary of State

confidential Jerusalem, March 2, 1949—2 p. m.

177. Palun 62. On March 1 Commission telegraphed Foreign Ministers seven Arab League states that, wishing pave way for general settlement Palestine question and reestablishment of peace, had decided to invite governments of Arab states to send representatives for purpose preliminary exchange views with Commission. Exchange views would concern refugee problem, solution of which was matter of urgency, and might eventually, if desire were expressed in course of conversation, be extended to other questions.1 Commission considered owing ease of communications, Beirut would be particularly suited to serve as place of meeting and that March 21 would be suit able for opening. Commission requested Foreign Ministers to communicate whether agreeable and to inform names of representatives.

Commission representatives each agreed that its government would be requested inform respective missions at Arab capitals re invitation and to urge that Arab Governments accept invitation as means of cooperating with Commission and facilitating progress toward peace in Near East.

If Department approves, ITS Delegation suggests US Missions at Arab capitals be instructed accordingly.2

Burdett

1 Mr. Shiloah, in a conversation with Mr. McDonald on February 28 (reported in telegram 164, March 1, from Tel Aviv, not printed; 501.BB Palestine/3–149), had advised of his Government’s warning to the Palestine Conciliation Commission about holding an all-Arab conference on refugees on the grounds that no solution for the problem would be produced; that no Arab State would dare to take a cooperative position at the conference; and that the conference would develop into a political gathering where the Arabs would harden their attitudes against an armistice and a peace settlement (telegram 167, March 1, from Tel Aviv, 867N.01/3–149). The Commission decided to go ahead with the conference, however, since “such step might facilitate progress toward peace and risk would be fully justified. In fact committee [Commission] feeling is that there is no other approach possible at the moment,” (Telegram 1991, identified also as Palun 73, March 7, noon, from Jerusalem, 501.BB Palestine/3–749)

2 The Department, in a circular telegram of March 3, 5 a. m., to Cairo, Jidda, Baghdad, Beirut, Damascus, and Amman, instructed the diplomatic officers at those posts to take appropriate action along the lines of the second paragraph of telegram 177 (501.BB Palestine/3–349).

The Consul at Jerusalem (Burdett) to the Secretary of State 501.BB Palestine/3–249: Telegram

[Document 501]

The Consul at Jerusalem (Burdett) to the Secretary of State

restricted Jerusalem, March 2, 1949—3 p. m.

178. Palun 63. Commission on March 1 agreed on text of first progress report to SYG of UN.1 Text being pouched Department.

Main sections of primarily narrative account Commission activities thus far were: 1. Establishment official headquarters at Government House Jerusalem.

2. Concentration on conciliation under GA resolution December 11.

3. Commission’s opinion Acting Mediator rather than Commission should conclude armistice negotiations under SC resolution November 16.

4. Quotation UNGA instructions re Jerusalem, Holy Places and refugees.

5. Establishment [garble2 ] committee re Jerusalem; meetings with Griffis re refugees and steps to obtain refugees expert; reference to Holy Places based on GA resolution December 11.

6. Brief account of official tour of Near East capitals for preliminary exchange of views.

7. Commission opinion Arab states and Israel were “definitely favorable to peace.” Further opinion, however, task would not be accomplished quickly or easily.

8. Commission action to invite Arab states to meet Commission Beirut March 21.

Yalcin and Yenisey of Turkish delegation departed Jerusalem for Ankara March 2; Boisanzer of French delegation plans depart for Paris March 4 or 5; both plan return Near East several days before March 21. Commission will, however, not suspend its activities but will continue work through committee[s] especially that on Jerusalem.

Sent Department 378, repeated Beirut 22, Damascus 8, Baghdad 8, Tel Aviv 15. Pouched Jidda 5, Cairo 11, Amman 10.

Burdett

1 The report, dated March 1 at Jerusalem, is printed in United Nations, Official Records of the Fourth Session of the General Assembly, Ad Hoc Political Committee, Annex to the Summary Records of Meetings, Volume II, 1949 (hereinafter identified as GA, 4th sess., Ad Hoc Political Committee, Annex, with the appropriate volume number), p. 1.

2 Presumably, the word “special” was intended.

The United States Representative at the United Nations (Austin) to the Secretary of State 501.BB Palestine/3–249: Telegram

[Document 502]

The United States Representative at the United Nations (Austin) to the Secretary of State

secret
priority New York, March 2, 1949—11:04 p. m.

258. Telegram from Bunche received at Lake Success evening March 2, reports that Vigier1 informs him Israeli-Lebanese negotiations are running into difficulties. Israelis unwilling evacuate Lebanese territory while Syrians remain on Lebanese front. Also object to an international frontier armistice commission, stating that the frontier will require rectification for security reasons.2

Bunche has received no word from Syrians regarding acceptance his invitation to armistice negotiations.

Israeli-Egyptian armistice commission initial meeting went off smoothly in cordial atmosphere.

Israeli–Trans-Jordan negotiations going slowly while Trans-Jordan delegation waiting clearance by Amman of agenda on cease-fire discussions.3

Austin

1 Henri Vigier, Mr. Bunche’s Deputy in connection with the armistice negotiations between Israel and Lebanon.

2 The Lebanese Foreign Minister informed Minister Pinkerton that Lebanon “would not yield one centimeter territory and would not discuss in armistice negotiations revision of frontiers.” (telegram 98, March 4, 6 p. m., from Beirut) The Department of State, on March 5, instructed Mr. McDonald to “ask ForMin whether report concerning request by Israeli repr during Israeli-Leb armistice negots for amendment Leb-Pal frontiers is correct and if so whether request reflects formal position Israeli Govt.” (telegram 133 to Tel Aviv) (Both telegrams are filed under 867N.01/3–349)

3 Amman reported, on March 2, that at the Transjordanian-Israeli negotiations on Rhodes, Mr. Bunche had proposed “that before discussing armistice, formal cease-fire agreement covering all Arab Legion fronts (not only Jerusalem) be signed. So far question Iraqi fronts not brought up.” (telegram 78, 867N.01/3–249)

Memorandum by the Assistant Secretary of State for United Nations Affairs (Rusk) to the Under Secretary of State (Webb) 501.BB Palestine/3–349

[Document 503]

Memorandum by the Assistant Secretary of State for United Nations Affairs (Rusk) to the Under Secretary of State (Webb)

confidential [Washington,] March 3, 1949.

Subject: Assignment of Mr. George McGhee1 as U.S. Coordinator on U.S. Palestine Refugee Matters.

1. It is becoming increasingly clear that a final settlement of the Palestine question will turn upon our ability to obtain some solution to the complicated question of Palestine refugees. There are now some 700,000 such refugees in Arab held Palestine and in neighboring Arab states. Only an insignificant fraction of these can be absorbed in the communities where they are now located. It is roughly estimated that not more than a fourth might be returned to their former homes in Israel in connection with a final peace settlement. The present United Nations program is a straight relief program which will terminate in September and it is not expected that the United Nations will undertake any long-range responsibility for these refugees.

The bulk of these refugees must be resettled in Arab–Palestine and in the neighboring Arab states. To do this, specific projects for their settlement must be worked out and supported by means of Ex-Im Bank loans, International Bank loans, private capital, or other resources not now committed. Such projects would include irrigation and drainage projects which will make new lands available for settlement. Construction work on such projects would itself absorb a considerable number of refugee laborers.

The national interest of the United States is so heavily involved in the solution of this problem that we should detail immediately an American of high rank, diplomatic ability and sound judgment as a Special Assistant to the Secretary of State with personal rank of Minister, to mobilize the public and private resources of the United States which might be brought to bear on this problem.

It is strongly recommended that Mr. George McGhee be named to this post. Mr. McGhee’s experience and performance with regard to Greek assistance, his knowledge of the Department and of other U.S. agencies concerned, and his broad political and business experience would make him admirably suited for this assignment. I hope that you will agree and will put this assignment to Mr. McGhee in the strongest terms.2

1 Coordinator for Aid to Greece and Turkey.

2 Mr. McGhee was named to the new post.

Editorial Note [Document 504]

Editorial Note

The Security Council, on March 3, resumed consideration of the application of Israel for membership in the United Nations; see the second editorial note, page 766 [Pg. 766 includes portions of Doc. 481, Doc. 482, Doc. 483, and Doc. 484]. During the ensuing discussion, Senator Austin announced that “The United States fully supports and will vote affirmatively on the application of the State of Israel for membership in the United Nations.” The text of his statement is printed in United Nations, Official Records of the Security Council, Fourth Year (hereinafter identified as SC, 4th yr.), No. 16, page 8.

On March 4, Senator Austin submitted the following draft resolution to the Council:

“The Security Council,

“Having received and considered the application of Israel for membership in the United Nations,

“Decides in its judgment that Israel is a peace-loving State and is able and willing to carry out the obligations contained in the Charter, and

“Recommends to the General Assembly that it admit Israel to membership in the United Nations.” (ibid., No. 17, page 8)

The resolution came to a vote the same day and was adopted by nine votes to one (Egypt). The United Kingdom abstained (ibid.,) page 14).

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Secretary of State 890E.00/3–449

[Document 505]

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Secretary of State 1

secret [Washington,] March 4, 1949.

Subject: Proposals for strengthening Lebanese-American Relations

Participants: The Secretary—Mr. Acheson

Dr. Charles Malik, Minister of Lebanon

NE—Mr. Clark

The Minister said that on behalf of his Government and on his own behalf he wished to congratulate me on my appointment and to wish me much success. I thanked him for his kind remarks and Dr. Malik proceeded to a discussion of the points he wished to present for our consideration.

Dr. Malik stated that during the past two years he had been in frequent contact with the State Department on United Nations problems of world-wide interest. While these problems had also been of importance to Lebanon he now wished to discuss Lebanese-American relations in a more specific sense, since it was his conviction that it was in the long-range interest of both our countries for such relations to be strengthened. He said that a draft treaty of Commerce and Friendship had been drawn up several years ago but that it had never been signed. What he wished to propose would go far beyond the terms of that treaty.

Dr. Malik said that Lebanon remembered with gratitude the active interest that the United States, under the leadership of President Roosevelt, had manifested in the achievement of Lebanon’s independence, especially during the Free French crisis of 1943.2 Moreover, it looked back upon nearly a century of friendly assistance by American philanthropic and religious organizations which have contributed much to the educational and cultural advancement of Lebanon and the entire Near East. He declared that Lebanon was unique throughout the whole of Asia and perhaps Africa as well as an oriental country which identified itself with Western Christian civilization. By virtue of this unique position, however, it was exposed to certain threats by more powerful forces stemming from the Islamic Arab hinterland to the east and the State of Israel to the south. He felt that the threat from these sources was real and dangerous and that it was not to the long-range interest of the United States to see Lebanon swallowed up by one or the other of them, whether it was from an Arab state such as Syria or Transjordan, as was sometimes heard discussed in these times, or from the Jewish State to the south. Lebanon required protection by the Western Christian states with which it had identified itself in culture and religion.

I inquired as to whether the Lebanese considered that the State of Israel constituted a genuine threat and if so in what manner and degree. Was it the pressure of continued Jewish immigration into Palestine that was feared, or was it something more? He replied that the Lebanese do in fact greatly fear Israel and that this fear was shared by all other Arab countries in the Near East. Continued Jewish immigration would, of course, increase the potential of Israel, but Israel already constituted a vast new factor in Middle Eastern affairs. For one thing, the Jews had powerful friends everywhere in the world, including the major countries. Zionism was a dynamic force and the people of Israel were energetic and possessed industrial and other potentials to a far greater degree than the Arabs now have.

He went on to say that, since I had asked this question, he would like to state his firm conviction that until the fears of the Arab world he had just described were relieved by some positive guarantee on the part of the great powers and particularly the United States, the peace and well-being of the Near East would continue to be in doubt. He suggested that it would be most helpful if the United States Government should issue, preferably in a statement by the President, a declaration that the status quo in the Near East must be maintained and that no further expansion on the part of Israel would be permitted. In this regard, he would like to express further his belief that the most important prerequisite to the establishment of a firm and lasting peace in the Near East would be for the United States, Great Britain and France jointly to agree on a common policy with respect to the political settlement of outstanding problems and on plans for the economic and cultural development of the entire area. I thanked him for this suggestion regarding consultation with Great Britain and France and said that it would receive our full consideration.

Returning to his proposals for closer relations between Lebanon and the United States, Dr. Malik said that Lebanon, by virtue of its unique position of Western orientation in the Arab world, would continue to need strong support from some Western power and hoped that such support would be forthcoming from the United States. Should it be disappointed in this hope, it was Dr. Malik’s personal opinion that Lebanon should in that event turn to some other source of active assistance such as, for example, France or the United Kingdom. I replied that I believed that Dr. Malik had correctly stated the interest of the United States in Lebanon and that we would continue to explore ways for strengthening our economic and other relations with both Lebanon and other countries of the Near East. I pointed out that the concept of our associating ourselves with other powers for defense purposes was a radical departure from our traditional policies and one with which I was sure the Minister would appreciate we must proceed slowly. I said that, for example, we had not yet completed our discussions with respect to the proposed North Atlantic Pact and that this question would continue to occupy our attention for some time. Nevertheless, we would be glad to explore with Dr. Malik the source of the Lebanese fears he had outlined, and the measures by which he might propose to relieve these fears. With reference to his statement that such proposals would go far beyond the provisions of our proposed treaty of Commerce and Navigation I inquired whether he envisaged taking them up in advance of the treaty or to discuss them along with preparations for concluding this treaty. Dr. Malik replied that he envisaged following both lines of approach and in fact all possible lines. I said that I thought he might wish to discuss the specific proposals he had in mind with Mr. Satterthwaite and at an appropriate stage I would be glad to renew our personal discussion of the proposals.

Dr. Malik said there was one other matter he would also like to discuss and that was the financial assistance of which the Lebanese had great need. A request had been made some time ago by Lebanon for an International Bank loan and he hoped Lebanon could count on the support of the United States for this request. I replied that, as Dr. Malik was aware, it has been our policy to put foremost the question of reestablishing peace in the Near East. As soon as that had been done we would be in a position to consider a program of technical assistance to the entire area, as envisaged in Point IV of the President’s inaugural address. In parting, Dr. Malik stated that, in accordance with my suggestion, he would get in touch with Mr. Satterthwaite and discuss the specific proposals he had in mind for strengthening Lebanese-American relations.3

1 Drafted by Harlan B. Clark of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs.

2 For documentation on this subject, see Foreign Relations, 1943, vol. iv, pp. 953 ff.

3 The conversation between Messrs. Satterthwaite and Malik took place on March 8. The latter raised the question of Lebanese security, remarking that “the Arab League had proven ineffective as a means of protecting the Arab world against the dynamic force of Zionism and at least some of the Arab states and especially Lebanon believed that only one or more of the Great Powers could afford it the degree of protection it required.” The Arab League, he said, “had never been effective at all in economic and cultural matters and had shown itself a failure in military affairs.” He continued that “His Arab friends kept appealing for some form of public assurance by the United States which had shown itself to be so friendly to Israel that expansion of Israel at the expense of neighboring states would not be permitted.” Mr. Satterthwaite replied that “it would not be in accordance with the tradditional policy of this Government to issue a unilateral statement of the sort envisaged by Dr. Malik. In any event, the fact was that a peace settlement in Palestine had not yet been reached and that the delineation of Israel’s frontiers and related questions were now terms of reference of the Conciliation Commission in which the United States was represented. It would undoubtedly prejudice the working of that Commission for the United States to intervene unilaterally at the present time in the manner suggested. More basic, however, was the United States’ conviction that the Charter of the United Nations provided guarantees to meet a contingency such as feared by Lebanon, and the United States believed that its good faith in upholding the Charter had already amply been demonstrated in the Azerbaijan dispute and elsewhere. Certainly it would be premature to make an announcement concerning the frontiers of Israel prior to their determination by the peace settlement and any statement which this Government might issue would, of course, have to be carefully phrased so as not to impugn the integrity of any single state.”

The Minister then suggested that “if some public announcement could not be made at this time, the United States would be prepared to reassure the various Arab Governments in confidence that the status quo in the Near East would be maintained.” Mr. Clark’s memorandum recording the conversation gives no indication of a reply by Mr. Satterthwaite (890.00/3–849).

Mr. John W. Halderman to the Acting Assistant Chief of the Division of Dependent Area Affairs (Cargo) 501.BB Palestine/3–1749

[Document 506]

Mr. John W. Halderman to the Acting Assistant Chief of the Division of Dependent Area Affairs (Cargo)

confidential Jerusalem, March 5, 1949.

Dear Bill: The enclosed paper,1 prepared by me in consultation with the delegation and Bill Burdett, and also the French member of the Jerusalem Committee and the French Consul General, was submitted to the Jerusalem Committee on the third. I emphasized that it was not an American proposal, but simply a working paper to serve as a basis of discussion.

The Committee has now approved the first part. The purpose of this section (under “I”) was to enable the Committee to arrive at a general basic position prior to undertaking talks with the states concerned. Now that this preliminary stage has been reached, we are taking steps to get in touch with Israeli and Transjordanese representatives, and hope to be able to discuss the matter with the other Arab states in Beirut later on this month.

I envision these talks as the real beginning of the work on the Jerusalem problem. Up to now we have had nothing but general statements in which Governments have presented their positions much as they do in General Assembly debates. We hope that when we get together in more of a negotiating atmosphere, and get down to actual cases, opportunities may be presented to work out something. We also plan to urge Israel and TJ to proceed at once to a division of the city into Jewish and Arab areas, which may become administrative areas in the permanent regime of the city. We will suggest that our consuls are available as a committee of experts to assist in this. I understood from General Riley when he was here that they would not undertake this matter in the Rhodes talks, but even if they do touch upon it, the fact that we are in touch with the respective Governments here should avoid any confusion.

When I said that the Committee had approved the first part of the paper, I should have added that they did so with the amendments indicated on the copy enclosed. The deletion concerning the suggested court is rather interesting, as it resulted from a fundamental different approach on my part from that of the French and Turks. It seemed to me most natural that when there are conflicts of jurisdiction, the differences should be settled judicially. However, they are not accustomed to this idea, and would leave the decision in the hands of the U.N. authority—the executive branch, so to speak. I don’t think they feel very strongly about it. The deletion was made because it did not seem essential to decide upon it right now.

Another point which may be difficult is the French desire to have an international police subject to the United Nations authority. So far they haven’t been precise about it, except that they feel there should definitely be such police in those Holy Places which shelter more than one religion or sect. In particular they mention the Holy Sepulchre, and they have given me startling stories of the jealousies and actual conflicts that occur there.

I [have] already reported by telegram the point made to me by the French in our private consultation that the United Nations authority should consist of a committee consisting of representatives of the U.S., France, Turkey, an Arab and a Jew.2 This is the reason why, in the working paper, I merely referred to a “United Nations Authority”, without describing it.

The second part of this paper is also intended to serve as a basis of discussion among ourselves and so that we will have various points in mind when we undertake our consultations. We haven’t yet discussed this part of the paper, except that the French member raised an objection to having the U.N. Authority report to the Trusteeship Council. In his view, the Trusteeship Council is associated with areas incapable of self-government, and not yet ready for independence. We did not debate the point, as it was really out of order, as he admitted.

Our general plan is gradually to develop a plan for Jerusalem as a result of our own work, and the consultations we will have. We hope that as a result of these consultations, the plan, when complete, will be acceptable to both sides, as well, of course, as to the U.N. This is being optimistic. We have little reason to expect, up to now, that the parties will give at all. But assuming we are successful to this extent, it would be possible to appoint the U.N. representative provided for in the resolution, and then appoint some committees of eminent experts in various fields to collaborate with him in working out detailed plans in such fields as public utilities, finance, etc. This is mostly to acquaint you a general line of thought, mostly my own at this point, though we have had some very general discussion along these lines in the Committee.

[Here follow personal observations and a request for comments on the letter.]

Sincerely yours,

John W. Halderman

[Enclosure]

The Internationalization of Jerusalem

i. basic requirements of the international regime

A. The City of Jerusalem shall be governed by the authorities and organs hereafter denominated.

B. A United Nations Authority with power to regulate: 1. Protection for and free access to the Holy Places.

2. Protection of human rights and the rights of minority groups.

3. Common public services.

4. External relations.

C. An International Judiciary.

D. Local democratic self-government in Jewish and Arab areas respectively as to all matters not placed within the jurisdiction of the international authority.

E. Provision for financing the city.

F. Provision for the maintenance of peace and order in the city.

ii. points to be included in statute

A. Jerusalem is constituted as an International City. Its boundaries shall be … (as described in the resolution).

B. A United Nations authority shall have power to make ordinances regulating: 1. Protection for and free access to the Holy Places.

2. Protection of human rights and the rights of minority groups, using as a guide, to the extent possible, the United Nations Declaration approved by the General Assembly in 1948.

3. The demilitarization of the city and the preservation of public order. Local law and order to be maintained by the respective Jewish and Arab administration.

4. Financial and budgetary matters. The local Arab and Jewish administrations shall make contributions to the international authority in amounts to be determined from time to time by the Authority.

5. Common public services.

6. Free access to and from Jerusalem and within the city for persons and goods.

7. Administration of special districts or supervision of neutralized areas as may be provided in the present statute.

8. External relations.

D. [sic] Local democratic self-government in Jewish and Arab areas respectively as to all matters not placed within the jurisdiction of the United Nations Administration.

E. An International Tribunal to be composed of three Judges to be selected by the President of the International Court of Justice, to decide questions relating to the competence of the organs of government herein provided, including the local Arab and Jewish administrations, and jurisdictional conflicts between courts, including religious courts.

F. The United Nations authority shall report to the Trusteeship Council, and shall also report to the Security Council on matters relating to the security and integrity of the international city.

G. The United Nations authority may, with the consent of the local Jewish and Arab administrations, provide for Jerusalem citizen ship. In the absence of such provision, the right to participate in the government of the city shall not depend upon citizenship in any state.

H. Mount Scopus shall be under Jewish administration, but subject to demilitarization and supervision of the United Nations Authority.

I. Frontier inspections and other incidents of international boundaries shall be carried out on the perimeter and not on the demarcation line within the city.

J. The United Nations Authority shall cooperate with the local administrations with a view to the preservation and development of the physical aspects of Jerusalem, and the promotion of the economic, social and cultural welfare of its inhabitants.

1 Below.

2 The telegram referred to is No. 185 (identified also as Palun 66), March 2, 6 p. m., from Jerusalem. At one point in the telegram it is stated that the “French objected to single UN representative on grounds inadequate to responsibilities, insufficient prestige, inadequate representation Christian interest … no certainty who representative would be, might well be Latin American, no strong objection to this, but would not have tradition of interest Jerusalem comparable, for example, to France, US. French-Turkish formula would exclude Soviet, and inclusion US should satisfy divergent Christian elements with interest in Jerusalem.… In defending single UN representative we did not state doubt US willingness continue official responsibility as Commission member for Jerusalem indefinitely. We considered five member commission unwieldy, and mistake to appoint representative on basis nationality. Should be person of proved ability to get along with both sides.” (501.BB Palestine/3–249)

The Minister in Syria (Keeley) to the Secretary of State 501.BB Palestine/3–549: Airgram

[Document 507]

The Minister in Syria (Keeley) to the Secretary of State

confidential Damascus, March 5, 1949.

A–67. Following communication to Prime Minister (mytel 109 March 51 ) of Department’s support of PCC invitation to Beirut meeting of Arab states (second paragraph Ethridge’s Palun 62 March 22 and Depcirtel March 3, 5 a. m.3 ) which Prime Minister said Syria would accept, I took occasion to express my hope that Syrian representatives would respond to Ethridge’s suggestion when here that they eschew generalities and give PCC the benefit of their thinking in specific terms. The Prime Minister assured me that he would be explicit. He said that heretofore two fears had stood in way of complete frankness: (1) Adverse Syrian public opinion which no politician had had courage to face and (2) Probable hostile (UN-backed Israeli coalition against Arabs. Believing firmly that no country could any longer afford isolationism, he has been endeavoring to educate Syrian public opinion in that sense and is determined resolutely to pursue a positive policy of collaboration with West. He recognizes that, as part of the price of effective western friendship, concessions must be made and settlement reached on Palestine issue. Hoping that PCC will be means of assuring Arabs fair settlement, Syria is prepared to cooperate with it in good faith. I told him that I personally was convinced of Ethridge’s integrity, independence and courageous attachment to ideals of justice and felt certain that within realm of realities he would insist upon fair deal to all concerned. I warned him, however, not to expect too much, that Arab and Israeli ideas of justice were far apart as their ideas of justice were undoubtedly wide of abstract justice and that what might be within realm of attainable might well be far from Arab hopes. Yet, in my opinion, best hope of peaceful settlement lay in frank statement to PCC of Arab views and sincere collaboration with PCC in trying to reach satisfactory compromise. I knew, I said, from past statements that Syrians would prefer to throw the Israeli into the sea but continued insistence upon such extremes was unrealistic. “They are there; let them stay,” replied Khalid Bey4 but added that justice to refugees and frontiers is all important and should be realistically faced. In conclusion, the Prime Minister said they would frankly express to PCC their views and hope for justice within realizable limits.

In two-hour exchange of views with President Quwwatli March 3, His Excellency showed more moderation than heretofore and, accepting my appraisal of Ethridge, said Syrians would cooperate with PCC for solution within realm of realities. He no longer contended, as always heretofore, that Syrians would never accept Jewish state in Palestine, but he said it was unrealistic to suppose that any partition boundaries could contain millions of Jews that unlimited immigration would bring to Palestine. Hence guarantees of territorial integrity of Arab neighbors was all important but, in light of recent history, could Arabs be blamed for skepticism as regards any guarantees in sight? Who, for instance, said Shukri Bey, will make the Jews with draw from Western Galilee, seized in violation of truce without even a murmur of protest from the nations that had threatened sanctions? I replied that I believed the Israeli likewise seek peace and to get it would have to make concessions. I also recalled in this connection US position in Item 4 of Deptel 57, February 25. The President thereupon expressed his appreciation of the Department’s policy statement with which he said the Prime Minister had acquainted him. I said that most of it was not new but that perhaps some of these indications of our basic policy of friendship toward the Arab countries had been over looked by the Syrians in their chagrin over what they felt to be our partisanship for the Zionists. It was, however, a timely restatement of those things which showed our friendly feelings for the Arab peoples and our desire to serve the cause of peace and stability in the Middle East. I added that given evidence of Syrian good will, of which Pales tine settlement is a necessary first step, it was my personal belief that US would increasingly give Syria evidence of its friendship, mentioning possibilities in some of President Truman’s statements, including Point Four of his Inaugural Address and, for first time, message given me by the President,5 and which I had not until now found what I considered a propitious moment to deliver, concerning his genuine friendship for the Arabs and what their peaceful cooperation might envisage. Shukri Bey said he believed in President Truman’s sincerity, and he hoped that our two countries could henceforth collaborate fruitfully to their mutual advantage. Again expressing my personal views, I said much would depend upon Palestine settlement and warned him that while I felt Ethridge would stand firm for justice within bounds of attainable, and receive US backing to that end, Syria must not expect that US would abandon its friendly support of Israel; it might only expect an equivalent friendly attitude toward the Arabs, or rather equal friendship to both friends.

Keeley

1 Not printed.

2 See telegram 177 from Jerusalem, p. 785 [Pg. 785 includes portions of Doc. 499 and Doc. 500].

3 Not printed, but see footnote 2 to telegram 177, p. 786 [Pg. 786 includes portions of Doc. 500 and Doc. 501].

4 Prime Minister Azm.

5 The editors are unable to identify this paper.

The Consul at Jerusalem (Burdett) to the Secretary of State 501.BB Palestine/3–749: Telegram

[Document 508]

The Consul at Jerusalem (Burdett) to the Secretary of State

secret Jerusalem, March 7, 1949—10 a. m.

192. Palun 71. [From Ethridge?] In private conversation Musa Bey Husseini said to me that representatives of Israeli Government who have been carrying on conversations with Transjordanians have suggested that Arabs and Jews get together and make a deal that will defeat internationalization of Jerusalem. Jews, he said, have told Transjordanians that they can give the Arabs a better deal than internationalization. Jews have said repeatedly that US is not interested in internationalization and only France is. In press conference inspired question was directed to proposition of what is Commission’s attitude if private arrangement is made. I replied as chairman of Commission that if the deal is in accord with letter and spirit of GA resolution Commission would welcome it but no deal would relieve US of responsibility of reporting a plan. [Ethridge?]

Burdett

The Secretary of State to the Legation in Syria 501.BB Palestine/3–549: Telegram

[Document 509]

The Secretary of State to the Legation in Syria

secret Washington, March 7, 1949—6 p. m.

us urgent

75. PriMin in conversation reported your 109 Mch 51 seems completely to have overlooked fact that SC on Nov. 16 decided that “In order to eliminate the threat to the peace in Palestine and to facilitate the transition from the present truce to permanent peace in Palestine, an armistice shall be established in all sectors of Palestine.

Calls upon the parties directly involved in the conflict in Palestine us a further provisional measure under art. 40 of the charter, to seek agreement forthwith, by negotiations conducted either directly or through the Acting Mediator on Palestine, with a view to the immediate establishment of the armistice.”

In our view therefore Syrian Govt is under unescapable responsibility to undertake armistice negots. Furthermore it might be useful to Azm Govt to plead force majeure as excuse to public opinion for entering into the inevitable agreement with Israel, pointing to SC res. Nov. 16 and making much of fact that Syria defers to UN judgment.

Rptd to Jerusalem 135 for Ethridge as Unpal 50.

Acheson

1 Not printed; it reported advice from the Syrian Prime Minister that “he had received another invitation from Bunche to open armistice talks with Israeli [officials] at Rhodes.… Might accept but did not like Rhodes as locale because of its connotations. Moreover as armistice is only formalization of cessation hostilities and as both parties already pledged to UN to observe truce during which hostilities forbidden under threat sanctions he sees no need for armistice discussions.” Minister Keeley expressed his agreement with this view, stating that “as Syrian and Israeli forces both occupying part of Galilee and presumably neither prepared short of reciprocal concessions in final peace settlement to withdraw, armistice talks between them unlikely to serve any useful purpose and might well have unfortunate repercussions. It is Legation opinion that if Syria now enters armistice negotiations with Israeli, Azm Government may be compromised if not forced out by hostile public opinion thus endangering success peace negotiations as well as ratification important measures such as French monetary accord and tapline. It would seem more in interest all concerned tacitly to accept status quo between Syrian and Israeli forces as virtual armistice or at least as no impediment to peace talks through PCC, with which Prime Minister is willing proceed, thus giving well disposed Azm Government more time to prepare public opinion and reinforce its position by hoped-for Parliamentary approval contriversial measures important to country’s economy and government’s stability. Any government that may succeed present one likely to be less amenable to peaceful Palestine settlement, less disposed to ratify pending agreements and less wedded to orientation westward.” (501.BB Palestine/3–549)

President Kuwatly, on March 6, expressed to Minister Keeley his opposition to armistice talks; and on March 8, Prime Minister Azm showed the Minister a draft of a “conciliatory if negative reply to Bunche” (telegram 113, March 8, noon, from Damascus). The Department, in reply on March 11, instructed the Minister to “explain to President and PriMin Dept’s point of view as stated Deptel 75.” It concluded by stating “we feel that Syrian Govt would be wise to undertake armistice talks and desire you make this point explicitly clear to Syrian Govt.” (Telegram 85 to Damascus) Nos. 113 and 85 are both filed under 501.BB Palestine/3–849.

The formal Syrian reply to Mr. Bunche, an “evasively-worded reply amounting to negative” was handed to René F. Servoise, Mr. Bundle’s political representative in Syria and Lebanon. After further discussion with Mr. Servoise, the Syrians withdrew their written reply and “instead took position Syria would only reply after conclusion current Israeli-Transjordan and Israeli-Lebanese talks.” (telegram 121, March 10, 6 p. m., from Damascus, 501.BB Palestine/3–1049)

Minister Keeley delivered the sense of Department’s telegrams 75 and 85 to Prime Minister Azm. The latter “patiently explained difficulties of Syrian position emphasizing that difference with Bunche seemed only one of procedure as Syria agreeable to armistice but saw too many dangers in direct negotiations with Jews.” (telegram 142, March 16, from Damascus, 501.BB Palestine/3–1649)

The Acting Secretary of State to the Secretary of Defense (Forrestal) 501.BB Palestine/3–849

[Document 510]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Secretary of Defense (Forrestal)

secret Washington, March 8, 1949.

My Dear Mr. Secretary: You will recall that last summer the Secretary of State requested, in his letters of June 7 and 17, and July 9 and 28,1 that the National Military Establishment make available military observers to assist Count Bernadotte, the United Nations Mediator for Palestine, in supervising the observance of the Security Council’s resolution of May 29, 1948.2 Since that time the National Military Establishment on a rotation basis has supplied a very considerable number of officers and enlisted men for the staff of the Palestine Mediator. Similarly, the Governments of France and Belgium have furnished personnel from the armed forces for this task.

Under the provisions of the General Assembly’s resolution of December 11, 1948 a Palestine Conciliation Commission was established to assume, so far as it considers necessary in existing circumstances, the functions given to the United Nations Mediator. On the request of the Security Council this Commission is authorized to undertake any of the functions now assigned to the Mediator on Palestine or to the United Nations Truce Commission by resolutions of the Security Council. To date, however, the Security Council has not relieved the Acting Palestine Mediator of his duties, although it is anticipated that in the relatively near future, when the Acting Mediator has succeeded in arranging armistice agreements between Israel and Transjordan, Lebanon, Syria, and Iraq, the Security Council will terminate the Office of the Mediator and confer his functions on the Conciliation Commission. The Conciliation Commission is at the moment, therefore, in a transition stage between the assumption in full of the Mediator’s functions and its present task, under the Assembly’s resolution of December 11, of taking steps to assist the Governments and Authorities concerned to achieve a final settlement of all questions outstanding between them.

The American Member of the Palestine Conciliation Commission, which is composed of Representatives of France, Turkey, and the United States, has already called upon the Acting Palestine Mediator for assistance with respect to air transportation and possibly also with regard to the use of certain of the military observer staff. It is anticipated that Mr. Ethridge will have increasing need for services of the military observers, although probably in much less degree than was the case with the Palestine Mediator because, as armistices are concluded, they will provide their own machinery for enforcement although there will still be a considerable measure of United Nations observation and control.

In light of this situation, the Department of State requests that the National Military Establishment furnish, in so far as compatible with the needs of the Armed Services, such personnel and assistance to the Palestine Conciliation Commission as the American Member thereof may request through channels either of the Department of State or by direct application to Commanding Officers in the Near East.

In view of the very great responsibility held by this Government as a Member of the Palestine Conciliation Commission, and in light of the President’s public statement of February 24, 1948, emphasizing his hope for the success of the Commission’s efforts in establishing peace in Palestine, I desire to stress the belief that the national interests of the United States are involved in this question and will be well-served by the continuing and valued cooperation of the National Military Establishment in supplying personnel and other aid to the United Nations effort for the reestablishment of peace in Palestine.3

Sincerely yours,

James E. Webb

1 None printed, but for summary of letter of July 9, see Foreign Relations, 1948, vol. v, Part 2, footnote 3, p. 1196.

2 For documentation on this subject, see ibid., pp. 533 ff.

3 In reply, on March 15, Secretary Forrestal stated that he had instructed the Secretary of the Navy to comply with the Department’s request (501.BB Palestine/3–1549). The reply is printed in airgram A–31, March 24, p. 864 [Pg. 864 includes portions of Doc. 551 and Doc. 552].

The Special Representative of the United States in Israel (McDonald) to the Secretary of State 867N.01/3–849: Telegram

[Document 511]

The Special Representative of the United States in Israel (McDonald) to the Secretary of State

secret Tel Aviv, March 8, 1949—9 a. m.

us urgent

184. Re Deptel 133 March 5.1 Conferred Foreign Minister2 5 p. m. March 7. Knox and Andrus3 present. Foreign Minister stated that report received by us apparently based on two misunderstandings. 1. Israeli representatives have made no claim whatsoever for amendment or rectification of Israeli-Lebanon frontier.

2. What was said about frontiers in present preliminary discussion referred to armistice lines concerning which Israeli representatives put forth idea that certain points armistice lines might not logically conform to legal frontiers because of topographical difficulties; if such viewpoint in armistice negotiations is maintained by Israeli it will, of course, be without prejudice to frontier lines.

Foreign Minister emphasized the above misunderstood minor points were far overshadowed by (and merely a part of) two major difficulties as follows. 1. Israelis have agreed in principle to Bundle’s proposal the frontier lines will be armistice lines but Israelis make condition that this proposal apply to whole frontier including Syrian and not only part thereof.

2. As regards Netulla salient, while Israelis troops are over into Lebanon on western side of salient the Syrians are occupying Israel territory on eastern side. The Lebanese demand that Israeli withdraw from Lebanon in the west while Syria refuses to withdraw in the east would, because of topography, squeeze Israeli army into a militarily unmaneuverable area if the Syrians attacked. Thus Israeli tentative viewpoint is (1) pending understanding with Syria Israel would prefer that Lebanon-Israel armistice (not frontier) line be drawn through an agreed part of the Lebanon occupied territory west of salient in order prevent withdrawing Israel forces into a salient narrowed by Syrian occupation and a possible military trap; (2) if Syria would agree evacuate Israel territory in eastern salient Israel would readily yield their position in west.

Comment: Foreign Minister’s explanation involves very technical military points of involved positions and is given herein as under stood by mission. Mission has impression that Israel very anxious for armistice with Lebanon (with which country Israel never felt it had a real quarrel as compared with other Arab states) but that negotiations badly complicated at moment owing interposition of Syrian troops and unwillingness Israel yield all bargaining points to Lebanon and be left with no cards to play for Syrian evacuation of Israel territory. This obviously awkward because it places Lebanon in middle of possible impasse between Syria and Israel. Mission has hopes time and Bundle’s skill will solve problem. End comment.

While mission believes that very cautious approach should be used at this juncture to avoid complicating individual points of negotiations we are prepared, at Department’s instructions, use all influence possible vis-à-vis Israel to assist UN in any fair, militarily logical, and politically possible solution.

Department pass Army.

McDonald

1 Not printed, but see footnote 2, p. 787 [Pg. 787 includes portions of Doc. 501 and Doc. 502].

2 Mr. Shertok changed his name to “Sharett” as of March 6 (telegram to the Under Secretary of State from Mr. Eytan, 867N.002/3–749).

3 Col. Burton C. Andrus, Military Attaché in Israel.

The Secretary of State to the Special Representative of the United States in Israel (McDonald), at Tel Aviv 501.BB Palestine/3–849: Telegram

[Document 512]

The Secretary of State to the Special Representative of the United States in Israel (McDonald), at Tel Aviv

secret Washington, March 8, 1949—4 p. m.

us urgent

140. Pls take up with Israeli auths report contained Baghdad Embtel 95 March 81 rptd you as 2. If report substantiated state in strongest terms that USG as member PCC would deplore any action leading new outbreak hostilities.2

Acheson

1 Not printed; it reported information from the Iraqi Foreign Minister that Israeli forces were concentrating at various points with the apparent intention of dislodging Iraqi troops from the Iraqi-occupied sector of Palestine. It also contained the Foreign Minister’s hope that the United States “would do everything possible to restrain Israel from aggression against Iraqi troops.” (867N.01/3–849)

2 This telegram was repeated to Baghdad and to Jerusalem for Mr. Ethridge, Chargé Dorsz conveyed the substance of the message on March 8 to the Foreign Minister and Under Secretary of the Foreign Office Rawi. Both “expressed gratitude over quick US action.” (Telegram 100, March 10, 9 a. m., from Baghdad, 501.BB Palestine/3–1049)

The Chargé in Egypt (Patterson) to the Secretary of State 867N.01/3–949: Airgram

[Document 513]

The Chargé in Egypt (Patterson) to the Secretary of State

Cairo, March 9, 1949.

A–299. A statement by King Abdullah that he had advised the Arab states before the outbreak of fighting to study the situation in Palestine carefully and that he had ordered his forces to enter the former Man dated territory on May 15, 1948, only when he found that other members of the Arab League insisted on intervention was printed in Al Garida Al Misaiya, a new evening daily newspaper, yesterday. The new paper, which will apparently be pro-Wafdist in tone, stated that the Hashemite monarch had given his views in a special interview.

King Abdullah, was quoted as saying he had marched into Palestine in order to avoid accusations which might have been leveled against him. He had given the order to march in without having changed the views expressed in his warning to the other Arab states. This warning had pointed out that it would not be sufficient to rely on courage and faith to secure victory, but that it was necessary to take into account every eventuality and to be prepared for “behind the scenes” activity.

The order to enter Palestine had been given although he knew that the Transjordanian army and Kingdom lacked sufficient resources to face the situation. “We have made and still are making great sacrifices to safeguard Arab unity”, continued King Abdullah, “but we are now faced with two alternatives”. He defined these as being either to resume fighting with the object of annihilating the Zionists in Palestine and their supporters abroad, or to acknowledge the present status quo and to sign peace agreements. “I believe”, added King Abdullah, “that Transjordan will adopt the latter course”.

Explaining his opposition to an All Palestine Government, the King said that in his opinion it lacked the necessary basis and its establishment had been inspired purely by personal ambition. Also it was unreasonable for the All Palestine Government to take Gaza as its seat, as this would deprive Transjordan of a Mediterranean port.

Dealing with the Palestine conference at which he had been chosen King of Palestine, he said that the Palestine Arabs had turned to him in their plight and appealed for liberation. He had responded with more than the resources of his country. “Can I”, he concluded, “turn away from them now?”

Patterson

The Secretary of State to the Special Representative of the United States in Israel (McDonald), at Tel Aviv 501.MA Palestine/3–949: Telegram

[Document 514]

The Secretary of State to the Special Representative of the United States in Israel (McDonald), at Tel Aviv

secret Washington, March 9, 1949—5 p. m.

144. Pls take early opportunity discuss orally problem Arab refugees with FonMin along fol lines: 1. Problem of early disposition Arab refugee question matter of friendly and growing concern to USG. Israeli Govt will recall strong US support of Dec 11 res of GA, para 11 of which established principle that refugees wishing to return to their homes and live in peace with their neighbors should be permitted to do so at earliest practicable date and that compensation should be paid for property of those choosing not to return and for loss of or damage to property which under principles of int law or in equity should be made good by the govts or authorities responsible.

2. Altho concern this Govt to alleviate distressed conditions among Palestine refugees has been amply demonstrated, USG has consider ably broader interest this problem than temp relief. Considered opinion USG that speedy and equitable solution refugee problem is indispensable if common US-Israeli desire for stabilization and development NE is to be achieved and if exploitation refugee problem by foreign interests inimical best interests peoples NE is to be prevented. USG firmly convinced that insistence by Israeli or Arab Govts to use refugee problem to obtain concessions re final peace settlement would react to serious disadvantage such Govts before world community and US public opinion, and would seriously prejudice establishment cooperative relations among NE neighbors. Conversely, early demonstration magnanimity and humanity in dealing with this problem would contribute greatly to possibility early modus vivendi between Israel and Arab neighbors and would substantially increase security that area.

3. Israeli Govt will recall extent to which Israel’s objectives have been furthered by USG’s attitude re European DP’s and has had recent proofs USG’s desire cooperate thru measures to facilitate thru IRO immigration European LP’s into Israel. US sincerely hopes Israel will display broad humanitarian interest in dealing with Arab refugee problem.

In view our mutual deep interest in objective establishing enduring peace in NE, USG wishes inquire as to plans of Govt of Israel to implement purposes Dec 11 res with respect Arab refugees.1

Pls repeat reply to US Rep, PCC.

Acheson

1 This telegram was repeated to Jerusalem as No. 144, identified also as Unpal 53, for Mr. Ethridge. Mr. McDonald, in reply on March 14, stated that he had stressed to the Foreign Minister on three occasions prior to receipt of telegram 144 the great concern of the United States concerning implementation of the resolution of December 11 and that he thought it preferable to delay a few days before pressing the matter (telegram 207 from Tel Aviv, 501.BB Palestine/3–1449).

The Secretary of State to the Consulate General at Jerusalem 501.BB Balestine/2–2849: Telegram

[Document 515]

The Secretary of State to the Consulate General at Jerusalem

secret Washington, March 9, 1949—5 p. m.

145. Unpal 54. For Ethridge. Dept appreciates your thoughtful tel Palun 57.1 Specific comments re your numbered paras fol:

(1) Expect completion enabling legis within few days on $16,000,000 US relief contribution, with advance payment $8,000,000 available within few weeks. Balance payable fol Congressional action, probably not before April, on appropriation legis. In presenting case to Cong emphasis has been given to viewpoint expressed last two sentences your para 1, and general response Cong indicates concurrence this view.

As one means meeting relief rehabilitation needs after termination UN program, Dept actively considering measures to stimulate more effective drive for voluntary funds. Moreover prominent cits including Bayard Dodge2 [and James Terry] Duce, Aramco, contemplated early formation influential group for purpose launching educational and publicity campaign. At appropriate time Dept will also consider feasibility endeavoring persuade UNICEF extend program beyond present commitment.

(2) Dept is in full agreement and is making representations Israel.

(3) Dept considers this of equal importance with your para 2. Are you in position estimate for prelim planning purposes approx number refugees who would desire return Israel and under what conditions? Have you any suggestions re desirability and practical methods deter mining more precisely wishes of refugees this question?3 On assumption large number would be unwilling or unable return Israel, could Arab states be stimulated near future undertake planning on basis short term work projects utilizing refugee labor which would be of permanent benefit to countries concerned? Such projects would enable those refugees who wish remain in countries harboring them to engage in productive activity behalf Arab states. Moreover, such planning would constitute useful transition to realistic attitude by Arab states toward refugee problem as whole. Presumably experts could be made available by UN or other sources in connection such planning upon request Arab states.

(4) Your para 4 requires careful study. Direct compensation from Israel to Arab Govts without some means intermediary control and supervision would doubtless result in dissipation funds or failure apply them for constructive resettlement purposes. Another important aspect this question is intention, publicly announced by Israeli officials, to put forth counter-claims against Arab states for war damages. Dept believes any effort by Israel relate question compensation refugees to war indemnities should be firmly resisted. Since former refers to property assets of legitimate residents Pal with incontestable right ownership to properties in question, question has no relation any claims against Arab states. For this reason may be inadvisable make Arab states custodians compensation funds.

Dept recognizes that outside financial aid through loans or contributions will be required assist Arab states in providing for refugee populations during interim phase between termination UN relief and initiation large scale development projects in Arab states. We are examining projects limited in scope and financing which might be undertaken during interim phase. Refugee expert to be assigned to PCC could be extremely useful making recommendations this question. Dept also giving urgent consideration to elaboration Point 4 of Pres inaugural address with respect unilateral and multilateral technical assistance programs in NE, but on most optimistic basis flow of capital resulting from this source unlikely for many months.

(5) We hope tentative proposals will be formulated in few weeks re work projects which would fit in with longer range development schemes while affording work for refugees in areas where now located. Some projects might be financed from private sources, including oil cos which have manifested desire contribute to econ [and] social development.

US commitment re direct grants or loans impossible at present. Until projects are more clearly defined and until Arab states show initiative in requesting aid for specific developmental projects, it will be difficult consider methods financing. Possibility ExIm and IBRD loans dependent on submission sound projects by govts concerned.

At Dept’s suggestion UK is also considering question projects for assimilation refugees. Moreover we have informally raised with Brit Emb question UK intentions vis-à-vis Transjordan with respect increased financial aid in light anticipated expansion TJ’s population and area.

For your info only, Dept plans appointing George McGhee as US Coordinator on Palestine refugee matters. Announcement will follow shortly.

Acheson

1 Identified also as telegram 172, February 28, from Jerusalem, p. 778 [Pg. 778 includes portions of Doc. 493 and Doc. 494].

2 President Emeritus of the American University at Beirut.

3 Mr. Ethridge advised, on March 14, that he had “not been able to devise any method by which desires of Arabs could be made known. Have encouraged organization of camp committee who might communicate wishes to Commission but our thinking is that no referendum possible or valuable just now. Those who have dealt with the refugees say most of them want to be back in Palestine, whether in Israel or not. Inclined to think that is true.” (telegram 221, identified also as Palun 81, 501.BB Palestine 3/1449) In the same message, Mr. Ethridge indicated that “six weeks of effort to get the Israeli Government to commit itself on the refugee problem have resulted in not one single statement of position. That is true also of Jerusalem and all other problems with which we have to deal.” Later the same day, Mr. Ethridge transmitted the text of a telegram to him from Mr. Shertok, the date of which was not supplied by Mr. Ethridge. Mr. Shertok’s telegram concluded that “if pushed to the wall to say what I think at present stage all I would be able to say is that major solution is resettlement elsewhere and not in Israel” (telegram 223, identified also as Palun 84, 501.BB Palestine/3–1449).

Mr. Wells Stabler to the Secretary of State 501.BB Palestine/3–949: Telegram

[Document 516]

Mr. Wells Stabler to the Secretary of State

confidential Amman, March 9, 1949—7 p. m.

91. Glubb Pasha gave following account this morning of armistice talks between Transjordan and Israel at Rhodes:

When talks commenced Israelis raised 4 points as conditions to cease-fire and armistice: (1) Free access to Hadassah and Hebrew University;

(2) Free passage past Latrun;

(3) Opening railroad to Jerusalem;

(4) Filling in trench dug by Arabs in no man’s land near Government House. In return Jews would give electricity to Arab quarters Jerusalem. (All these points previously discussed in Jerusalem between Dayan and Abdullah Tel.)

As Transjordan delegation did not consider these conditions related to military armistice, officer returned to Amman for instructions. On return officer weatherbound at Cyprus and therefore Transjordan sent message yesterday to delegation instructing it accept 4 conditions but suggesting railroad be under joint control. As cost repair electric wiring in Arab part Jerusalem excessive, delegation also instructed state that instead electricity would prefer that road from Damascus gate past new gate and Jaffa gate and thence to Bethlehem be opened and that Jews give up their positions on Mount Zion, Nebidaoud and Deirabutor.1

Glubb said that Abdullah Tel thought Jews would accept this arrangement in belief that lines thus agreed would represent final lines in Jerusalem and that Arabs were giving up claims to upper Bakaa, Qatamon et cetera.

Glubb thought that “with any luck” cease-fire agreement would be signed tomorrow. He indicated that for purposes this agreement clause would be added to effect that it would be applicable to Iraqi areas if and when Arab Legion took over Iraqi front-line positions (Legtel 85, March 7).2

He said that next phase at Rhodes would be conclusion armistice but that with turn of events near Akaba one of Transjordan’s principal bargaining points disappearing. Consequently, there would seem to be little use in taking any but most reasonable attitude towards Jewish demands.

Sent Department 91, repeated Jerusalem 50.

Stabler

1 The United Nations announced, on March 9, that the Israeli and Transjordanian Delegations held “their first joint informal meeting” that afternoon at Rhodes. The meeting lasted two and a half hours, during which an exchange of views took place on 11 points, in a “very cordial atmosphere” (press release PAL/456).

2 Not printed, but see footnote 1, p. 799 [Pg. 799 includes portions of Doc. 508 and Doc. 509].

The United States Representative at the United Nations (Austin) to the Secretary of State 501.BB Palestine/3–949: Telegram

[Document 517]

The United States Representative at the United Nations (Austin) to the Secretary of State

confidential New York, March 9, 1949—7:55 p. m.

293. Following “memorandum on armistice negotiations at Ras el Naqura and at Rhodes” received from Eban today:

“Israeli-Lebanese armistice talks:

1. The main military problems affecting northern Palestine are: (a) Question of Israeli forces in occupation of Lebanese border villages.

(b) Presence of Syrian forces on Israeli territory at Mishmar Hayarden.

(c) Presence in Lebanon of Syrian forces which took part in the invasion of Israel and whose presence is related directly to the Arab-Israeli war.

2. Problem (a) does not in itself constitute any insuperable difficulty and could be adjusted in any general settlement of the northern frontier. Indeed, some of these villages have already been evacuated unconditionally. Problems (b) and (c), however, cannot be settled so long as the Syrian Government refuses to enter armistice negotiations.

3. It is obviously impossible for Israel to conclude agreements for the withdrawal and reduction of its forces with the Lebanese authorities, while Syrian forces are allowed to maintain themselves in full strength in positions threatening Israel’s security. The principle of withdrawal and reduction laid down in the November 16 resolution must be applied to the whole area; otherwise any government can secure the prospect of military dominance simply by refusing to com ply with the November 16th resolution.

4. The November 16th resolution applies to Syria just as much as to any other of the states concerned. Syrian refusal to comply with that resolution is not only inadmissible in itself, but also has a disrupting effect on the negotiations between Israel and Lebanon, who are both clearly anxious to conclude an armistice.

5. The conclusion is that all available international influence should be brought to bear to induce Syria to enter negotiations in order that the dispositions of Syrian forces, like those of Israel and the Lebanon, should be governed by the principles of the November 16th resolution. It appears from his communication to the SC this morning that the Acting Mediator is making efforts in this direction.

Negotiations at Rhodes:

6. A similar position prevails in the Israeli-Transjordan armistice negotiations. The central sector contains a large body of Iraqi troops. If Israel and Transjordan were each to accept the withdrawal and reduction required by the November 16th resolution, while Iraq[is] were not bound by any such principle, the result would be to leave Iraqi forces in a dominant position at the very heart of Israel. No action agreed to by the Government of Transjordan could remove the threat to Israel security so long as Iraqi troops remain on Israeli territory a few miles distant from the coast and from the most densely populated centres of Jewish population.

7. There are contradictory reports of Iraq’s intention to abide by any agreement signed by Transjordan. Reports of Iraq’s willingness to this effect were published, later denied by General Riley, given renewed currency and later denied by the Iraqi Premier. The Transjordan delegation has now informed Dr. Bunche that they are now empowered to represent Iraq. It is obviously necessary, however, to have this undertaking from the Iraqi Government itself. Dr. Bunche has now invited the Iraqi Government to confirm officially that it will consider itself bound by any agreement signed by the Transjordan delegation. In the meantime, a discussion is proceeding on the armistice lines on other fronts.

8. The conclusion here is that unless Iraq, as well as Syria, complies directly, or through an accredited intermediary with the November 16th resolution, the prospects of an armistice with the Lebanon and Transjordan will be gravely impaired. Should it become necessary, Israel may have to ask the SC whether Syria or Iraq are justified in refusing to comply with the November 16th resolution.”

Austin

Memorandum by the Secretary of State to the President 867N.01/3–1049

[Document 518]

Memorandum by the Secretary of State to the President

secret Washington, March 10, 1949.

We received two rather alarming telegrams from our Legation in Amman, the capital of Transjordan, yesterday afternoon. The first1 indicated that Israeli forces in rather large strength had started moving into the southern Negev area which, according to the telegram, is under Arab Legion occupation. The second telegram2 reported that King Abdullah had informed our Chargé d’Affaires that Israeli forces had been attacking an Arab Legion post at Ein Gharandal, four miles inside the Transjordan frontier.3

The Department called in Ambassador-designate Elath4 and gave him the substance of the reports we had received. Elath brought with him a telegram which Dr. Bunche had sent the Israeli Government from Rhodes quoting a note which Bunche had received from the Chief of the Transjordan armistice delegation at Rhodes informing him under the instructions of the Transjordan Government that Israeli forces had crossed the Transjordan military lines in the Negev on the morning of March 7 and describing the situation as extremely delicate. The Transjordan Government requested in this note to Bunche that Israeli forces cease such operations during their armistice negotiations and withdraw to their original positions.

Elath also had with him the text of Tel Aviv’s reply to Bunche which asserted that nowhere in the Negev were Israeli land or air forces operating outside the Israeli borders, and that these forces had not crossed and did not intend to cross the Transjordan frontier. The Israeli reply referred to the fact that the Transjordan note revealed the presence of Transjordan forces in the Negev and stated that this constituted a serious embarrassment to the armistice negotiations. The Israeli Government then registered a strong protest against this “invasion” and requested Bunche to transmit to the Transjordan Government the Israeli demand for the immediate withdrawal of the Transjordan forces to their own side of the frontier.

The Department expressed to Elath the gravest concern as regards the situation and strongly impressed upon him the serious consequences that would ensue should the report of the Israeli incursion into Transjordan be verified. Elath stated that his government was fully aware of and had no desire to provoke such consequences.5

This morning Elath has telephoned the Department to say that he has had a further telegram from Foreign Minister Sharett (Shertok) again stating categorically that no Israeli forces had crossed into Transjordan or had any intention of doing so.6

Ambassador Franks has also telephoned me to inform me of telegrams about this situation which he has received. He had been instructed to see me, but thought he would not trouble me by coming down in person. He added that the information he was giving me was for you as well as for me. He said that the movement of a considerable Israeli force south into the Negev toward the Gulf of Akaba was not in line with the Security Council resolution and that the recent armistice could not override the Security Council. The British also have reports, not yet confirmed, that the Israelis have moved into Transjordan territory. He confirmed our information that Bunche is sending observers into the area to report on the situation, and said that his government hoped to hear from these observers soon.

The Ambassador further said that his government had sent instructions to the British forces in Akaba to the effect that if the Israeli forces fire on British forces, the fire is to be returned, and that if Israeli aircraft fly over British forces they will be engaged. The British Consul at Haifa has also been instructed to give the Israeli Government the exact text of the instructions.

The Ambassador then said that the only bit of more encouraging information he had is a report from Amman indicating that the Israeli forces which had made contact with the Arab Legion inside Transjordan had broken off contact at dusk yesterday and retreated west ward. This later information is confirmed in a telegram which the Department received from the Legation at Amman this morning that Israeli forces have left Transjordan territory and are proceeding southward toward the Gulf of Akaba.

Sir Oliver Franks then said that he wished to express to me the anxiety of his government and to explain what they had done in the situation. The Ambassador later phoned to say that the Ambassador had forgotten to make the following statement: “We were reluctant to believe that Israeli forces had taken this action, but if the news of an aggression into Transjordan territory is confirmed, British obligations under the Anglo-TransJordan Treaty will, of course, immediately come into question.”

I thinked the Ambassador for this information and said that I felt sure the British at Akaba would behave with restraint and not allow any minor incident to set off the balloon. I also told him of the reports we had received from the Israelis denying the truth of the report that they had crossed into Transjordan. I pointed out that the frontier is not marked, and that if someone should wander across it without evil intent it would be too bad to set off the whole show. The ambassador said he would use what I had told him in a message to his government. The important point was he said as I would know that “this does touch his people on a very raw nerve”.

1 No. 88, March 9, not printed.

2 No. 90, March 9, not printed.

3 A third telegram of March 9, No. 89, gave Mr. Stabler’s view that the Israeli advance, when negotiations for an armistice by Transjordan and Israel were proceeding, “seems ultimate in breach of good faith” and a flouting of the United Nations by Israel. The Israeli action was said to be “further evidence to Arabs that Israeli intentions, far from being peaceful, are perfidious and aggressive.… Cause of peace, which Israel claims earnestly to desire, is not being served through this later maneuver.” Mr. Stabler then recommended urgently that the United States “make immediate representations in strongest possible terms to Israel demanding that Israeli forces return at once to and remain in positions occupied at time commencement Rhodes talks and that Israel finally accept principle that any questions relating to territorial disposition must await final peace settlement.” (501.BB Palestine/3–949)

4 Elianu Elath, who had recently changed his surname from Epstein.

5 The information covered in Secretary Acheson’s memorandum up to this point was sent to Tel Aviv in telegram 145, March 9, 7 p. m. The Department instructed Mr. McDonald to convey to the Israeli Foreign Office its expression of “gravest concern” and of “serious consequences” should the reported Israeli incursion into Transjordan be verified (867N.01/2–2849). Telegram 145 was repeated to London, Amman, New York and to Jerusalem as No. 146, identified also as Unpal 55, for Mr. Ethridge. It was sent also to Beirut, Baghdad, Damascas, Jidda, and Cairo the following day in a circular telegram of March 10 (867N.01/3–1049).

6 Mr. Satterthwaite’s memorandum of conversation states that he “thanked Mr. Elath for the prompt response to our inquiries, and took occasion to point out that our representations had not been based on press reports but on information which we had received from our representatives. I expressed the hope that there would be no further developments which might adversely affect the present delicate negotiations.” (867N.01/3–1049)

Memorandum by Mrs. Dorothy H. Morgret in the Office of the Secretary of State Secretary’s Memoranda, Lot 53 D 444, Secretary’s Memos

1 [Document 519]

Memorandum by Mrs. Dorothy H. Morgret in the Office of the Secretary of State

secret [Washington,] March 10, 1949.

Memorandum of Telephone Conversation Between the Secretary and the British Ambassador

Subject: Palestine

The Ambassador telephoned to inform the Secretary he had two or three telegrams about Palestine and he thought he should give the Secretary the important information from them. He was asked by his Government to see the Secretary, but he thought he would not trouble the Secretary by coming down at this point. He said the information was for the Secretary and the President.

The Ambassador said that considerable Israeli force is moving south in the Negeb toward the Gulf of Akaba. This is not in line with the Security Council. The recent armistice cannot override the Security Council. The British have reports, not yet confirmed, that the Israelis have moved into the Transjordan territory. They hope to hear from UN observers soon about it. What they are saying is that something which looks worrying seems about to happen. The Ambassador said they have given instructions to British forces in Akaba saying that if the Israelis behave aggressively to British forces, then the aggression will be returned. He said instructions have been sent to the British representative at Haifa asking them to inform the Israeli Government that we understand this force is moving south and if they do attack British troops, etc, the fire will be returned, or if aircraft fly over British forces they will be engaged. He said the only bit of better information comes from Amman which says the Israeli forces broke off at dusk yesterday and retreated westward. They were contacted by a force of the Arab legion. The Ambassador explained he wanted to express to the Secretary the anxiety of his Government and explain what they have done in the situation.

The Secretary thanked the Ambassador for the information. He said he knew the British at Akaba will behave with restraint and not allow any minor incident to set off the balloon.

The Ambassador said he would use this in a message to his Government.

The Secretary told the Ambassador we have had the same reports and have heard also that Bunche has sent down observers. We have also heard that the Israelis say this is not true; they have not crossed the border.

The Secretary said there is no marked frontier and if somebody wanders across it without evil intent, it would be too bad to set off the whole show.

The Ambassador said the important point is, as the Secretary will know, this does touch his people on a very raw nerve.

1 Lot 53 D 444 is a comprehensive chronological collection of the Secretary of State’s memoranda and memoranda of conversation for the years 1947–1953, as maintained by the Executive Secretariat of the Department of State.

The Consul at Jerusalem (Burdett) to the Secretary of State 501.BB Palestine/3–1049: Telegram

[Document 520]

The Consul at Jerusalem (Burdett) to the Secretary of State

secret Jerusalem, March 10, 1949—noon.

us urgent

207. Deptel 146, Ninth.1 Statement by Shiloah that presence Transjordan forces in Negev is “invasion” of Israel appears to be effort camouflage fact advance Israeli forces in Negev constitutes violation SC Resolution July 15 establishing permanent truce in Palestine.

Under Israeli theory all territory alloted by Nov. 29 GA Resolution to Israel is Israeli territory regardless whether occupied by Israel or Arab forces at time truce went into effect. Therefore presence Arab force on such territory is “invasion”. At same time Israel maintains right of conquest to territory allotted Arabs by November 29 GA resolution and now held by its forces. ConGen unable reconcile claim Arab occupation is “invasion” while Israel occupation is not.2

Since truce established by SC in Palestine Transjordan forces have held southern Negev under occupation. Although exact truce lines not delineated by UN observers, territory lying roughly south of parallel 31 controlled by Transjordan through outposts and roving patrols. Thus present advance Israeli forces appears constitute as flagrant violation SC truce order as advance into Arab lines at any other point. Is equivalent to Transjordan attack towards Israeli-“invaded” Ramie or Lydda.

Israeli action apparently intended obtain occupation all Negev before permanent armistice lines drawn at Rhodes. This would face UN with still another fait accompli and give Israeli another political and military advantage during time of truce.

Consul General feels strongest representations should be made to Israel Government against any advance by Israeli forces into Negev areas occupied by Transjordan and that representations should not be limited crossing by Israel of old Transjordan frontier as indicated in penultimate paragraph Deptel 146. Advance by Israeli forces constitutes not only violation truce but jeopardized Rhodes armistice negotiations, work of PCC and will destroy slowly developing willingness Arab States negotiate settlement with Israel.3

Sent Department, repeated Amman 14, Beirut 27, Damascus 10, Baghdad 11, pouched Jidda, Cairo.

Burdett

1 This was a repeat of No. 145 to Tel Aviv, not printed; but see footnote 5, p. 811 [Pg. 811 is part of Doc. 518].

2 Mr. Shiloah, the head of the Israeli Delegation at Rhodes, sent a message of March 9 to Mr. Bunche, in which he stated that he had been instructed to inform the latter that “nowhere in the Negev are Israeli land or air forces operating outside the borders of Israel.” The message continued that the crossing of Transjordanian forces into Israeli territory constituted “a serious embarrassment to the conduct of our present negotiations.” The message registered the strongest protest by the Israeli Government and requested Mr. Bunche to transmit the protest and a demand for immediate withdrawal to the Transjordanian Government (telegram 298, March 10, 12:40 p. m., from New York, 501.BB Palestine/3–1049).

3 Jerusalem, on March 11, advanced the view that “Because small Arab Legion strength in region Israel apparently believes can occupy area quickly, without serious fighting and with minimum world attention. Israel can then maintain publicly area never under Arab Legion control and any subsequent action by Legion to recover positions constitutes ‘invasion’ Israeli territory.” (telegram 215, 867N.01/3–1149)

The Special Representative of the United States in Israel (McDonald) to the Secretary of State 501.BB Palestine/3–1049: Telegram

[Document 521]

The Special Representative of the United States in Israel (McDonald) to the Secretary of State

secret
niact
urgent Tel Aviv, March 10, 1949—3 p. m.

190.1 ReDeptel 140, March 8 (reference Embtel Baghdad 95, March 8,2 repeated Tel Aviv 2).

Inquired of Foreign Office as directed noon March 9. At noon today received verbal reply from Eytan who stated that Prime Minister had instructed him inform as follows: 1. While government very appreciative of US efforts facilitate armistice and peace US going “a bit too far” in asking information on how Israel disposes its troops within area of Israel.

2. Israel perfectly entitled dispose its troops as it deems necessary for own security and has a perfect sense of its obligations and sense responsibility and reality of present situation.

3. Israel does not consider itself bound to account to anyone re deployment of troops within Israel.

Eytan remarked privately that Prime Minister much upset over inquiry with its implicit questioning of motives.

Facts of situation, as reported mission by MA liaison, are: 1. Past six weeks Iraqis and Palestine Arabs from triangle been raiding nightly farms in Israel coastal strip and area south of Ara-Lajun line. Raiders apparently after cattle, food, and prisoners. Some few farmers killed.

[Here follow paragraphs numbered 2 to 8 giving details of the raids and of Israeli action to prevent the raiders from crossing Israeli lines and containing the statement that “PGI reportedly has no intentions launching offensive against Iraqis but will firmly resist and punish raiders” and comment by Mr. McDonald that “while Israelis will probably not [be] provoked into formal action it is always possible that punitive action or hot pursuit might carry over into Iraqis lines if raids continued.”]

Sent Department 190, repeated Baghdad 1.

[ McDonald ]

1 This telegram was originally received as No. 194.

2 Not printed, but see footnote 1, p. 803 [Pg. 803 includes portions of Doc. 511, Doc. 512, and Doc. 513].

Message Released by the United Nations Security Council on March 11, 1949 IO Files

[Document 522]

Message Released by the United Nations Security Council on March 11, 1949

March 11, 1949

S/1284

Cablegram Dated 11 March 1949 From the Acting Mediator to the Secretary-General Transmitting the Text of a General Cease-Fire Agreement Between Israel and Transjordan

For President Security Council: I have the honour to inform the Security Council that on the morning of 11 March at Rhodes the Delegations representing the Governments of Israel and Transjordan in the current Armistice negotiations signed a General Cease-Fire Agreement applying to all sectors in which forces under the Israeli and Transjordan Command are opposed. The text of this Agreement is as follows:

Israeli Transjordan General Cease-Fire Agreement

We, the undersigned on behalf of our respective Governments do hereby agree that: 1. A General Cease-Fire between the armed forces of the two parties shall be effective as of the date of the signing of this Agreement.

2. The General Cease-Fire shall be complete and enduring and shall apply to all elements of the Military or para military forces under the command of the parties signatory—land, sea and air—wherever located and shall extend to all sectors in which the armed forces of the two parties are found in proximity to each other beginning in the North at Kh Deir Azab (MR 1510 1574).

3. No element of the ground or air forces of either party shall advance beyond or pass over the lines or positions now held by the foremost elements of its ground forces and no element of air or naval forces of either party shall enter into or pass over the waters adjacent to the coastline now held by the other party for any purposes whatsoever.

4. Complete supervision of the Truce by the United Nations observers shall be allowed and facilitated.

5. Movements of civilians shall not occur from one side to the other except by mutual agreement of the parties.

This General Cease-Fire Agreement shall be without prejudice to the rights, claims, interests and positions of either party signatory hereto as regards specific matters which may relate to the Armistice negotiations now in progress or to the ultimate peaceful settlement of all outstanding issues between the parties.

Done and signed in quadruplicate at Rhodes, Island of Rhodes, Greece, on the eleventh day of March nineteen forty-nine, in the presence of the United Nations Acting Mediator on Palestine. For the Government of Israel For the Government of Transjordan

Reuven Shiloah Col. Ashed Sudki El Jundi

Col. Moshe Dayan Col. Mohammed Bey Mouaita

In urging the parties to undertake voluntary cease-fire at this time, I expressed the hope that its scrupulous observance by both sides would serve to dissipate the tension which has recently developed in the Southern Negev.

The negotiations on the Armistice Agreement continue.

The Consul at Jerusalem (Burdett) to the Secretary of State 501.BB Palestine/3–1149: Telegram

[Document 523]

The Consul at Jerusalem (Burdett) to the Secretary of State

Jerusalem, March 11, 1949.

216. According to Palestine Post Ben Gurion stated in Assembly speech yesterday “Jerusalem was part of Jewish state, and there was no difference between Jerusalem and other parts of Israel. World recognition would be sought for this”.

Repeated Beirut 28, Baghdad 12, Damascus 11, Amman 16, pouched Cairo, Jidda.

Burdett

The Secretary of State to the United States Representative at the United Nations (Austin), at New York 501.BB Palestine/3–949: Telegram

[Document 524]

The Secretary of State to the United States Representative at the United Nations (Austin), at New York

confidential Washington, March 11, 1949—1 p. m.

154. Re memo whose text reported urtel 293 Mar 9 you may wish informally tell Eban Dept has already drawn attention US Min Damascus fact Syrian Govt obligated under SC res Nov. 16 to undertake armistice negots.

Concern of PGI for conclusion armistices with Lebanon, Transjordan, Syria and Iraq meets with sympathetic response this Govt. This underscores our anxiety aroused by reports in Amman Legs tels 88, 89 and 90, Mar 9,1 rptd USUN, indicating Israeli forces may have penetrated Transjordan territory. Consequences such action shld be very apparent to Eban but you shld stress our grave concern and hope that these reports may prove unfounded.

Acheson

1 None printed, but see footnotes 1–3, p. 810 [Pg. 810 includes portions of Doc. 517 and Doc. 518].

The Secretary of State to the Consulate General at Jerusalem 501.BB Palestine/3–1149: Telegram

[Document 525]

The Secretary of State to the Consulate General at Jerusalem

secret Washington, March 11, 1949—6 p. m.

153. Unpal 57. For Ethridge from Rusk. Dept contemplates concentrating activities here re Palestine refugee problem under George McGhee with title of Special Assistant to Secstate. We believe would be useful for McGhee join you for Beirut conference but that, contrary last sentence, Unpal 54 Mar. 9,1 official appt shld not be announced until his return from Beirut since we have no desire confuse Griffis’ operation or to cross wires with PCC responsibilities under Res of Dec. 11. Consequently McGhee would appear in Beirut merely as Dept Officer on special mission for Secy to gather background info on refugee problem. Upon his return he will deal not only with immed and interim phases refugee problem but, more particularly, long-range measures designed for final settlement.

McGhee tentatively plans arrive Beirut Mar 19. Wld like to see Bunche and may either during conference or afterwards call at Rhodes if Bunche himself not available Beirut or Jerusalem. Returning US, McGhee will spend few days London to concert with Brit, officials on refugee problem.

If you perceive any objections this proposal pls tele. Rptd Cairo 267 for Griffis; Beirut 110, London 817, USUN 157. [Rusk.]

Acheson

1 Identified also as telegram 145 from Jerusalem, p. 805 [Pg. 805 includes portions of Doc. 514 and Doc. 515].

The Secretary of State to the Special Representative of the United States in Israel (McDonald), at Tel Aviv 501.BB Palestine/3–1049: Telegram

[Document 526]

The Secretary of State to the Special Representative of the United States in Israel (McDonald), at Tel Aviv

secret Washington, March 11, 1949—7 p. m.

155. Dept considers PM comments paras 1–3 ur 194 [190] March 10 inappropriate. Seems indicate PM misunderstood purpose approach you instructed make by Deptel 140 March 8. Ask Eytan inform PM USG had no intention “asking info on how Israel disposes its troops within Israel”. Add USG concerned by any report indicating possibility new outbreak hostilities Pal and because of this concern desired in most friendly spirit bring Iraqi report attention Israeli auths. State US reps Baghdad being instructed take up with Iraqi auths question raids reported urtel.1

Acheson

1 This telegram was repeated to Baghdad. The Department, on March 11, requested Chargé Dorsz to inform the Iraqi Foreign Minister about the U.S. approach to the Israelis as a result of his request. At the same time, it instructed him to state to the Foreign Minister the “belief USG that in interest preservation peace Iraqi mil auths Pal should make every effort prevent such raids into Israeli areas.” (Telegram 84 to Baghdad, 867N.01/3–1149) Regarding the request of the Iraqi Foreign Minister, see footnote 1, p. 803 [Pg. 803 includes portions of Doc. 511, Doc. 512, and Doc. 513].

The Secretary of State to the Consulate General at Jerusalem 501.BB Palestine/3–249: Telegram

[Document 527]

The Secretary of State to the Consulate General at Jerusalem

secret Washington, March 11, 1949—7 p. m.

156. Unpal 60. Position to be taken by Jerusalem Comite in informal consultations with reps of Israel and Transjordan (Palun 66)1 believed sound. Dept considers that arrangements for Jerusalem shld be on principle that general administrative responsibilities will be vested in Arab and Jewish admins in respective areas of Jerusalem and that only specified functions will be carried out by whatever internatl and joint auths may be created.

Re French proposal that internatl auth shld consist reps Arabs, Jews, US, France, and Turkey, Dept agrees such auth unwieldy and otherwise undesirable. As means of bringing French to support internatl auth headed by UNRep, USRep Palestine Comm is authorized to inform French that US wld be willing support French national for first UNRep in Jerusalem provided that highly qualified person is made available.

Dept feels that concept of UNRep and one rep each from Arab and Jewish local admin constituting a Comm and acting by majority vote (last para, ref tel) is preferable to concept UNRep with advisory council. Participation of Arab rep and Jewish rep in Comm shld have result of engaging Arab and Jewish responsibility for actions taken by internatl auth in matters of common concern. Power on part of internatl auth in Jerusalem to bring important security matters to attn SC seems desirable, although precise method of such contact wld depend on relation of internatl auth in Jerusalem to UN. Art 4 of draft Jerusalem Statute bears on this point.

Dept is not clear as to reasons for lack of Comite approval of “internatl court with power to decide jurisdictional competence government organs and local courts and questions re exercise powers internatl auth.” Dept believes desirable to have some internatl tribunal competent to determine these questions, perhaps only on reference by Jerusalem internatl auth. Use of ICJ or chamber of that Court for this purpose may not be possible under UN Charter and Statute ICJ without amendment. Dept suggests provision for Jerusalem internatl tribunal to be selected, for example, by Pres ICJ.

Acheson

1 Identified also as telegram 185, March 2, from Jerusalem, not printed, but see footnote 2, p. 794 [Pg. 794 is part of Doc. 506].

The United States Representative at the United Nations (Austin) to the Secretary of State 501.BB Palestine/3–1149: Telegram

[Document 528]

The United States Representative at the United Nations (Austin) to the Secretary of State

New York, March 11, 1949—9:07 p. m.

319. Following is cablegram from Acting Mediator to SYG transmitting text of general cease-fire agreement between Israel and Trans Jordan:

“We, the undersigned on behalf of our respective governments do hereby agree that: 1. A general cease-fire between the armed forces of the two parties shall be effective as of the date of the signing of this agreement.

2. The general cease-fire shall be complete and enduring and shall apply to all elements of the military or para-military forces under the command of the parties signatory—land, sea and air—wherever located and shall extend to all sectors in which the armed forces of the two parties are found in proximity to each other beginning in the north at Kh Deir Azab (MR 1510 1574).

3. No element of the ground or air forces of either party shall advance beyond or pass over the lines or positions now held by the foremost elements of its ground forces and no element of air or naval forces of either party shall enter into or pass over the waters adjacent to the coastline now held by the other party for any purpose whatsoever.

4. Complete supervision of the truce by the UN observers shall be allowed and facilitated.

5. Movements of civilians shall not occur from one side to the other except by mutual agreement of the parties.

This general cease-fire agreement shall be without prejudice to the rights, claims, interests and positions of either party signatory hereto as regards specific matters which may relate to the armistice negotiations now in progress or to the ultimate peaceful settlement of all outstanding issues between the parties.”

Austin

The Special Representative of the United States in Israel (McDonald) to the Secretary of State 867N.01/3–1149: Telegram

[Document 529]

The Special Representative of the United States in Israel (McDonald) to the Secretary of State

secret
niact Tel Aviv, March 11, 1949—11 p. m.

us urgent

205. ReDeptel 145, March 9, further to our 202, March 11.1 At 4 p. m. Foreign Minister requested my [me] call. Knox also present. Foreign Minister categorically denied any invasion Transjordan territory or any such intention and gravely stated Israel’s resentment US seeming assumption Israel’s guilt and consequent warning prior inquiry of Israel regarding its intentions or actions.

Foreign Minister explained as follows: 1. At 10 p. m. last night (March 10) Israeli flag raised over Umm Reshresh police station on shore Gulf of Aqaba just west Transjordan frontier (145885) “thus completing and making effective Israel’s possession of Negev”.

2. For some days Israel forces moving south in Negev with difficulty owing necessity find new transit avoiding any encroachment on Transjordan frontier; had to avoid eastern road in parts because it crosses Transjordan frontier and had to find new approach to Umm Reshresh in order avoid using road that crosses Egyptian frontier. Movement successful and at no point did Israeli forces cross either Transjordan or Egyptian frontiers.

3. As Israeli units approached Naqb el Aqaba (137890) (not Rasen Naqb which is on Egyptian side 136891) approximately 7 miles NW junction Gulf AqabA–Transjordan frontier (145885) and also Umm Reshresh they saw from distance unit of Transjordan Arab Legion entrenched there. Israeli forces stopped because under strict orders avoid clash.

4. Immediately Transjordan opened “diplomatic warfare” through three channels: a. Message conveyed to Foreign Minister from Abdullah that latter shocked hear Israel advancing on Aqaba and that this did not accord with spirit Rhodes and that Israel forces were clashing with Transjordan. King alleged incidents at Naqb el Aqaba, Wadi Araba, and Aqaba area. To this Foreign Minister replied that if source King’s anxiety was that Israel had intentions Port Aqaba or had crossed Transjordan frontier Foreign Minister could assure him neither was case, if Abdullah was in position equally assure Transjordan troops would not cross Israel frontier all would be well and that Foreign Minister assumed Abdullah aware fact Negev between Egypt and Transjordan was assigned to Israel by UN and that Israel determined exercise sovereignty over it. As regards incidents: Incident at Naqb el Aqaba was well within Israel territory: Incident Wadi Araba was when Transjordan police patrol from Ein Gharandal (170944) fired on Israel troops well within Israel Negev and then withdrew, no incident in Aqaba area.

b. Second channel was Transjordan complaint to Bunche accusing Israel of crossing a Transjordan drawn “line” in Negev. This complaint admitted very helpful existence Transjordan invasion troops in area, Shiloah replied to Bunche as indicated in Deptel under reference and requested Bunche tell Transjordan evacuate area before larger issues are raised.

c. Third channel through HMG representative Tel Aviv who left note Foreign Office callings attention Government to HMG’s ally’s charges that Israel had crossed frontiers and was attacking Ein Gharandal. Note outlined line of action British troops in Aqaba would take certain instances as follows: (1) If Israeli forces crossed Transjordan frontiers and fired they would be fired upon.

(2) If Israeli forces fire from Israel side fire would be returned.

(3) If Israeli cross frontier without firing they will be warned and then fired upon.

(4) If Israeli aircraft flew over British positions they would be fired upon whether they fired or not.

Foreign Minister stated that during the night of March 9–10 the Transjordan forces at Naqb el Aqaba and at Umm Reshresh evacuated and Israel forces occupied positions without firing.

Foreign Minister then read cable received from Eilat2 giving details of conversations in Department (reDeptel under reference) in which Eilat stated that attitude was tense and accusatory at first but more conciliatory at end. Foreign Minister said he would be less than frank if he did not state that this attitude of US based entirely on complaints from one side and without prior inquiry of Israeli Government has caused deep official resentment. (He was also probably thinking of inquiry made under instructions Deptel 140, March 8.) He stated that the Israeli move to Aqaba Gulf was undertaken with extraordinary care and great difficulty to avoid infringement Transjordan Egyptian frontiers and to avoid clashes. Conscious that Israel aggression would involve clash British, he stated “if there is no respect for our integrity there should be some respect for our intelligence”. He added that if this ex parte attitude on part of US were publicly known it would produce most unfortunate reaction.

Foreign Minister concluded by stating that Government had asked Bunche send observers immediately Negev check Israeli position, transit area, and alleged clashes. Also had instructed Shiloah at Rhodes March 11 sign cease-fire agreement with Transjordan in area of which most northern point is village of Budrus (149153) further line to north excluded because lack confirmation that Transjordan has power act for Iraq.

Comment: View tenseness situation and public feeling, earnestly hope that Department will not prejudge Israel’s intentions or actions on basis of complaints received from Arab capitals, Information gathered independently by MA’s tends confirm Foreign Minister’s statement that Israel has tried avoid clashes and has scrupulously refrained from infringing on Transjordan territory. End comment.

Pass to Army, Air, Navy.

Sent Department, passed London 16, Amman 4, Jerusalem 19.

McDonald

1 Not printed; it gave Mr. McDonald’s comment that the “Mission considers highly disturbing Transjordan assertion that it has established a military ‘line’ across Israeli territory in Negev and now accuses Israel of crossing that line. “Feeling among Israelis here is that Transjordan and British are determined precipitate clashes on Israel territory in effort force establishment armistice lines after which Transjordan will consider itself in permanent occupation of area.” (867N.01/3–1149)

2 Alternate spelling of Elath; see footnote 4, p. 811 [Pg. 811 is part of Doc. 518].

Mr. Wells Stabler to the Secretary of State 867N.01/3–1249: Telegram

[Document 530]

Mr. Wells Stabler to the Secretary of State

secret Amman, March 12, 1949—4 p. m.

100. 1. It is understood that Sassoon has sent message to King within, past two days to following effect: (a) Israelis advancing in Negev have no intention crossing Transjordan frontier or of attacking Akaba and King should so inform his “British allies”;

(b) Israel hopes Arab Legion and British forces will receive orders not to attack Israeli Forces in order that present excellent relations existing between Israel and Transjordan may continue;

(c) Israel wishes conclude peace settlements soonest with Transjordan provided Transjordan and British will not take aggressive action in Negev. King’s reply is expected to be noncommital.

2. British troops at Akaba have been ordered by British Government to use restraint and in event Israelis cross frontier, to warn them to retire before opening fire. All Israeli aircraft over Transjordan positions will be fired on immediately.

3. Glubb said this morning that in signing cease-fire agreement yesterday at Rhodes Israelis would not agree to clause re extension cease-fire to Iraqi areas if and when Legion took over (Legtel 91, March 9). Bunche consequently informed both sides in writing that at such time as Arab Legion took over Iraqi front line it would be incumbent on both parties to discuss extension present agreement those areas.

4. Israelis are reported to have occupied in past 48 hours no man’s land in Beitjibrin–Faluja area, taking over 15 Arab villages.

Sent Department 100, repeated Jerusalem 63 for PCC.

Stabler

Mr. Wells Stabler to the Secretary of State 501.BB Palestine/3–1249: Telegram

[Document 531]

Mr. Wells Stabler to the Secretary of State

secret Amman, March 12, 1949—5 p. m.

101. Government and military circles here have been badly shaken by recent Israeli actions in Negev particularly when armistice negotiations were proceeding at Rhodes. Although still hoping that US and UK as well as United Nations will find some effective method of putting halt to continued violations by Israel of SC resolutions, both in spirit and in letter, they recognize that past efforts to deal with such Israeli violations and faits accomplis have resulted in failure—in de facto acceptance of advantages gained by Israel through violations. While there are indications that Transjordan, facing realistically its present position vis-à-vis Israel, would be willing conclude peace with that country notwithstanding developments in Negev, there is considerable question as to whether Israel will cease its aggressions at this point. Evidence available at Arab Legion and Iraqi headquarters, and confirmed to certain extent by UN observers, points to intended Israeli attack on “Arab triangle”.1 (Immediately following telegram2 quotes text of memorandum on subject provided by Arab Legion headquarters.)

Since previous Israeli violations of SC orders have been undertaken in surprise moves, no opportunity has been offered to take any action concerning them except in nature ex post facto protests. Result has been that violations succeeded as faits accomplis. However in this instance evidence indicates that Israel plans aggressive measures toward an area which cannot even remotely be construed as “Israel territory” and may translate them into action at any time.

Would earnestly and urgently recommend that Department consider calling in Israeli Ambassador and, informing him of these reports, warn him of serious consequences affecting US–Israel relations if Israel undertakes this or any other aggressive action. Unless this is done and Israel is placed firmly on notice another violation and fait accompli will probably be chalked up in Israel’s favor.3

Sent Department 101, repeated Jerusalem 64 for PCC, USUN 6.

Stabler

1 The area in Palestine bounded by the towns of Nablus, Jenin, and Tulkarm.

2 No. 102, March 12, 7 p. m., not printed.

3 The Department, in telegram 30 to Amman, March 14, suggested that “If Iraqi and TJ Govts have reliable and specific evidence indicating Israelis planning offensive against triangle, would seem logical for them bring such evidence to attention Bunche.” The telegram was repeated to Baghdad and to Jerusalem for Mr. Ethridge (501.BB Palestine/3–1249). London, on March 14, reported information from Sir Alec S. Kirkbride, British Minister to Transjordan, who was then at London for consultation, that the Transjordanian Delegation at Rhodes had suggested that the cease-fire should apply to the Iraqi front as soon as this front would be taken over by Transjordan but that the Israeli Delegation had refused, saying the matter would be discussed after the takeover. It also advised of a telegram received that morning by the Foreign Office from Amman stating that the Israeli Foreign Minister had informed the Transjordanian Delegation that Israeli forces would occupy Samaria to “maintain order” as soon as the Iraqi forces withdrew (telegram 964, 867N.01/3–1449).

The Consul at Jerusalem (Burdett) to the Secretary of State 501.BB Palestine/3–1449: Telegram

[Document 532]

The Consul at Jerusalem (Burdett) to the Secretary of State

top secret
urgent Jerusalem, March 14, 1949—11 a. m.

222. [Palun 82?] For Acheson’s eyes only from Ethridge. All members of Commission remaining here have strong feeling that work of the Commission has been seriously prejudiced by: (1). Aqaba incident because although technically no border may have been violated at least new territory has been occupied and a SC order flouted. Furthermore it appears evident purpose to take Negev without exchange in contravention US position as stated in GA.

(2). Ben Gurion’s statement on Jerusalem previously reported to Department in ConGen telegram 216, March 11.

(3). Failure or refusal of Israeli Government to make any statement re refugees that would put Commission in position to find a key for peace negotiations, despite representations made by Department (see Palun 811 ).

We are not in possession of any assurance that could be given Arabs that any settlement on any question will be respected. As previously reported, this was a major theme of Arabs during our tour of capitals.

Above situation obviously prejudices success Beirut Conference. We have informally discussed calling off conference but my own feeling is that whether it fails or not we must (a) make the effort, (b) get the situation out into the open before there is further deterioration. Consequently we are going ahead with it. If the Department can do anything useful during Shertok’s visit to induce him to make one conciliatory gesture it may save the situation. Arabs have constantly impressed upon us that they regard the refugee question as test of Israeli good faith.

The second point they have made as I have previously reported, is that they want guarantees. I have consistently replied that the only assurance in which I can encourage them is through UN. When they see it flouted and the Commission treated as unwelcome interlopers they are not likely to regard that as great assurance. Indeed unless strong action of some kind is taken now Palestine may become even holier as the burial place of the UN.

My own feeling is that if Beirut Conference fails there is little left for us to do but to call for direct negotiations between Israel and the Arab states and present a plan for the internationalization of Jerusalem that will be academic. Seems to me therefore, that Department is faced with major decision—whether it should or will try to enforce position that if Israel takes the Negev it should make exchange of territory elsewhere. If the decision is to insist upon that it will require the strongest representations at the earliest possible moment. On the other hand Stabler expressed feeling Sunday that Transjordan would be willing to negotiate peace on almost any basis.

Some of us have the feeling that one reason for Shertok’s hasty departure might be desire to avoid showdown with Commission on refugee problem. Whether true or not, I hope the Department will consider the possibility that2 exists for turning his visit to our advantage. I am sure that he considers Washington more friendly than the Commission and has not been sufficiently impressed with US interest in UN settlement. I wish he could be shown that this is not the case. [Ethridge.]

Burdett

1 Identified also as telegram 221, March 14, from Jerusalem, not printed, but see footnote 3, p. 806 [Pg. 806 is part of Doc. 515].

2 At this point in the text appears “(Palun 82).” It is the opinion of the editors that Palun 82 is the same as telegram 222 from Jerusalem. This designation, therefore, has been deleted here and placed in brackets, with question mark, at the beginning of the message. In the “Summary of Daily Meeting with the Secretary” of March 15, Mr. Rusk, who became Assistant Secretary of State for United Nations Affairs on February 8, is said to have “reported that the Palestine situation is getting more serious. He asked the Secretary whether he had read telegram no. 222 from Ethridge. The Secretary said that he had not but would. Mr. Rusk said we should send this along to Key West at once with an indication that the Department will have some recommendations to make to the President in regard to it but that we desired the President to have this information immediately.” (Secretary’s Daily Meetings, Lot 58 D 609. This lot is a chronological collection of the records of the Secretary of State’s daily meetings with top Department of State officials for the year 1949–1952, as maintained by the Special Assistant to the Secretary of State.)

Memorandum by the Coordinator on Palestine Refugee Matters (McGhee) to the Under Secretary of State (Webb) 501.BB Palestine/3–1549

[Document 533]

Memorandum by the Coordinator on Palestine Refugee Matters (McGhee)1 to the Under Secretary of State (Webb)

secret [Washington,] March 15, 1949.

Attached are policy recommendations with respect to Palestine refugees, together with a supporting policy paper which contains on page 20 a statement of recommended planning objectives.2 These have been approved by Mr. Rusk, who hopes that they can be discussed at your regular staff meeting at the earliest opportunity.

Since I plan to leave for Beirut the morning of March 17, I would like to discuss this paper with you tomorrow, together with proposed plan of action and planning with respect to the refugee problem which are dealt with in papers attached.

After you have given consideration to these papers, I hope then to be able to discuss them with the Secretary, who has indicated his willingness to do so and to advise me of the President’s views with respect to this matter.3

[Annex 1]

Memorandum by the Coordinator on Palestine Refugee Matters (McGhee) to the Secretary of State

secret [Washington,] March 15, 1949.

Policy Recommendations

It is recommended that: (1) It be recognized as in the national interest of the United States that an early and effective solution be found to the problem of the Palestine refugees. Such solution should make possible their repatriation or resettlement in such a manner as to minimize present and potential political and economic tensions prejudicial to United States interests in the area affected.

(2) The United States be prepared to contribute such technical and financial assistance to the solution of this problem as it considers necessary, while at the same time refusing to accept sole responsibility for solution of the problem and seeking to confine U.S. financial assistance thereto within limits consistent with its national interests.

(3) A plan be developed as a matter of urgency for the implementation of this policy, including proposals for relief, rehabilitation, and long-range resettlement projects, estimated costs, and expected sources of funds, and operational procedures, including the part to be played by the U.S., the governments in the affected area, other interested governments, and the United Nations.4

[Annex 2]

501.MA Palestine/3–1749

Policy Paper Prepared in the Department of State 5

secret [Washington,] March 15, 1949.

Palestine Refugees

the problem

The problem is to determine the nature and extent of United States interest in the question of some 725,000 Arab refugees from the Palestine hostilities, and in the light of the findings, to make recommendations concerning United States policy towards the long-range disposition of this question.

discussion

(1) Background: As a result of hostilities in Palestine preceding land following the termination of the British Mandate and establishment of the State of Israel on May 15, 1948, almost the entire Arab population of Palestine fled or was expelled from the area under Jewish occupation. These Arabs, now estimated at 725,000, took refuge in Arab-controlled areas of Palestine and in the neighboring Arab states. The present distribution of the refugees is approximately the following: Lebanon 100,000- an addition of 10– 10.5% to the normal population

105,000

Syria 85,000– “ “ “ 3.5– 4% “ “ “ “

100,000

TransJordan 85,000 “ “ “ 21% “ “ “ “

Iraq 5,000 “ “ “ 0.1% “ “ “ “

Egypt 8,000– “ “ “ 0.04– 0.05% “ “ “ “

10,000

Palestine

North 230,000 areas under Egyptian, Iraqi, and Transjordanian military occupation

South 225,000

No accurate statistical breakdown of the refugees exists. However, the International Children’s Emergency Fund considers 425,000 or 58% of the refugees eligible for assistance under its program: this group consists of infants, young children, pregnant women, and nursing mothers. Approximately 15% of the refugees are aged, sick, and infirm. It would appear that the able-bodied men and women amount to a maximum of 25 percent of the total, or 180,000.

The condition of these refugees, dependent upon their own slender resources and upon those of the neighboring states, rapidly became acute. Since the Government of Israel refused to permit repatriation of Arab refugees into Israeli territory while a state of war existed, and since relief assistance enlisted by the United Nations Mediator for Palestine in August was wholly inadequate to meet a problem of this magnitude, the Mediator referred the problem to the General Assembly in September, with a renewed appeal for assistance. This appeal was reiterated by the Acting Mediator in a report to the United Nations on October 18, 1948,6 in which he made recommendations for the establishment of a United Nations relief program for assistance to the refugees.

(2) Action taken up to present.

In response to the Mediator’s initial request in August for emergency supplies, the Department’s only recourse, in the absence of authorized public funds, was to appeal to American voluntary agencies. As a result of this action, funds and supplies exceeding $1,500,000 have been contributed by American voluntary sources as of March 1, 1949.

On November 19, 1948, the General Assembly unanimously passed a joint US-UK-Belgian-Dutch resolution calling for a United Nations program for the relief of Palestinian refugees. This resolution declared that a sum of $32,000,000 would be required for a nine months’ program, to be raised by voluntary contributions, and authorized an immediate advance of $5,000,000 from the UN working capital fund.

This Government granted a leave of absence to Stanton Griffis, American Ambassador to Egypt, to enable him to accept the appointment as Director of United Nations Belief for Palestine Refugees.

On December 7, President Truman announced his intention of recommending to the Congress that the United States contribute 50 percent of the amount called for in the United Nations resolution, or $16,000,000.7 The authorizing legislation for this appropriation has been passed by the Senate, and is now pending in the House of Representatives.

The General Assembly resolution of December 11, 1948, establishing a Conciliation Commission far Palestine resolves “that the refugees wishing to return to their homes and live at peace with their neighbors should be permitted to do so at the earliest practicable date, and that compensation should be paid for the property of those choosing not to return and for loss of or damage to property which, under principles of international law or in equity, should be made good by the Governments or authorities responsible”. A machinery for implementing these objectives is provided by the resolution, which “instructs the Conciliation Commission to facilitate the repatriation, resettlement and economic and social rehabilitation of the refugees and the payment of compensation, and to maintain close relations with the Director of the United Nations Relief for Palestine Refugees and, through him, with the appropriate organs and agencies of the United Nations.” We strongly supported the resolution of December 11, and have instructed the American member of the Conciliation Commission to be guided, with respect to the refugee question, by its terms.

With respect to the attitude of the Israeli Government towards the question of repatriation, we have undertaken and are undertaking action on the diplomatic level in two respects: (1) with the underlying purpose of safeguarding Arab absentee property interests in Israel against application of the Israeli ordinance of December 12, 1948 authorizing sale of such property, we are urging Israel not to take unilateral action which would prejudice achievement of an agreed settlement on the return of refugees to their homes and return of property to refugee owners; (2) we are urging Israel to implement the purposes of the December 11 resolution, as a means of facilitating political settlement of the Palestine problem and preparing the way for a modus vivendi with the Arab states.

If Israel indicates agreement in principle with the December 11 resolution, or expresses its willingness to cooperate in resolving the refugee question, we also contemplate making representations to the Arab states, with a view to their adoption of a more realistic attitude towards the question of accepting a share of the refugees on a permanent basis and with a view to stimulating them to make constructive plans to this end.

(3) Assumptions that can be made with respect to the problem.

Failure to liquidate or materially reduce the magnitude of the Arab refugee problem would have important consequences. The Arab states presently represent a highly vulnerable area for Soviet exploitation, and the presence of over 700,000 destitute, idle refugees provides the likeliest channel for such exploitation. In addition, their continued presence will further undermine the weakened economy of the Arab states, and may well provide the motivation for the overthrow of certain of the Arab Governments. Moreover, failure to liquidate the problem would adversely affect the possibility of a permanent settlement in Palestine, and would create a permanent source of friction between Israel and the Arab states.

Conversely, speedy action looking to the equitable solution of the refugee problem would further the restoration of peace and security and contribute to the stabilization of the Near East. It would prevent the exploitation of the refugee problem by foreign interests inimical to the best interests of the peoples of the Near East.

In view of the stated position of Israel towards the question of repatriation, and the large-scale preemption of Arab lands and housing by Jewish immigrants, who are entering Israel at the rate of 25,000 monthly, it would be wholly unrealistic to expect Israel to agree to the repatriation of all those so desiring. Although the Jews originally accepted the partition resolution of November 29, 1947, under which the Arab population of the Jewish state would have numbered 500,000, it is doubtful that the State of Israel would now permit more than a small number of refugees to return to Israel. If Israel could be persuaded to accept any substantial number, it is probable that it would request financial assistance in carrying out their repatriation.

It is reasonable to assume that as many as 600,000 refugees will have to be permanently settled in the Arab states. The Arab states, however, will be unable to accomplish the resettlement of this number without adverse economic and political repercussions, unless material assistance is forthcoming.

It can also be assumed that any machinery and resources which are placed at the disposal of the Conciliation Commission to implement its task will be inadequate to deal with a resettlement problem of this magnitude. Moreover, the resources of the United Nations and its specialized agencies are presently inadequate to handle this problem and, to judge from the response of the member states to the appeal for funds to implement the November 19 resolution establishing a relief program, the member states would not be willing to contribute the material resources required to carry out a mass resettlement program if such action were proposed in the United Nations.

Finally, it can be assumed that Great Britain is the only major foreign power whose degree of interest in the liquidation of the refugee question is sufficient to insure any significant participation in its solution. (Attention should be called in this respect to Great Britain’s close treaty relations with Egypt and Iraq, and to her special position with respect to Transjordan, the latter two of which would probably be heavily involved in any mass resettlement program.)

(4) United States interests and policy in the Near East.

The Near Eastern area, which consists of Israel and the Arab states, is an area of vital strategic importance, a communications center, and a major source of petroleum. As such, it is an area of special concern to all the great powers and to certain lesser powers. During recent years our chief objective in the Near East was to prevent inherent rivalries and conflicting interests in that area from developing into conditions which might lead to a third world war, an objective dictated by our primary interest in safeguarding the security of the United States.

Because of the special significance of Palestine, the conflicting interests and aspirations of the Near East as a whole have had a primary focus in that country and, during the past year, found expression in open hostilities. Prior to the outbreak of hostilities, this Government took a leading part in seeking a solution of the Palestine problem which would be acceptable to the interested parties. Since the failure of these attempts, we have been active in supporting measures designed to end the conflict, and to achieve a permanent settlement of the Palestine problem. These efforts, carried on within the framework of the United Nations, have been governed by our desire to support in the Near East the principles of the United Nations, and to put an end to the threat to international security and to American strategic interests in the Near East which the present situation represents.

In conjunction with our efforts to achieve the permanent settlement of Arab-Jewish differences with respect to Palestine, we are striving to promote the establishment of cooperative relationships between Israel and the Arab states, as a condition to the stabilization and peaceful development of the area.

On a regional basis, it is our policy to assist the Near Eastern countries in maintaining their independence, to strengthen their orientation towards the West, and to discourage any tendencies towards the development of authoritarian and unrepresentative forms of government. Such efforts are designed both to minimize the debilitating effects of internal discontent, and to strengthen the determination of these states to resist external pressures and intervention.

(5) Effect of the refugee problem upon United States interests and policy.

From the political point of view, the stabilization of the Near East is a major objective of American foreign policy. The refugee problem, therefore, as a focal point for continued unrest within the Arab states, a source of continuing friction between Israel and the Arabs, and a likely channel for Soviet exploitation, is directly related to our national interests.

From the strategic point of view, the Joint Chiefs of Staff, on September 22, 1948, with specific reference to the Arab refugee question, characterized the Near Eastern area as an area of critical strategic importance, and emphasized the necessity, from a military standpoint, of maintaining the Arab world oriented towards the United States and the United Kingdom. They therefore recommended that, as a measure to strengthen our military position, the United States should make provision for generous assistance to the Arab refugees from Palestine.8 The Secretary of Defense on January 25, 1949, charterized the presence of the refugees in the Near East as a serious threat to the political, economic and social stability of this region, and a serious danger to the health and welfare of the peoples of the Arab states and Israel.9

Our present policy with respect to Palestinian refugees, as set forth in the Secretary’s Policy Problem Book, is the following:

We should use our best efforts, through the Conciliation Commission and through diplomatic channels, to insure the implementation of the General Assembly resolution of December 11, 1948;

We should endeavor to persuade Israel to accept the return of those refugees who so desire, in the interests of justice and as an evidence of its desire to establish amicable relations with the Arab world;

We should furnish advice and guidance to the governments of the Arab states in the task of absorbing into their economic and social structures those refugees who do not wish to return to Israel.

(6) Attitudes of UN, individual governments, and refugees themselves toward the problem.

(a) Attitude of the UN.

Count Bernadotte, the slain Palestine Mediator, very early established the principle of UN responsibility for the Palestine refugees. In Conclusion (G) of his report, dated September 16, in Part Three (Assistance to Refugees), he said:

“So long as large numbers of the refugees remain in distress, I believe that responsibility for their relief should be assumed by the United Nations in conjunction with the neighbouring Arab States, the Provisional Government of Israel, the specialized agencies, and also all the voluntary bodies or organizations of a humanitarian and non-political character.”

However, at the Third Session of the General Assembly in Paris, the United States Delegation was careful to insist in conversations with other Delegations that there was no legal responsibility for refugee relief devolving upon the United Nations. The United States Delegation succeeded in eliminating from the United Kingdom draft of the Preamble of the resolution before the Third Committee providing for an emergency relief program, a paragraph which would have established United Nations responsibility for this problem. The issue was placed before the Third Committee and the Assembly on its own merits as a question involving humanitarian as well as political elements which would have to be met on an ad hoc basis without establishing a precedent for similar United Nations action in other cases.

Nevertheless, in the eyes of the refugees themselves and to an even greater extent in the view of the Arab Governments, there is a United Nations responsibility for the care of the refugees only slightly less than an imagined United States responsibility, since the Arab Governments are prone to insist that Israel would not have come into existence without United States support and, had there been no Israel, there would have been no refugees.

Subsequent to the passage of the resolution, the UN in the field, under the directorship of Ambassador Stanton Griffis, has undertaken primary responsibility for the emergency phase of refugee relief. There is no doubt that the Secretary General, Mr. Trygve Lie, feels convinced that the United Nations must continue to show effective leadership in meeting this problem. However, in essence, the continuing participation of the United Nations in dealing with the interim and long-range phases of the matter will depend on the attitudes of the Governments who compose the United Nations.

(b) Attitudes of Governments.

It was significant that when the Palestine refugee problem was considered by Committee 3 in Paris last autumn, support was more verbal than valuable in tangible terms. Mr. Mayhew of the British Delegation, at the very commencement of the session, insisted that the Third Committee should immediately devise measures to meet the refugee problem. When asked, however, what measures the United Kingdom had in mind or even if its delegation had a draft resolution, Mr. Mayhew confessed that they had neither ideas nor the embodiment of ideas in resolution form. The British attitude seemed to be one of viewing with great alarm, but most of the spade work in developing the resolution which was finally adopted by the Assembly was done by the United States Delegation. It is probable, however, that it was due to British influence that the Netherlands and Belgium associated themselves with the United Kingdom, and the United States, in jointly sponsoring a resolution. Unfortunately, however, the interest of these governments in contributing to the refugee relief in more tangible terms than sponsorship of a resolution has not proved to be very great. Although the Belgian Government has contributed approximately one-half a million dollars, the Dutch have given nothing, while the French contribution still awaits Parliamentary approval. The British contribution totals one million pounds.

The response of other governments has been even less enthusiastic. In fact, the great brunt of relief expenditures has been borne, perforce, by the Arab States, on whom these refugees are quartered. Dr. Bayard Dodge estimates that from the time the first refugees escaped from Haifa and Jaffa in the spring of 1948, to December 1 in that year, the Arab Governments contributed $11 million in cash or kind to their sustenance. This sum, in light of the very slender budgets of most of these Governments, is relatively enormous.*

The conclusion seems inescapable, therefore, that even though the United Nations should formulate a program for the interim and long-range relief periods, its constituent Governments cannot be relied upon for very effective contributions with the possible exception of the United Kingdom.

The United Kingdom has definitely indicated its mounting concern at the refugee problem, realizing as it does how the presence of 700,000 demoralized and hungry people can threaten the entire stability of the strategic Middle East in which the United Kingdom has a vital interest. Thus, the British Foreign Secretary on March 2 spoke to Ambassador Douglas in London of the depth of his concern regarding the plight of the Arab refugees. Mr. Bevin felt that this was a problem of alarming proportions which “deserves the utmost efforts of the United States and United Kingdom as well as the United Nations”, to say nothing of being a political problem of the first magnitude for the reestablishment of peace in the Middle East (London telegram 787, March 310 ).

Although this was the attitude of the British Foreign Secretary, his Foreign Office has as yet not formulated concrete proposals for meeting the problem. Nevertheless, British Missions in the Middle East have been circularized with a questionnaire and the Foreign Secretary, who displays a keen personal interest in the matter, in the last week of February directed that the views of the Commonwealth Governments regarding the refugee problem be ascertained, as they might be helpful not only in a material way but also in the United Nations. Mr. Bevin thought that India and Pakistan, which have wide experience in handling refugee problems, might be of particular help. He felt also that the French Government should be consulted because of its wide Moslem responsibilities. (London telegram 742, March 111 ).

On the basis of this evidence, therefore, there would seem to be ground for considerable spade work with the British. Through the British Middle East Office the United Kingdom has extensive economic contact with the Arab Governments and an immense reservoir of experience on which to draw. Furthermore, in very concrete terms the British should be able to tap the resources of such great engineering firms as Gibbs and Cox, who, it is understood, have prepared detailed engineering plans for river development projects and land improvement schemes in Transjordan and other areas where Palestine refugees might be settled.

Since the British and American Governments are in concert as to their strategic requirements in the Middle East, it would seem absolutely essential that any program for that area in regard to refugee relief which would be sponsored by this Government, either in the United Nations or as a separate project, should be accomplished in the closest accord with the United Kingdom Government.

(c) Attitude of the Refugees Themselves.

All reports from the field—i.e., those of Dr. Bayard Dodge and Mr. Colin Bell of the Friends Service Committee, recently returned from Gaza, and of Mr. St. Aubin, the Field Director in the Near East of the American Red Cross, plus reports from United States Missions in that area—confirm that the great bulk of the refugees wish to return to their homes and cling to the illusion that it will be possible to do so.

The danger point will come when the refugees realize that it will be impossible for the majority to return home. It is true that Mr. Stanton Griffis in Cairo’s airgram A–254, March 1,11 expresses the opinion that, once peace is restored, large numbers of refugees will infiltrate across the Israeli border and return to their former abode. Nevertheless, the Representatives of the Provisional Government of Israel have very clearly indicated that Israel has no intention of taking back more than a portion of the refugees. The Israeli Representative in Washington, Mr. Eliahu Elath, told Mr. Mark Ethridge that he thought that maybe the Christian Arabs might be permitted to return but that the Moslem Arabs would be an intractable element who could not assimilate in Israel. Furthermore, Israeli authorities have followed a systematic program of destroying Arab houses in such cities as Haifa and in village communities in order to rebuild modern habitations for the influx of Jewish immigrants from DP camps in Europe. There are, thus, in many instances, literally no houses for the refugees to return to. In other cases incoming Jewish immigrants have occupied Arab dwellings and will most certainly not relinquish them in favor of the refugees. Accordingly, it seems certain that the majority of these unfortunate people will soon be confronted with the fact that they will not be able to return home. Unless some alternative is prepared and some hope offered them of an improved life in the future, it is certain that the political, to say nothing of the social, repercussions of this discovery will be very great.

If a proper program can be devised and implemented promptly, it is to be anticipated that the refugees will cooperate in carrying out the program, especially since they will in any case have no alternative. These people, for the most part, have long been inured to hardship and to life on a subsistence level. Although they have a very natural desire to return to their local fig tree and vine, to use Ambassador Griffis’ phrase, it should be possible, if they had a reasonable prospect of acquiring some other fig tree and vine elsewhere, to maintain their morale and to put tools in their hands for their own salvation. The danger will be, if through lack of a proper program or adequate funds, they find themselves, on one hand, cut off from a hope of return to their former homes and, on the other hand, bereft of hope in establishing a new life for themselves elsewhere. If this should transpire it seems almost a foregone conclusion that the ensuing conditions of unrest and despair would provide a most fertile hotbed for the implantation of Communism, and we should in that moment expect to see in the vitally important strategic Middle East a reproduction of the present debacle in China.

(d) Attitude of the Arab states.

It is the present policy of the Arab states to insist upon the repatriation of all the Palestinian refugees, and none of the Arab states with the exception of Transjordan contemplates the permanent settlement of any refugees within its own territory. It can be assumed that the most virogous efforts will have to be exerted by the Conciliation Commission and by interested governments if the Arab states are to be persuaded to adopt a more realistic and cooperative attitude towards this question. Moreover, it can be assumed that their active cooperation could only be obtained under the following circumstances: (1) they would require evidence that substantial material assistance would be forthcoming from outside sources to aid in solving the refugee problem:

(2) they would require assurances that such aid would be of material benefit to their countries and populations, as well as to the refugees themselves;

(3) they would require assurances that the administration of such aid would involve no derogation of sovereignty; and

(4) they would require evidence that Israel was prepared to cooperate effectively in the liquidation of the refugee question.

(7) United States Public Attitude Toward the Problem.

The American public, generally is unaware of the Palestine refugee problem, since it has not been hammered away at by the press or radio. Aside from the New York Times and the Herald Tribune, which have done more faithful reporting than any other papers, there has been very little coverage of the problem. With the exception of a Sunday feature article by Max Boyd, the wire service stories, if filed, have not been used. Editorial comment is still more sparse. Freda Kirchwey in Nation, a few editorials in America (Catholic), an editorialized article in the New Leader and one editorial each in the Baltimore Sun and the Des Moines Register nearly exhausts the list. Most of the news articles and editorials have had a friendly slant, except for the New York Post, which was violently opposed to helping the Arabs. While some of the articles have addressed themselves to the question of the nature of the settlement as regards repatriation or resettlement, none of them have raised the question of continuing aid. Consequently one may conclude that, barring any dramatic developments which would arouse prejudices or create new issues, a continuing but not spectacular aid program would probably be supported by the enlightened few, and would not, in all likelihood, run into strong opposition.

Congressional Attitude.

In considering the authorizing legislation for the U.S. contribution of $16,000,000, the Senate Foreign Relations Committee was chiefly concerned with the fact that the U.S. Delegation at Paris had taken action which appeared to commit the U.S. morally, if not legally, to a contribution thus placing Congress in the position of being a rubber stamp. It was also concerned about the establishment of a precedent under which the United States might undertake other programs of this character which would not be supported by all UN Members on the basis of the regular scale of contributions. There was no challenge of the thesis that the contribution was in the national interest, an argument which, though valid, is apparently tiresome because over-worked.

The House Committee on Foreign Affairs readily accepted the Senate action on the U.S. contribution but raised questions concerning the possible application of the matching principle as a condition for the U.S. contribution. The point was not pressed in this instance but is one which should be borne in mind in connection with any further program.

Neither the Senate nor the House Committee probed the problem of continuing assistance. The Department rested its case on the need for relief over a limited period of time on the basis that aid was essential to contribute to the peace settlement and stabilization in the Near East. It also stressed the General Assembly resolution declaring that the right of refugees to return to their homes should be recognized, and the role of the Conciliation Commission in facilitating the economic and social rehabilitation of the refugees. An aside remark by one of the senators in the hearings that the program might go on for three or five years was not taken up. This was the only intimation that Congress might expect to be faced with a request for some kind of continuing program. The fact that it was not picked up is probably more significant in connection with the lack of opposition to the present program than in relation to the possibility of a continuing program. No statement has been made at any time that no further assistance would be needed.

The Senate adopted the joint resolution without objection after the presentation of the report of the Senate Committee (which was also adopted unanimously) had been presented by Senator Connally. The House Committee was unanimous in the adoption of its report to the House. The only hitch thus far has been in the House Rules Committee which postponed action on the rule to report the measure because its members had, with one exception, never heard of the Arab Refugee problem.

It is perhaps not unreasonable to conclude from the foregoing that a reasonable program for continuing aid would not meet with strong opposition in Congress. However, the form of such aid, the question of whether it is multilateral or unilateral, and its bearing upon other aid programs, are matters on which the success or failure of continuing aid may hinge.

(8) Attitude of Individuals and Groups Interested in the Problem.

The private groups interested in the Palestine Refugee problem consist primarily of the following: (a) the oil companies (ARAMCO, Standard of N.J., Socony Vacuum, Gulf Oil Company, American Independent Oil Company, Standard of California, Standard of New York, and the Texas Company, all of whom have varying degrees of interest; (b) Church groups, particularly the American Friends Service Committee, the Church World Service Committee, the National Catholic Welfare Conference, the Lutheran World Relief and several small denominations all of whom are associated directly or indirectly with welfare or religious projects in the Near East; (c) lay groups such as the Near East Foundation, the Near East College Association, Middle East Relief, Inc., Middle East Union, Committee for Holy Land Appeal (an over-all body comprising most of the aforementioned groups for the purpose of raising emergency funds) and the American Red Cross. A number of interested individuals, some of whom are closely identified with one or more of the above groups include the following: Winthrop Rockefeller, Nelson Rockefeller, Bayard Dodge, Kermit Roosevelt, Harold Hoskins, Lowell Thomas, Barclay Acheson, Dr. Patton, Edward Miller, Col. Eddy, Terry Duce, and Garland Hopkins.

All of the foregoing would probably give strong support for public assistance measures designed to stabilize the Near East and to promote the welfare of those peoples. Most of these groups are associated with or might be interested in contributing or raising funds from private sources for long-range welfare projects in the area. A campaign is to be launched shortly on the initiative of Kermit Roosevelt and Garland Hopkins to raise funds for a refugee welfare program. Present thinking is that it should extend over a five-year period. The oil companies when approached for relief funds last autumn were reluctant to support a feeding program and indicated, at that time, their greater concern and possible willingness to participate financially in longer range projects which would be of permanent value to the Near Eastern peoples. They will undoubtedly contribute through appropriate channels to private projects of this character. The possibility that some of them might also be induced to finance useful work projects in certain areas should not be excluded in the event that funds from other sources are inadequate. A $5 million figure was tossed about last autumn as a tentative indication of oil company interest in long-range welfare projects, but it would be unwise to accept this figure as even a tentative target until the programs of voluntary agencies are more fully developed.

Welfare programs are needed immediately in the refugee centers and every effort should be made to induce the voluntary agencies to develop and finance such programs. The campaign referred to above is the only major effort being undertaken. However, it is unlikely that any program financed from this source could be developed in the field for many months. Regardless of the time factor it is important that any such program be coordinated with the planning of the continuing aid program.

The first approach to the private groups should probably be made at an early date in order to ascertain in more detail the nature of the projects envisaged. We might wish to encourage in-camp training projects as the best means to enable the refugees to adapt themselves to new conditions. We can reveal our concern about continuing aid, but indicate that it is a difficult and complex problem which cannot be quickly or easily implemented. Moreover, an initial effort on the part of private groups will be of value in urging public assistance as it becomes clear that the magnitude of the problem is too great for them to cope with. Their fund-raising activities and the attendant publicity will call attention to the continuing need and help pave the way for Congressional action.

recommendations

The following objectives are recommended as a basis for planning with respect to the problem, subject to change as the plan develops: (1) To stimulate the adoption of plans to expedite the transfer of the problem from its present unproductive relief basis to a basis for a definitive settlement;

(2) To persuade Israel to accept the principle of repatriation of an agreed number or category of refugees, with provision by Israel for appropriate safeguards of civil and religious rights and on condition that those repatriated desire to live at peace within Israel and to extend full allegiance thereto;

(3) To persuade Israel to initiate the gradual repatriation of an agreed number or category as soon as possible;

(4) To urge the Israeli Government to make equitable compensation for the property and assets of those refugees who do not desire to return and of those whose property and assets have been expropriated or otherwise disposed of by the State of Israel;

(5) To provide for the permanent settlement in Arab Palestine in the near future of as large a number of the refugees as appears economically practicable;

(6) Under the assumption that Arab Palestine, or at least a large portion thereof, will be allotted to Transjordan in the final peace settlement, to undertake concerted planning with the British Government with a view to the early integration of a large portion of the refugee population into the economic and political structure of the expanded state as a whole;

(7) To examine the developmental resources common to Israel and the expanded state of Transjordan, with special reference to their water resources, with a view to stimulating cooperative economic development projects, where feasible, for the mutual benefit of both states;

(8) If the repatriation of substantial number of refugees becomes feasible, to give special consideration to those areas having the greatest relative concentrations of refugees, particularly Lebanon, which is undergoing serious economic pressures and facing potential political pressures, and the Gaza area of southwestern Palestine, with its limited developmental potentialities;

(9) With respect to those refugees who cannot be assimilated in Israel or the expanded state of Transjordan, to examine the potentialities for permanent resettlement elsewhere in the Near East, bearing in mind the capabilities of northeastern Syria and northern Iraq, where basic manpower shortages and large cultivable areas exist;

(10) Where feasible, in the resettlement of refugees, to plan on utilization of projects which will contribute to the long-range development of the productive capacity and economic potential of the area, as contrasted with short-term projects which might be without ultimate benefit to the countries involved.12

1 In this position, Mr. McGhee served as Special Assistant to the Secretary of State.

2 These papers are printed as Annexes 1 and 2, below. The planning objectives on page 20 are the 10 recommendations in Annex 2.

3 Filed with this memorandum is an undated memorandum, prepared presumably by Mr. McGhee and entitled Plan of Action [regarding] Palestine Refugee Problem,” not printed.

4 According to a memorandum of April 21, the numbered paragraphs were accepted as a “Policy Decision, March 15, 1949.” The authorship of the memorandum is not indicated (867N.48/4–2249). The word “be” in each of the first two paragraphs above was changed to “is” in the memorandum of April 21 and the word “should” was added as the third word in paragraph 3.

5 The specific authorship of this paper is not indicated. The first six sections, except for 6(d), and the 10 recommendations at the end of the paper were largely quoted from memoranda prepared separately by the Office of Near Eastern and African Affairs and the Office of United Nations Affairs. The former was sent to Mr. McGhee in a memorandum of March 12 by Mr. Satterthwaite as provisional views on “Policy and recommendations concerning solution of the Arab refugee question” (867N.01/3–1249). The latter was in the form of a memorandum by Mr. McClintock to Mr. McGhee on March 14 and dealt with the “Attitudes of UN, individual governments, and refugees themselves toward Palestine refugee problem” (867N.48/3–1449). The Policy Paper begins with a table of contents, here omitted.

6 United Nations, Official Records of the General Assembly, Third Session, Supplement No. 11A. For the proposed United States draft resolution based on the needs of the refugees as set forth in this report, see telegram Delga 411, October 20, 1948, from Paris, Foreign Relations, 1948, vol. v, Part 2, p. 1497.

7 For text of statement by President Truman, see telegram Gadel 688, December 6, 1948, to Paris, Foreign Relations, 1948, vol. v, Part 2, p. 1648.

8 See telegram Telmar 19, September 28, 1948, to Paris, Foreign Relations, 1948, vol. v, Part 2, p. 1427.

9 See Secretary Forrestal’s letter to Chairman Bloom, January 25, p. 697 [Pg. 697 includes portions of Doc. 423 and Doc. 424].

* The total direct relief offered the Arab refugees by the Israeli Government to date consists of 500 cases of oranges. [Footnote in the source text.]

10 Not printed.

11 Not printed.

11 Not printed.

12 In a memorandum of March 23 to Mr. McClintock, James Q. Reber of the Executive Secretariat stated that the Policy Paper had been shown informally to the Secretary of State, the Under Secretary, and Mr. Rusk and that the Secretary had informally approved the “conclusions” (actually, the recommendations). The memorandum also stated that “This approval and knowledge of the specific policy issues included in the paper are sufficient to permit Mr. McGhee’s operations to be initiated.” Mr. McClintock quoted the memorandum in telegram 147 of March 25 to Mr. McGhee at Beirut. The memorandum and telegram are both filed under 501.MA Palestine/3–2249.

The Consul at Jerusalem (Burdett) to the Secretary of State 501.BB Palestine/3–1649: Telegram

[Document 534]

The Consul at Jerusalem (Burdett) to the Secretary of State

secret Jerusalem, March 16, 1949—11 a. m.

230. Palun 86. [From Ethridge.] Comay1 met with Jerusalem Committee as official representative Israel, accompanied by Lifshitz and Goulan. He proposed plan consisting internationalization Old City, division remainder area between adjacent states, and international authority over holy places in area.

Introductory statement largely devoted historical summary similar previous statements by Israel representatives on subject, but containing unusually strong condemnation UN for failure implement internationalization city or assuming responsibility for its protection. World opinion described as apathetic when Jerusalem under attack and siege. Jewish Jerusalem today in fact part of Israel and Jewish inhabitants citizens psychologically and in fact. Inconceivable they should be placed under international regime or that Israel could have part in such solution. Present day situation entirely different from 1947 when Jewish Agency reluctantly accepted internationalization.

In presenting plan he emphasized that world interest Jerusalem largely religious and historical. This interest concentrated in Old City which only half one per cent area and 15 per cent population area. Rest of area predominantly sectarian and world interest would be fully met by international authority over holy places. He judged from past evidence UN does not want responsibility for governing entire area, and this not necessary.

Israel not willing renounce Old City to permanent Transjordan rule. This would be perpetuation unstable and explosive situation. He expressed desire that two parties in control of city proceed to permanent demarcation Arab-Jewish areas. Committee agreed to facilitate this with assistance consuls who participated in previous talks this subject. US and French Consul envisioned.

Comay said he could not commit his Government at this stage, but Committee members are uncertain whether any flexibility in position. Appears certain Israel will not agree to Jerusalem as legal entity separate from Israel. Possible it might relinquish demand re Old City, resulting international regime limited to holy places. Committee members and USDel considers internationalization Old City only basically unfair and unacceptable. Committee has previously adopted general attitude that incorporation city into adjacent states not compatible international regime. In introductory statement, chairman of committee explained its general view that regime compatible with GA resolution might consist international authority with jurisdiction holy places and matters common concern, local Arab and Jewish administrations for remaining government functions.

Committee will probably not meet with Comay before presenting progress report to PCC and talking with Arab representatives in Beirut. [Ethridge.]

Burdett

1 Michael Comay, Director of the British Commonwealth Division in the Israeli Foreign Office.

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in Iraq 867N.01/3–1049: Telegram

[Document 535]

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in Iraq 1

confidential Washington, March 16, 1949—4 p. m.

94. Embtel 101 March 10.2 While recognizing Iraq’s needs in combatting possible subversive elements US unable consider lifting arms embargo before peace settlement achieved Palestine or SC Res May 29 rescinded. Dept assumes Fonoff realizes embargo could not be lifted for Iraq alone.

Emb shld point out that speedy conclusion armistice agreements as called for by GA Res Dec 11 wld hasten final peace settlement.

Acheson

1 This telegram was repeated to Tehran, Damascus, Moscow, Ankara, and London.

2 Not printed; it reported that a note from the Iraqi Foreign Office cited dangers that Kurdish forces led by Mustafa al-Barzani would in a few days try to enter Iraq. The forces were said to be supported by the Soviet Union and under its influence, in order to achieve Soviet political aims (867N.01/3–1049).

Memorandum by the Director of the Office of Near Eastern and African Affairs (Satterthwaite) to the Secretary of State 867N.01/3–1749

[Document 536]

Memorandum by the Director of the Office of Near Eastern and African Affairs (Satterthwaite) to the Secretary of State

secret [Washington,] March 17, 1949.

Subject: Israel–Transjordan Situation.

Discussion:

In response to your request, there are submitted hereunder pertinent excerpts from information we have received concerning the situation between Transjordan and Israel subsequent to my memorandum to you of March 14.1

Dr. Bunche on March 11 cabled the Security Council that he had directed United Nations observers to make a thorough and prompt investigation of all complaints, to verify military positions and their date of establishment and to apply fully the conditions of the truce. He added that at the time the cable was sent he had had no reports from observers which verified that there had been any fighting in the area.

On March 13 Dr. Bunche cabled the Security Council that United Nations observers were in the field and were making on the spot investigations, but that owing to poor transportation and communications facilities he did not yet have their detailed reports and could not therefore submit to the Council a definite report on this matter. He added that the only incident of fighting thus far reported involved an exchange of fire between Arab Legion and Israeli elements in the vicinity of Ghamr (just over the border in Transjordan) prior to the signing of the cease-fire on March 11. In this engagement one Arab Legion armored car was disabled. Dr. Bunche also stated that he had formally requested the Israeli and Transjordan delegates at Rhodes to inform their Governments that military activity of this kind, regardless of whether actual fighting eventuated, must be regarded as contrary to the conditions of the truce imposed by the Security Council.

On March 16 our Legation in Amman cabled that according to the Arab Legion Israeli soldiers are crossing the Transjordan frontier in the area of Gharandal to steal sheep. The Legion has been ordered to take no action until United Nations observers have been able to reach the area. If after that forays continue the Legion may have to open fire.

The Department has thus not yet received a definite answer as to whether the Israelis actually did cross the Transjordan frontier. The report from United Nations observers, which apparently will be as authoritative as any we shall receive, has not yet come in.2

Meanwhile, we have been receiving disturbing reports concerning the situation on the Israeli-Iraqi frontier. Information has come in to the effect that the Israelis are moving troops into that area, and the Iraqis, the Trans Jordanians, and the British are fearful that the Israelis may be about to commence hostilities against the Iraqi-held area of Arab Palestine. In response to our inquiry, the Israelis have admitted that they are moving troops into the area but have stated that they are doing so in order to afford Israeli farmers protection against cattle and food stealing raids allegedly being made from the Iraqi area. This is going on at a time when preparations are being made for the withdrawal of the 20,000 Iraqi troops in the area and their replacement by 2,000 men of the badly over-extended Arab Legion. The Israeli object to this, and state that it is a violation of the truce because the substitution of the Army of one sovereign power for another is not a normal troop replacement.

In our opinion, there is a real and disturbing possibility that Israel may be about to undertake hostilities in this area, in order to occupy more of the Palestine territory allotted to the Arabs by the November 29 General Assembly Resolution and to present the world with another fait accompli. Our Mission in Tel Aviv cabled today that the Israeli Chief of Staff has sent a warning to the United Nations that Israel may have to take military action to stop the Arab raids (telegram No. 211 of March 16)3 (Tab A). The Mission adds that there is no tangible evidence that Israel contemplates military action but suggests that you may care to point out to Israeli Foreign Minister Sharett, during his call upon you tomorrow, the desirability of taking no action which would lead to hostilities. In this the Mission in Tel Aviv concurs with a conclusion which we had reached. A memorandum discussing the points which might be taken up with Mr. Sharett during his call upon you tomorrow is being sent to you today.4

1 Not printed; it summarized reports alleging or denying Israeli incursion into Transjordan (767N.90i/3–1449).

2 Mr. Stabler advised, on March 18, that General Riley the same morning had “Confirmed that Israelis did cross frontiers and that four or five Israeli jeeps were cut off in Transjordan territory at point northern Gharandal.” The General also stated that he had received the assurances of the Israeli commander that his troops had been removed to the Palestine side (telegram 117, 867N.01/3–1849).

3 Not printed.

4 Baghdad, on March 17, reported that the Iraqi Foreign Minister had requested urgently to see Ambassador Crocker to express the hope that “US either through Tel Aviv or USDel, PCC would take effective measures to guarantee that Israel will not take advantage transfer Iraqi troops by sending Jewish troops and people into vacated area [i.e., the Nablus–Jenin–Tulkarm triangle] which Transjordanians and local Arabs plan populate.” The Foreign Minister also stated that “Iraq wants find peaceful solution Palestine problem and authorizes Transjordan discuss armistice with Israel for areas now in Iraqi hands.” (Telegram 115, 501.BB Palestine/3–1749) Ambassador Crocker, on March 21, informed the Department of his first conversation with newly appointed Foreign Minister Jamali, who “asked again for US assurances that Israel would not take advantage Iraq–Transjordan switch.” The Ambassador “reiterated our position re inability act unilaterally and emphasized US will do everything possible to help adjust Palestine problem through UN. Further, I expressed as main hope for Arabs necessity their coming to grips with realities and taking advantage UN machinery which offers best hope for quick adjustment matter, … Jamali expressed keenest disappointment re our unwillingness go along with Iraqi viewpoint and pull Iraq’s chestnuts out of the fire.” (Telegram 128 from Baghdad, 501.BB Palestine/3–2149)

Mr. Fraser Wilkins to the Secretary of State 501.BB Palestine/3–1849: Telegram

[Document 537]

Mr. Fraser Wilkins to the Secretary of State

confidential Rhodes, March 17, 1949—12 noon.

[Unnumbered.] For Satterthwaite from Wilkins at Rhodes.

(1) According information from Riley and Vigier to Bunche Israeli-Lebanese armistice agreement is delayed because Israelis insist on inclusion article providing Israelis may continue occupy strategic points Lebanese territory until Syrian armistice is concluded.1

Lebanese delegation, on other hand, has informed Israeli delegation and Bunche disagreeable [it is agreeable?] clause providing “no warlike act or act of hostility shall be conducted from territory controlled by one of the parties to this agreement against the other party”.

Israelis however are not satisfied believing Lebanese territory might still be used by Syria. Lebanese consider their proposal adds Lebanese guarantee to UN guarantee. Bunche considers Israeli article introduces new element into terms of reference of negotiations which was not raised at time Lebanese and Israelis agreed to negotiate under UN chairmanship in accordance with SC resolution November 16. Lebanese delegation and Israeli delegation agreed on March 15 to refer issue to their governments and meet again on March 23. Bunche subsequently informed Israelis at Rhodes he considers their continued insistence on Lebanese signing agreement sanctioning presence Israeli troops on Lebanese soil for indefinite period so unreasonable that he feels compelled to report matter to SC and seriously to consider withdrawing from all negotiations.2

It seems clear Israelis desire tie Syrian negotiations into Lebanese agreement for purpose of bringing pressure on Syria through Lebanon to negotiate and subsequently to make withdrawal Israeli troops from Lebanese territory contingent on withdrawal Syrian troops from Israeli territory. If Israelis continue block agreement Bunche’s present program will be prejudiced and commission will undoubtedly be questioned at Beirut meeting by Lebanese and other Arab States regarding Israeli good faith and whether real possibility exists to negotiate regarding refugees and peace settlement.

In order avert threatened stalemate in Lebanese negotiations it is recommended Israeli Government be informed by Department that proposed Lebanese clause seems to have same effect as proposed Israeli article and that early acceptance would facilitate Bunche’s task and commission’s work on eve Beirut meeting.3

(2) According UP release, Sharett on March 10 warned of possible new outbreaks in Palestine, stated that Iraqi irregulars were raiding along central front and added Israel may be forced to take action to bring things back to normal. Israeli press, in addition, has for some time been calling attention to alleged minor incursions from Iraqi-held Samaria into Israeli coastal plain. Israeli Government has also protested to Bunche on basis of reports regarding replacement of Iraqi troops in Central Palestine by Arab Legion. Developments of this character generally precede Israeli action. It may be assumed, if Israelis are unable make satisfactory arrangements with Transjordan in reported meetings with Abdullah regarding widening of Israeli coastal strip, that Israeli political and press moves may be accelerated and may be followed by Israeli clashes with Iraqis or Arab Legion in central sector. Bunche believes such developments might be forestalled if US were able to express hope to Israeli Government that press reports of possible Israeli action do not indicate deterioration in situation.

Sent Department through Navy. Repeated to Beirut, Baghdad, Amman, Damascus and Jerusalem.

1 In a telegram received at the United Nations on March 17, Mr. Bunche stated that an Israeli-Lebanese armistice agreement was “held up solely by Israeli intransigence”; that he had informed Mr. Shiloah “in most emphatic terms that Israeli position in this regard is utterly unreasonable and that if it is not changed before end of this week, I must report to SC that Israelis are deliberately blocking Lebanese agreement in apparent attempt to bring pressure on Syria”; and that “Israeli good faith” was involved. The text of Mr. Bunche’s message was transmitted to the Department by New York in telegram 356, March 17, 2:50 p. m., 501.BB Palestine/3–1749.

2 The telegram from Mr. Bunche, cited in footnote 1 above, stated that if the Israeli position did not change in the next few days, he would “seriously consider” withdrawing from both the Lebanese and Trans Jordanian negotiations and return to New York.

3 Mr. Wilkins, at Beirut, advised the Department on March 19 that “Israelis have informed Bunche they are prepared sign Lebanese agreement immediately without provision concerning Israeli troops on Lebanese soil.” (telegram 121, 501.BB Palestine/3–1949)

The Consul at Jerusalem (Burdett) to the Secretary of State 501.BB Palestine/3–1849: Telegram

[Document 538]

The Consul at Jerusalem (Burdett) to the Secretary of State

secret
niact Jerusalem, March 18, 1949—8 a. m.

us urgent

233. Palun 88. For Acheson from Ethridge. Technical study entitled “Arab refugee problem” handed me yesterday by Israeli Government largely repeats Sharett’s statement in previous conversations. Study begins with denial of responsibility, minimizes dislocation and in brief can be summed up in one sentence “when the whole matter comes up for discussion in the context of general peace talks the Israeli Government will consider whether conditions are stable enough for a certain number to come back without creating a security problem”. Study emphasizes Israeli viewpoint that resettlement in Arab states is main solution and not repatriation and continues with estimate of abilities of Arab states to absorb them.

Pouching text.

Sent Department, repeated Baghdad 17, Damascus 14, Cairo 17, Jidda 8, Amman 18. [Ethridge.]

Burdett

The Consul at Jerusalem (Burdett) to the Secretary of State 501.BB Palestine/3–1849: Telegram

[Document 539]

The Consul at Jerusalem (Burdett) to the Secretary of State

secret Jerusalem, March 18, 1949—11 a. m.

238. Palun 87. [From Ethridge.] While we intend to continue efforts to achieve substantial degree internationalization Jerusalem we consider agreement on separate legal entity practically out of question unless USG willing apply strongest pressure. Mayor New City sixteenth insisted to Jerusalem committee that Israel entitled to all Jerusalem.

USDel accordingly thinking along lines possible compromise formula and submits following for Department’s consideration. Will show members Jerusalem committee as informal suggestion. If Department and PCC approve we should sound out Arab representatives in Beirut on this among other possible plans:

“1) An international regime is established for the Jerusalem area.

2) The area shall be permanently demilitarized.

3) The area is divided into Arab and Jewish zones which shall, except as hereafter provided in Article 5, be administered respectively by (adjacent Arab State) and Israel as integral parts of their territory.

4) An international authority for the Jerusalem area shall consist of a United Nations representative and (of other members?).1

5) The international authority shall have power to make regulations to assure protection of and free access to the holy places. It may provide guards or other personnel at such places, and may also call upon the respective local authorities for assistance and cooperation.

6) The international authority shall have the right to make representations to the appropriate local Israel and Arab authorities, or to the Foreign Ministers of those governments concerning the following matters within the Jerusalem area: a) Protection of human rights and the rights of distinctive groups;

b) Free access to and from Jerusalem and within the city;

c) Common public services;

d) Maintenance of peace and order;

e) The demilitarization of the area.

7) Whenever the international authority decides that a dispute exists concerning any matter specified in paragraphs 5 or 6, and that such dispute concerns a matter seriously prejudicial to the welfare of the area, or of the international interest therein, it may refer the dispute to a special tribunal to be appointed by the president of the International Court of Justice.

8) If the tribunal deems that the dispute is susceptible of decision on the basis of law, it shall decide on that basis, utilizing the present statute or any of the sources set forth in Article 38, paragraph 1 of the statute of the International Court of Justice. Such decisions shall be legally binding on the parties.

9) If the tribunal deems that the dispute is not susceptible of decision on the basis of law, it shall render an opinion ex aequo et bono, giving special consideration, where appropriate, to the principles and purposes of the United Nations, important United Nations resolutions and declarations, and important multilateral treaties. Such opinions shall be advisory in character, but shall be regarded as embodying the judgment of the world community on the question in issue.

10) Israel and the Arab States shall deposit declarations accepting, with respect to legal disputes arising between them concerning the Jerusalem area, the jurisdiction of the International Court of Justice as compulsory ipso facto and without special agreement.”2

Sent Department 238, repeated Amman 19. [Ethridge.]

Burdett

1 As in the source text.

2 The Department replied on March 22, stating that “Although fully sympathetic problems your most recent draft attempts to reconcile we feel paras. 1 and 3 are almost mutually exclusive; that right of representation described para. 6 in fact gives international authority very little real power; and that there are grave doubts as to efficacy legal authority described paras. 7, 8 and 9, in absence any executive authority. Accordingly we prefer you do not submit this draft to PCC or Arab Reps Beirut.” (Telegram 133, identified also as Unpal 67, to Beirut, 501.BB Palestine/3–1849)

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom 867N.113/3–1849: Telegram

[Document 540]

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom

top secret Washington, March 18, 1949—8 p. m.

us urgent

945. Brit Emb Mar 17 orally informed Dept that a request for arms under Anglo-Transjordan treaty had been received from King Abdullah and that in view of recent Israeli moves in Pal and especially situation on Iraqi front “it will no longer be possible to refuse to send arms to Arab Legion”. Brit Emb said Bevin informing US Amb of this move.1 Emb officer thought main reason move was to enable Legion to defend itself if attacked by Israelis after taking over from Iraqis.

At working level Dept expressed great concern this move, pointing out adverse effect it likely to have on armistice negots and emphasizing likelihood resultant pressure to remove US embargo on arms for Israel. Dept also stated Israelis might seize upon UK decision as pretext to reopen hostilities. Dept furthermore expressed belief that sending arms to Legion would place UK in unfavorable moral position, since UK, which has stated Israel has acted contrary to UN resolutions, would be doing so itself.

Dept assumes in absence Emb report that Bevin has not raised this point or that you have handled it there on same basis as earlier discussions same subject. In connection any further discussion this point with UKG, they may be told that in our view minimum requirement prior to any such step would be notification [consultation] to [with]2 mediator.3

Acheson

1 At a luncheon on March 16, Mr. Bevin expressed to Ambassador Douglas his concern regarding Israeli intentions, particularly over the possibility of Israeli action against Arab positions in Samaria. He said arms “have continued to flow into Israel on such a scale that it is becoming more and more ‘ridiculous’ for UK to refuse Arab Legion appeals for arms and ammunition.” Failure to heed King Abdullah’s requests “would not only adversely affect UK–Transjordan relations which are ‘important to all of us’, but destroy completely Arab Legion morale.” (Telegram 1051, March 18, 5 p. m., 867N.01/3–1849)

2 The two corrections were requested by the Department in telegram 1007, March 23, 9 p. m., to London (867N.113/3–2349).

3 This telegram was repeated to Amman and to Jerusalem for Mr. Ethridge. London, in reply on March 19, advised of information from the Foreign Office that the British Government would inform Mr. Bunche as soon as a final decision was made to begin deliveries (telegram 1079, 867N.113/3–1949).

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in Israel 867N.01/3–1949: Telegram

[Document 541]

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in Israel

secret Washington, March 19, 1949—2 p. m.

us urgent

173. Dept welcomes report that Israel–Lebanon armistice to be signed March 19 or 20 and that Syria will enter armistice negotiations. Principal point of concern now becomes problem of Iraqi front Samaria. Obviously prospect of peaceful settlement on entire Palestine question would be greatly set back if fighting broke out over that point. Dept believes Israel and Transjordan should proceed promptly to armistice agreement, that this armistice agreement should be extended to the Iraqi front and that Israel should interpose no objection if Iraqi troops turn over Samaria front to Transjordan. As preliminary step it would seem desirable for existing cease fire to be extended automatically to Iraqi front on assumption by Transjordan of responsibility for that area.

This matter will probably be discussed with Sharett here Tuesday. Request you follow situation closely and do everything possible to bring about rapid conclusion Israel–Transjordan armistice.1

Acheson

1 Concerning the latter point, Thomas F. Power, Deputy Secretary-General of the United States Mission at the United Nations, notified Mr. McClintock on March 18 of a telegram received by Secretary-General Lie from Mr. Bunche stating that “the Syrian Government had indicated its readiness to undertake armistice negotiations with Israel.” (memorandum of telephone conversation by Mr. McClintock, 501.BB Palestine/3–1849) Minister Keeley reported similar information from Damascus on March 20, expressing his belief that Prime Minister Azm’s decision to negotiate was “motivated primarily by desire to avoid giving Israeli possibility of using Syria’s refusal to enter armistice negotiations as pretext for refusing to comply with refugee repatriation clause of December 11 resolution but also to leave no stone unturned to speed final solution Palestine conflict.” The Prime Minister also sought the Minister’s friendly advice whether any useful purpose would be served by sending special emissary … to US to endeavor to enlist US support of some reasonable solution. I replied that while I felt sure my government would appreciate being kept informed of progress in Syrian thinking, it would not welcome any démarche that seemed to by-pass PCC” (telegram 151, 501.BB Palestine/3–2049).

The Chargé in Transjordan (Stabler) to the Secretary of State 501.BB Palestine/3–2049: Telegram

[Document 542]

The Chargé in Transjordan (Stabler) to the Secretary of State

secret Amman, March 20, 1949—9 p. m.

121. This afternoon at Shuneh King said that last night he had received Colonel Dayan, Israeli Major whom he described as Sharett’s secretary, and Abdullah Tel to discuss Israeli proposals re Arab Legion taking over Iraqi frontier (Legtel 118, March 18). He indicated meeting was friendly. Israelis said there were several territorial adjustments to be made in “Arab triangle” area but they would not insist they be made at this time. Israelis mentioned certain “high places” but did not specify. King said it was understood such adjustments would await peace settlement. According to His Majesty Dayan then drafted proposals re this matter which agreed to Legion taking over and postponed until later territorial adjustments. Dayan said he would return Tel Aviv with draft and would give King formal answer Israeli Government March 21 at 1800 hours. Meanwhile Abdullah Tel has gone to Beirut to discuss matter with Transjordan Prime Minister.

King seemed pleased by progress meeting and indicated he had told Israelis he prepared work with them for peace but that their frequent changes of heart made it difficult. Re this said that previously Israel wanted Iraqi Army leave Palestine and he had worked toward this end at H–3 meeting with Iraqi Regent and Prime Minister. Now, however, when this almost accomplished Israel appeared to be placing obstacles in the way.

Later this afternoon Glubb gave additional details these conversations as result his meeting with King and Abdullah Tel this morning at Shuneh. Dayan apparently told King Israelis would require road from coast Tafula and several high points along railroad in Tulkarm area. However, he specifically stated that Tulkarm and Qalquiliya would not be involved and would remain Arab. At this point Abdullah Tel said it would be difficult for Transjordan vis-à-vis other Arab states and Palestine Arabs to take over frontier and immediately make territorial adjustments in favor Israel. Dayan allegedly replied Israel Government understood this and therefore would only request Transjordan Government sign paper agreeing to certain territorial adjustments which would not be put into effect until several months after take over.

While it will not be known until tomorrow whether meetings will result in solution to problem, some speculation exists here that Israel, having ascertained King’s attitude favorable certain adjustments, may make excessive demands.1

Sent Department repeated Baghdad 21, Beirut 18 for USDel.

Stabler

1 In the afternoon of March 21, Transjordan agreed to the proposals under which Transjordan would take over the Iraqi front. Abdullah el-Tel, at 9 p. m., the same day met at Jerusalem with the Israelis who gave their approval to the proposals (telegram 122, March 22, 10 a. m., from Amman, 501.BB Palestine/3–2249).

The Consul at Jerusalem (Burdett) to the Secretary of State 867N.01/3–2149: Airgram

[Document 543]

The Consul at Jerusalem (Burdett) to the Secretary of State

Jerusalem, March 21, 1949.

A–41. Amman and Ramallah Arabic newspapers announce the termination of the military government in Arab Palestine and the establishment of a civil administration, retroactive to March 15, 1949.

According to the official announcement Omar Pasha Mater, formerly Military Governor General of Palestine has been appointed Civil Governor General of Arab Palestine and will be under the Ministry of the Interior of Transjordan. Other appointments are: Abdullah Bey el Tel as Commissioner for the Jerusalem District (seconded from the Arab Legion); Ahmad Bey el Khalil as Commissioner for Samaria District; Na'iem Bey Touqan as Commissioner for Hebron District.

The Palestine Post in commenting on the change in government says that it was scheduled to take place on April 1, 1949, but that the date was advanced in order to present the Arab League and the Arab States at the Beirut Conference with the established fact that Transjordan was in control of the area.

Burdett

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Secretary of State 501.BB Palestine/3–2249

[Document 544]

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Secretary of State 1

[Washington,] March 22, 1949.

Participants: S—The Secretary

NEA—Mr. Satterthwaite

NE—Mr. Rockwell

Mr. Moshe Sharett, Foreign Minister of Israel

Mr. Eliahu Elath, Israeli Ambassador-Designate

[Here follow, after “an exchange of amenities,” various views expressed by Mr. Sharett.]

Mr. Sharett said that in his opinion things were going pretty well as regards the international position of Israel. An armistice with Lebanon would be signed on March 23.2 The situation with Iraq was not so good, since the Iraqis have decided not to be “contaminated” by any contact with the Jews and desire to be the only Arab State which has not entered into negotiations with Israel. A further complication was the fact that Transjordan planned to take over the Iraqi position. This would be a major troop replacement which would be contrary to the terms of the Palestine truce. In addition, there was the difficulty of the raids into Israeli territory from the Iraqi area. In Mr. Sharett’s opinion, Israel had shown remarkable forbearance in not taking retaliatory action, with one exception.

At this point, I informed Mr. Sharett that I had discussed the situation on the Iraqi front with the President on March 21. The President had expressed to me his great concern lest by some mishap a military flareup occur in this area. He and I were of the opinion that the withdrawal of the Iraqi Army and its replacement by a lesser number of Transjordian troops was a move in favor of peace. The President was firmly convinced that a renewal of hostilities must not be allowed to occur because of the situation on the Iraqi front.

Mr. Sharett replied that he could give the President and myself his complete assurance that Israel had no intention of commencing hostilities on the Iraqi front. It was not the policy of Israel to seek further conflict in Palestine. He said that he could not, of course, assure me that there would not be military action in this area, because one could never tell what might happen when two armies opposed each other, but that I could inform the President that the policy of Israel was, to seek to avoid hostilities.

I then inquired as to the progress of the armistice negotiations with Transjordan. Mr. Sharett said that things were not going too smoothly there, and that the main trouble was that Transjordan was not a free agent. He was certain that if Israel and Transjordan were left to negotiate together there would be no difficulty, but that the British were interfering. In the first place, it was not true that Israeli forces had crossed the Transjordan frontier. He could categorically assure me that, based on the border as shown on maps available in Tel Aviv, no one in the Israeli capital knew of any Israeli incursion across the frontier.

Mr. Sharett stated that Israel was very much disturbed by the report that Transjordan had requested the assistance of British troops at Aqaba in patrolling the Palestine–Transjordan frontier. In Tel Aviv it was suspected that the purpose behind this request was to enable Transjordan to withdraw forces from that area to send to the Iraqi front, thus strengthening its position in that area contrary to the terms of the truce. In Mr. Sharett’s opinion the British had violated the truce in the first place by sending forces to Aqaba and had done so again by reenforcing the garrison later. He stated that Israel would be “very much obliged” if the United States would seek to persuade the British to desist from patrolling the Palestine–Transjordan frontier. It was pointed out that the Department had received no information that the British had decided to accede to Trans Jordan’s request.

I suggested that if the British did not patrol the frontier and British forces remained within the town of Aqaba area, Israel surely would not imagine that Great Britain had hostile intentions against the Negev, and the presence of British troops in Aqaba should not be allowed to affect the Israeli–Transjordan negotiations. Mr. Sharett demurred, stating that Israel would have to take into consideration, when it came time to discuss the reduction of forces, the British troops at Aqaba, since to all intents and purposes they were part of military forces of Transjordan. He added that Israel hoped to arrange demilitarized strips on both sides of the Palestine–Transjordan frontier in the same manner that similar strips had been arranged on both sides of the Palestine–Egyptian frontier through the Israeli–Egyptian armistice. The presence of the British troops at Aqaba, however, was a factor which complicated the situation considerably.

I then brought up the question of the Palestinian refugees. Mr. Ethridge had hoped it might be found possible for Israel to issue some kind of conciliatory statement concerning the refugees before the conference called by the Palestine Conciliation Commission at Beirut, but apparently it had not been possible to arrange this before Mr. Sharett’s departure. The United States Government was, I said, very much interested in a solution of the refugee problem and felt that Israel had an important role to play. Mr. Sharett declared that Israel was fully cognizant of the implications of the problem as they would affect the future relations of Israel with the Arab states. The matter of a possible statement had been discussed in a Cabinet meeting and it had been decided that Israel could not possibly make such a commitment before the matter was discussed in connection with the final peace settlement. In the opinion of the Israeli Government it was out of the question to consider the possibility of repatriation of any substantial number of the refugees. The most logical solution was resettlement in the Arab countries, where so much land was available. Israel was quite prepared to make financial contributions to this resettlement, and also, if it were desired, to give technical assistance. Mr. Sharett did not mean to say that there would be no repatriation at all. He thought that it might be possible for Israel to accept a “limited” number of refugees, such as might be necessary to reunite families which had become separated. He reiterated his conviction that the matter was one which had to be discussed at the peace conference and stated that it was impossible for Israel to make any kind of public commitment before that time.3

1 Drafted by Mr. Rockwell. At the outset, according to a memorandum of March 16 from Mr. Satterthwaite to the Secretary, the latter was to see Mr. Sharett on March 18. The memorandum suggested that the Secretary stress to his caller recent Israeli moves in the southeastern Negev, a final territorial settlement, the Arab refugee question, the status of Jerusalem, and “Respect for United Nations Decisions.” Concerning the last of these subjects. Mr. Satterthwaite wrote of the certainty of Mr. Ethridge that “Mr. Sharett considers Washington more friendly to Israel than the Conciliation Commission and that the Foreign Minister has not been sufficiently impressed with United States interest in a settlement of the Palestine question through the United Nations. It is suggested that you may wish to leave no doubt in Mr. Sharett’s mind that the United States Government fully supports the authority of the United Nations and the Conciliation Commission as regards the final settlement of the Palestine dispute.” (501.BB Palestine/3–1649)

2 The agreement was signed on that date at Ras En-Naqura; for text, see SC, 4th yr., Special Supplement No. 4.

3 In a separate memorandum of conversation by Secretary Acheson, drafted by Mr. Rockwell on March 22, it is recorded that at the close of the meeting, the Israeli Foreign Minister stated that his Government “was very much interested in obtaining American technical assistance for the organization and training of the Israeli Army.” Mr. Satterthwaite informed Mr. Sharett that the United States had no legal authority to send a military mission to Israel. When Mr. Sharett stated that his Government might offer positions as advisers to retired American Army officers, the Secretary replied that the Department would look into the request (867N.20A/3–2949).

The Minister in Lebanon (Pinkerton) to the Secretary of State 501.BB Palestine/3–2249: Telegram

[Document 545]

The Minister in Lebanon (Pinkerton) to the Secretary of State

confidential Beirut, March 22, 1949—3 p. m.

127. Palun 92. [From Ethridge.] Following conclusion first Commission meeting with Arab States,1 Commissioners among themselves on March 21 again exchanged preliminary views regarding refugee problem.

Ethridge suggested that Commission might consider adoption of attitude based on following reasoning: 1. GA resolution December 11 in Paragraph 11 made provision for repatriation and compensation. Commission fully supported these instructions and desired detailed views governments and authorities concerned regarding number wishing return and method determining and paying compensation.

2. GA resolution December 11 in Paragraph 11 instructed Commission to facilitate repatriation, resettlement and economic and social rehabilitation of refugees, compensation payments and to maintain close relations with Griffis and with other US agencies. Commission believed for practical reasons greatest emphasis should be given in formal and informal discussions with representatives Arab States to development of program which would facilitate resettlement and economic and social rehabilitation in Arab Palestine and in Arab States of refugees who cannot be repatriated. Commission should stress to representatives Arab States it would be wiser in long run to get away from the narrow objective of rigid insistence on repatriation and concentrate on broader objective of resettlement and economic and social rehabilitation.

3. GA resolution December 11 in Paragraphs 6, 10, 11 and 12 appeared to give Commission basis for approaching problem broadly.

4. Following practical steps might be taken by Commission: (1) It should be stressed to Arab States that it is doubtful Israel would be able absorb more than small number of refugees.

(2) Arab States should prepare themselves to continue aid thus far extended and instead of direct relief should attempt resettle refugees and initiate projects for absorbing them.

(3) Peace talks, including particularly territorial settlement in Palestine should commence soonest following Beirut meeting and current armistice talks.

(4) Commission report to April session GA that no general settlement of Palestine question nor successful conclusion to specific problem of refugees seems possible unless there is general economic development in NE and should recommend that GA call upon specialized agencies, internal organizations and member states to render technical and financial assistance upon request governments and authorities concerned in NE (see following telegram).

(5) Commission should immediately establish committee of experts to survey economic needs of area and on request of governments and authorities concerned to render technical assistance including assistance in obtaining financial aid from international and other courses (see following telegram).

Ethridge emphasized foregoing was tentative and for Commission’s consideration and would submit working paper in several days. Boisanger fully supported. Yalcin agreed. Yalcin also suggested Commission should determine repatriation figure for Israel but withdrew suggestion following explanation quotas for Arab States and Israel might more logically be established in light more detailed information of various aspects of refugee problem described in Paragraph 11 GA resolution December 11. Yalcin added that during separate talks with Syrian and Transjordan representatives he had gathered impression Syria and Transjordan might vie with each other in taking refugees if greater number increased prospect financial and economic assistance, presumably from US.

Sent Department, repeated Jerusalem 26, Damascus 13, Baghdad 11, Cairo 14, Jidda and Amman unnumbered. [Ethridge.]

Pinkerton

1 As set forth in telegram 126 (identified also as Palun 91), March 22, 11 a. m., from Beirut, not printed; it stated that Egypt, Iraq, Lebanon, Saudi Arabia, Syria, and Transjordan were represented (501.BB Palestine/3–2249).

The Minister in Lebanon (Pinkerton) to the Secretary of State 501.BB Palestine/3–2249: Telegram

[Document 546]

The Minister in Lebanon (Pinkerton) to the Secretary of State

secret
urgent Beirut, March 22, 1949—6 p. m.

128. Palun 93. From Ethridge and McGhee. Following proposals for PCC action on long-range aspects Palestine refugee problem which were discussed in general terms PCC meeting yesterday (see Palun 92)1 submitted for Department’s consent before definitive discussions PCC. Proposals based on Department thinking as reported by McGhee, on increasing conviction Ethridge and PCC that economic development key to long-range solution refugee problem, on desire assure due basis for outside development assistance in light US objective avoid direct responsibility and probable Arab reaction against unilateral offer, and on necessity prompt action if assistance under rehabilitation program can begin to be effective before termination present UN relief program. It is tentatively assumed relief program will not be renewed in light probable difficulty obtaining additional appropriation US Congress and in order put pressure on Arab states initiate work relief projects. (1) PCC would report to GA in April that no general settlement Palestine question nor solution problem refugees possible without general economic development in Near East. PCC would recommend to GA that it call on specialized agencies, other appropriate international organizations and member states to render on request of governments and authorities concerned, appropriate technical and financial assistance.

(2) Meanwhile PCC, under authority Paragraph 12, GA resolution 11 December and pursuant instructions Paragraphs 6, 10 and 11, would appoint technical commission composed of representatives member states, specialized agencies and international organizations most likely be able render technical and financial assistance. Commission would survey economic development needs of area and, upon request of governments or authorities concerned, provide appropriate technical assistance including assistance in obtaining necessary financing for particular projects from international and other sources. It is envisaged that technical commission be headed by particularly well-qualified objective US citizen who could command confidence US executive, Congress and public, possibly with a UK deputy. Technical experts might be predominantly US with sprinkling of other nationalities including French to give multilateral flavor. Commission might include as members or observers representatives of International Bank, FAO, WHO and other international agencies and of private organizations in position render assistance. Commission’s approach could emphasize economic development with refugee problem in background and be on area basis even though relations with governments concerned would probably be largely bilateral. Commission could organize country subcommissions on request individual governments and among other things recommend nature organization required to carry out program developed. Report of technical commission, with comment PCC and GA, would be available to all in position render assistance whose efforts could be coordinated by technical commission or successor even after termination PCC.

US acceptance of foregoing should be conditional assurance other members PCC that plan could be implemented along lines approved by US and assurance Arab states that requests for assistance would be forthcoming prior to appointment of commission. In addition to Department’s comments on concept and timing of above proposal Department’s comment requested on whether GA resolution of 11 December re PCC are considered to provide adequate basis for technical commission which could provide authoritative guidance all aspects Near East economic development, whether approval for creation of commission or for its membership need be obtained from GA prior to PCC action, and whether international nature of commission likely to affect adversely possibilities financial assistance from Export Import Bank and private US sources including oil companies. Sponsorship of technical commission by PCC might serve to allay criticism of UN and of US under President’s Point 4 program for favoring one area for economic development over others with comparable needs. Assuming acceptance above proposals by Department and PCC, US would assume responsibility proposing to PCC plan of organization, US candidates and terms of reference for commission and taking initiative its activation. Final Department decision re above proposals can await full discussion following McGhee’s return first week April after visit remaining Arab states and London. Department’s tentative views would, however, be helpful now to Ethridge in informal discussions with PCC and Arab representatives in view close timing if proposals are to be considered in April GA session.

If Department agrees, please repeat Arab capitals, USDel, Now York and London with request for views to be repeated to Beirut for Ethridge. [Ethridge and McGhee.]

Pinkerton

1  Supra.

The Chargé in Transjordan (Stabler) to the Secretary of State 501.BB Palestine/3–2349: Telegram

[Document 547]

The Chargé in Transjordan (Stabler) to the Secretary of State

secret
niact Amman, March 23, 1949—4 p. m.

us urgent

126. Legtel 123 and 124, March 22.1 King requested me come down to Shuneh this morning in order inform me of developments of last night’s meeting between Transjordan and Israeli representatives.

Meetings had taken place in Jerusalem instead of Shuneh and was attended by Fellah Pasha Medadha, Abdullah Tel and Hussein Bey Sirraj (Under Secretary Foreign Office) for Transjordan and by Walter Eytan, [garble] Colonel Yigal Yadin and Moshe Dayan for Israel.

Israelis presented detailed demands for territorial adjustments on Iraqi front which in some instances represented Arab withdrawals up to 10 miles from present front lines. After many hours conference lasting to 1300 hours this morning Israelis modified demands to points beyond which further modification out of question. They informed Transjordan representatives that Transjordan must agree to these proposals and sign formal agreement within 24 hours or Israel would withdraw its agreement to Arab Legion taking over from Iraqis. Another meeting at which Israelis expect final answer is arranged for tonight at Shuneh.

In brief Israeli finalized demands are as follows: 1. Line in north front to be redrawn south of Ummelfahm (MR 165213) and Arara (MR 159211) to permit free use by Israelis of main road to Afula.

2. Line in east which now runs slightly west of Baqa (MR 155202)–Tulkarm–Qalqiliya road to be redrawn eastwards, not including Israeli possession of Tulkarm or Qalqiliya but including Taiyiba (MR 151186) and Qfarqasim (ME 148169). Line would end at Rantis (MR 152159), now junction between Iraqis and Arab Legion.

3. Line in west which now runs through Qaun (MR 194201) to be redrawn slightly west.

Israelis proposed that this agreement remain secret but that as soon as armistice agreement signed at Rhodes, secret agreement (although still remaining secret) would immediately be regarded as agreed in mutual revision of armistice terms. Implementation of secret agreement would take place in three stages: (a) Within three to four weeks—adjustment eastern lines;

(b) Within six to eight weeks—adjustment northern lines; and

(c) Within three to four months from date of signature full implementation secret agreement.

Israelis also proposed that with number of days yet to be specified all Iraqi forces would be withdrawn from area of former mandated territory of Palestine.

In return Israel would agree to Legion taking over Iraqi front as soon as armistice agreement signed and would authorize Israeli delegation Rhodes sign armistice at once on basis positions held at time cease-fire agreement signed.

Transjordan representatives pointed out to Israelis adverse effect on Arab public opinion when this agreement became public unless Transjordan received compensations. It was suggested Israelis withdraw from area close to Road Latrun to Beitsira (MR 154144) or withdraw from Ummburj (MR 147126) area and agree to Legion use of road running north from Beitjibrin. Israelis refused and said they would not agree any compensation.

Transjordan representatives at meeting, with whom I talked at Shuneh, indicated atmosphere of meeting not friendly and that Israelis had taken very strong line. They had impression that if agreement not signed Israelis might take offensive action to make adjustments demanded. (It is understood Dayan told member Consulate General Jerusalem on March 18 that if rectification not made by agreement, Israel would make them anyway.)

King indicated to me he felt that if he refused to sign agreement, Israel would recommence hostilities and whole area might be lost. It would in fact be better to sacrifice another fifteen villages with additional estimated 15,000 refugees than to lose what little left of Arab Palestine. On other hand if he did sign agreement and then armistice signed, it might be more difficult for Israelis to make further excessive demands. He not entirely decided what his attitude would be and it would depend on circumstances of tonight’s meeting at Shuneh. If he could be certain that US would take action prevent Israel from reopening hostilities, he would try postpone decision for another day or two and endeavor negotiate more reasonable adjustments. However, in absence this certainty, he felt he almost forced into signing agreement tonight. We only wished it were possible to believe that Israel would present no further demands.

I offered no comment to HM beyond thanking him for keeping USG informed of developments.

Sent Department 126, repeated Baghdad 25, Beirut 22 for USDel PCC. Pouched Jerusalem.

Stabler

1 Neither printed.

The Chargé in Transjordan (Stabler) to the Secretary of State 501. BB Palestine/3–2349: Telegram

[Document 548]

The Chargé in Transjordan (Stabler) to the Secretary of State

secret
niact Amman, March 23, 1949—7 p. m.

us urgent

127. Legtel 126, March 23. Israeli demands and 24-hour ultimatum re Iraqi front, both in themselves and in face expressed attitude USG toward extension armistice to this area and toward Transjordan taking responsibility therein, seem totally unreasonable and in nature of blackmail. While King may feel himself forced to sign agreement tonight, it is however possible that he will succeed in postponing final decision. In view this latter possibility would urgently recommend Department give consideration making strong representations to Israeli Government (if agreement not signed tonight) insisting that matter of territorial dispositions and adjustments be left to peace settlement and that armistice negotiations at Rhodes be concluded at once on present status quo.

Transjordan is willing and ready reach peace settlement but it does appear to be rank injustice for USG to stand by while Israel at point of gun in forcing Transjordan into such an agreement. This situation would seem to offer opportunity for USG to show that it intends implement its policy as expressed in UN on November 20.

Will inform Department earliest possible moment whether agreement signed or not.

Sent Department 127, repeated Beirut 23 for USDel FCC, Baghdad 26.

Stabler

Statement by the President [Document 549]

Statement by the President 1

March 24, 1949

It is with gratification that I have today signed Senate Joint Resolution 36 authorizing a special contribution by the United States of $.16 million for the relief of Palestine refugees.

The United Nations General Assembly on November 19, 1948, urged all States members of the United Nations to make voluntary contributions as soon as possible to a relief fund totaling $32 million. The Secretary of State informs me that thus far fifteen other Members of the United Nations have contributed and that other Governments have signified their intention to send money or contributions in kind. There is a pressing need for this fund, for seven hundred thousand refugees are living almost on starvation level. It is the hope of the United States that very promptly the total $32 million fund will be subscribed by the members of the United Nations, or other countries, which have not yet given to the fund.

I trust that before this relief program is ended means will be devised for the permanent solution of the refugee problem, and that the efforts of the Palestine Conciliation Commission to establish a lasting peace will bring hope of a brighter future to these destitute victims of the recent hostilities in the Holy Land.

1 Released by the White House on March 24; reprinted from Department of State Bulletin, April 3, 1949, p. 419.

Memorandum by the Secretary of State 867N.01/12–749

[Document 550]

Memorandum by the Secretary of State

secret [Washington,] March 24, 1949.

Conversation With the President

Subject: Conversation with Israeli Foreign Minister

I reported to the President my talk with Foreign Minister Sharett1 which fell into two principal topics:

First, I had again impressed the Foreign Minister to make some statement which would be helpful to the Beirut Conference and would at least give some indication of the willingness of the Israeli Government, assuming conditions of peace and stability to repatriate a portion of the refugees. The Foreign Minister, however, felt that he could not make any statement on this subject except as a part of a general peace settlement.

Second, I had urged upon the Foreign Minister the desirability of a prompt conclusion of the armistice with Trans-Jordan, including arrangements for committing the Trans-Jordan troops to relieve the Iraqi troops. I had reported to the Foreign Minister the President’s concern about this matter since he thought it was important for the development of both the armistice and permanent peace that as many troops as possible be withdrawn. I explained that the Foreign Minister had shown a tendency to want to use this matter of a substitution of troops to gain both territorial readjustments on the Samarian front and to try to force Iraq into discussions with Israel. I mentioned briefly the cables on this subject received this morning and our concern that the Israeli forces might attempt to bring about some adjustment of the frontier by military action.

The President was disturbed over the uncooperative attitude being taken and said that we must continue to maintain firm pressure.

1 See memorandum of conversation that took place on March 22, p. 853 [Pg. 853 includes portions of Doc. 543 and Doc. 544].

Memorandum by the Director of the Office of Near Eastern and African Affairs (Satterthwaite) to the Secretary of State 811.22767N/3–2449

[Document 551]

Memorandum by the Director of the Office of Near Eastern and African Affairs (Satterthwaite) to the Secretary of State

confidential [Washington,] March 24, 1949.

Subject: Proposed modification of policy to permit limited number of officers from Israel and Arab States to be trained in U.S.

Discussion:

Since the imposition of the embargo on the shipment of arms to the Near East because of the Palestine conflict, the Department has followed the policy of turning down requests from the Arab States and Israel for training of officers of their military services, in the United States. Although such a policy was not explicit in the arms embargo or the Security Council Truce resolutions of May 29 and July 15, 1948, it was felt that it was consistent with our policy of not giving military advantage to either side.

It is believed that the time has now come to reconsider this policy for the following reasons: 1) Armistice agreements have been signed between Israel and Egypt and Israel and Lebanon. Armistice talks are now in progress between Israel and Transjordan (the latter is now in the process of arranging to take over Iraqi military positions in Palestine) and will start shortly between Israel and Syria. It is hoped that these negotiations will preclude any major renewal of hostilities in Palestine.

2) The Arab States have recently shown a desire for closer relations with the West, and have renewed their requests for permission to send trainees to the United States.

3) Israel, despite her announced policy of neutrality between the East and West, has requested permission to send a certain number of officers to the United States for training. Giving such permission would be one way of encouraging Israel towards a Western orientation.

4) Great Britain and France already have student officer missions from some of the Arab States in training, and neither of these powers has seen anything inconsistent between its actions in this respect and its obligations under the various UN truce resolutions for Palestine.

Recommendations:

It is recommended that our present policy be changed to permit the sending of officer student training missions from Israel and the Arab States, in reasonable numbers, consistent with the ability of the various services to handle such missions.

[Here follow concurrences.]

The Secretary of State to the Consulate General at Jerusalem 501.BB Palestine/3–1549: Airgram

[Document 552]

The Secretary of State to the Consulate General at Jerusalem 1

secret Washington, March 24, 1949.

A–31. Unpal A–1. [For Ethridge.] Following is text of letter Mch 15 from Sec. Defense together with its accompanying memo responding affirmatively to Dept’s request that NME continue to provide aid such as military observers, transportation and other facilities, to PCC similar to that already extended to UN Mediator for Palestine:

“My dear Mr. Secretary: With reference to your letter of March 8, 1949, “UNA”, in which you request the continuance of the support of the National Military Establishment in supplying personnel and other aid to the United Nations in its efforts to reestablish peace in Palestine, I wish to inform you that I have instructed the Secretary of the Navy to comply with your request, bearing in mind certain important principles regarding our participation. A copy of my memorandum to him is enclosed for your information.

It would be appreciated if you would keep me informed of the progress being made by the United Nations, estimating whenever it becomes possible to do so the duration and scope of the continued participation of the Military Establishment in support of the UN in this area. Sincerely yours, James Forrestal.”

“Memorandum for the Secretary of the Navy

March 15, 1949.

Subj: Assistance to the United Nations in the Near East.

Attached is a letter from the Department of State dated 8 March 1949, signed by the Under Secretary of State, which contains a request for the continued assistance of the National Military Establishment in supporting the United Nations Mediator and the Palestine Conciliation Commission of the United Nations in their efforts to maintain peace in the Near East.

Inasmuch as the Chief of Naval Operations was designated Executive Agent of the Joint Chiefs of Staff for supporting the United Nations Mediator in Palestine, and in the light of the attached request from the Department of State and the urgent need for security in this vital area, I desire that the Department of the Navy, with the necessary collaboration of the Departments of Army and Air Force, continue to support the efforts of the United Nations to maintain peace in the Near East. I therefore request that the Department of the Navy deal directly with the Department of State in making the necessary arrangements for this support.

In providing this support, I consider it essential that certain principles be kept constantly in mind. This support by the National Military Establishment of the foreign operations of the United States and the United Nations should be limited to activities in observing and supervising the armistice in this area and should not be permitted to extend to the use of military personnel for other purposes such as guard, protective or enforcement duties or personal services. This type of support of the UN should be shared as appropriate with other members of the United Nations and should be provided on an equitable basis from among the three Services in accordance with arrangements to be worked out by you with the Departments of Army and Air Force. We should, insofar as circumstances permit, reduce the extent of our participation in this Mission as soon as and as much as practicable without jeopardizing the objective of the Mission. Finally, the Department of State should request the United Nations to provide appropriate subsistence, logistic support and reimbursement for the extraordinary expenses of our participation in this mission. James Forrestal.

CC: The Secretary of the Army

The Secretary of the Air Force

The Joint Chiefs of Staff”

Acheson

1 This airgram was repeated to New York.

The Chargé in Transjordan (Stabler) to the Secretary of State 867N.01/3–2449: Telegram

[Document 553]

The Chargé in Transjordan (Stabler) to the Secretary of State

secret
niact Amman, March 24, 1949—4 p. m.

most immediate

129. Legtels 126 and 127, March 23. King informed this morning that agreement between Transjordan and Israel re Iraqi front area was signed last night at Shuneh but that final clause was inserted to effect that agreement is subject to ratification by Transjordan Prime Minister. Ratification must be communicated to Israel Government in writing not later than March 30 or agreement is null and void. (Immediately following telegram contains summary agreement.1 )

Apparently King told Transjordan representatives that if they could find suitable means to postpone final action, this course had his approval. Consequently Transjordan representatives indicated to Israelis they could not commit Transjordan Government to this agreement without approval Prime Minister. Israelis thereupon agreed to final clause.

Israelis also agreed to several other minor modifications—dates of implementation stages; manner of withdrawal Iraqi forces; insertion Articles 8 and 9. In addition they agreed to modification in adjustment of territory on western front (fourth paragraph No. 2 Legtel 126) whereby line would end at Budrus (No. 149153) which is junction between Legion and Iraqis, not Rantis. On east front (fourth paragraph No. 3, Legtel 126) line will run somewhat east of Qaun (MR 194201) instead of west.

Israelis all clearly indicated that if agreement in present form not ratified, they would advise Legion not to take over Iraqi front. If they did so, Israel would not be responsible for consequences.

While at first His Majesty seemed satisfied that final action on agreement had been postponed, he later appeared to have qualms lest postponement result in creation new difficulties, re both Israel and Iraq. He wished to settle question once and for all as decision to postpone final concurrence in agreement might prolong situation. However, he would let matter stand as now and would discuss it with Prime Minister on latter’s return from Beirut Friday or Saturday.

Sent Department 129; repeated Baghdad 27, Beirut 24 for US Del PCC; pouched Jerusalem.

Stabler

1  Infra.

The Chargé in Transjordan (Stabler) to the Secretary of State 867N.01/3–2449: Telegram

[Document 554]

The Chargé in Transjordan (Stabler) to the Secretary of State

secret
niact Amman, March 24, 1949—5 p. m.

130. Herewith summary agreement referred to in Legtel 129 March 24: 1. Israel agrees to taking over by Arab Legion on Iraqi front.

2. Demarcation lines to be as in map attached to agreement (map signed by Transjordan and Israeli representatives).

3. Agreement to be implemented in following stages: (a) In area west of road from Baqa to Jaljuliya (MR 145173) and from there to east of Qfarqasim—within five weeks after signature general armistice agreement; (b) In area of Wadiara (MR 153209) north of line from Baqa to Zububa (MR 171217)—within seven weeks after signature GAA; (c) All other areas—within fifteen weeks after signature GAA.

4. “Israel, for its part, has made similar changes for benefit of Transjordan” (This is clause without meaning but according to Transjordan representatives included for sake Arab public opinion. Transjordan representatives hope later to change “has made” to “will make”).

5. Transjordan guarantees for all Iraqi forces in Palestine and agrees their number to be included in formula governing reduction of forces in GAA.

6. Armistice demarcation line in GAA to be based on positions held on date signature cease-fire agreement as certified by UN.

7. Agreement to be considered revision of GAA to be signed at Rhodes.

8. In case of villages affected inhabitants entitled to full rights of residence, property and freedom. If they leave may take livestock and moveable property and receive without delay full compensation for land they leave behind (Transjordan representatives believe this also empty clause).

9. Israel will pay to Transjordan cost of 20 kilos of first class road in compensation for loss of road between Tulkarm and Qalqiliya.

10. Mixed committee of two representatives from each party and chairman appointed by UN chief staff to peg out lines under this agreement.

11. Agreement not to be published without consent both parties nor “shall it in any way prejudice an ultimate political settlement between the parties.”

12. Agreement subject ratification Transjordan Prime Minister, ratification to be communicated in writing to Israel not later than March 30. Failing ratification agreement null and void and without effect.

Agreement signed March 23 for “Hashemite Jordan Kingdom” by Fellah Pasha Medadha and Hussein Sirraj and for “State of Israel” by Eytan, Yadin and Dayan.

Sent Department 130, repeated Baghdad 28, Beirut 25 for USDel PCC Pouched Jerusalem.

Stabler

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State 867N.01/3–2449: Telegram

[Document 555]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State

secret London, March 24, 1949—9 p. m.

1177. Latest Foreign Office info re Israeli-Transjordan (TJ) undercover negotiations Jerusalem (Paragraph 2, 3 and 6, Embassy 1153, March 23)1 is report from Amman that Israelis have reduced demand for 15 km. belt to belt 5 km. deep and 60 km. long starting from point TJ line north of Lydda and continuing along Iraqi front to point not far from Jenin. Message sent late last night states Israelis gave TJ until 1900 hours March 23 to accept and that TJ answer was to be given at meeting later that night. Message indicated King considering acceptance even though it involved “all remaining plain land”.

2. Late today Burrows said he had no further info re reply made by TJ but that above info had been communicated to Department along lines final sentence Embreftel. He described situation as “somewhat better but still extremely worrying”. He was impressed by fact TJ negotiating under duress of clearest kind and was relieved that Abdullah had not put UK on spot by seeking its advice.

Douglas

1 Not printed.

Memorandum of Telephone Conversation, by Mr. Robert M. McClintock 501.BB Palestine/3–2549

[Document 556]

Memorandum of Telephone Conversation, by Mr. Robert M. McClintock

secret [Washington,] March 25, 1949.

Subject: Negotiations in and concerning Palestine.

Mr. Power telephoned this morning to say that Dr. Bunche had reported surprising progress between the Israeli and Transjordan Delegations on Rhodes in reaching the bases for an armistice agreement. He said, however, that the Israelis were complaining about alleged reinforcement of the British garrison at Aqaba and suggested to Secretary General Lie that he approach the United Kingdom Delegation with the thought that it would be helpful if the UK could reduce the number of troops at Aqaba. Bunche thought that the UK might also issue a public statement to this effect and indicate that it would not resort to military action unless Transjordan should be threatened with open aggression. As usual, Dr. Bunche added the suggestion that it would be nice if the State Department also put pressure on the British.

I told Mr. Power that the British were as well aware as we of the secret negotiations being undertaken by the Israelis and Transjordians supplementary to the armistice talks on Rhodes. The Israelis had very recently threatened King Abdullah that they might resume hostilities against the Iraqis in Samaria. Under these circumstances the British would certainly not feel disposed to reduce their garrison in Transjordan and I did not think the Department of State would be warranted in asking them to do so.

Mr. Power telephoned later this afternoon to pass on Mr. Ross’ suggestion that it might be helpful to Dr. Bunche to inform him of the secret negotiations going on behind his back between Israel and Transjordan. I said it was, no doubt, a very human temptation to wish to tell our friend, the Mediator, of what was happening but that I did not think we had any warrant to do so or that we could possibly take the risk with Israel, which had not informed the US of what was going on, using our action with Bunche as a pretext to denounce the agreement now reached secretly with Abdullah. I told Mr. Power that under no circumstances should USUN divulge to the Secretariat or to Bunche its knowledge of the secret negotiations between Abdullah and the government at Tel Aviv. Mr. Power seemed somewhat unconvinced. I later confirmed my position with Mr. Rusk and have informed Mr. Power.

Messrs. Ross and Power had comments on the proposed draft SC resolution sent in Beirut’s telegram 132,1 similar on the whole to our own. We agreed that the Mediator’s office, as well as his functions, should be terminated; that the Truce Commission should be liquidated; and that the court of first instance in cases of alleged violations of the armistice agreements should be the Palestine Commission and not the Security Council itself. In general, the resolution should tie up all the loose ends and supplant completely the previous resolutions of the Assembly and the Council dealing with the functions of the Mediator and the Truce Commission. We also agreed that there should be some complimentary reference to the work of Bernadotte and Bunche.

1 Identified also as Palun 95, March 24; it gave the text of a draft of a proposed resolution to be submitted to the Security Council. In telegram 131, identified also as Palun 94, the same day, Beirut advised that “Bunche–Wilkins conversation resulted in first draft of proposed SC resolution … which Bunche plans to transmit to SYG about March 24 for discussion with interested SC delegates on means terminating Mediator’s SO functions following conclusion armistice talks under SC resolution November 16.” Telegrams 131 and 132 are filed under 501.BB Palestine/3–2449.

The Secretary of State to the Legation in Lebanon 501.BB Palestine/3–2549: Telegram

[Document 557]

The Secretary of State to the Legation in Lebanon

secret Washington, March 25, 1949—noon.

us urgent

145. Unpal 68. [For Ethridge.] Re para 1 Beirut Tel 128 Mar 22, wld prefer not place refugee problem1 before GA at Apr session since Comite 3 agenda already one of largest at this session and explosive character Palestine problem might cause debate to get out of hand. Seems to us paras 11, 13 and 14 GA Res Dec 11 provide sufficient authority for PCC in reporting to SYG to request him to call on specialized agencies and other govts and authorities to render appropriate assistance if necessary.

Concerning reference your para 1 to gen econ development, we wld prefer more restricted formulation along line that solution refugee problem will necessitate stimulation econ projects which would facilitate assimilation refugees and simultaneously raise econ potential of cooperating states.

Re para 2 distinction shld of course be made between planning phase of long-range operation and its execution with respect concept that proposed technical commission upon request govts or authorities concerned provide assistance in obtaining necessary financing for particular projects from internatl or other sources. In our view PCC shld appt technical comite composed of eminent personnel as you suggest, which wld have sole task of surveying entire refugee problem and of preparing detailed blueprints for solution that problem. PCC cld then recommend to GA or to Govts and authorities concerned on basis its technical comites findings ad hoc authority or org, such as regional development board, which would carry out plans technical comite. Such an authority or org might be able facilitate financial assistance from appropriate lending agencies.

We believe Art 12 GA Res Dec 11 provides PCC with full auth appt technical comite any time.

We do not feel necessary have formal assurance from other members PCC that plan proposed by technical comite will have to be implemented along lines approved by US, although this is in fact a necessary consideration. It seems to us that by choice leading personnel and gen position US in internatl community this objective can be achieved without undue stress in spelling it out. Also we do not feel it essential to have assurances of requests for assistance from Arab Stated before technical comite is set up. To make such requests prerequisite to estab comite might imply moral obligation on PCC affirmatively to meet these requests. All that seems necessary is assurance by Arab Govts that they will give full cooperation to efforts of PCC and its technical comite in devising long-range solution problem.

Foregoing views preliminary and, as you suggest, final decision will await McGhee’s return and further consultation with Ethridge.

Acheson

1 Mr. McClintock, in a telegram of March 24, informed Ambassador Griffis at Paris that “President today signed refugee relief bill. We hope RFC loan will be available within a week.” (No. 935, 501.MA Palestine/3–2449)

The Secretary of State to the Legation in Transjordan 501.BB Palestine/3–2349: Telegram

[Document 558]

The Secretary of State to the Legation in Transjordan 1

secret Washington, March 25, 1949—5 p. m.

37. Dept appreciates prompt and thorough fashion in which you have reported Israel–TJ talks re Iraqi front, and has given full consideration to recommendations you have made. However, view fact that TJ reps have now signed agreement, Dept does not believe that US representation Tel Aviv would be productive.

We feel that view circumstances Abdullah’s instinct to sign agreement (ur 127 Mar 23) is sound and that his reasoning as to effect signing might have on possibility future Israeli demands is logical. Without seeking to give King advice, you may tell him that USG wld regard any attempt at major breach of provisions secret agreement as serious obstacle to progress being made toward peace in Pal and that USG would be prepared give strong advice against such action to any party attempting major breach.

Acheson

1 This telegram was repeated to London.

Editorial Note [Document 559]

Editorial Note

On the afternoon of March 25, King Abdullah Ibn el-Hussein handed the Chargé in Transjordan, Wells Stabler, a message which he requested be urgently transmitted to President Truman. The message dealt with the subject of territory occupied by Iraqi forces and with the request of Israel for a modification of the present front between Iraqi and Israeli forces. The message was transmitted to the Department by Amman in telegram 132, March 25, 8 p. m. (867N.01/3–2549)

The Chargé in Transjordan (Stabler) to the Secretary of State 501.BB Palestine/3—2649: Telegram

[Document 560]

The Chargé in Transjordan (Stabler) to the Secretary of State

secret Amman, March 26, 1949—noon.

us urgent

most immediate

134. Deptel 37, March 25. While Transjordan representatives in fact signed secret agreement, agreement does not have any validity until it is ratified by Prime Minister who is understood to have raised objections both as to form and substance of negotiations. (It is possible that Prime Minister may resign over agreement and will have to be replaced by another who would be willing to ratify it, probably Fellah Pasha Medadh.)

Abdullah feels strongly about manner in which agreement has been forced on him but realizes implications of failure to ratify. He is convinced, as are all Transjordan representatives participating in current negotiations, that if agreement is not ratified, Israelis will take action to force out Iraqis (which would also involve Legion again) and make by force territorial adjustments which would probably far exceed what they are endeavoring to extort from Abdullah through negotiation. Abdullah also feels that Israelis would succeed in such moves without any effective action being taken by UN, US or UK to stop them.

However, he approved postponement final action on agreement in hopes some way could be urgently devised to prevent Israel from forcing him into this agreement which he also knows will not improve his position, not only re other Arab States but also re his own people and Palestine Arabs. Hence his message to the President (Legtel 132, March 25).1

USG informed Israel that it felt latter should interpose no objections to Transjordan assuming responsibility for Iraqi area before question of secret agreement had arisen. Moreover, Israeli Foreign Minister gave formal assurances to President through Secretary of State that Israel has no intentions whatsoever commencing hostilities on Iraqi frontier. Now, however, USG seem prepared permit Israel force Transjordan into paying excessive price without compensation for privilege of taking over Iraqi areas, while at same time threatening that if price not paid, Israel will exact it anyway.

I fear that Israel has so many times been able to violate truce without consequences that King, if he should order ratification of agreement, would gain little comfort or support from substance last sentence Deptel 37.

If USG does not take strong line now to stop Israel’s constant, defiant and threatening attitude, I venture to suggest that before Palestine peace is concluded, Israel may well have its frontiers on the Jordan. If this does occur, I submit that it will be only because Israel found apathy and appeasement toward its defiant policy.

In view King’s message to President and above, would strongly urge Department reconsider its attitude as expressed in Deptel 37 prior to March 30. Failing this and in event agreement is finally ratified, would then recommend that Department authorize me to inform King, in addition to last sentence Deptel 37, that USG still stands firmly behind its policy enunciated by Jessup in UN on November 20.2

Sent Department repeated Baghdad 30, London 23, Beirut 27 for USDel PCC.

Stabler

1 See editorial note, supra.

2 Baghdad reported, on March 29, that Iraqi Foreign Minister Jamali had asked for United States assistance in restraining Israeli territorial demands in areas now held by Iraqi troops (telegram 157, 501BB Palestine/3–2949).

The Chargé in Transjordan (Stabler) to the Secretary of State 867N.01/3–2749: Telegram

[Document 561]

The Chargé in Transjordan (Stabler) to the Secretary of State

secret Amman, March 27, 1949—6 p. m.

135. Prime Minister who appeared to be in somewhat bitter frame of mind made following comments this morning: 1. While he had agreed to despatch King’s message to President he thought there was little if any likelihood that either US or UK would or could come to Trans Jordan’s assistance. Postponement final action on agreement had been due to advice received from within Transjordan Government that external assistance might be forthcoming to prevent conclusion this agreement. However, he had told King yesterday that he did not feel optimistic about nature President’s reply and on this basis it had been decided to request Israeli representatives to meet with Prime Minister and other Transjordan representatives at Shuneh late afternoon Tuesday March 29. (It is understood Abdullah Tel telephoned Dayan yesterday concerning this meeting and stated that while there was no change in principle re agreement there were few points re implementation which Transjordan representatives wished discussed.) Prime Minister indicated meeting had been put off to March 29 in order await President’s reply.

Prime Minister said that at meeting Tuesday he planned to propose modifications in demands and also to seek compensations (probably in Hebron area where Israelis are understood to have informed their delegates at Rhodes they are prepared give up number of villages). He also planned propose that area in triangle which Israelis demand should become no man’s land under UN until such time as peace settlement is reached.

He too thought it would be preferable to consider this entire question as military one, to cancel present secret agreement and to incorporate it in terms of general armistice agreement to be signed by two delegates at Rhodes. While Israelis may not agree to suggestions on modifications, he expected they would agree to Rhodes delegates signing armistice agreement including Israeli demands in triangle.

Prime Minister said that following Tuesday’s meeting matter would again be discussed in Council of Ministers with view reaching final decision (presumably prior March 30).

In general Tawfic Pasha welcomed delay in final action on secret agreement as it gave Transjordan additional time to attempt reach more suitable adjustments.

(It appears that provided he does not have to ratify agreement with his signature Prime Minister has no intention resigning.)

2. Regarding armistice negotiations at Rhodes Prime Minister said they have been more or less suspended pending outcome negotiations at Shuneh. When queried re Transjordan’s position on Jerusalem he replied that Transjordan would have to accept almost any terms which Israelis demanded. Presumably Bunche would draft compromise which Transjordan would be obliged accept. Tawfic Pasha indicated that he no longer concerned about attitude Arab states or others, that his principal concern was welfare Transjordan and Arab Palestine and that he must now act, regardless of cost, to prevent complete disaster.

3. Prime Minister commented at length on future attitude of Transjordan toward UK. Said that this morning he had informed British Chargé that in future Transjordan, while remaining friend and ally of Britain and willing receive advice from British or anyone else, would act as it saw fit in its own interest. Transjordan would no longer regard it as mandatory to follow British advice.

Sent Department 135, Baghdad 31, Jerusalem 744, USDel PCC pouched London.

Stabler

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Director of the Executive Secretariat (Humelsine) Executive Secretariat Files, Lot 58 D 609

[Document 562]

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Director of the Executive Secretariat (Humelsine)

[Extract]

secret [Washington,] March 28, 1949.

Participants: The Secretary

The Under Secretary

Mr. Rusk

Mr. Bohlen1

General Smith2

Mr. Humelsine

. . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Palestine

Mr. Rusk talked briefly about the Palestine situation. He told the Secretary that the Presidential policy on Palestine was outlined very carefully in Telmar 1483 which was sent to General Marshall at the time of the last General Assembly in Paris. Mr. Rusk said to make the position outlined in this telegram effective it would be necessary to bring Governmental pressure to bear and that such a course of action would cause the President considerable heartburn before it was over. He told Mr. Acheson that there were two papers4 regarding this subject that he would like to have him discuss with the President at his 12:30 meeting today. Mr. Acheson indicated that he would do so and thought that he should advise the President to call in his political advisers to talk this over. Mr. Rusk went on to say that if the President exercises reasonable firmness now, we will likely get a reasonable solution to the problem.

. . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1 Charles E. Bohlen, Counselor of the Department of State.

2 Waiter Bedell Smith, whose resignation as Ambassador to the Soviet Union was accepted by President Truman on March 25.

3 Dated November 10, 1948, to Paris, Foreign Relations, 1948, vol. v, Part 2, p.1565.

4 The editors are unable to identify the two papers.

The Minister in Lebanon (Pinkerton) to the Secretary of State 501.BB Palestine/3—2849: Telegram

[Document 563]

The Minister in Lebanon (Pinkerton) to the Secretary of State

top secret
niact
urgent Beirut, March 28, 1949—5 p. m.

149. Palun 97. For the Secretary (and at his discretion for the President) from Ethridge. Talks with Arab governments over past week have only confirmed what I previously reported to Department; That if Jews would only make conciliatory gesture on refugee problem PCC could get on with its work of trying to get peace. Failure of Jews to do so has prejudiced whole cause of peaceful settlement in this part of world.

As we anticipated Commission has been confronted by insistent demand from Arabs that Jews evidence good faith and willingness to abide by GA resolution December 11 before negotiations were entered. They argued since Jews have constantly flouted UN resolution there was nothing for the Arabs to gain by entering negotiations under UN auspices. They have maintained that only when Jews show respect for UN or until other guarantees of fulfillment are forthcoming will they be willing enter peace talks.

Arab attitude toward refugee problem proceeds from two or three reasons. One is that they recognize presence of 700,000 or 800,000 homeless idle people as political weapon against Jews. They feel they can summon world opinion even if some refugees die in meantime. They frankly say, moreover, that when Israel comes up for confirmation in GA they intend to fight her and are trying to get their friends to fight her on ground she cannot pretend to be peace-loving as long as her aggression continues and on ground that, since she is defying UN resolution and directives, as in the Akaba incident arid on refugee problem, it is mockery to admit her as nation willing and able undertake obligations of charter. It has been intimated to me that government “friendly to Arabs” might even suggest that GA direct SYG to send telegram to PCC asking whether the countries involved under December 11 resolution had accepted resolution in principle and were assisting in implementing it. If such move is made and not defeated in GA I might be in very embarrassing position of having to join fellow commissioners in reporting that Israeli Government has not accepted resolution in principle and refuses implement it.

Second reason for Arab position is fear of domestic repercussions on refugee problem. Since Egypt and Saudi Arabia have no refugees (Egypt has reportedly sent all of hers into Gaza strip) and Iraq has only about 4,000, figure of 800,000 constitutes about one-tenth population remaining Arab states. Since they generally more advanced than other Arabs they constitute potential core of dangerous agitators offering a threat to existence of Arab government. They also create, so Arab leaders here have told me, core of irridentist movement that will plague all Arab states and provide basis for continual agitation to point that there will be no possibility of having anything more than armistice in Middle East.

In private conversations both Saudi Arabian and Egyptian have told me that if Israel would take token number of refugees back as preliminary gesture, peace talks could move along. Frightened Trans-jordanians desperately want peace talks but are also extremely sensitive to idea of “running out” on other Arab states. I am convinced they will talk peace, particularly boundary lines, when they have signed their armistice, but it is likely that on refugee problem they will continue to maintain Arab line. I am more than ever of opinion that if Jews are not deliberately stalling peace negotiations until they can consolidate their position and grab off more land as they seem to be doing in triangle, they are being most short-sighted and making it difficult for themselves ever to have peaceful relations with their neighbors.

Although Commission is making bricks without straw and with, I fear, too little support from home, it is going on with its work. We are staying in Beirut until Arab governments have agreed to further “exchange of views” with Commission in some neutral city where Jews will also be present. In their present mood the Arabs will not even talk about peace conference. We will have to try to ease them into it. In meantime, Commission intends, when it leaves Beirut, to go back to Tel Aviv for talks with [Ben-]Gurion. Jews told us they were ready for direct negotiations, but again refugee problem is not one that can be negotiated directly between Israel and another government, since all Arab governments except Yemen involved.

Although we feel we must go back to Tel Aviv it will do us little good unless Israel Government is pressured by USG to make concession which it could easily make without prejudicing its position in peace negotiations and without revealing its final hand. It is pure rubbish for Shertok to say he cannot do so; Israeli Government already knows how many it will take back and under what conditions. If it had any respect for UN and any desire to live by its ordinances it could make PCC’s job easier and shorter and make its own position vis-à-vis the Arabs much more secure than it will ever be if it continues to allow refugee problem to be source agitation in every Arab country and refugees a ready prey to agitators who already working among them.

My own position is most unhappy. It is bad enough to realize UN prestige in this part world already gone, but worse than that is realization that US prestige constantly declining and feeling toward US increasingly despairing. Since we gave Israel birth we are blamed for her belligerence and her arrogance and for cold-bloodedness of her attitude toward refugees. Of course everybody expects US to pass miracle but none is needed in this case. All that is needed is effective pressure directed toward making Israel realize that her own interests and ours also are being jeopardized in this strategic area by her intran-sigeance. So far as we are aware, Israel has not replied to approach made in Deptel 144 March 9.1 Firm reiteration of policy enunciated in GA by Jessup on territorial questions and insistence that Israel abide by resolution as to refugees would, I am convinced, clear atmosphere and bring quick peace which Israel needs as badly as Arabs. If Dept intends to do anything along that line, it should be done before PCC goes Tel Aviv.

I am frankly asking for help. If we do not help out I can see no good result from the work of this Commission. What I can see is an abortion of justice and humanity to which I do not want to be midwife; complete destruction of all faith in an international organization and creation of a very dangerous flame against US in this part of world. [Ethridge.]

Pinkerton

1 To Tel Aviv and repeated to Mr. Ethridge at Jerusalem; it is printed on p. 804 [Pg. 804 includes portions of Doc. 513 and Doc. 514].

President Truman to King Abdullah Ibn el-Hussein of Transjordan 867N.01/3–2349

[Document 564]

President Truman to King Abdullah Ibn el-Hussein of Transjordan 1

top secret Washington, March 28, 1949—6 p. m.

us urgent

His Majesty King Abdullah Ibn el Hussein: I have received Your Majesty’s message of March 25 concerning the situation affecting the Iraqi front in Palestine. I agree with Your Majesty that the replacement of Iraqi troops by forces of Transjordan would be a move in favor of peace, and that the cease-fire and armistice between Israel and Transjordan should be extended to the Iraqi front.

With regard to the Israeli request for a modification of the present front between the Iraqi forces and those of Israel, I desire to recall to Your Majesty that the policy of the United States Government as regards a final territorial settlement in Palestine and as stated in the General Assembly on Nov 30, 1948 by Dr. Philip Jessup, the American representative, is that Israel is entitled to the territory allotted to her by the General Assembly Resolution of November 29, 1947, but that of Israel desires additions, i.e., territory allotted to the Arabs by the November 29 Resolution, it should offer territorial compensation.

I understand that one of the provisions of the secret agreement which has been initialled by Your Majesty’s representatives is that the agreement “shall not in any way prejudice an ultimate political settlement between the parties”. Your Majesty may be assured that the United States Government, as a member of the Palestine Conciliation Commission, will regard any attempt at a major breach of the provisions of the secret agreement between Transjordan and Israel as a serious obstacle to the progress being made toward peace in Palestine, and that the United States Government would be prepared to make strong representations against such action to the party attempting it.

I send Your Majesty my best and most cordial wishes.2

Harry S. Truman

1 Transmitted to Amman in telegram 38, March 28, 6 p. m., with the instruction: “Pls convey following message from President to King (ur 132 March 25).” Mr. Rusk, in a memorandum of March 28 to the Secretary, had discussed King Abdullah’s message and had recommended that he discuss the matter with the President and obtain his approval for sending a proposed reply. The memorandum, which was drafted by Mr. Rockwell, noted that “Transjordan, by signing the agreement, might thus be afforded some measure of protection against further Israeli territorial demands.” The Department’s draft reply was cleared with Matthew J. Connelly, Secretary to the President.

2 The President’s message was delivered to King Abdullah at 3 p. m., March 29. The latter expressed to Chargé Stabler his “Thought that now no other course of action left open but to accept Israel’s demands.” (Telegram 137, March 29, 5 p. m., from Amman, 867N.01/3–2949)

The Secretary of State to the Legation in Lebanon 501.BB Palestine/3–2849: Telegram

[Document 565]

The Secretary of State to the Legation in Lebanon

confidential Washington, March 28, 1949—6 p. m.

148. Unpal 69. [For Ethridge.] Fol tel recd today from USUN:

“SYG has been informed by PCC Secretariat that French and Turkish members favor a Palestine peace conference in Geneva in immed future. He is replying that such a meeting seems premature at this time. Accordingly he will not authorize expenditure of UN funds for trip and meeting in Geneva. SYG understands this is Ethridge position.”

Shld appreciate your views. Dept feels SYG shld be guided by recommendations of PCC, particularly if there is any momentum which might facilitate tangible results at a peace conference. If armistice agreements are signed near future we see certain advantages prompt peace talks and are prepared intimate these views SYG if you concur.

Acheson

Memorandum by the Assistant Secretary of State for United Nations Affairs (Rusk) to the Secretary of State 501.BB Palestine/3–2949

[Document 566]

Memorandum by the Assistant Secretary of State for United Nations Affairs (Rusk) to the Secretary of State

top secret [Washington,] March 29, 1949.

Subject: Suggested Remarks for use in Conversation with the Foreign Minister of Israel.

Discussion

It is recommended that you request Mr. Moshe Sharett, the Foreign Minister of Israel, to call upon you to discuss this Government’s views with regard to an equitable settlement of the Palestine problem. Mr. Mark Ethridge, the United States Representative on the Palestine Conciliation Commission, urges again, in Beirut’s top secret telegram 149, March 28, attached (Tab A), that without pressure placed by the United States on Israel there can be no good result from the work of his Commission. He says that in the Middle East, since “we gave Israel birth”, we are blamed for her belligerence and her arrogance, and for the coldbloodedness of her attitude toward the refugees. He feels that a firm reiteration of the policy announced in the General Assembly by Dr. Jessup on territorial questions, and insistence that Israel abide by the Assembly’s resolution of December 11, 1948 as to refugees, would clear the atmosphere and bring a quick peace which Israel needs as badly as the Arabs. If you should see Mr. Sharett before the vote is taken in the forthcoming General Assembly on Israel’s admission to the United Nations, your representations would have greater effect. It is suggested that you might speak to the Israeli Foreign Minister along the following lines:

Final Territorial Settlement in Palestine

The United States Government has, observed with keen and continuing interest the progress being made toward the establishment of peace in Palestine, as illustrated by the armistice agreements which have been signed between Israel and Egypt on the one hand and Israel and the Lebanon on the other, and by the progress which is being made in the negotiation of an armistice between Israel and Trans-jordan. The United States Government hopes that armistice agreements will soon be signed between Israel and the remaining Arab States which have participated in the Palestine conflict, and is firmly convinced that there must be no new outbreak of hostilities in Palestine.

The United States Government is deeply interested in an equitable final settlement of the Palestine problem, and looks forward to the negotiations of such a settlement by the parties concerned. The position of the United States Government as regards a final territorial settlement, and as set forth by Dr. Philip Jessup in the United Nations General Assembly on November 20, 1948, is that Israel is entitled to the boundaries allotted to her by the General Assembly resolution of November 29, 1947, and that no changes should be made in these boundaries without the full consent of Israel. However, if Israel desires additions to this territory, i.e., areas allotted by the General Assembly resolution of November 29 to the Arabs, such as Western Galilee and Jaffa, which are now under Israeli military occupation, Israel should make territorial concessions elsewhere. The President has asked me to state to you his conviction that Israel is not entitled to keep both the areas allotted to it by the November 29 resolution and areas allotted to the Arabs by this resolution, and that Israel should make appropriate territorial compensation for any territory it seeks to retain beyond that allotted to the Jewish state by the November 29 resolution. Status of Jerusalem

The United States Government firmly supports the principle of the internationalization of the Jerusalem area, as recommended by the General Assembly resolutions of November 29, 1947 and December 11, 1948. The General Assembly resolution of December 11, 1948, stated that an international regime for Jerusalem “should provide for maximum local autonomy for distinctive groups consistent with the special international status of the Jerusalem area”. Under these circumstances, it would appear feasible that Jewish Jerusalem could be administered by Israel, perhaps as a trusteeship, and Arab Jerusalem by Transjordan on similar terms. However, in the opinion of the United States Government, it is essential that the Jerusalem area be placed under the overall supervision of some representation of the United Nations.

Palestinian Refugees

The United States Government is deeply concerned by the problem represented by the 800,000 Palestine refugees. The United States is counting heavily upon Israel to play a major role in the solution of this problem, not only in offering financial assistance in the resettlement of those refugees who do not desire to return to Israel, but also in the repatriation to Israel of a substantial number of the refugees. This Government regards such action on the part of Israel as a necessary condition to the establishment of a basis for cooperation between Israel and its neighbors.1

1 In a memorandum of March 28 to the Secretary of State, Mr. Rusk examined the problems analyzed in this memorandum, except for the question of the Palestinian refugees, and recommended that Secretary Acheson discuss them with President Truman (501.BB Palestine/3–2849).

The Secretary of State to the Legation in Transjordan 890D.00/2–2349

[Document 567]

The Secretary of State to the Legation in Transjordan

secret Washington, March 29, 1949.

No. 3

The Secretary of State refers to the Legation’s despatch No. 12 of February 23, 1949,1 reporting the counsel of Samir Rifai Pasha to King Abdullah regarding this Government’s attitude toward the Greater Syria problem, and requesting the Department’s guidance in the matter.

For the Legation’s information, officers of the Department discussed the Greater Syria issue informally with Samir Pasha in the course, of his visit to Washington in January 1949. Although the subject was discussed only briefly, occasion was taken to make it as clear as possible that the Department was concerned over the ambitions of King Abdullah to create a Greater Syria encompassing the territories of neighboring states and that this Government looked with disfavor upon such a scheme. It is apparent from the Legation’s despatch under reference that Samir Pasha has either misunderstood or has distorted the Department’s views in his counsel to King Abdullah.

It is true, of course, that it is a fundamental principle of our national policy to respect the right of all peoples to choose the form of government under which they will live. Similarly, this Government does not look with favor upon territorial changes that do not accord with the expressed wishes of the peoples concerned. From careful consideration of the Greater Syria plan as envisaged by King Abdullah, however, it would appear that there is insufficient basis to support the contention that such a plan would be “a spontaneous development springing from the will of the people.” As it is the Department’s opinion that under these circumstances King Abdullah’s attempts to further his proposal for the creation of a Greater Syria are a disturbing factor in the Arab Near East, the Government of Transjordan would be in error to believe that the Department in any sense, tacit or otherwise, either favors or condones the scheme.

The Officer in Charge should take suitable opportunity to make the Department’s views known to King Abdullah and to Samir Rifai Pasha in a manner which, while as tactful as possible, should serve to remove any further misconceptions regarding our attitude toward this issue.

1 Not printed.

The Consul at Jerusalem (Burdett) to the Secretary of State 867N.002/3–2949: Telegram

[Document 568]

The Consul at Jerusalem (Burdett) to the Secretary of State

Jerusalem, March 29, 1949.

253. Press announces decision by Cabinet move Ministries of Health, Education, Religion and Social Welfare and War Sufferers to Jerusalem together with departments of additional ministries. Committee appointed to recommend further transfers. Estimated 1,000 government officials involved in move. Ramallah radio interprets announcement as effort influence Conciliation Commission and show Jewish determination make Jerusalem capital Israel.1

Sent Department: pouched Amman, repeated Beirut 48.

Burdett

1 The Jerusalem Committee of the Conciliation Commission considered the implications of the Israeli decision and concluded that “this constitutes fait accompli and part [of the] process establishing capital Jerusalem.” The United States Delegation similarly concluded that “this move further prejudices prospects internationalization and confirms opinion that Israel will not relinquish new city of [to] international authority.” (telegram 153, identified also as Palun 101, March 29, 10 p. m., from Beirut, 501.BB Palestine/3–2949) The Conciliation Commission decided, on March 30, to send a written communication to the Israeli Prime Minister calling attention to press reports and adding that “if confirmed, PCC would be obliged to call attention of Israeli Government to incompatibility of such measure with paragraph 8 of GA resolution December 11 … PCC requests assurance from Ben Gurion it is not intention Israeli Government to transfer ministries to Jerusalem.” (telegram 160, also identified as Palun 102, March 31, 3 p. m., from Beirut, 501.BB Palestine/3–3149)

The Minister in Lebanon (Pinkerton) to the Secretary of State 501 BB Palestine/3–2949: Telegram

[Document 569]

The Minister in Lebanon (Pinkerton) to the Secretary of State

confidential Beirut, March 29, 1949—2 p. m.

152. Palun 100. [From Ethridge.] ReDeptel 148, March 28, USDel position has been that it will consider any meeting place when it becomes obvious that talks can be held or that they will be fruitful. In meantime, we expect no commitment nor have Arabs agreed to further talks. Arabs are canvassing among themselves now and will give reply to Commission within day or two. Question of meeting place will then come up as Arabs have been asked to indicate their preference.

My own feeling as stated in Commission has been that it is preferable to meet in this part of the world. Jerusalem is out because Arabs consider they would compromise themselves if they negotiated in [garble] Rhodes is distasteful to them psychologically. Tentatively most of the Arab Delegates have said they prefer Geneva although currency difficulties there very great for most of them. Boisanger has not committed himself directly although in Commission he has frequently referred to Geneva as a possibility. Yalcin definitely is against Rhodes and favors Geneva possibly under instruction as Turks have [garble] claim on Rhodes. Jews have indicated to Boisanger preference for Geneva.

Strongest argument against Geneva to my mind is that unless Arabs send missions empowered to negotiate and sign, there will be constant shuttling back and forth to me, thus prolonging any negotiations and giving the situation time to deteriorate more. If, however, Arabs agree to talks and indicate preference for Geneva, I will have to agree and undertake to impress upon them desirability from their point of view of sending strong delegates.

We concur fully view contained and action proposed last paragraph reference telegram. [Ethridge.]

[ Pinkerton ]

The Secretary of State to the Legation in Lebanon 501.BB Palestine/3–2449: Telegram

[Document 570]

The Secretary of State to the Legation in Lebanon

confidential Washington, March 29, 1949—7 p. m.

156. Unpal 70. [For Ethridge.] Our preliminary reaction draft proposed SC res set forth Palun 95 Mar 24 and commented on in Palun 941 is favorable. We believe however this res shld seek to tie in all loose ends and leave no doubt but that functions and Office of Mediator well as Truce Comm are terminated.

We have fol recommendations: 1. To Para 3 add fol new language: “Thanks the Truce Comm established by the SC res of 23 Apr., 1948 for its distinguished efforts in carrying out an arduous and dangerous task and declares this Comm dissolved.”

2. Proposed para. 5 of draft res would be more explicit if it read as fols: “Requests the PCC to undertake the observance of the ceasefire in Palestine; upon the assumption by the PCC of this task the remaining functions of the UN Mediator on Palestine under SC resolutions, and the office of the Mediator, shall terminated.”

3. Para. 6 might read: “Requests the SYG to appoint the present Chief of Staff of the Palestine Mediator to continue, under the supervision of the PCC , such of the present truce supervision organization as the PCC may require in maintaining the cease-fire, and as may be necessary in assisting the parties to the armistice agreements in the supervision of the application of the terms of those agreements.”

Believe undesirable for supervisor armistice agreements have direct access to SC. There will undoubtedly be many allegations of breach of armistice which wld impose a needless and politically embarrassing task on SC of investigating charges which can only be checked by on-the-spot observation. We feel PCC is logical body to whom chief of staff shld report alleged breaches of armistice agreements and PCC wld then be free bring grave infractions attention SC.

4. Feel also there shld be some laudatory reference in SC res to outstanding contribution Bernadotte and Bunche. Probably since latter drafted present proposed res this was omitted.2

Rptd USUN as 193.

Acheson

1 Regarding these two telegrams, see footnote 1, p. 869 [Pg. 869 is part of Doc. 556].

2 Jerusalem reported, on April 9, that the content of telegram 156 had been discussed with Mr. Bunche, who was “strongly of opinion, however, with which USDel agrees, that PCC should not become involved in armistice agreements.” Mr. Bunche was said to be of the opinion that the armistice agreements did not require PCC supervision, a matter he planned to discuss with Department officers on his return to the United States (telegram 280, also identified as Palun 121, 501.BB Palestine/4–949).

The Secretary of State to Mr. Ralph J. Bunche 501.BB Palestine/3–3049: Telegram

[Document 571]

The Secretary of State to Mr. Ralph J. Bunche 1

confidential Washington, March 30, 1949—7 p. m.

For Acting UN Mediator for Palestine. US Govt refers its proposals of Sept 19482 re export aircraft parts for Near East commercial airline needs, which proposals were concurred in by you Sept 18.3

This Govt considering desirability liberalizing policy to permit export to Israel and to Arab States, without prior approval of Mediator, aircraft, spares, other aviation items which US Govt satisfied required for establishment and maintenance civil air services and rehabilitation civil air navigation, communications and ground facilities, not limited to services in effect July 15, 1948. Request your early views this proposal.

Acheson

1 This telegram was sent to Cairo as No. 339 and repeated to Rhodes. Mr. Bunche, at Rhodes, replied in an undated telegram, received in the Department on April 3, that he concurred in the liberalizing policy. Henceforth, he said, “if US Government satisfied such items will be used for non-military purposes only, I see no need to obtain prior approval of Mediator for issuance of export permits.” (Navy telegram NCR 3768, 501.BB Palestine/4–349)

2 See telegram 908, September 16, 1948, to Jerusalem, Foreign Relations, 1948, vol. v, Part 2, p. 1406.

3 See footnote 1, ibid., p. 1408.

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Secretary of State 501.BB Palestine/3–3149

[Document 572]

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Secretary of State

[Washington,] March 31, 1949.

My Proposed Conversation With Mr. Sharett

I went over with the President my proposed talk with Mr. Sharett as outlined this morning with Mr. Satterthwaite.1 The President approved it and asked that a memorandum of the conversation be sent to him after it had taken place, and said that he would say the same thing to Dr. Weizmann when he arrived in this country.

1 This allusion is not clear to the editors. Possibly, Secretary Acheson was referring to an outline of the matters discussed in Mr. Rusk’s memorandum of March 29, which was drafted in Mr. Satterthwaite’s office.

The Chargé in Transjordan (Stabler) to the Secretary of State 867N.01/3–3149: Telegram

[Document 573]

The Chargé in Transjordan (Stabler) to the Secretary of State

secret Amman, March 31, 1949—2 p. m.

143. Legtel 142, March 30.1 After meeting which lasted until 0300 hours this morning understanding had been reached on all points. It was agreed that original agreement and modifications thereto would not be kept secret and that they would form instructions to two armistice delegates at Rhodes who would include terms thereof in general armistice agreement. However, until armistice agreement signed, terms these “instructions” would not be made public. Modifications to original agreement were signed by Defense Minister and Israeli representatives and were appended to original agreement as annex.

Israelis were unwilling accept Transjordan concept that areas demanded by Israel which were not allotted to Israel under partition should be made no man’s land, and stated that question of partition did not enter into discussions. While Israelis insisted they should occupy areas up to lines laid down in original agreement, it was nevertheless agreed that neither Transjordan nor Israeli forces would occupy Arab villages within areas affected and that such villages would remain “enclave”. Villages would raise own police forces and would have contact with areas under Transjordan or Israeli occupation through UN. This arrangement would preclude possibility large numbers refugees.

Israelis also agreed to change in wording paragraph 4 of original agreement so that it would read “Israel, for its part, will make certain changes for the benefit of Transjordan in area west of Hebron”. Re this Israel will make ratification of lines this area which would return to Transjordan authority considerable territory. Also agreed that paragraph 3 original agreement would be entirely eliminated.

Fawzi Pasha said Israelis wished discuss last night question of Latrun for which they willing make compensation. However, Transjordan representatives replied that first step should be signature of armistice based on lines at time of cease-fire agreement and that later further talks would be held concerning Latrun, Hadassah, Potash works, railroad to Jerusalem, etc.

Fawzi Pasha indicated it now expected armistice agreement (draft of agreement concerning Arab Legion fronts has been considered and approved by Transjordan) including terms re Iraqi front would be signed at Rhodes on Monday April 4. It is understood Legion will take over from Iraqis on April 5.

In general, Defense Minister appeared glad to have matters settled and felt Transjordan had used weeks grace to good advantage.

Sent Department 143, repeated Baghdad 35, Beirut 30 for USDel PCC, Jerusalem 76.

Stabler

1 Not printed; it advised that the King, the Prime Minister, the Chief of the Transjordanian Delegation at Rhodes, and the Defense Minister would meet with Israeli Representatives on the evening of March 30 to discuss the question of the Iraqi front. The Trans Jordanians anticipated proposing that “those areas in question which were allotted to Arabs under partition should become no-mansland under UN until final settlement.” (867N.01/3–3049)

The Minister in Lebanon (Pinkerton) to the Secretary of State 501.BB Palestine/3–3149: Telegram

[Document 574]

The Minister in Lebanon (Pinkerton) to the Secretary of State

confidential Beirut, March 31, 1949—6 p. m.

163. Palun 105. [From Ethridge.] At request French Foreign Office Boisanger has asked Ethridge to recommend that Department approach Israeli representative Washington re new Israeli requirement Jerusalem visitors have civilian visas for entry into Israel. Ethridge agreed report matter Department and suggested French representative Washington consult Department re what action desirable. We doubt wisdom constant heckling approaches but suggest this matter might be included in any general over-all approach re Jerusalem or Palestine which Department may make to Israeli Government.1

Sent Department 163, repeated Jerusalem 86, Tel Aviv 6, Amman unnumbered. [Ethridge.]

Pinkerton

1 Secretary Acheson, on April 1, informed Mr. Ethridge as follows: “I want you to know that we have given very careful consideration to Palun 97, Mar 28, which I have discussed with the President. We also have in mind Palun 99, Mar 29, and Palun 105, Mar 31. I have asked Sharett to see me Apr. 5 and shall go over these questions with him. The President says that he will cover the same points with President Weizmann when he arrives in this country.” (Telegram 166, identified also as Unpal 73, to Beirut, 501.BB Palestine/4–149) Palun 97 is identified also as telegram 149 from Beirut, p. 876 [Pg. 876 is part of Doc. 563]; Palun 99, identified also as telegram 151 from Beirut, March 29, is not printed.

Editorial Note [Document 575]

Editorial Note

The meaning of the expressions “Rhodes formula” and “Rhodes-type talks” in connection with the methods of negotiation between Israel and some of its Arab neighbors for armistice agreements is not entirely clear. The United Nations Bulletin of March 15, 1949, page 226, states that, with the convening of the Egyptian and Israeli negotiators at Rhodes, there “followed 42 days of almost continuous session. The procedure adopted was for Dr. Bunche to hold preliminary discussions separately with each delegation on each substantive item. Then informal meetings were arranged between the heads of the delegations and the Acting Mediator. And when discussion on the item had reached an advanced stage, joint formal meetings of the two delegations were held.”

A press release by the United Nations, No. PAD/456 of March 9, states that the delegations of Israel and Transjordan, the same afternoon, held “their first joint informal meeting which lasted two and a half hours. In a very cordial atmosphere, an exchange of views took place on 11 points raised by both delegations in connection with the delineation of armistice lines, including the Jerusalem sector.” (IO files)

The nature of these expressions became of special moment to the Department of State early in 1948. Rufus G. Smith of the Office of United Nations Political Affairs, on March 4, 1948, prepared a memorandum entitled “The Rhodes Formula,” which read in part as follows:

“The 1949 armistice agreements between Israel and its four Arab neighbors were achieved pursuant to a November 1948 Security Council resolution which called on the parties to negotiate ‘either directly or through the acting mediator on Palestine.’

After adoption of the resolution, Israel said that it would prefer direct negotiations but, if this was not immediately practicable, would be prepared to negotiate through UN intermediaries. Arab replies did not deal with the procedural aspect and the meetings apparently began with no advance agreement on how they would proceed.

The account of the chief Israeli negotiator and Bundle’s reports agree that the first one or two meetings were separate. According to Bunche, the first joint meeting took place on the second day. The Israeli account says that at this meeting the delegations first exchanged views through Bunche but ‘it was not long before the delegations were arguing with one another directly.’ Bundle’s report only says that the two delegations were introduced at that first meeting and that he became chairman at their request. Thereafter, according to Bunche, there would be preliminary discussions between himself and each of the delegations separately, ‘informal meetings between heads of delegations and the United Nations,’ and ‘joint formal meetings of the two delegations.’

Apparently, then, there were both joint meetings with Bunche in the chair and informal meetings between Bunche and each party separately. There is no indication of the frequency of each type of meeting. It is also not clear whether the substantive negotiations took place in the separate sessions, in the joint sessions, or in both. Israel would probably maintain that they took place in the joint sessions, or at least primarily in such sessions. Bunche, while referring to some Israeli descriptions of the negotiations as ‘inaccurate and misleading,’ has refused to expand publicly on his reports to the Security Council at the time.

Bunche’s reports, however, do reflect a gradual change in terminology. By the time of the Israel-Jordan and Israel–Lebanon discussions, which began after the Israel–Egypt agreement was signed, he was talking of negotiations ‘between’ representatives of the parties under UN chairmanship. Also, in his summary report to the Council on all four armistice agreements, submitted after conclusion of the Israel-Syria agreement, he recommended adoption of a draft resolution referring to negotiations ‘between’ the parties.”

The memorandum continued with a chronological account of the negotiations and their background and aftermath, which, in pertinent part, referred to Mr. Bundle’s report of January 12, 13, and 25, printed on pages 649 [Pg. 649 includes portions of Doc. 383 and Doc. 384], 654 [Pg. 654 includes portions of Doc. 388 and Doc. 389], and 698 [Pg. 698 includes portions of Doc. 424 and Doc. 425], respectively; and concluded with a section entitled “An Israeli Account of the Rhodes Negotiations,” which presented the views of Walter Eytan, the Chief Israeli Representative at the Rhodes negotiations, as given in his The First Ten Years (New York, Simon and Schuster, 1958), pages 28 ff.

The Department, on March 7, 1968, informed Amman that “virtually only authoritative reports on procedures followed at Rhodes are those Bunche submitted to UNSC. … In any event it [is] clear that ‘Rhodes formula’ … embraced variety of methods, both formal and informal, joint and separate.” (telegram 126252)

Mr. Smith’s memorandum and telegram 126252 are filed under POL 27 Arab–Isr.

Editorial Note [Document 576]

Editorial Note

The Governments of Israel and Transjordan signed a General Armistice Agreement at Rhodes on April 3; for the text, see SC, 4th yr., Special Supplement No. 1.

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Secretary of State 867N.01/4–549

[Document 577]

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Secretary of State 1

secret New York, April 5, 1949.

[Subject:] Palestine Problem

Present: The Secretary

Mr. Sharett, Foreign Minister of Israel

Dean Rusk

I expressed appreciation for Mr. Sharett’s visit and stated that I wanted to congratulate him upon the armistice recently concluded between Israel and Transjordan. I then expressed the hope that the negotiation of an armistice with Syria could rapidly be brought to a conclusion.

I said that I had had an opportunity to discuss with the President the matters which had been discussed between Mr. Sharett and myself in Washington, and that I now wished to discuss with Mr. Sharett the President’s views on the general situation.

The President has been following the situation in the Near East with very close attention and deep personal concern.

On the question of the boundary settlement, to which attention would turn as soon as the armistice negotiations had been completed, the President wished to reaffirm his attitude which he has expressed on many occasions.

The President supports the settlement of the November 29 resolution and considers that Israel has a clear and unequivocal claim to the territories allotted to Israel in that resolution and that any changes in such territories adverse to Israel must have Israel’s consent. Insofar as Israel might itself wish a rectification of the November 29 frontiers—and we can understand that some rectification will be desired—we believe that these changes must be brought about by agreement. Further, such agreement should result from negotiation and consent in the genuine meaning of those terms. The President believes that Israel must be prepared to offer territorial concessions in one part of its territory in exchange for increments of territory which it desires elsewhere. Actually, the President does not foresee that there should be any serious difficulty in reaching agreement on this basis.

With respect to Jerusalem, the President stands behind the concept of internationalization as set forth in the solution of the General Assembly of December 11, 1948. It is recognized that the interest of the international community is primarily in the Holy Places and in the maintenance of orderly conditions around the Holy Places. International interest is not primarily concerned with regulating the day-to-day activity of the inhabitants as such. For that reason the President believes that it should be possible to work out arrangements, perhaps under the trusteeship system, under which Israeli and Arab authorities could accept responsibilities in Jerusalem, but which recognize international interest and authority for the Holy Places.

I then stated that the most serious difficulty and the source of greatest immediate concern to the President was the question of Palestine refugees. These refugees number some 800,000. They constitute a serious political problem disturbing to the good order and well-being of the Near East. The Assembly resolution of December 11 set up the principle of repatriation. While it can be understood that repatriation of all of these refugees is not a practical solution, nevertheless we anticipate that a considerable number must be repatriated if a solution is to be found.

The President is particularly anxious that an impasse not develop on this subject, with one side refusing to negotiate for a final settlement until a solution is found for refugees, and the other side refusing to take steps to solve the refugee question until there is a final political settlement. We must avoid the argument as to which is the horse and which is the cart, because in fact the political settlement and the refugee solution are part and parcel of the same problem and both are cart and both are horse.

The President believes that now is the time for Israel to make a real contribution to a political settlement by showing that it is prepared to make a beginning on the refugee problem. The Israeli Government could state that it considers this problem a necessary part of a final political settlement, but that it is prepared to move immediately to attempt repatriation of a portion, say a fourth, of the refugees eligible for repatriation. I stated that we hoped that Israel could accept immediately the repatriation of refugees coming from areas now under Israeli occupation, but not allotted to Israel under the November 29 resolution and, in addition, a substantial number into Israel proper.

A statesmanlike move by Israel with respect to refugees would make it possible for the President to continue his strong and warm support for Israel and efforts being made by its Government to establish its new political and economic structure on a firm basis.

In reply, Mr. Sharett stated first that he was familiar with our views on boundary questions and that he was also hopeful that an agreed solution could be reached. He stated that he realized that mutual adjustments were involved but that he did not see any insurmountable difficulty.

Regarding Jerusalem, Mr. Sharett said that he personally found the suggestions about trusteeship reasonable and worthwhile suggestions for further study, and that his own attitude was that a solution might very well be found along those lines. He stated, however, that he did not wish to exclude at this time another kind of solution which might be reached by agreement between Israel and Transjordan—an agreement which would require the imprimatur of the General Assembly and which would, of course, take into account international interest in the Holy Places. He stated that in prior discussion with Transjordan on the subject of Jerusalem they had found Abdullah insistent upon the principle of annexation rather than of internationalization.

The impression left by Mr. Sharett was that the Israeli Government had not rejected the idea of a joint trusteeship of some sort for the city of Jerusalem, but that it still had in mind the possibility of a direct agreement between Israel and Transjordan which could be agreed to internationally.

On the question of the refugees Mr. Sharett stated that he first had a question about the numbers involved. Israeli experts thought that the number of legitimate refugees was in the number of 500,000 to 550,000, but that there were many local inhabitants who described themselves as refugees in order to obtain relief.

Apart from numbers, Mr. Sharett stated that he could not agree to a distinction between territory allotted to Israel under the November 29 resolution and other territory now under Israel control. The primary reason is that security in Israel is indivisible, and he illustrated this by a detailed explanation of operations in the West Galilee area. He stated that Israel could not give up the minimum security which it had won with so much blood and expenditure by reintroducing large number of refugees into the very areas from which-Israel had been seriously threatened.

Mr. Sharett then restated the Israeli position that the refugee problem can only be solved in terms of final peace settlement and that basically resettlement is the proper solution for refugees. He stated that the question arose out of war and could only be settled in a peace. He said there would never have been a refugee problem had the Arabs not initiated the war; that Israel had been willing to accept the presence of a large Arab minority within its territory, but that the situation is now completely changed and that to return refugees who had once left the country created quite a new problem. He stated that their return would disturb the homogeneity of Israeli areas; they could settle themselves in neighboring Arab states, not only to their own benefit but to the benefit of the Arab states themselves and would increase the productive capacity and capital equipment of such states.

He stated that he would report fully my remarks to his Government and, indeed, that Mr. Ben Gurion would be discussing the refugee question with the Palestine Conciliation Commission on April 7.

I then continued by stating that I thought Israel should consider the refugee question in three phases.

As a first step I thought that the Israeli Government should find a way to state that it is prepared to accept a considerable number of refugees on a repatriation basis. Since there may be some difference of opinion as to the numbers involved, it may not be possible to talk about precise figures, but some quantitative indication of what Israel could do would be an important step. Such a step would permit Mr. Ethridge and the Palestine Conciliation Commission to proceed with an orderly consideration of the entire question, would set the framework for a discussion of a political settlement and would make it easier for us to get the assistance of Congress in dealing with the later aspects of the problem.

As a second phase, I thought that, as peace discussions continued, the Israeli Government might be able to say that since discussions would be going well and there would be a prospect of a settlement, the Israeli Government could then begin actual repatriation. Initially repatriation might be to less critical areas from a security point of view and could be worked out so that it would not jeopardize the Israeli military position.

The final step would be the final political settlement which would include whatever additional contribution Israel could make in terms of repatriation.

Mr. Sharett said that he felt that the two fully understood each other’s point of view and that he would report my statement fully to his Government and asked me to express his appreciation to the President for the President’s interest and concern in this question.

Mr. Rusk raised with Mr. Sharett the difficulty being caused by certain administrative action by local authorities by which Israel would unnecessarily complicate and prejudice forthcoming negotiations. He cited the recent requirements that visitors to Jerusalem have civilian visas. Mr. Sharett thought that the only visas involved were those required for transit through Israel itself, but that some question about permits may have arisen, in connection with direct entry into Jerusalem from Arab-held territories. He said he would get in touch with his Government immediately and try to clarify that situation.2

1 Drafted by Mr. Rusk; it is a redraft in the first person of a memorandum drafted originally in the third person, with no substantive changes. Both memoranda are filed under the same number. Secretary Acheson transmitted a copy to President Truman with his memorandum of April 7, which stated in part: “You will recall asking me to send you a copy of this memorandum so that you could use it in connection with your conversation with Dr. Weizmann when he arrives in this country.” (867N.01/4–749) The Acheson–Sharett conversation began at 11:15 a. m. on April 5 in Apartment 42–A, the Waldorf Towers (marginal notation on Mr. Acheson’s memorandum of March 31, p. 886 [Pg. 886 includes portions of Doc. 572 and Doc. 573]).

2 The Department sent a lengthy summary of the Acheson–Sharett conversation to Ambassador McDonald and Mr. Ethridge at Tel Aviv on April 6. The telegram noted that the Israeli Foreign Minister saw the Secretary at the latter’s request. After its summary, the Department concluded as follows: “We do not feel that McDonald should associate himself with PCC in meeting with Ben Gurion, since he is not member of PCC. However, Dept desires he as Amb urgently give PriMin full account interview, stressing points made by President and Secy. “Both McDonald and Ethridge should express to BenGurion serious concern this Govt at reports from UN Mediator of reported Israeli incursion into Syrian territory Apr. 5. Dept understands McDonald has already received direct communications from Bunche and has seen text of urgent message from Bunche to Israeli Govt Apr 5 stating that if any Israeli forces are beyond Syrian frontier he must insist this is most flagrant and dangerous violation of SC truce and that such forces must be withdrawn immediately. McDonald should state that, coming on very day when Secy has in terms of friendly interest so fully explained to Israeli FonMin President’s deep concern for prompt peace in Palestine, this report if true would necessar[il]y cause most unfavorable impression here, particularly at a time when Israel membership UN on point being discussed GA.” (Telegram 208, 501.BB Palestine/4–649)

The text of Mr. Bunche’s message to the Israeli Government was transmitted to the Department by Beirut in telegram 177, identified also as Palun 111, April 5, 11 p. m., 501.BB Palestine/4–549.

The Minister in Lebanon (Pinkerton) to the Secretary of State 501.BB Palestine/4–549: Telegram

[Document 578]

The Minister in Lebanon (Pinkerton) to the Secretary of State

confidential Beirut, April 5, 1949—1 p. m.

174. Palun 108. [From Ethridge.] During second and last joint meeting between Commission and Arab states at Beirut on April 5, representatives of Egypt, Transjordan, Lebanon, Saudi Arabia and Syria informed Commission their governments agreed to continuation of exchange of views at some neutral place at an early date. Iraqi representative stated his government was unable to accept and that prior to further discussion GA Resolution December 11 regarding refugees should be accepted by Israel. Iraqi representative privately stated, however, Iraq would send observer to further meetings.

Egypt, Transjordan and Syria representatives indicated Italy, Brussels, and Evian would be acceptable for meeting in that order. Lebanon preferred Evian. Saudi Arabia had no instructions. Commissioners did not discuss matter further with Arabs re Jerusalem nor among themselves. Commission plans defer decision regarding place and date pending meeting with Ben-Gurion April 7.

Arab representatives made it clear they expected Commission to present their views regarding imperative character paragraph 11 GA Resolution December 11 and that Israel, if it desired to cooperate, might be expected now to make it possible for Arab refugees to return to their homes and to cancel other present Israeli measures re refugee land and property which are prejudicial to interests of refugees.

Commission explained it planned to visit Tel Aviv April 7 and would present Arab views regarding refugees and would ascertain Israeli attitude.1

Department please pass to US Mission, New York.

Sent Department 174; repeated Tel Aviv 7, Jerusalem 28, Baghdad 15, Damascus 23, Amman unnumbered, Cairo 17, Jidda unnumbered, London 3. [Ethridge.]

Pinkerton

1 Mr. Ethridge, on April 4, had expressed his view to the Department that the Arabs had made a real concession in agreeing to go ahead with peace talks and that “If Israel would make concession now on refugees we would be on our way.” (Telegram 170, identified also as Palun 107, from Beirut, 501.BB Palestine/4–499)

Editorial Note [Document 579]

Editorial Note

The Second Progress Report of the Palestine Conciliation Commission was released in two parts, dated April 5 and 9. They dealt primarily with Arab and Israeli views, respectively, on the Palestine refugee question. The text of the report is printed in GA, 4th Sess., Ad Hoc Political Committee, Annex, volume II, page 3.

The Consul at Jerusalem (Burdett) to the Secretary of State 501.BB Palestine/4–549: Telegram

[Document 580]

The Consul at Jerusalem (Burdett) to the Secretary of State

secret Jerusalem, April 5, 1949—3 p. m.

266. Article 8 of Israel Transjordan agreement provides for special committee which “shall have exclusive competence over such matters as may be referred to it”. Questions listed for committee attention pertain mainly to Jerusalem and have direct bearing on future city.

In defending agreement before Knesset Ben-Gurion stated, according to Palestine Post, one of major problems in negotiations overcome when questions connected with Jerusalem left to special committee “to be settled without UN intercession”. Post quotes Dr. Bunche as saying special committee will find means making life for people in Jerusalem easier and helping Jerusalem return to normal. Diplomatic correspondent of Post asserts Israel and Transjordan will negotiate directly through special committee without intervention of any third party on all questions outstanding “including those which would normally be subject of Peace Conference and which, would have been regarded as within scope of PCC”. He believes establishment of special committee has seriously weakened position PCC.

Israel has long shown desire settle problem Jerusalem directly with Transjordan without “interference of third party” and Consul[ate] General has consistently maintained UN must be considered interested party in any agreement re Jerusalem. Creation this committee with apparent approval acting mediator furnishes Israel and Transjordan convenient means settling question concerning Jerusalem by mutual agreement and without taking into account UN interest in city. Difficult to perceive how functions assigned committee will not make more difficult carrying out provisions GA Resolution December 11 re internationalization.

Burdett

The Minister in Lebanon (Pinkerton) to the Secretary of State 501.MA Palestine/4–549: Telegram

[Document 581]

The Minister in Lebanon (Pinkerton) to the Secretary of State

confidential Beirut, April 5, 1949—4 p. m.

175. Palun 109. [From Ethridge.] On April 4 Eytan, Director General Israeli Foreign Office replied to PCC letter referred to in Legtel 160 March 311 and stated:

Ben Gurion directs me to confirm it is intention of Government of Israel to accommodate certain of its departments in Jerusalem and government after careful study of question finds itself unable accept view this step is incompatible with Article 8 of GA resolution December 11. There is in considered opinion of government’s advisers nothing in this article nor in any other article of GA resolution December 11 that could be interpreted as forbidding Government of Israel to establish any of its departments in Jerusalem.

Pending final determination of future of Jerusalem Government of Israel deems itself entitled to use accommodation available there as matter of administrative convenience.

Eytan then expressed Government of Israel’s regret PCC in April 1 press release in Beirut “should have publicly criticized” government’s conduct before reply could be made to PCC letter.

Eytan concluded by confirming PCC appointment April 7 with Ben Gurion who was looking forward to exchange of views with PCC on present situation and on plans for future.

PCC decided April 5 to take two steps: (1) To write Eytan that PCC press release had not criticized government but had stated content PCC letter which expressed PCC opinion that if it were true Israel planned transfer Ministries to Jerusalem PCC considered it incompatible with GA resolution December 11; and (2) to discuss matter with Ben Gurion April 7.

PCC remains of opinion transfer of Ministries to Jerusalem is incompatible with GA resolution December 11. It is matter of Israel intent. Theory expressed in Eytan’s letter that resolution is silent would presumably make it possible for Israel to announce Jerusalem as capital of Israel with impunity.

Boisanger believes US and France should discuss with Sharett in Washington. We agreed report matter to Department and suggested French representative Washington consult Department regarding desirable action.

Repeated Jerusalem 89, Tel Aviv 8, Amman unnumbered. [Ethridge.]

Pinkerton

1 Identified also as Palun 102, not printed; it advised of a letter from the Palestine Conciliation Commission to Prime Minister Ben-Gurion, which, in citing press reports on the transfer of Israeli ministries to Jerusalem, stated that if the reports were confirmed the “PCC would be obliged to call attention of Israeli Government to incompatibility of such measure with paragraph 8 of GA resolution December 11.” The letter requested the assurance of the Prime Minister that it was not the intention of the Israeli Government to transfer the ministries to Jerusalem. (501.BB Palestine/3–3149)

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom 867N.48/4–549: Telegram

[Document 582]

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom 1

top secret Washington, April 5, 1949—6 p. m.

1176. For McGhee from Satterthwaite. In general discussion with Secy Apr 2 re NEA area, FonMin Bevin2 emphasized desirability holding Arabs “in line” and expressed view US and UK shld adopt common line for development potential resources needed for our defense. He stated that after Palestine question settled, he hoped concentrate on several major development projects, particularly Lake Victoria and Lake Tana water schemes and Euphrates. Latter he considered offers possibility establishing under good living conditions population of five to six million capable withstanding Soviet pressure.

Bevin further stated Arab refugee problem being studied. He said 40,000 could be resettled on Jordan slopes and that he was putting pressure on Syrian Govt for resettlement 200,000–300,000 Northern Syria. He hoped Transjordan could absorb remainder.

Re general area he favors vigorous econ development drive by West, since development important for capital goods market and for food production.

Secy replied that President is greatly interest ME development as complement to Western European recovery, is extremely interested in Euphrates project, and desires concentrate on development problems rather than diffuse our energies. Secy further stated our desire proceed on internatl front and belief IBED appropriate org for development Point IV program. [Satterthwaite.]

Acheson

1 This telegram was repeated to Jerusalem as No. 187 and for Mr. Ethridge as Unpal 74.

2 Mr. Bevin was in the United States to attend the Second Part of the Third Session of the General Assembly, which began in New York on April 5.

The Acting Secretary of State to the Secretary of Defense (Johnson) 867N.20A/3–2949

[Document 583]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Secretary of Defense (Johnson)

restricted Washington, April 6, 1949.

My Dear Mr. Secretary: During the course of a call which he paid upon the Secretary of State on March 22, the Foreign Minister of Israel, Mr. Moshe Sharett, stated that the Israeli Government was very much interested in obtaining American technical assistance for the organization and training of the Israeli Army. He said that his Government would like to offer positions as advisers to a limited number of retired United States Army officers, or Reserve officers on inactive status, who were skilled in the various branches of military organization. Mr. Sharett added that the purpose of his request was not to prepare the Israeli Army for offensive operations but to reorganize it in the most efficient manner possible to permit the reduction of the number of men now under arms.

Mr. Sharett was told that the Department would be glad to discuss his request with your office and to give it sympathetic consideration. It was also explained that in the absence of permanent legislation, it would be impossible to comply with his request on the basis of a military mission.

The Department would appreciate receiving your opinion as to whether the procedure suggested by Mr. Sharett is permissible under the law and regulations and agreeable to the National Military Establishment. It appears that it would be desirable and in the national interest to permit competent retired or reserve officers, having the confidence of the National Military Establishment, to assist the Israeli authorities in the basic organization of their army.

It appears also, however, that while we should, if possible, give agreement in principle to Mr. Sharett’s request, it would be advisable to postpone the granting of permission to individual officers until such time as the armistice negotiations between Israel and the Syrian Governments have been successfully completed, or at least until we are satisfied that the likelihood of a renewal of hostilities in Palestine has passed.

Sincerely yours,

James E. Webb

The President to the Secretary of State 501.MA Palestine/4–649

[Document 584]

The President to the Secretary of State

Washington, April 6, 1949.

My Dear Mr. Secretary: In accordance with Section 1 of the Joint Resolution providing for the authorization of a special contribution by the United States for the relief of Palestine refugees (Public Law 25, 81st Congress, approved March 24, 1949), I have today allocated $8,000,000 to the Department of State from funds advanced by the Reconstruction Finance Corporation under the provisions of Section 2 of the aforementioned Act, which advance has been deposited with the Treasury of the United States, and established under Appropriation Symbol No. 119/00043.

These funds are to be used by the Department of State as a special contribution to the United Nations for the purposes set forth in the resolution of the General Assembly of the United Nations of November 19, 1948, providing for the relief of Palestine refugees.

Sincerely yours,

Harry S. Truman

The Ambassador in Israel (McDonald) to the Secretary of State 501.BB Palestine/4–849: Telegram

[Document 585]

The Ambassador in Israel (McDonald) to the Secretary of State

secret Tel Aviv, April 8, 1949—noon.

268. ReDeptel 208, April 6.1 Ethridge arrived Tel Aviv April 7 in time study Dept instructions before PCC Conference with Prime Minister. After receiving brief report from Ethridge of PCC talk with B[en-] G[urion] and Foreign Office staff I saw Prime Minister. My exchange with Prime Minister followed closely Dept’s argument and complemented and reinforced presentation BG PCC. 1. Prime Minister said he had not heard of “alleged Israel violation of Syrian frontier” until morning April 7; charges might be true and if confirmed troops would be ordered back at once and commander punished. Prime Minister insisted Israel concerned only to have Syrians return their side international frontier. Hour later Shiloah (in course long explanation at residence with staff re Israel–Transjordan armistice agreement and related matters being reported airgram fully) said positively that Israeli troops already withdrawn.

2. On question Israeli’s frontiers, Prime Minister’s attitude identical with that of Sharett reported Deptel 208.

3. Re Jerusalem Prime Minister said President Truman’s view (Deptel 208) was encouraging and that he hoped Israel and Transjordan could reach agreement on administration of city and internationalization of holy places. Israel prepared if necessary challenge PCC’s Jerusalem recommendations before GA.

4. Re refugees, Prime Minister repeated Sharett’s arguments (Deptel 208) and insisted any repatriation program must be “integral part peace settlement. It must not precede nor follow peace”. Israel’s contribution to repatriation and resettlement must wait until Arabs no longer threaten resumption war because returning refugees now might welcome invaders. He argued GA December 11 resolve impliedly accepted this thesis and he insisted that Israel’s answer on this point was unshakable.

In reply my argument that American and world public opinion was increasingly critical of Israel’s position and that it should in own interest accept Dept’s program of gradualism, Prime Minister replied: “I am fully aware public criticism but Israel too small make promises it cannot or does not intend to carry out. Israel right self-protection is paramount. Govt must insist irrespective criticism right defend country’s existence. Not fair ask it jeopardize safety by repatriation now”.

Comment: At present I see no prospect softening Israel’s position refugees. Attitude Jerusalem and frontiers more promising. Hence it is fortunate PCC is pressing plans European conference. I hope Dept decides call regional conference heads of American missions (Embtel 259. April 3)2 before Ethridge who strongly supports plan leaves this area.

McDonald

1 Not printed, but see footnote 2, p. 894 [Pg. 894 includes portions of Doc. 577 and Doc. 578].

2 Not printed; in this message, for the attention of Mr. Satterthwaite, Ambassador McDonald suggested the “possibility regional conference preferably Rhodes while Bunche still there, of heads Missions Beirut, Damascus, Baghdad, Amman, Tel Aviv, Jidda, Cairo and possibly Yemen. Attendance Ethridge also obvious advantage him and us, and your or Hare’s presence as chairman would be most useful.” (501.BB Palestine/4–349)

The Consul at Jerusalem (Burdett) to the Secretary of State 501.BB Palestine/4–849: Telegram

[Document 586]

The Consul at Jerusalem (Burdett) to the Secretary of State

secret Jerusalem, April 8, 1949—1 p. m.

272. In Old City yesterday encountered extreme bitterness and resentment among Palestine Arabs over signature Israel Transjordan armistice. Particularly angered over provisions in Article 6 for turning over to Jews area in triangle containing 16 villages and reportedly 35,000 inhabitants. Asserted villagers defended homes during entire period of conflict and saw no justification for surrender their lands. Villagers reportedly begging Iraqis to stay and delegation sent Baghdad to plead case. Arabs scoffed at clause permitting villagers remain and stating Jews would not enter villages. Stated essential work surrounding lands to survive and many persons from Tulkarm and Qualqiliya also depend on lands to be given Jews. Pointed to fate villagers left in Faluja area when Egyptians withdrew alleging were terrorized by Jews and forced by physical violence to leave. Anticipated great majority Arabs in area would become refugees.

Open criticism of Transjordan and King Abdullah voiced. Stated in desire conclude immediate peace and obtain title to Arab areas in Pakistan [Palestine], King paid no heed to wishes or rights Palestine Arabs. Denied persons signing treaty had right to speak for Palestine Arabs or dispose their territory. US and UK assigned share of blame since failed give Abdullah concrete assurances assistance in event Jewish attack.

Abdullah Tel, Governor Old City, confirmed above feeling Palestine Arabs, Stated as adviser to King had warned him that cession territory in triangle most unwise politically and “would shake kingdom Transjordan”. He refused associate himself officially with negotiations despite anger of King although did conduct Jewish officials to Shuneh. Stated that alleged compensation to Transjordan in Hebron area mere fiction since territory of no value and contained no “name” villages. Tel stated from military point of view could sympathize with demands Jews for improvement of lines in triangle. He urged they compensate by giving back villages in Ramie Ludda area (not towns) or Beitjibrin sector. This would enable King to show people concrete quid pro quo and offset adverse political reaction. Jews as usual refused to give anything not even village of Dawayima although this discussed for three hours.

Re Jerusalem Abdullah Tel maintained not intention Arabs exclude UN from Jerusalem discussions (Contel 266, April 5) through creation special committee. Said this undoubtedly desire of Jews but Arabs wished and realized needed assistance UN and PCC in Jerusalem settlement. Claimed would not accede to any further demands Jews in Jerusalem and was now time for Jews give something.

Re Syrian coup,1 Abdullah Tel, who recently proceeded Damascus as emissary King Abdullah, stated revolt entirely internal against associates President Quwwatly who completely corrupt. Stated group surrounding President of Lebanon of same ilk and should watch step or might suffer similar fate. Asserted Iraq and Transjordan both supporting Zaim.

From above conversations appears that Israel obtained its demands at cost further bitterness among Arab people and that in acquiescing King Abdullah also incurred public resentment. Only by risking strong popular opposition and possible upheavals can Arab leaders, regardless own wishes, agree to further Jewish demands without receiving real concessions in return. To obtain permanent peace treaties and even temporary stability in area essential find formula for forcing Israel to make concessions in accord with US policy as set forth by Jessup in speech November 20 and to comply with GA resolution December 11.

Sent Department 272, repeated Baghdad 22, Beirut 56, Damascus 19, Amman 21. Pouched Cairo, Jidda.

Burdett

1 The reference is to the coup by Col. Husni Zaim which overthrew the Government of Syria on March 30; see Secretary Acheson’s memorandum of April 25 to President Truman, p. 1630 [Pg. 1630 is part of Doc. 1132].

The Consul at Jerusalem (Burdett) to the Secretary of State 501.BB Palestine/4–949: Telegram

[Document 587]

The Consul at Jerusalem (Burdett) to the Secretary of State

confidential Jerusalem, April 9, 1949—10 a. m.

274. Palun 115. [From Ethridge.] On April 7, PCC had 2½ hour meeting with Israeli Prime Minister Ben-Gurion and his aides. Discussion revolved around (1) general and specific instructions contained in GA resolution December 11; (2) Beirut meeting with Arab states; (3) date and place of further meeting between Arab states, Israel and PCC.

Discussion revealed, in general, that (1) Prime Minister was willing to send Israeli representatives to some neutral place such as Switzerland or Italy where Arab representatives would also be present for talks either separately or jointly and either through PCC or directly beginning April 26. Prime Minister would consult his government and give definite answer before April 12; (2) Prime Minister was unable to make any commitment regarding refugees prior to peace settlement during which question would be discussed and toward solution of which Israel would contribute what it could; (3) Prime Minister was unable to accept principle of internationalization of Jerusalem area as envisaged in paragraph 8 GA resolution December 11 and intended to argue case before GA in September. International supervision of holy places was acceptable.

Yalcin as PCC chairman opened discussion emphasizing PCC task under general instructions regarding conciliation and specific instructions regarding Jerusalem and refugees. Before Beirut meeting Arabs had wished to make talks with Israel contingent on prior solution for refugee question. At Beirut PCC had been able to persuade Arabs to continue talks at early date at neutral place without advance commitment regarding refugees. PCC had already requested Israel for conciliatory statement on refugees without result. Would Israel now be willing to accept principle of repatriation, resettlement and rehabilitation as stated in paragraph 11, GA resolution December 11?

Ben-Gurion replied it was not within Israel’s competence to change GA instructions regarding Jerusalem and refugees. Instructions were matter entirely between GA and PCC. When GA considered PCC reports, Israel would be “on equal footing” to argue its case.

Ben-Gurion pointed out that paragraph 11, GA resolution December 11 specifically stated “refugees wishing to return to their homes and live at peace with their neighbors”. Ben-Gurion emphasized Arab states made war on Israel and that Palestine Arabs were invited by Arab states to fight Israel. Peace has not yet been achieved and it was not yet clear Arabs wished to live at peace. Israel was willing to contribute to solution of refugee problem. Such action would be in interest of justice and self-interest of Israel. It would depend, however on whether peaceful relations were established between Israel and Arab states.

Ben-Gurion continued GA decision on November 29 to internationalize Jerusalem was based on reasons no longer valid. UN had failed to protect Jerusalem in May, 1948. Destruction in Jerusalem had been caused by Arab states which defied UN. One hundred thousand Jews had been imperiled. Israel objects to decision of December 11 regarding internationalization and wishes to argue case before GA in September. Although PCC is bound by paragraph 8, GA resolution December 11, Israel does not accept. However, Israel accepts international supervision of holy places. Israel bases its attitude on (1) presence 100,000 Jews in Jerusalem and (2) significance of Jerusalem as capital city since David. Jerusalem is to Jews what Rome and Paris are to Italians and French respectively.

Yalcin replied regarding refugees it was not question between victor and vanquished but one of human rights. If Arab states were wrong they might be punished but not Arab people. Israel has always had World sympathy which has assisted Jews in reaching promised land. If Israel denies Arab rights, world opinion would be alienated. Israel should not, like Hitler, use methods incompatible with standards western civilization.

Ben-Gurion answered that Israel had been faithful to moral principles and reiterated Israel would make its contribution but that it depended on Arab states at time of peace settlement. Ben-Gurion emphatically denied Israel expelled any Arabs from Israeli territory and, with considerable emotion, stated creation of refugee problem was organized plan by Arab states or British or both. Mandatory power should be brought before some world court or morals [sic]. Even now propaganda campaign magnifying refugee problem from 500,000 to 800,000 was being waged by those who had instigated Arab war against Israel. Ben-Gurion contended resettlement of Arabs in Arab states would be more humane than in Israel. Repatriation and resettlement would be discussed at peace settlement at which time Israel would not forget humanitarian side of question.

Ethridge outlined development of Arab thinking during PCC tour of Near Eastern capitals and at Beirut during which PCC had emphasized unrealistic character of Arab position of refugees and necessity of considering question within framework of peace settlement. Arabs had made great concession by agreeing. Intermediate steps were now required. Refugee question was key to solution whole Palestine problem. Israel held key. Israel might now make conciliatory gesture which would be appreciated by Arab states and world. US government and people were concerned regarding refugees. Ethridge suggested Israel might take action regarding such subjects as continued flight of refugees from Israel as reported by representatives of refugee groups, deterioration Arab orange groves, blocking of Arab accounts and similar matters. Such action might mitigate problem. At same time PCC could help by investigating refugees on relief roles and determining whether nomads and others were unjustifiably obtaining relief.

Ben-Gurion replied any Israelis expelling Arabs would be punished. Any cases brought to Israeli attention by PCC would be investigated. On subject world opinion regarding refugees Ben-Gurion stated Israel was small and serious situation would arise if world opinion turned against Israel. Self-preservation, however, was more important. If refugee problem was considered before peace settlement and Arabs were repatriated Israel might be attacked; consequently Israel could not undertake any program before such settlement. Israel feared Arab states and not Arabs but, pending peace with Arab states, Arabs readmitted to Israel might become Arab Army. Ben-Gurion appreciated importance of contradicting PCC which represented great individual states and UN but it was question Israeli self-preservation.1

Sent Department repeated Tel Aviv 29. [Ethridge.]

Burdett

1 Consul Burdett, on April 9, reported that “PCC this morning discussed Jerusalem question in light of Ben Gurion statement yesterday (re Palun 115). French delegate maintained that PCC should regard this as rejection GA resolution of December 11 and unacceptable to PCC. For this reason his delegate would not participate in further discussions this subject with Comay. PCC would proceed to draft detailed proposals in light its interpretation GA resolution. Ethridge argued that PCC should not present proposals to GA without having explored fully with parties concerned possible areas [of] agreement. Israel should not be in position to argue that proposals unacceptable because of lack consultation. Regardless position PCC he wanted Halderman consult with Comay. PCC agreed Halderman should do this and make results available for further work on detailed proposals.” (Telegram 276, also identified as Palun 117, from Jerusalem, 501.BB Palestine/4–949)

The Consul at Jerusalem (Burdett) to the Secretary of State 501.BB Palestine/4–949: Telegram

[Document 588]

The Consul at Jerusalem (Burdett) to the Secretary of State

confidential Jerusalem, April 9, 1949—2 p. m.

278. Palun 119. Commission decided this morning to open further talks at Lausanne on April 26 providing adequate communication facilities available. Official decision will be taken April 12. USDel favored Rhodes but received no support from Jews, Arabs or colleagues in that viewpoint. Ethridge argued against commission leaving this part of the world and insisted upon inserting in summary record statement that it was mistake. Even those Arabs who had at first supported Rhodes withdrew support when Syrian coup came about. Arab press and radio are referring to Rhodes as island of shame. Jews flatly said they did not want to go there.

Burdett

Mr. Mark F. Ethridge to the President 501.BB Palestine/4–1149

[Document 589]

Mr. Mark F. Ethridge to the President

secret Jerusalem, April 11, 1949.

Dear Mr. President: [Here follows one paragraph of personal observations.]

This is by far the toughest assignment you have ever given to me. The Arabs are shocked and stupefied by their defeat and have great bitterness toward the UN and the United States. The Jews are too close to the blood of their war and their narrow escape, as they regard it, from extinction, and too close to the bitterness of their fight against the British mandate to exercise any degree of statesmanship yet. They still feel too strongly that their security lies in military might instead of in good relations with their neighbors. That is fantastic, of course, for so small a country and I have tried to point out to them that by not making peace quickly they are endangering their own security by stimulating Arab irridentism, and the security of America and the Western World. In other words, the absence of peace plays into Russia’s hands.

The Arabs have made what the Commission considers very great concessions; the Jews have made none so far. I appreciate greatly the help you have given along that line and will of course be grateful if you will keep the pressure up.

I am convinced that there is no sound solution to the refugee problem—that is, no solution that will not continue dangerous political agitation—short of the application of Point 4 of your inaugural message to the Middle East. I have been working with George McGhee, who was in charge for the State Department of the implementation of the Truman Doctrine. He was, as you know, sent out by the Department to look into the refugee situation. He and I are agreed on what we consider a sound approach. He returns to the United States next week and I have asked Mr. Acheson if he will not seek an appointment for him with you.

Again, thank you very much for your many evidences of kindness, and confidence.

Sincerely yours,

Mark Ethridge

Memorandum of Conversation, Prepared Presumably by the First Secretary of Embassy in the United Kingdom (Jones) 867N.48/4–2149

[Document 590]

Memorandum of Conversation, Prepared Presumably by the First Secretary of Embassy in the United Kingdom (Jones)1

secret [London,] April 13, 1949.

Subject: Meeting re Arab Refugees

Participants: Mr. Michael R. Wright (Chairman), Asst Under-Secretary of State, British Foreign Office Mr. E. A. Berthoud, Foreign Office

Mr. B. Boothby, Foreign Office

Sir John Troutbeck (B.M.E.O., Cairo)

Mr. Norman Young (British Treasury)

Mr. J. Beith (Foreign Office)

Mr. A. G. Maitland (Foreign Office)

Miss C. Waterlow (Foreign Office)

Mr. J. J. McCloy (President, International Bank)

Mr. G. C. McGhee (Department of State)

Mr. G. Lewis Jones (American Embassy, London)

The persons named above met in the Ambassadors’ Waiting Room of the British Foreign Office on April 13.

Mr. Wright opened the meeting by saying that it was strictly informal and that just as he understood that everything said on the American side was subject to confirmation, so, too, everything said on the British side would have to be taken up with Mr. Bevin and was subject to his approval.

Wright said that Foreign Office information is that the total of refugees is now closer to 900,000 than to 800,000, and that we are all faced with the problem that present relief efforts will end next fall (December at the latest). He said that the UK is anxious to pass from the stage of relief to the stage of resettlement. The UK has in mind a number of long-range plans for the social and economic betterment of the Middle East. He thought the necessity for these being implemented as quickly as possible is emphasized by the recent loss to the West of China. He said that the Middle Eastern countries have many problems not very different from those of China and that it would be tragic if for lack of attention from the US and the UK these countries should go the way of China.

An outstanding source of discord and infection in the Middle East, Wright said, is the presence of the 900,000 Arab refugees, who have an “unsettling” effect wherever they are located. The UK would like to marry its development plans with plans for the resettlement of the refugees.

Wright said that he would be frank: the UK is very “distressed” at the possibility that all aid to the refugees should be through United Nations channels. He did not think that the UN is a particularly efficient body for such work, and the UN approach might permit the USSR to obtain a foothold in the Middle East through participation in UN organizations. Also, in whatever form financial help was given, the major contribution would have to come from the UK and the US. Wright said that the UK fully realized, however, that the US has special problems and that in order to satisfy Congress US aid might have to take place under a UN or a PCC umbrella.

Wright said the Foreign Office has carefully examined all of the developments projects in the area and has selected three short-range schemes which they feel could be put into effect very quickly. “In order to show the way”, the UK is unilaterally making a ten-year £1 million loan without interest to the TJ Government for a very simple scheme which would involve resettlement within the next year or two of between 40 and 60 thousand refugees.

The second plan favored by the Foreign Office is the Jordan Canal Plan which would cost £8 million for works and £8 for land purchase, and which would involve agreement between Israel and TJ. In four or five years the Jordan Canal Plan, it is estimated, could resettle more than 100,000 refugees.

The third plan which attracted the Foreign Office was the Gezira Scheme in Syria which, within a few years, could take care of another 100,000 refugees.

The potentialities of Iraq are great, but the works there are larger and more costly than those he had mentioned. Estimates show, however, that within six to ten years it might be possible to settle 200,000 refugees in Iraq.

Wright said that very germane to the refugee problem generally is whether Israel will permit a number of Arab refugees to return to their homes. He said UK policy is that Israel should either take the refugees back or compensate them, but the UK realized that the chances of Israel following either course are extremely poor. How poor will depend upon the pressure which the US Government is prepared to exercise on Israel in this connection.

Wright said that the £1 million interest-free loan to Transjordan was a firm proposition. However, because of the financial position in which it finds itself, the UK will have to consider its financial participation in wider schemes very carefully.

Wright then asked for the views of Mr. McGhee.

McGhee said that the US is anxious to see the refugee problem settled and is willing to “do its part” in such a settlement. However, the US wished to avoid unilateral responsibility in this matter, and this would indicate the necessity for a UN or PCC facade.

McGhee said that he had just toured the various Arab States, had seen the refugees, and had seen the areas where they might at some future time be resettled. He had discussed the question exhaustively with Mr. Ethridge of the PCC and with a large number of officials working in the area. This had led him to adopt certain basic assumptions in working out the slow process of resettlement: (1) Number of refugees is about 700,000;

(2) Repatriation of a certain number of refugees to Israel (he had in mind 200,000) is of the utmost importance, because such a gesture by Israel would go far to alter the attitudes of the Arab States who now flatly refuse to discuss the refugee question.

(3) Transjordan, Syria and Iraq, in that order, offer the best opportunities for refugee resettlement; only token contributions could be expected from Lebanon and Egypt.

(4) Resettlement of refugees is the Middle Eastern development program.

(5) Re financial aspects it must be recognized that Point Four will be of use only for technical assistance; that in addition to foreign exchange, any program will require providing the local government with local currency; and that Arab States themselves can not be relied upon to make sacrifices to help with a problem not of their making.

(6) Best approach to Arab Govts would be to stress the development aspect for their benefit and not to stress the refugee aspect. Nevertheless, the rise in the standard of living in each Arab country will be the index of its ability to absorb refugees. By the same token, so far as the US is concerned, emphasis on development may be a kind of Pandora’s Box which might lead to a flood of demands from South American and other countries for extensive development programs.

(7) Before the US can make any moves with regard to development and resettlement in the Arab countries, the US must have reasonable assurances that the Administration will have funds available for this purpose. To proceed without such assurances would be to risk letting the Arabs down and lowering US prestige disastrously.

(8) The number of private and UN agencies involved in the refugee problem now and potentially are such that planning on an area basis will be necessary in order to assure proper priorities between the various projects.

Mr. Wright then asked Mr. McCloy to speak.

McCloy said that the International Bank does not deal in relief matters; its sources of supply would immediately dry up if it tried to do so. The Bank must have reasonable prospects for repayment and “it takes a good deal of imagination to see such prospects in the Middle East.”

One idea which had occurred to McCloy was exploring, as a possible factor which might tip the scales in favor of certain projects in the Middle East, the idea of a consortium of countries which would underwrite the Bank’s loan. He suggested possibly the UK, US, and France. He admited that there is no precedent for this in the US, but he did not think guaranteeing such a loan without appropriating funds would be improper for Congress if it chose to do so.

McCloy explained that the UN does not interfere with the Bank’s business.

McCloy said that one factor inherent in Middle Eastern countries is that large scale foreign investment would almost inevitably have such an inflationary effect that it would frustrate the investment itself.

McCloy took up McGhee’s idea of planning on an area basis and said that he hoped that this planning group would not produce another report. The World had too many such reports and he understood that another one from the Middle East is “on the fire” in the UN Secretariat. It was his thought that it was much better to build one small dam at a time rather than to embark on a grandiose five-year plan for the entire area.

Mr. Norman Young said that there was no sense in the UK loaning sterling to Iraq for local expenses when Iraq has large sterling sums at its disposal in London. He pointed out that on account of the British balance of payments position it would be extremely difficult for the UK to make further loans to the Middle East involving the provision of capital equipment goods on credit. The Treasury was, moreover, opposed in principle to lending for conversion into local currency since it was considered that this must inevitably result in inflation.

Sir John Troutbeck suggested that it might be possible to use the very large oil royalties now being accrued by the Persian Gulf Sheikhdoms for regional development, since very little scope for such development exists within the Sheikhdoms themselves.

McGhee then discussed attached “working paper” in detail.

At the end of McGhee’s remarks, the Chairman said that he found the idea of using PCC as the UN facade very attractive. It had the advantage of being a going concern, to which UN has already given broad responsibilities. He said that Mr. Bevin is extremely interested in the development of the Middle East and in the refugee problem and that, consequently, the Foreign Office would like to go over McGhee’s working paper with Mr. Bevin. He was glad to note from a remark made earlier by McGhee that the US looked with favor upon the £1 million UK Pilot Project in Transjordan.

McCloy said that he did not like the idea of another special survey of Palestine. He said there are a number of active expert groups connected with the UN, including FAO, WHO, etc., who have funds and experts. He thought these agencies might be called upon to supply any technical advice required and that to his mind, in view of the work which has already been done on various ME projects, “a couple of engineers” would be enough.

Wright said the McGhee’s idea was “selection” rather than “survey”. He suggested that it amounted to a “small PCC working group”.

Sir John Troutbeck said that he felt that there was a vital need for statistical information regarding all phases of the refugees. McGhee said this was a problem which he felt should be tackled at once and suggested that if the Foreign Office could name a suitable individual (such as Mr. Mills of the Colonial Office) he felt quite sure that the PCC would welcome an opportunity to avail itself of his services. He was going to look into the possibility of a similar expert being supplied from Washington.

The meeting ended with an expression of appreciation to McGhee for his lucid exposition of the problem. Wright said the Foreign Office would keep in touch with McGhee through the British Embassy in Washington and through Lewis Jones.2

[Here follows an account of the further telephone conversation between Mr. Jones and John Beith of the Eastern Department later the same day.]

1 Transmitted to the Department by London in despatch 702, April 21. The despatch noted that Mr. McGhee participated “in a series of conversations” regarding, the Arab refugee problem and that the memorandum printed here recorded the most important of these conversations.

2 Attached to this memorandum was an undated working paper entitled “Proposed Plan of Action”; for the version of April 27, see p. 939 [Pg. 939 is part of Doc. 608].

The Secretary of State to the Consulate General at Jerusalem 501.BB Palestine/4–949: Telegram

[Document 591]

The Secretary of State to the Consulate General at Jerusalem

secret Washington, April 13, 1949—11 a. m.

195. Unpal 76. [For Ethridge.] Re Palun 103, Mar 311 and 117, Apr. 9,2 you are authorized discuss with other members PCC possibility expressing internl responsibility and concern for Holy Places in Jerusalem by means of Arab and Israeli trusteeships along lines outlined by Secy to Sharett as reported 2nd para Deptel 208, Apr. 6 to Tel Aviv.3

We have impression from Palun 117 that Fr position is unrealistic and that we must seek achieve minimum of internationalization of Jerusalem which will be possible of acceptance by both sides rather than to perfect intricate and logical plan which will have no basis in reality. You are authorized in conversation with Israeli officials to indicate that Sharett told Secy he personally found suggestions for trusteeship reasonable and worth further study, although he did not exclude possibility solution by direct agreement between Israel and Transjordan.

Acheson

1 Identified also as telegram 161 from Beirut, not printed.

2 Identified also as telegram 276 from Jerusalem, not printed, but see footnote 1, p. 904 [Pg. 904 is part of Doc. 587].

3 Not printed, but see footnote 2, p. 894 [Pg. 894 includes portions of Doc. 577 and Doc. 578]; the second paragraph of the telegram is virtually a direct quotation of the sixth paragraph of Secretary Acheson’s memorandum of conversation of April 5, p. 890 [Pg. 890 is part of Doc. 577].

Mr. Mark F. Ethridge to the Secretary of State 501.BB Palestine/4–1349: Telegram

[Document 592]

Mr. Mark F. Ethridge to the Secretary of State

secret Jerusalem, April 13, 1949—1 p. m.

291. Palun 126. For the Secretary from Ethridge. Two days after Commission’s talk with Ben-Gurion last week Lipschitz, one of three Israeli members of Jerusalem Committee set up in Foreign Office, called me and urgently asked to see me. Obvious his primary purpose was to arrange meetings here for Comay who seems to be second man at Foreign Office during Sharett’s absence. Comay came to Jerusalem and talked with Halderman and Yenissey, Turkish member of Jerusalem Committee. Afterwards he had three-hour talk with me, during course of which he disclosed Israel’s position on almost all matters under PCC consideration. Following is summary of Israeli views on primary questions:

Jerusalem: Comay said that Ben-Gurion had been angered by Yalcin’s observation that Commission was bound by its terms of reference and question of full internationalization was not therefore debatable. Ben-Gurion had reacted more strongly than had been intended and had therefore over-stated Israel’s position. Intent of Ben-Gurion’s statement was that if Commission felt bound to propose full international regime in letter and spirit of resolution, Israel would be compelled to oppose in GA. It was not Ben-Gurion’s intention to deny possibility of acceptable solution within resolution. He desired to correct PCC report which was sent to Lake Success and would write the Commission letter correcting impression left upon Commission. Comay’s main point was that Commission should strive to achieve plan acceptable to parties concerned, namely Israel, Transjordan (or other adjacent state) and UN. If Committee were to proceed without reference to states immediately concerned, product of its work would probably be unacceptable and would not contribute to solution of problem. He considered it possible to achieve plan which would be acceptable to all concerned. He was convinced that UN would accept plan containing more limited form of internationalization than might have been contemplated when resolution was adopted last December, provided plan were acceptable to parties concerned. Ben-Gurion, basis of his own extensive experience with UN here is convinced that GA would not only accept such plan, but would be extremely pleased to achieve settlement of problem.

Comay advised “month of masterly inactivity” while Transjordan and Israel try to work out through special committee agreement on Jerusalem. He thought there would be no difficulty about Jewish-Arab lines in Jerusalem since Israel would be willing to compensate for Arab expropriated property inside city. What Israel had proposed to Transjordan, in informal talks that seem to be going on now, is division of city into three zones: Jewish, Arab and international (Old City). Dayan told me later that Transjordan had shown reluctance to discuss any matters other than these strictly within armistice terms although Transjordan had previously evidenced willingness to effect opening of Bethlehem and Scopus roads and to deal with other technical matters preliminary to any peace settlement.

Comment: Ben-Gurion’s strong reaction in which he virtually announced that Jerusalem would be capital of Israel did in fact create strong reaction in Commission. As reported previously, French and Turkish delegates refused to allow their members of Jerusalem Committee to meet formally with Comay for further explanations of Israeli position. For USDel I said that whether other members met or not I would instruct Halderman to do so and to explore with both sides and all parties concerned fullest possible area of agreement. Commission finally agreed that Halderman should represent Jerusalem Committee in talks with Comay and convey information to Commission. I told Comay that I did not of course consider that he had so far helped us toward a solution and I hoped he would continue his talks with Halderman and give us his full views. He promised to do so “a little later”. I am sure what he has in mind is trying to work out a deal with Transjordan and present the Commission with written agreement, achieved perhaps in manner of Tulkarm agreement. Nevertheless, I am willing to consider any agreement that can be made between them although I am afraid it will give my French colleague apoplexy.

Comay has so far not even discussed anything substantive on Jerusalem. It is obvious from French plan previously reported that French will press for full internationalization including international force, special courts, distinct citizenship and special currency for Jerusalem. I consider that impossible and fantastic. I am afraid, however, that Turks will swallow it and that we may come to situation where there will be two reports to GA although I will do all I can to prevent it. Turkish attitude is not based so much upon any consuming passion for protection of holy places as upon distinct pro-Arab bias and upon, I fear, growing desire to put Israel in defensive position whenever possible perhaps a personal reaction to Israel’s refusal to give at any point. My own position, I feel, accords with Department’s and with my Contel 192, March 7.

It occurs to me Ankara may be giving Yalcin and Yenissey fairly free hand in this stage PCC work and that their reaction is largely personal. Yalcin, for example has consistently opposed Rhodes as meeting place and maneuvered for Geneva whereas Sarper, according to NY tel 450, April 31 did not think Turkey would object to Rhodes. PCC work on Jerusalem, refugees and other matters might proceed more smoothly if Department were able to instruct our Embassy Ankara to keep Turkish Government regularly informed of developments and to suggest importance of cooperation within PCC. French, although better informed re Palestine than Turks and having understandably more rigid position re Jerusalem may also have personal bias; consequently French understanding of US position might be improved through their Embassy. Washington views such as those reported Amman telegram 85, April 112 are case in point.

Refugees: Comay’s position on refugees was pretty much as has been reported with few additions. He said that at low point there were about 70,000 Arabs in Israel-held territory but number has increased to about 130,000 through infiltration and through taking over of new territory, such as Tulkarm and in Beersheba area. Israel did not feel, therefore, that it could take many more. He asked if Commission had any figure in mind. I told him Commission had not discussed figure because it stuck to principle of resolution but that my own feeling was that since Israel had once accepted state with 400,000 Arabs in it she should be prepared to take back at least 250,000 refugees and compensate others. He said it was completely impossible, that Israel was deterred at moment from reducing her immigration quota of Jews only by sentiment and political dynamite. On any practical basis, he added, immigration would certainly have to be cut because adequate employment, housing and services were not being provided for those who are coming in and Israel could not possibly double her burden in next two years. Later in conversation he said that it was probable that total number of Arabs in Israeli territory might reach 200,000 eventually through infiltration and “our taking a token number”. Aside from economic burden, Israel determined not to have any fifth column inside its lines particularly if faced by stronger Arab state backed by major power.

Comment: It is obvious that Israel has not changed position on refugee problem whatever. Israeli Cabinet yesterday considered memorandum of suggestions from Commission as to steps that might, be taken now to mitigate plight of refugees and also proposal of statement by Ben-Gurion clarifying Israeli position and mollifying Arab sentiment. No word has come from that meeting. Israel does not intend to take back one refugee more than she is forced to take and she does not intend to compensate any directly if she can avoid it. Ben-Gurion and Comay have both argued that refugees are inevitable result of war and no state in modern history has been expected to repatriate them. Both cite Baltic states and Turkey. They contend also that number greatly exaggerated and they can prove it. Israel refuses to accept any responsibility whatever for creation of refugees. I flatly told Ben-Gurion and Comay that while Commission was no tribunal to judge truth of contentions, I could not for moment accept that statement in face of Jaffa, Deir Yassein, Haifa and all reports that come to us from refugee organizations that new refugees are being created every day by repression and terrorism such as now being reported from Haifa. I have repeatedly pointed out political weakness and brutality of their position on refugees but it has made little impression. They are aware that world sentiment is being roused to some extent by plight of Arab refugees but they contend they are being subject to calumnies and vicious propaganda. I have answered that they are master propagandists of world and that if Arabs had tenth the genius at it they would rouse public opinion to where it would engulf Israel in wave of indignation, particularly in view of fact that world has so greatly helped Israel to come into being. They don’t admit that world has helped. Comay told me that but for US intervention at wrong time (apparently with proposal for second truce) Israel would be at Jordan. “And,” he added, “she needs space”.

Territorial Settlements: Comay said that there will be little difficulty with Lebanon or Syria and “only minor local adjustments of border on a give-and-take basis to increase our security” will be suggested. He thought either Lebanon or Egypt might be first to sign peace agreement. Israel, he said, has no territorial claims on Egypt and he did not think Egypt would make any on Israel. Settlement of Gaza strip, he thought, would be between Transjordan and Egypt rather than between Israel and Egypt.

As to Transjordan, Comay said that Abdullah had advanced idea of port on Mediterranean with corridor across Negeb but Israel had no intention of giving up Negeb or allowing it to be cut in half. He felt that something could be worked out to give Transjordan guaranteed access to some port, either Gaza or one further north. Any arrangement with Transjordan would depend upon the position of Arab Palestine. He repeated that if Arab Palestine were to fall to Transjordan, which he considers inevitable, a “new situation” would arise in which Israel would have to give greater consideration to her security. That would involve not giving up any territory in Samaria but of getting more by going to the Samarian foothills. Tulkarm, for instance, would sooner or later have to become Jewish. It would also increase security, importance of Western Galilee which Israel intended to hold in any case.

Comay did not feel that Abdullah would have any great reluctance to give up more of Arab Palestine because, he argued, “He is getting a bonus out of the war by additional territory and more population”. Comay insisted that Israel would not sign any peace with Transjordan that envisioned extension of British-Transjordan treaty to Arab Palestine. He said there has been mention of federation of Transjordan and Arab Palestine.

Comay thought that in southern Arab bulge, the armistice lines would pretty well hold.

Comment: Israel’s position as to Gaza strip is, I believe, that she does not want it with 330,000 Arabs in it, 230,000 of them refugees, particularly since she has back country upon which they have been living. She is probably content at the moment to let it wither. That is also true as to Tulkarm. Palestine Arabs with whom I have talked say that armistice clause not only created thousands of new refugees in that they will eventually be driven out of villages that were given up but that it was the death sentence of Tulkarm, which has lived on rich land that Abdullah surrendered. Palestine Arabs are bitter with Abdullah, Britain and US. They contend that our inactivity amounted to pressure upon Abdullah to sign.

It is obvious from Comay’s statement of Israel’s territorial claims that she is in direct contravention of US policy. When I told Comay that he was certainly aware that President and Secretary had only recently reaffirmed to Sharret US views on territorial settlement he replied, “yes, but we hope to change Washington’s mind”.

General Comment: In spite of all Department has done since January, Israel has stiffened rather than modified her position. Armistice talks emphasized Arab weakness because, as Bunche told me, Israel gave at no point and Arabs gave at every point where concession was necessary. Israel intends to exploit that weakness to the maximum.

Again it seems to me that Israeli position has brought into question whole US policy as to Palestine. One matter of concern is that unfair arrangements sponsored by UN and approved by US would have serious repercussions in Middle East and tend to discredit US, besides providing good basis for exploitation by unfriendly powers.

[Ethridge]

1 Not printed. Selim Sarper was Turkish Representative at the United Nations.

2 This was a repeat to Jerusalem of Amman’s telegram 160 to the Department, not printed.

Editorial Note [Document 593]

Editorial Note

On April 13, King Abdullah handed a message to Stabler, the Charge in Transjordan, with the request that it be transmitted to President Truman. In the message the King stated that the confiscation of Arab property in Jewish-occupied areas was against the principles of international law. Noting that a year had elapsed since the Arabs fled their lands, and that their financial condition had worsened, he requested President Truman to exercise his personal influence towards restoration of the property and assets of the Arab refugees. King Abdullah stated his belief that efforts to relieve their condition, which could be made through the International Red Cross and other channels, would be the basic step towards solving the problem of the refugees and toward facilitating the peace talks which were about to begin.

The King’s message to President Truman was transmitted to the Department by Amman in telegram 162, April 13, 3 p. m. (867N.00/4–1349)

The Chargé in Transjordan (Stabler) to the Secretary of State 867N.01/4–1349: Telegram

[Document 594]

The Chargé in Transjordan (Stabler) to the Secretary of State

secret Amman, April 13, 1949—4 p. m.

163. During conversation this morning King made following comments: 1. He trusted Israel would abide by armistice agreement and would not take any further aggressive action. He believed Israelis were trying to work with him to obtain peace but hoped US, as friend both parties, would use its influence to bring about just settlement. He regarded last paragraph President’s message March 28 (Deptel 38, March 281 ) as guarantee against breach armistice agreement by Israel. I pointed out US Government would be prepared make strong representation to either side attempting such breach.

2. Transjordan would send delegation to PCC meeting at Lausanne composed of Transjordians and Palestine Arabs with latter in majority. However, he believed that any meeting in which all Arab states took part would not result in progress toward peace. Peace settlement between Transjordan and Israel would be reached in direct talks held in this area. He said Transjordan would be willing commence such talks irrespective attitude other Arab states, for Transjordan which had entered war with others, now left alone in Palestine. He reiterated desire for outlet to sea and thought that with six outlets on Palestine coast Mediterranean Sea [Transjordan] should be given one.

3. As British had pressed him so much regarding relations between Transjordan and Egypt, he had agreed to Prime Minister undertaking talks with Egyptian Government. But he believed Farouk remained hostile and regarded latter’s message to Zaim regarding necessity for retaining Republic in Syria as directed toward Transjordan and himself. Egyptian forces in Bethlehem-Hebron still of [are] fomenting unrest that area and if they are [not?] withdrawn as promised upon return from Cairo of Prime Minister, they might have to be removed forcibly.

4. Situation in Samaria now quiet notwithstanding efforts junior Iraqi officers to excite disorders. Has appointed Lt. Colonel Mohammed Mayta (formerly Commander 6th Legion Regiment Old City) as Military Commander with orders take strong action to suppress further disorders, Transjordan has now assumed full responsibility for law and order that area and determined to maintain it.2

Pouched Arab capitals and London.

Stabler

1 See footnote 1, p. 878 [Pg. 878 includes portions of Doc. 563 and Doc. 564].

2 Charge Stabler, on April 15, advised that on the previous day Ahmad Khalil, appointed Governor of the Samaria District; Naim Touqan, appointed Governor of the Hebron District; and Ahmad Touqan, a prominent resident of Nablus, called on him at their request. “They indicated that while there was still bitterness and resentment over Transjordan–Israel armistice, it was on wane and that Palestine Arabs wished settle Palestine problems soonest. Only solution was settlement based on partition and on unification Arab Palestine and Transjordan. … They considered that acceptance partition principle at Lausanne might make settlement with Israel easier to achieve. … This group considered it was entirely possible that Transjordan and Israel could and would establish friendly relations and that at future date exchange diplomatic representatives would take place. … Khalil and others inquired whether US would support Arab acceptance of partition principle and would exert pressure on Israel to reach settlement on this basis. While making no specific comment I indicated that adoption reasonable and practical attitude on problem would make early settlement Palestine question more possible and stated policy of US Government on final territorial settlement.” (Telegram 165 from Amman, 867N.01/4–1549) Mr. Stabler’s message noted that all three of his visitors were Palestinian Arabs.

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Director of the Executive Secretariat (Humelsine) Secretary’s Daily Meetings, Lot 58 D 609

[Document 595]

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Director of the Executive Secretariat (Humelsine)

[Extract]

secret [Washington,] April 15, 1949.

eyes only

Subject: Summary of Daily Meeting With the Secretary

Participants: The Secretary

The Under Secretary

Mr. Rusk

Mr. Kennan

Mr. Bohlen

Mr. Humelsine

Arab Refugee Problem

Mr. Webb said that Mr. George McGhee was back from his preliminary survey of the Arab Refugee problem and that he was seeing McGhee and Rusk on this subject at 5:30 in the afternoon. In connection with this item, Mr. Acheson said that it was his opinion that we should have a more positive program in regard to our relationship with [the] Israeli[s]. Mr. Rusk said that in this connection the Department was making a study of the various steps that we could take to put positive pressure on the Israeli Government in an attempt to secure a reasonable and fair settlement of the problem.

. . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Message Released by the United Nations Security Council on April 16, 1949 IO Files

[Document 596]

Message Released by the United Nations Security Council on April 16, 1949

April 16, 1949

S/1308

Cablegram Dated 16 April 1949 From the Acting Mediator to the Secretary-General Transmitting Declarations by Israel and Syria Concerning the Ceasefire Agreement

For President of Security Council: I have honour to report that following identical declarations addressed to M. Henri Vigier as my representative and Chairman of Israeli-Syrian armistice negotiations were signed by heads of two delegations and exchanged 13 April. These declarations developed out of Syrian proposal for a formal ceasefire agreement. As preliminary to armistice negotiations, and as indicated, both parties wish them communicated to Security Council.

Declaration made on behalf of Israel reads

“I have the honour to make to you the following declaration on behalf of Israel:

‘Israel accepts and confirms the resolution of the Security Council of 15 July 1948 as a measure which forbids any recourse to military force of any form. Such a measure will remain effective so long as the Security Council has not expressly abrogated it.

It is understood that such a measure obligates the interested parties to grant every facility to United Nations observers in order to allow them to ensure a complete and effective supervision of the ceasefire.

I should be grateful if you would communicate this declaration to the interested parties and the Security Council. Alouf Makleff’”

[Here follows the declaration in French by Syria signed by Fezi Selo.]

The armistice negotiations will be formally resumed on 21 April.

The Chargé in Transjordan (Stabler) to the Secretary of State 867N.01/4–1649: Telegram

[Document 597]

The Chargé in Transjordan (Stabler) to the Secretary of State

top secret
urgent Amman, April 16, 1949—8 a. m.

166. With conclusion of Trans Jordan–Israel armistice agreement, next item on Transjordan–Israel agenda is presumably initiation talks through special committee (Article VIII Armistice Agreement) leading to settlement remaining differences and to peace accord between two countries. Israel for its reasons is most anxious to commence such direct talks without third party soonest and is probably pressing Transjordan through various mediums in this regard. As Department is aware, Abdullah is also anxious to settle Palestine problem soonest but at present is taking no action re special committee in view public reaction in Transjordan and Arab Palestine to armistice agreement (last paragraph Legation’s 158, April 91 ). However, as resentment wanes, it may be expected Abdullah will appoint Transjordan delegates to special committee and instruct them meet early date with Israelis. In ensuing talks it is thought that in his desire for settlement and in belief RI [he?] could count on no outside assistance, he would be inclined accede somewhat too rapidly and generously to Israeli demands which include Jerusalem settlement and other points.

While it is realized that policy of US Govt is to encourage and promote steps which might lead to settlement Palestine problem, it is equally true that cardinal point of US policy is support UN. It would seem, however, that with commencement special committee talks and with probable accession by Transjordan to Israeli demands, UN, PCC and GA Resolution December 11 would be relegated to background position of insignificance and future of Jerusalem and other matters would be decided without taking into account world community. With this possibility in mind, it is suggested Department might wish consider instructing me advise King on friendly and personal basis that he might do well to proceed slowly re special committee talks in order await outcome Lausanne Conference and possible further negotiations under auspices PCC. Although King has often expressed his belief that UN has proven itself ineffective and impotent, it is thought he would nonetheless accept this advice, which might be coupled with reaffirmation US attitude re internationalization Jerusalem and US policy on final territorial settlement.2

Sent Department 166, repeated Jerusalem 89, for USDel PCC, London 27.

Stabler

1 Not printed.

2 The Department, in its reply of April 20, stated that it had “given careful consideration suggestion advanced ur 166 Apr 16 but after review all factors involved believes it not desirable approach King this sense.” (telegram 49, 867N.01/4–1649)

The Consul at Jerusalem (Burdett) to the Secretary of State [Document 598]

The Consul at Jerusalem (Burdett) to the Secretary of State

secret Jerusalem, April 16, 1949—noon.

300. Palun 127. [From Ethridge.] Department’s suggestion re Jerusalem conveyed French delegation along lines indicated Unpal 76.1 Boisanger did not comment this suggestion but said he thought agreed position within PCC possible.

Secretariat has produced working draft proposals re Jerusalem as requested by Jerusalem Committee, drawing on French paper and various unofficial suggestions by USDel. This paper represents sound basis work in view USDel and we think might be adjusted to trusteeship pattern.

Paper proposes following international organs, all other powers to be in hands authorities Jewish and Arab zones.

UN administrator appointed by GA would have direct control and power make regulations re holy places to which status quo applies and supervision protection and access other holy places in area. Could call on authorities to grant rights passage visitors these places, and power decides disputes re holy places.

All persons in area would be entitled human rights as set forth UN December and administrator may bring questions appropriate authorities and if necessary to appropriate UN organ.

Area would be demilitarized and formal assurances given by parties re demilitarization and inviolability demarcation lines. Administrator would report violations SC.

Administrator authorized recruits small force for protection holy places and his headquarters staff.

Administrative council consisting 10 members, 4 from each zone and two neutral, would be responsible for common public services, coordination measures for maintenance peace and order, budgetary matters and other municipal matters common to area such as town planning.

International tribunal appointed by President ICJ would have jurisdiction disputes re competence organs and courts within area and also whether acts of organs compatible statute.

Mixed tribunal would have jurisdiction cases in which parties do not belong same zone.

Responsible Jewish Arab authorities would be called on to negotiate economic arrangements with view facilitating commerce between zones.

Under foregoing plan international organ would exercise actual governing power only over holy places, which point already agreed by states concerned. As to other main points such as demilitarization, peace and order, free access and human rights, USDel thinks international obligations should be proposed and might be substantially strengthened by giving international tribunal power hear complaints and render advisory opinions on motion international authority. This might be more effective means effectuating international interest than direct reference appropriate UN organ, where debates likely to be on political basis and result ineffective resolution. Reference such organs could follow, taking into account advisory opinion and subsequent attitude parties concerned. States concerned might find it difficult to reject expression international interest through such method.

Principle questions re trusteeship which occur to us at present follow:

Can main purposes trusteeship under charter be reconciled with objectives international community re Jerusalem and with public opinion in area?

In addition to direct international authority over holy places, should not international interest be afforded expression re other basic points in regard area as whole? If so, should this not be focal point of internationalization and would not creation trusteeship, with administration awarded adjacent states focus attention rather on division city between separate sovereignties?

[Ethridge]
Burdett

1 Identified also as telegram 195, April 13, to Jerusalem, p. 910 [Pg. 910 includes portions of Doc. 590 and Doc. 591].

The Chargé in Transjordan (Stabler) to the Secretary of State 867N.01/4–1649: Telegram

[Document 599]

The Chargé in Transjordan (Stabler) to the Secretary of State

confidential Amman, April 16, 1949—5 p. m.

168. King said this morning that on April 15 he had received Eytan, Sassoon and Dayan at Shuneh to discuss various matters relative to armistice agreement and special committee talks. HM indicated that Israeli attitudes much more friendly and reasonable than during previous meetings re triangle. Israelis had agreed in areas affected under Article 6 armistice terms would remain unmolested and that villagers would be given free passage back and forth to Arab lines. HM said he had told Israelis that Transjordan would be prepared accept peace agreement at Lausanne conference regardless attitude other Arab states. However, he also indicated to them that he doubted any accord could be reached at such conference and that only direct talks could result in agreement. He pointed out to them that such agreement would have to be sanctioned and guaranteed by PCC or by one or more great powers.

King informed that he would instruct government commence special committee talks immediately. (It is understood first meeting will be held at Shuneh on April 21 in presence Transjordan Prime Minister who still being in Cairo as yet uninformed. Prime Minister expected return April 18 and it is believed he may wish postpone such talks.)1

[Here follows final paragraph speculating on the composition of the Trans Jordanian delegation to the Lausanne Conference.]

Sent Department 168, repeated Jerusalem 90, London 28.

Stabler

1 Further details of the meeting of April 15 were furnished by London on April 20, based on information reported to the Foreign Office by Minister Kirk-bride. King Abdullah was said to have asked for a port on the Mediterranean, either in the vicinity of Gaza, with access via Beersheba, or at Acre; compensation for Arab refugees; and the unfreezing of Arab assets in Israel. The Israelis appeared taken aback by the first of these points, stating “such port would divide Israel. They offered full transit facilities to Transjordan to and through Haifa. King countered by offering Israel transit facilities to Aqaba if Transjordan took over Beersheba.” (Telegram 1524, 867N.01/4–2049)

The Consul at Jerusalem (Burdett) to the Secretary of State 501.BB Palestine/4–1949: Telegram

[Document 600]

The Consul at Jerusalem (Burdett) to the Secretary of State

secret Jerusalem, April 19, 1949—5 p. m.

309. Palun 130. From Ethridge for the President and Acheson. Please read this in connection with Palun 129 April 19.1

[Here follow first two paragraphs requesting Mr. Ethridge’s relief as American member of the Palestine Conciliation Commission, to return to his newspapers.]

As for the work here: We are beginning to see the beginning of the end. I assume a Jerusalem plan acceptable to the US and in major degree to countries involved can be worked out. In fact it is in the making and Halderman will present it to Department when he comes home. At any rate, it will not be presented to Assembly until September.

After nine weeks we have persuaded Arabs to sit down for peace talks with the Jews. If there is full-dress debate at Lake Success on admission of Israel, there will be a delay of several weeks in beginning those talks on any effective basis for reasons set out in Palum 129. If such a delay were inevitable, I would in any case have to ask for relief. If fight over Israel’s admission is not serious, negotiations would go along quickly at Lausanne, I am convinced. Egypt and Israel apparently both anxious to sign; outstanding difficulties between Israel and Lebanon and Syria not so serious that long negotiations would be involved. Major negotiations between Transjordan and Israel, and my belief is that Israel will get pretty much what she wants and give very little, if anything.

Refugee problem, most serious of all, is one that will hang on for two or three years. Commission cannot solve it, but can set up machinery for solution providing US Government agrees to general plan. Neither French nor Turks want to take initiative on that, but are willing to work under guidance of US. I have agreed with George McGhee on a plan which he will present to Department. My colleagues on Commission have agreed that if State Department approves in consultation with British, French, and Turks, they will accept any plan American Delegate introduces. In any case, Department will no doubt shortly give an answer on general procedure and Commission can set up machinery.

Frazer Wilkins of US Delegation thoroughly familiar with everything that has gone on and could be deputized to continue in Lausanne. I would be glad of course to be at the Department’s call in the States and to give all the help there that I can.

[Here follow the last two sentences of the telegram, bearing on Mr. Ethridge’s return to the United States, with May 15 being the suggested date of arrival.] [Ethridge.]

Burdett

1 Identified also as telegram 308 from Jerusalem, not printed; Mr. Ethridge reported that at the Israeli Prime Minister’s request, he had “proceeded from Jerusalem to Tiberias April 18 for purpose of further discussions re refugees and Jerusalem prior to PCC departure for Lausanne. Ben-Gurion added nothing new of substance to his previous statements of Israeli policy to PCC but made some interesting remarks re details which are being reported separately.” Following this meeting, Mr. Ethridge saw Mr. Comay, who informed that the Israeli Foreign Office was “considerably concerned” because the question of Israeli admission to the United Nations had been referred to Committee One by the General Assembly. Mr. Comay was unsure whether this action was merely a delaying device by the “Arabs, British and others” or whether a full-dress debate would follow “during which it would be necessary for Israel substantively to state its position re such outstanding questions as refugees and Jerusalem.” Mr. Ethridge concluded that “In view of Israel’s intransigeance particularly on refugees and territorial questions and her unwillingness to heed advice from US which I believe would have kept her out of her jam at GA, it would probably be salutary to have world public opinion brought to bear upon her through UN.” (501.BB Palestine/4–1949)

The Consul at Jerusalem (Burdett) to the Secretary of State 501.BB Palestine/4–2049: Telegram

[Document 601]

The Consul at Jerusalem (Burdett) to the Secretary of State

top secret Jerusalem, April 20, 1949—9 a. m.

311. Palun 132. From Ethridge to Acheson. Comment Amman telegram 1661 [, repeated] to Jerusalem as 89.

(1) From what I learn Abdullah is so anxious to make peace that it is probably too late to give him any advice that would do him any good.

(2) Reported to us yesterday unofficially that Transjordan Delegation at Lausanne would be headed by Transjordan chief but most of delegates would be Palestinian Arabs. In that case they would offer stronger resistance to Israel’s further demands than Abdullah would and therefore advice probably unnecessary.

(3) Even if foregoing were not true, I believe that any assurance given him should go no further than reaffirmation of previous US position as contained in President’s recent message to Abdullah and our promise that if in course of negotiations there was threat of force or duress and facts warranted it we would be prepared to make unilateral representation at Tel Aviv.

(4) As I have interpreted both US and UN policy it has been to encourage direct negotiations toward an honest and fair agreement. Therefore heavy responsibility involved in intervening in Transjordan affairs by attempting to persuade her to adopt different negotiating tactics than she would otherwise do. Wisdom such course appears highly doubtful unless US frankly prepared to sponsor effective measures to prevent further Israeli incursions an Arab Palestine and Transjordan territory. Our understanding current Arab opinion UN and US re Palestine leads us to think any advice from US would be misinterpreted perhaps too optimistically and that its acceptance would proceed from ulterior motives.

[(5)] Territorial question appears really important on this connection. Re Jerusalem, we are not at all sure Transjordan would prefer international to bilateral division city. While they would accept international they have shown no enthusiasm for it. Furthermore parties cannot control Jerusalem solution in same way as boundaries. Even if they made agreement it would still be possible superimpose international regime of only kind that now seems possible, namely one which will recognize respective sovereignties adjacent states. In view actual situation, preliminary agreement between parties might be more helpful our objectives than otherwise. [Ethridge.]

Burdett

1 Dated April 16, p. 919 [Pg. 919 includes portions of Doc. 596 and Doc. 597].

The Consul at Jerusalem (Burdett) to the Secretary of State 501.BB Palestine/4–2049: Telegram

[Document 602]

The Consul at Jerusalem (Burdett) to the Secretary of State

secret Jerusalem, April 20, 1949—10 a. m.

312. Palun 133. From Ethridge. On April 18 I visited Ben-Gurion at Tiberias at his request. Prior to my departure from Jerusalem, Comay informed me Ben-Gurion would discuss such pending questions as issuance of conciliatory statement re refugees by Israel Government and Israeli views re some form of internationalization of Jerusalem. Ben-Gurion mentioned neither question and apparently had no intention of doing so. Instead Ben-Gurion analyzed at length Britain’s mistaken imperialistic policy in Middle East in past and present and stressed economic and humanitarian role which position of US in world affairs ought to require US to play in this area. Ben-Gurion said that British were still attempting to operate in Middle East under policies in vogue toward end of 19th century; that Britain was attempting to rule through little kings like Abdullah; that US should declare its second independence of British Foreign Office; and that US must develop Middle East economically and raise living standard throughout area.

Jerusalem: Ben-Gurion did not seem to wish to discuss internationalization of Jerusalem as set forth in paragraph 8 General Assembly Resolution December 11 but confined himself to observation that Jerusalem could not be capital of Israel “for several years.” Jerusalem was too near “edge of Israel.” If, however, Israel’s eastern boundary were Jordan, Jerusalem could become capital immediately. Meanwhile, Tel Aviv was not suitable capital, apparently for security reasons but Haifa would be and might be. Israel planned to make Jerusalem center for watchmaking, diamond-cutting and other light industries. Return of tourists and pilgrims would be important to its economic existence. Demilitarization of Jerusalem could not be foreseen under existing circumstances.

Refugees: Ben-Gurion made no reference to possible conciliatory statement by Israeli Government re refugees and it was obvious from trend of his remarks that there has not been slightest change in Israeli views despite statement of American position by McDonald. Ben-Gurion emphasized role which US should play economically in Middle East and stressed that resettlement was only logical answer. Egypt was overpopulated and if Arab states were wise Egyptians would be resettled in Iraq. There was no reason why Palestinian and Israeli Arab refugees should not be resettled in Iraq and in Syria, both of which were seriously underpopulated. Israeli itself cannot and will not accept return of Arab refugees to Israeli territory for security and economic reasons. Israel will, however, contribute to assistance for refugees in three Ways: (1) Compensation for Arab land to be paid to Arab farmers through Israeli-Arab mixed claims commission. Ben-Gurion mentioned, in this connection, that Israeli could have war claims against Arab states but that these claims should be considered separately and apart.

(2) Israel would permit Arab refugees to return with object of reuniting separated families.

(3) Israel would assist in resettlement of refugees elsewhere, probably by making available its knowledge and information of Near East countries and by sending Israeli experts and technicians at no charge to assist in whatever resettlement program might be developed.

Territorial settlement: Ben-Gurion indicated Israel had no intention of relinquishing any part of Negev. If I thought its southern portion “a wilderness”, which I said I did having flown over it that morning, I should “come back and see it in ten years.” Israel could develop even most unpromising parts of Israel territory because “it not only loved but needed it.” Transjordan would not be granted corridor to Mediterranean nor would there be corridor between Transjordan and Egypt. Israel could not be cut in two. British would not be permitted access across Israel under cover of Transjordan. Transjordan could have “free zone” in Tel Aviv or Haifa or anywhere else it chose on Mediterranean with right of passage. Present Gaza strip might become autonomous like Luxembourg. If Egypt did not want Gaza because of refugees therein Israel would accept and permit those refugees to return to their homes. Transjordan could have [access to the Mediterranean?] without corridor but with right of free passage. Israel believed it should have all of west coast of Dead Sea as Transjordan had all of east coast, particularly if Transjordan absorbed rump of Palestine. British bases in Arab Palestine under Anglo-Transjordan treaty would not be permitted. Arab Palestine might be accorded special status in settlement through federal device in union with Transjordan.

Peace settlements: Ben-Gurion considered that Israel would be able to conclude settlements with Egypt and Lebanon first because of close affinity with each. Israel and Egypt had much in common and agreement would break ice. Immediate prospect re agreement with Lebanon was more dubious as there were rumors of another Lebanese Government crisis, Ben-Gurion hoped for quick armistice and peace settlement with Syria. Iraq would not negotiate. Transjordan would. Israel must always consider whether Arab state representatives really represent their countries. Farouk is probably Egypt but who is Zaim and does Nuri speak for Iraqi people. Ben-Gurion felt Zaim coup might not be internal and considered Nuri British agent and hated by Iraqis. Abdullah was definitely British tool. Israel, nevertheless, could endeavor to conclude settlements with as many Arab states as possible as quickly as possible. Individual problems between states could not be considered outside framework of settlement. [Ethridge.]

Burdett

Editorial Note [Document 603]

Editorial Note

Mr. McClintock, on April 20, drafted a telegram to Mr. Ethridge for the signature of Secretary Acheson. After reference to Palun 129 and 130 of April 19 (see page 923 [Pg. 923 is part of Doc. 600]) and discussing the relief of Mr. Ethridge, the draft telegram read as follows: “This Govt is not disposed to change policy because of Israeli intransigeance as most recently manifested by Ben Gurion as reported Palun 133, April 20. We support resolution of Dec. 11 and your able effort to present logic of that resolution to Israeli and Arab Govts still has our full backing. If Israeli application for admission UN calls forth major inquiry in present GA and Israelis, as you predict, decide to stall at Lausanne, we would then be disposed to utilize your desire for relief to derive maximum diplomatic advantage. Your resignation from PCC could therefore have political significance and would serve to show Israeli Govt that US Govt is not pleased with its tactics.

“However, we are disposed to resort to fullest diplomatic pressure on Israel at present time and are prepared, if Israeli Govt pays any heed to our suggestions, to tell them that if they will go ahead on a reasonable peace settlement, including satisfactory assurances re Jerusalem and refugees, we will do our utmost to insure that GA handle membership question with maximum of swiftness and minimum of debate. In such case, as you predict in Palun 130, talks at Lausanne might go along quickly. We should in that event wish very much that you continue as our Representative with assurance that once Lausanne conversations reached successful conclusion you would at once be relieved of your responsibilities on PCC.

“Therefore, as I see it, we should within a few weeks be able to relieve you of the PCC assignment either by reason of Israeli intransigeance and consequent stalemate, or by Israeli willingness to compromise and therefore a speedy conclusion to your efforts.” (501.BB Palestine/4–2049)

The editors have been unable to find any evidence that the draft telegram was actually sent.

The Consul at Jerusalem (Burdett) to the Secretary of State 867N.01/4–2049: Telegram

[Document 604]

The Consul at Jerusalem (Burdett) to the Secretary of State

top secret Jerusalem, April 20, 1949—4 p. m.

316. Primary US objective in Palestine understood by Consulate General to be restoration peace and tranquility. Policy based on premise long-term stability, economic and political development Middle East and its affiliation with western democracies of vital interest to US. US position on refugees and boundary settlement dictated by above considerations. Support for internationalization Jerusalem apparently motivated largely by general policy supporting UN resolution and wishes Christian particularly Catholic groups rather than on consideration vital strategic interests US. Attitude Israel regarding final settlement as reported Palun 1261 again pointedly underlines necessity facing question what measures US will take to implement policies adopted in national interest.

Conclusion armistice agreements apparently marked important step towards achievement US objectives. However, cognizance must be taken of fact agreements acquiesced in by Arab states under varying degrees of force or threat of force on part of Israel. Arabs realized were defeated militarily, felt could count on no action by UN or great powers to curb further aggression by Israel and thus must sign armistice on any terms. Use of blackmail particularly flagrant in case of Transjordan negotiations which UN official characterized as marked by “utter perfidy on one side and utter stupidity on other”. Inevitable result has been storing up turbulent reservoir resentment against Israel, UN and. US which will constantly seek favorable opportunity burst forth. In addition has created strong reaction against Arab ruling groups and repeated calls to “new generation” to free country from despotism present rumors [rulers?] as first step towards resumption military action against Zionism. With discrediting old leaders, blow to Arab nationalism and frustration resulting from failure anti-Zionist campaign, younger men seeking new set values which Communists only too willing provide.

Hasty conclusion peace treaties ignoring rights of one party will only breed instability and preparations for renewal of fighting contrary to interests of UN, US, Israel and Arabs. Department may, therefore, wish instruct American Legation (Amman telegram 166, April 16 to Department) to informally advise King US prepared, if warranted by facts, to make strongest representations to Israel against use of force or threats of force both during and after peace negotiations including talks in Special Committee. This would give Transjordan badly needed confidence and permit it to negotiate without duress and on equal basis with Israel and would be in accord with traditional US policy of favoring agreements openly and freely arrived at. Would prevent King from feeling must give in to such damaging demands as those in Article 6 of Armistice agreement. President’s message to King could be interpreted to King in above manner and similar assurances might be given other Arab states. In adopting this position US should be prepared take requisite measures against Israel if necessary. Regarding Jerusalem now appears not likely PCC will be able obtain real UN control over Jerusalem and that international regime will take forms mentioned in Palun 127.2 Such regime could be superimposed regardless nature agreement reached between Transjordan and Israel in direct negotiations. However, because special UN interest and obligation maintain peace and security in Holy City essential that Transjordan not accept settlement imposed by duress and that rights and interests Palestine Arabs be protected. King Abdullah has not always shown much zeal in protecting interests Palestine Arabs and their confidence in him has been considerably shaken by terms armistice agreement. If UN insists (perhaps through Jerusalem Committee of PCC) on participating in any Jerusalem settlement as third party involved could assist in reaching equitable agreement that would contribute to permanent tranquility. Such settlement should include return to Arabs of traditional Arab areas seized by Jews with demarcation line running approximately as outlined in Consulate’s telegram 35, January 13. Also compensation for property remaining in Jewish Sections, resumption of public utility services in entire city using existing facilities, free access to Mount Scopus and free use Nablus–Bethlehem road.

As means controlling Israel suggest postponement until September session Israel application for UN membership. Israeli actions including two offensive in Negev, attack in Galilee, seizure southern Negev, incursion into Syria and liberal use of big stick in armistice talks hardly support her claim to being “peace-loving state”. Nor does her refusal to abide by sections GA Resolution December 11 regarding refugees and Jerusalem indicate much respect for organization she now seeking join. Postponement would enable US to continue tactics of acting through UN on Palestine question and would demonstrate to Israel that she cannot continue to ignore with impunity opinion world community.3

Sent Department; repeated Amman 22.

Burdett

1 See telegram 291, April 13, from Jerusalem, p. 911 [Pg. 911 includes portions of Doc. 591 and Doc. 592].

2 Identified also as telegram 800, April 16, from Jerusalem, p. 920 [Pg. 920 includes portions of Doc. 597 and Doc. 598].

3 The Department replied, on April 26, that it “appreciates reasoning ur 316 Apr 20 but after careful consideration all factors involved believes it not desirable take step suggested third para re instructions Leg Amman.” (Telegram 222, 867N.01/4–2049)

The United States Representative at the United Nations (Austin) to the Secretary of State 501.BB Palestine/4–2049: Telegram

[Document 605]

The United States Representative at the United Nations (Austin) to the Secretary of State

secret
priority New York, April 20, 1949—11:05 p. m.

509. Bunche today told us he would remain as Acting Mediator only until the Syrian negotiations were completed. Is fairly optimistic that when negotiations reopened after the religious holidays on April 21 they would make good progress.

In discussing his draft proposed SC Resolution (Beirut’s No. 132, Palun 95, March 24) and Department’s suggested changes (Deptel 193 to New York,1 Unpal 70, March 29), Bunche said that there was no need for PCC to share in cease-fire observation as suggested Department’s paragraph 6,2 since each armistice agreement is self-contained arrangement providing for an armistice commission chaired by chief of staff of the truce supervision organization or senior officer of organization designated by him. Commissions are to handle questions relating to terms of armistice and minor disagreements and difficulties. Outbreak of fighting must be referred to SC in any event. Bunche pointed out that such an arrangement is a continuation of existing situation under which chief of staff handles locally minor incidents, refers basic disagreements to Mediator, while actual fighting must be referred to SC.

In connection with the armistice commissions, Bunche said it was the intention after the Syrian negotiations were completed to combine the commissions, establishing one for Northern and one for Southern areas. The UN and the Israeli personnel would remain the same, the Arabs changing as the agenda of the commissions might require.

Bunche believes that Riley or his successor, together with a force of about thirty officers and thirty enlisted men, should continue to be empowered to supervise the truce organization in maintaining the cease-fire.

Re Department’s suggestion for paragraph 5,3 Bunche does not believe it necessary specifically terminate office of Mediator in SC Resolution, pointing out that office established by GA and December 11 Resolution provided for automatic termination when functions transferred to PCC.

Bunche agrees that the Truce Commission might be dissolved, as suggested in Department’s addition to paragraph 3.4

Resolution along foregoing lines will have to be sponsored by some SC member since Acting Mediator has no such authority.

Bunche is prepared, if asked, to make an oral statement to SC, supplementing his written report following conclusion of Syrian negotiations. He furnished USUN a rough draft of his proposed written report which is summarized in Usun 510, April 21.5 Text being forwarded by pouch.

Bunche has refused suggestion from Lie and other sources that he should lobby for the early admission of Israel to UN. Feels this inappropriate for Acting Mediator, and that before Israel admitted should “come clean” on the following points: (1) report on Bernadotte’s assassination; (2) attitude toward refugees; (3) attitude toward internationalization of Jerusalem; (4) boundary demands. He reacted favorably to informal suggestion above points might best be covered at opening Lausanne Conference.

In respect to the report on Bernadotte’s assassination, Bunche stated he had been assured by Israelis that it would be ready before GA opening, although it would be largely a negative report. Eban has promised him to expedite submission.

Bunche fully shares Ethridge’s observations and recommendations on refugees, which he discussed fully in Beirut.

He was bearish on prospects for effective internationalization of Jerusalem. Said that only if USG willing put strong pressure on Israelis will Jerusalem be internationalized. Believes Jerusalem question has been pretty well settled by the probable Transjordan-Israeli deal under which Abdullah will get Arab Palestine and part of Jerusalem. He anticipates, however, that such arrangement may blow up when Abdullah realized that small Arab section of Jerusalem likely to be squeezed economically by Israelis so that in less than a year it will not be viable. Israelis fully cognizant weakness of Arab Jerusalem. Although not hostile to the concept of two trusteeships for Jerusalem, Bunche is definitely skeptical.

In respect to boundaries, Bunche observed that Israelis would never commit themselves on what their eventual goals were. It was clear that they did not intend to give up territory in Negev, or elsewhere, which had been assigned them in armistice agreements. Until some clarification of this point, however, the Arabs have legitimate grounds for hesitation and doubt about final arrangements.

Bunche expressed his great appreciation for Department’s back stopping and effective intervention during numerous critical periods in his negotiations.

He emphasized repeatedly that he is most anxious to get away for a long rest as soon as possible since he is in very poor health.

Austin

1 This was a repeat of No. 196, March 29, to Beirut, p. 884 [Pg. 884 includes portions of Doc. 569 and Doc. 570].

2 See paragraph numbered 3 in No. 156.

3 See paragraph numbered 2 in No. 156.

4 See paragraph numbered 1 in No. 156.

5  Post, p. 933 [Pg. 933 includes portions of Doc. 606 and Doc. 607].

President Truman to King Abdullah Ibn el-Hussein of Transjordan 867N.00/4–1349

[Document 606]

President Truman to King Abdullah Ibn el-Hussein of Transjordan 1

confidential [Washington, undated.]

I have received Your Majesty’s message of April 13, 1949, concerning the restoration of Arab refugee property in Israeli-occupied areas.

In accordance with its instructions, the Palestine Conciliation Commission, on which the United States Government is represented, is actively discussing with the Israeli Government the question of implementation of the General Assembly resolution of December 11, 1948 with respect to the return of refugees to their homes and compensation for the property of those who do not return. In addition, the United States Government has emphasized to the Israeli Government its hope that no action will be taken prior to the negotiations called for under that resolution which would prejudice the attainment of an agreed settlement on the question of the return of refugees to their homes and the restoration of property to refugee owners. The United States Government will continue its efforts to this end.

Your Majesty is assured that the question of the Arab refugees, which is under active consideration by this Government, is a matter of deep personal concern to me.

I appreciate Your Majesty’s good wishes, which I heartily reciprocate.

Harry S. Truman

1 Transmitted to Amman in telegram 52, April 21, 7 p. m., with the instruction: “Pls transmit fol reply from Pres to King Abdullah (urtel 162 April 13):” Regarding No. 162, see editorial note, p. 916 [Pg. 916 includes portions of Doc. 592, Doc. 593, and Doc. 594]. Telegram 52 was repeated to Jerusalem for Mr. Ethridge and to Tel Aviv.

The United States Representative at the United Nations (Austin) to the Secretary of State 501.BB Palestine/4–2149: Telegram

[Document 607]

The United States Representative at the United Nations (Austin) to the Secretary of State

secret New York, April 21, 1949—12:30 p. m.

510. Bunche has made available to USUN rough draft of his report to SC. It briefly reviews the truce period and armistice negotiations, is couched in general and judicious terms. No specific criticism made of the parties except for sharp statement that some of the ten UK personnel killed in operation were lost under conditions which fully justifies the UN in holding the governments concerned responsible. In some instances had adequate protection been given the deaths could have been avoided.

Report draws some broad conclusions re technique of settling disputes on basis of Palestine experience. For example, concludes that an imposed truce can be applied and supervised for a period of four to five months at the most but then must be superseded by the next step toward peace. Observes that independent communication and transportation systems indispensable for success of negotiations and life of personnel.

Negotiations leading to armistice agreements described as being in each case tortuous and difficult. Demonstrate, however, that once the parties could be brought together they could, with UN assistance, be led to reasonable agreement. Asserts there is good reason to believe that peace settlement will be forthcoming in due course by virtue of efforts of PCC. He expects armistice agreements to remain in force successfully.

His conclusions point toward his suggested SC Resolution (mytel 509, April 20). Since armistice agreements provide for own machinery for supervision and call for UN assistance in this regard, unnecessary to continue impose on states concerned the onerous conditions of SC truce. Suggests SC might consider adopting new resolution declaring unnecessary prolong truce of July 15 Resolution, but reaffirming order to desist from further military action pursuant to Article 40, and calling on authorities to continue observe unconditional cease-fire. Such action consistent with realities of situation and would fully safeguard basic objective of SC that fighting not be resumed.

Suggests that remaining Mediator’s functions be transferred to PCC since there is no longer any useful function to be performed by the Mediator. Further activity by him would unfavorably impinge on PCC work. Concludes that in such situation as Palestine most effective instrument of Mediator or Conciliator is prompt and vigorous UN action.

Austin

Memorandum by the Coordinator on Palestine Refugee Matters (McGhee) to the Secretary of State 867N.48/4–2249

[Document 608]

Memorandum by the Coordinator on Palestine Refugee Matters (McGhee) to the Secretary of State

secret [Washington,] April 22, 1949.

Subject: Palestine Refugee Problem.

Discussion

Attached are the following papers on the Palestine Refugee Problem based on careful study by the Departmental officers concerned and observations during my recent visit to the Near East. They develop from the Policy Decision of March 15, 1949,1 certain new Policy Recommendations and a Proposed Plan of Action.

1. Policy Decision of March 15, 1949.

2. Conclusions.

3. Policy Recommendations.

4. Proposed Plan of Action.

5. Proposed Steps to be Taken Within U.S. Government.

6. Tentative Approach to Total Cost of Program.2

Recommendation

It is recommended that the proposed Policy Recommendations be approved.

[Annex 1]

Palestine Refugee Problem

conclusions

1. Although, the total number of Palestine refugees and destitute persons now receiving relief is 950,000,* it is assumed that the maximum number of bonafide displaced persons who must eventually be repatriated or resettled will not exceed 700,000. The difference will be largely applicable to Arab Palestine.

2. The disposition of the refugees is now a political issue of the highest order between Israel and the Arab States, neither of which will consider it as a refugee problem. This situation will probably continue until there is some general peace settlement.

3. In the meantime, continuing and vigorous pressure will have to be exerted upon Israel and the Arab states if their agreement to repatriation and resettlement, respectively, on the scale required, is to be secured. With the exception of Transjordan, which appears to see in the refugees an opportunity to improve her political and economic position, the Arab states are reluctant to accept refugees for permanent resettlement for political as well as economic reasons. They take the position that Israel, and to a lesser extent the United Nations and the United States, created the problem and are responsible for its solution. They feel that this should be through repatriation, in accordance with Article 11 of the General Assembly Resolution of December 11, 1948. The Israelis, on the other hand, are reluctant to repatriate any large number of refugees because of economic and security considerations, and because of the need for land to carry out their planned Jewish immigration program. The Israelis take the position that the problem was created by the invasion of the Arab states, and must be solved by resettlement.

4. Agreement by Israel to repatriate at least 200,000 refugees, pursuant to the General Assembly Resolution, is considered a necessary precedent to any ultimate and satisfactory solution of the refugee problem. This is necessary to reduce the total to a number capable of assimilation on a self-supporting basis in the Arab countries within a reasonable time, and to provide a favorable atmosphere for assumption by the Arab states of the responsibilities involved hi the resettlement. In view of the large-scale preemption of Arab lands, housing and employment possibilities in Israel, primary attention should be directed to securing repatriation of refugees to those formerly predominantly Arab areas now under Israeli military occupation which are outside the boundaries of the Jewish state as defined in the resolution of November 29, 1947.

5. There has been no appreciable absorption of refugees into the existing economies of the Arab states, nor can there be under present conditions without increase in unemployment, further depression of the already low standards of living and deterioration of the political stability of the Arab states, already seriously undermined by economic problems and the recent hostilities.

6. The refugees will continue to be largely dependent for their support upon assistance from outside the Arab states, after termination of the present UNRPR relief program now expected at the end of the year. The present number of refugees cannot be supported by the Arab governments nor by the voluntary relief organizations, either within or outside the Arab states.

7. At the earliest possible date and certainly at the termination of the present UNRPR program, assistance to the refugees should wherever possible be on a work rather than a relief basis, even though the initial cost per refugee is greater. A work relief program will serve to check the present serious deterioration in morale among the refugees, and will result in accomplishment of useful work directed toward their own resettlement, toward raising; the economic potential of the country in which they live and toward an orderly reduction in heed for further outside assistance.

8. Absorption of the refugees into the economies of the Arab states on a self-supporting basis can only be achieved through raising of the economic potentials of the countries involved through increase in amount or productivity of arable land, development of new industries, improvement in transportation, etc.

9. Apart from political considerations Syria, Iraq and Transjordan offer significant possibilities for resettlement or employment of refugees. Lebanon offers limited possibilities. Egypt and Saudi Arabia could take only token quotas. Although possibilities for immigration to other countries should be thoroughly explored, the number involved would probably not be great. Resettlement possibilities: 2–3 Years 5–10 Years

Syria Up to 200,000 Up to 750,000

Iraq Token Over 750,000

Transjordan (and Arab Palestine) 150–200,000 Same

Lebanon Up to 50,000 Same

Egypt Token Same

Saudi Arabia Token Same

Other Small Same

10. Overall responsibility for the refugee problem should be placed squarely on Israel and the Arab states. All outside assistance should be under the auspices of the. United Nations. Any plan developed to deal with the refugee problem should be formulated within this context, and should utilize all possible sources of assistance including interested and able UN member states, specialized agencies, related international organizations and private organizations. Although any United States contribution to solution of the refugee problem should be made available within the framework of UN responsibility, the US should assure that its assistance is effectively utilized through supervision of development and work relief projects undertaken wholly or largely with US funds.

11. The objective of a refugee program should be to repatriate or resettle the refugees as rapidly and economically as possible, while minimizing present and potential economic and political dislocations. For example, although on political grounds Syria and Iraq are reluctant to take refugees, their ability to provide a basis for eventual self-support is far greater than that of Transjordan, whose acceptance of the majority of the refugees would necessitate permanent subsidization of the county.

12. In order to secure the cooperation of the Arab states, any solution of the refugee problem must be formulated within the broader framework of the interests of the countries concerned. This will require full recognition of the legitimate economic development aspirations of the countries involved, in their own interest as well as in the interest of solving the refugee problem. Nationals of the countries concerned should in many cases be the immediate beneficiaries of the projects, with the refugees benefiting indirectly. Since the development projects required for solution of the refugee problem will probably absorb most of the external financing available for the Near East during the next few years, the questions of economic development and of the solution of the refugee problem are indivisible, and both must be taken fully into consideration and carefully coordinated in any overall plan which is evolved. This would also apply to United States assistance to the Near East through the “Point Four” Program.

13. Insofar as possible all outside assistance to the Arab states in connection with the refugee problem should, for internal Arab political reasons, have at least the appearance of being as a result of the request of the states concerned.

14. The present distribution of the refugees among the Arab states has an important bearing on the situation that would result if no further outside assistance were provided after termination of the UNRPR program. Only Lebanon and Transjordan would face a really difficult situation in caring for or assimilating their refugees. If Transjordan acquires all of Arab Palestine, including the Gaza strip, she will have on present figures 729,000 refugees, in comparison with an original population of 850,000. Transjordan is in reality an artificial state created by the British, and exists only by virtue of a British subsidy. The total government budget is only $5,000,000. It is itself unable to do anything for the refugees and their care, and at the termination of the UNRPR program, would remain a responsibility of the UN, the UK or whoever would be willing to assume it. In their present mood and circumstances other Arab states have neither the desire nor the resources to assume it, and would be in good position not to assume it.

15. No new program which gives hope of solving the refugee problem should be initiated unless financing can be assured for the achievement of certain minimum objectives. Failure of the program due to lack of financial support would further prejudice UN and US prestige and relations with the Arab states, and further aggravate the dangerous economic and political conditions created by the refugee problem. Although as much as possible of the financial assistance required should be furnished on a loan basis, grants will continue to be required, particularly for work relief and local currency costs.3

[Annex 2]

Palestine Refugees

policy recommendations

It is recommended that: 1. As an essential condition to the solution of the Palestine refugee problem, the United States exercise continuing pressure on Israel by all appropriate means to repatriate a minimum of 200,000 Arab refugees, to Israel and Israeli-occupied areas of Palestine, from refugees now outside this area eligible for and desiring repatriation.

2. The United States exercise coordinate pressure on the Arab states to accept and cooperate in the resettlement of the remaining Arab Refugees (approximately 500,000).

3. It be recognized that there will be need for continuing outside assistance for the refugees after termination of the present UNRPR program (now estimated as December, 1949).

4. Such outside assistance continue to be extended under the auspices of the United Nations.

5. Such assistance place primary emphasis upon work relief rather than direct relief, and be directed toward a progressive reduction and eventual elimination of outside assistance, through reintegration of the refugees on a self-sustaining basis into the political and economic structure of the Near East, in such a manner as to create a minimum of present and potential economic and political tensions.

6. The United States cooperate actively with the Palestine Conciliation Commission in the development of a program for achieving the foregoing objectives, for presentation to the General Assembly at the September session.

7. Funds required for execution of this program be obtained to the maximum extent possible through loans to the states concerned from the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development, the United States Export-Import Bank and from other member states, and through assistance from the United Nations and its specialized agencies and international organizations.

8. The United States be prepared to contribute as a grant, subject to Congressional appropriation, its share of such additional technical and financial assistance as it considers necessary to achieve the minimum objective of the overall program, while at the same time refusing to accept direct responsibility for the problem and confining United States assistance thereto within limits consistent with the national interest.

9. The general plan of action set forth on the attached statement be pursued in the attainment of these objectives.

[Annex 3]

Palestine Refugee Problem

proposed plan of action

1. Initiate immediately, together with the United Kingdom, a concerted program to overcome the present political stalemate preventing the Arab States and Israel from facing the refugee problem realistically and constructively. Full use should be made of direct diplomatic approach, official statements, publicity, etc., particularly as a background for the forthcoming extended talks between the Arab States and Israel in Switzerland.

2. In the meantime encourage all new public and private programs and projects, such as the UK pilot irrigation project in Transjordan and the International Bank flood control project in Iraq, which can be initiated within the present context and which will serve to alleviate the refugee problem in both its short and long range aspects.

3. Recommend to the Palestine Conciliation Commission that it establish permanent headquarters and add to its staff such administrative and technical personnel as are required for carrying out its operational responsibilities as they arise. Services should be initiated as soon as practicable to achieve coordination with the UNRPR program, to facilitate repatriation, resettlement and compensation, employment and emigration of refugees, and to represent the refugees vis-à-vis Israel and other governments.

4. Support the PCC proposal that it add to its staff other technical experts to initiate certain planning studies with respect to the refugees and the problems which will be faced in their repatriation and resettlement, which can be undertaken immediately within the present political context. Assist in the recruitment of the necessary personnel.

5. Initiate immediately planning required for the establishment of a broader economic survey group to be set up under the authority of the PCC as soon as political conditions permit, which would, in full cooperation with the states concerned and with other interested UN members, international and private organizations, examine the situation in the countries concerned in the light of existing surveys and recommend measures required to: a. Overcome economic dislocations created by the recent hostilities;

b. Provide necessary assistance for refugees from the hostilities and for their reintegration into the political and economic life of the area on a self sustaining basis;

c. Foster actively such economic development projects as are required to achieve the foregoing and which will, at the same time, serve to increase the economic potential of the countries concerned.

The technical group would recommend specific projects and sources of financing, as well as an integrated economic program and means of carrying it out.

6. At an appropriate stage in the work of the economic survey group, a more permanent agency would be created, pursuant to PCC recommendation, to carry out the approved program. Such agency would rely wherever possible on direct action of the states concerned, other UN members, international and private organizations. It would coordinate such activities, facilitate the furnishing of technical and financial assistance required and exercise general supervisory functions.

[Annex 4] 4

Palestine Refugee Problem

proposed steps to be taken within u.s. government

1. Approval of proposed Policy Recommendations and Plan of Action by the Secretary.

2. Preliminary discussion of proposed policy and plan of action with the President, particularly with respect to Recommendations 1 and 8.

3. Preliminary discussion of proposed policy and plan of action with Congressional leaders, particularly with respect to Recommendation 8.

4. Preliminary discussion of proposed policy and plan of action with the British, and determination of part UK can and will play in refugee program.

5. Initiation of action under Recommendation 1 and 2 and Proposed Plan of Action 1–5.

6. Preliminary discussion with Presidents of International Bank and Export-Import Bank to determine extent to which their institutions can participate in financing development projects which will contribute toward refugee resettlement.

7. Discussions with representatives of U.S. private organizations interested in the Palestine refugee problem to obtain their views on the proposed program and the contribution they can make to it.

8. Referral of whole question of the Palestine refugee problem to the National Security Council for decision as to action called for in the light of the national interest.

9. Final decision by the President on action to be taken in the light of the NSC decision.

10. Final discussion of President’s program with Congressional leaders, with indication of possible financial assistance to be sought from Congress.

11. Assuming political conditions in Near East permit, activate economic survey group called for in Recommendation 6 and Plan of Action 5 by assisting PCC to obtain outstanding American to head up group and competent technicians for its staff.

[Annex 5] 5

Palestine Refugee Problem

tentative approach to total cost of program

1. Approach on basis of cost for support of refugees:

Assume that outside assistance for direct support of the refugees will be required on a decreasing scale for 3 years.

Assume that 700,000 refugees must be supported for the first year, whether resettled or repatriated, an average of 500,000 for the second year, and an average of 300,000 for the third year.

Assume that the total outside cost of supporting refugees is $30.00 per person per year on a relief basis and $60.00 per person per year on a work relief basis.

Assume that 3/4ths of refugees will be supported the first year on the basis of work payments and l/4th on the basis of relief, and that in the next two years 7/8th will be supported through work payments and l/8th through relief.

Total Cost for Direct Support on This Basis

1st year 2nd year 3rd year Total

Relief $5,250,000 $1,875,000 $1,125,000 $8,250,000

Work 31,500,000 26,250,000 15,750,000 73,500,000

Total $36,750,000 $28,125,000 $16,875,000 $81,750,000

2. Approach from standpoint of resettlement cost:

Assume total cost of resettlement is $350.00 per person and for repatriation $175.00 per person.

Assume 2/3rds of these sums will be paid for wages and other local currency costs which will be furnished on a grant basis, and l/3rd for foreign exchange expenses or other items which can be set up

on a loan basis.

Assume these funds will be required over a period of three years in ratio 5.3.3.

Total Cost for Resettlement

1st year 2nd year 3rd year Total

Loan $32,000,000 $19,000,000 $19,000,000 $70,000,000

Grant 64,000,000 38,000,000 38,000,000 140,000,000

Total $96,000,000 $57,000,000 $57,000,000 $210,000,000

3. Although there is on the basis of “2”, adequate grant funds for expenditure for wages of refugees it cannot be assumed that all of these funds will be applicable to refugees. Some refugees will not be employable on resettlement projects, and some resettlement wage expenditures must be made to other local labor.

Capital outlays in addition to those required for refugee resettlement will also be required to assure a balanced program within each country and to provide some legitimate development in the countries concerned not directly connected with refugee resettlement.

4. It is tentatively estimated that total cost of an integrated program will be between 250,000,000 to 300,000,000, of which approximately 2/3rds will be on a grant basis and l/3rd on a loan basis. Source of such funds might be as follows:

International Bank and/or Ex-Im Bank $100,000,000

Compensation from Israel 50,000,000

Grant thru UN 100–150,000,000

U.S. share (70%) of grant† 70–105,000,000

1 See Mr. McGhee’s memorandum of March 15 and footnote 4 to that memorandum, p. 828 [Pg. 828 is part of Doc. 533].

2 Nos. 2 to 6 are printed, below. Their specific authorship is not indicated but the presumption is that they were drafted in Mr. McGhee’s office. All of these papers were dated April 27 unless otherwise indicated. The editors suggest that papers of earlier date were originally attached to the memorandum of April 22 and that these revisions, chiefly dated April 27, superseded the earlier papers and were subsequently attached to the memorandum of April 22.

* Distribution of refugees and destitute persons, as estimated by Palestine Conciliation Commission: Syria 85,000

Lebanon 131,000

Iraq 5,000

Arab Palestine 630,000

Transjordan 99,000

Egypt

Israel

Total 950,000

[Footnote in the source text.]

3 Mr. McGhee, in letters of April 29, transmitted copies of the Conclusions and of the Proposed Plan of Action, below, to London, Beirut, Damascus, Tel Aviv, Amman, Baghdad, and Cairo.

4 This paper is undated.

5 This paper is undated.

† Near East already allocated $12,000,000 for fiscal 1950 for technical assistance under planning for Point Four Program. [Footnote in the source text.]

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Secretary of State 501.BB Palestine/5–449

[Document 609]

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Secretary of State

confidential [Washington,] April 25, 1949.

Item No. 3—President Weizmann’s Visit

The President went over the four points1 which we hoped he would stress with President Weizmann. He approved of them all.

After luncheon I got separated from the President and Mr. Weizmann and involved with other guests. The President, Mr. Weizmann, the Israeli Ambassador, and the Vice President discussed the four points.

The President told me, after the interview, that he had made all four points. He said that President Weizmann had taken a helpful attitude on all of them. He said that the internationalization of Jerusalem could be worked out. He foresaw no insoluble difficulty in the boundary matters. He said that Israel would help financially with the refugees. I am not clear as to what was said about repatriation, although I know that the President pressed him on this matter.

As we were leaving, President Weizmann asked the President again for assistance on UN membership. I said that the Israeli representatives could really be of more assistance than we could if they would show a conciliatory attitude along the lines mentioned to Mr. Weizmann by the President.

As we were parting, President Weizmann said that he thought it might be a good idea for him to have a talk with me. I think that it might be worthwhile to follow this up while they are here.2

1 The four points were set forth in a memorandum of April 23 from Mr. Rusk to Secretary Acheson for his conversation with President Truman concerning the latter’s luncheon with President Weizmann later the same day. They dealt with the position of the United States on the internationalization of Jerusalem, boundary settlement, the refugee question and Israeli membership in the United Nations (867N.01/4–2349). The luncheon was actually held on April 25.

2 The editors have found no documentation in the Department of State files indicating a followup conversation with President Weizmann.

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Secretary of State 501.AA/4–2649

[Document 610]

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Secretary of State

secret [Washington,] April 26, 1949.

Subject: Israel’s Desire for Admission to the U.N.

Participants: The Secretary, Mr. Acheson

Mr. Elath, Ambassador of Israel

Mr. Eban, Israeli Representative at Lake Success

Mr. Satterthwaite, Director, NEA

Ambassador Elath opened the conversation by reviewing the position of Israel’s application for admission to the UN. He said that his Government attached such importance to this matter that he wished to introduce Mr. Eban, who was in charge of the problem at Lake Success and have him discuss the situation with me.

Mr. Eban then spoke at some length along the lines of a conversation he and Mr. Elath had had with Senator Austin in New York a few days ago. He emphasized the great disadvantage under which in his opinion the Israeli Government was working by not being a member of the U.N. The six Arab States, on the other hand, had the great advantage of not only being able to express their views to the GA, but they also, by virtue of their six votes, could have considerable influence on the votes of other members.

Mr. Eban remarked that the questions of Jerusalem, the Arab refugees and the boundaries seemed to be those causing the greatest difficulty. He then went on to discuss these three problems, devoting the greater part of the exposition to the Jerusalem situation.

He said that the Israelis had not only supported the plan for Jerusalem set forth in the resolution of November 29, 1947 but had participated in its drafting. Subsequently, however, the Arab States themselves had violently opposed the implementation of this plan by engaging in hostilities. He felt that insufficient importance had been attached internationally to the fact that whereas one year ago the conditions in Jerusalem had been those of utter destruction and chaotic warfare, peace and order had subsequently been restored, thanks to the efforts of the Israeli Government, to a remarkable degree. The problem was one of integrating the necessities of the State of Israel with the desires of the other states to maintain and protect the Holy Places. In this connection he asserted that 95% of the Holy Places are controlled by the Arabs. He thought, however, that considerable progress had been made and that a solution satisfactory to the U.N. was possible. In this connection he cited the address of President Weizmann of April 23 which, he said, had the full support and authority of the Israeli Government.

With reference to the refugees Mr. Eban thought that emphasis should be on resettlement rather than repatriation, although the Israeli Government had never rejected the idea of repatriation.

He felt that there should be less difficulty in reaching a settlement regarding boundaries and hoped that by negotiation this could be worked out at Lausanne.

Toward the conclusion of his rather lengthy exposition, the intent of which was to present as strong a case as possible for Israel’s early admission to the U.N., Mr. Eban said that his Government planned, at an early stage of the Lausanne talks, to make a statement of a conciliatory nature which he hoped would be of assistance in expediting Israel’s admission.

When Mr. Eban had finished I said that I felt that the Israeli Government itself was in a much better position to facilitate its entrance into the U.N. than we were. I recalled that I had suggested to President Weizmann at the White House luncheon yesterday that if Israel would only make some conciliatory gesture or statement along the lines that we have suggested, we would then have some basis on which to talk to the other nations in the General Asssembly.

Frankly, I continued, I had been very disappointed in my failure to obtain any results from the two long talks I had with Mr. Sharett. Not only had my suggestions not been acted upon but in some ways it seemed that we were farther away from a solution than when I had talked with Mr. Sharett. The three questions, in order of importance, which appeared to call for some explanation by the Israeli Government were the refugees, Jerusalem and the boundaries.

With reference to the refugees, I had never suggested that Israel accept a specified number now. I had only suggested to Mr. Sharett that Israel first announce that it would accept the principle of repatriation. Next, at least half of the refugees had come from areas outside the Israeli boundaries fixed by the UN Resolution which were under Israeli military occupation. Surely it should be possible to allow a good number of such refugees to return to non-strategic areas. Then, later on, when the final peace settlement had been reached, or shortly before, it should be possible to determine the exact number which could be repatriated. Mr. Sharett, in spite of my two talks with him, had flatly rejected this thesis and had even gone so far, when I had suggested the emotional and moral values that my proposals might have, as to suggest that such values should not be taken into consideration in international settlements. I had therefore been pleased to read President Weizmann’s statements. I could only wish that he had been present when Mr. Sharett had been making his views known to me.

With reference to Jerusalem, I was glad to note that progress was apparently being made and mentioned in this connection the arrangements which were under way for Dr. Weizmann to discuss that problem with Cardinal Spellman.

As to the boundaries, I was disappointed to learn from Mr. Ethridge’s telegrams that Mr. Ben-Gurion was apparently adamant in clinging to the view that Israel was entitled not only to the territory allowed it by the UNGA resolution but to all the rest of the territory it occupied militarily. Since, in writing at least, I understood the Government of Israel to accept the position that it was willing to negotiate on the basis of the November 29, 1947 resolution, it seemed to me that this was a very unwise position to take.

We were fully in accord with Israel’s making the best bargain it could but did not want this bargaining to be on the basis of threats. This was particularly important in view of the fact that a bad bargain would not lead to permanent peace. As they knew, the Arab Governments were already under heavy attack from their public and press for having been too hasty in signing armistice agreements. If the final boundary settlements were such as to lead the Arab peoples to believe they had been imposed by force, Israel would, in my view, be acting contrary to its own best interests.

Again I pointed out that I was not trying to tell the Israeli Government what it should do. The U.S. had supported Israel’s application for membership and would continue to do so. Unless, however, the Israeli Government were willing to make its position known on these important issues, it would be difficult for the U.S. Delegation to go to the other nations at Lake Success and endeavor to persuade them that they should also vote for Israel’s admission at this session.1

Both Ambassador Elath and Mr. Eban replied briefly to my remarks. They felt that perhaps Mr. Sharett’s real views had not been fully understood. Mr. Eban expressed himself as optimistic regarding the possibility of reaching an agreement on the boundaries and Ambassador Elath felt that the question of the refugees could also be worked out, once the question of the danger to Israel’s vital interests had been eliminated. They said they would, of course, make my views known to their Government and seek clarification of their Government’s views on the points I had raised.2

1 The Department, on April 27, informed New York that the “US not in position join in sponsoring resolution for admission Israel pending further info re possibility Israeli reps Lausanne giving assurances concerning status Jerusalem, Palestine refugees, and territorial settlement which would create favorable atmosphere for admission Israel. “Such res unnecessary for action on application and would, if presented in manner suggested, be attempt influence other dels. Our position of support for application when actually considered remains unchanged.” (telegram Gadel 23, 501.AA/4–2749)

2 The Department summarized this memorandum for Tel Aviv on April 28 in telegram 250 (501.AA/4–2849). The telegram also noted that “Elath called Apr 28 once more to urge speedy action re Israeli membership UN. Expressed conviction Lausanne talks would not be real success as long as Israel not member, since Arab states would see no reason take speedy action toward final peace as long as world community apparently did not regard Israel as worthy of membership. Dept reiterated necessity Israel’s making conciliatory gesture on three above points in order create atmosphere favorable admission Israel. Elath said he realized Israel would have to make some compromise re refugees, but that naturally Israeli Govt did not wish give away this valuable trump card before final peace negotiations.” Telegram 250 concluded with the instruction to Tel Aviv to “Pls seek earliest appropriate opportunity convey PrimMin and FonMin substance Secy’s conversations with Eban and Elath, emphasizing in strongest terms points made by Secy.”

The President of Israel (Weizmann) to President Truman 501.BB Palestine/4–2649

[Document 611]

The President of Israel (Weizmann) to President Truman

Washington, April 26, 1949.

My Dear Mr. President: Our meeting yesterday was a memorable occasion and again, on behalf of my government and myself, I thank you for your hospitality and profound understanding.

Because of the peace negotiations about to begin in Lausanne, I was especially heartened by your observations regarding the admission of Israel to the United Nations. So long as the Arab governments seek by political means to destroy the elements of stability in the present situation, neither Israel nor the Arab peoples will be free to turn their energies to peaceful development. No single act, in my judgment, will contribute so much to the pacification of the Middle East, as the speedy admission of Israel to the United Nations, and the withdrawal of this final act of recognition from the arena of political debate.

I was also extremely happy to learn that you were familiar with the position of my government on the question of Jerusalem. As I stated last Saturday, although Israel bears a direct and inescapable responsibility for Jewish Jerusalem, I am satisfied that there is no real incompatibility between the interests and concerns of Christianity, to which His Holiness the Pope has recently given eloquent expression, and the aspirations of the people of Jerusalem to assure their government and security in conformity with their national allegiance. I firmly believe that a harmonious solution of this problem can swiftly be secured with international consent. The concern which you expressed and the considerations which you emphasized lend added force to the urgency for a speedy and broadly acceptable solution.

I stress again that we are fully mindful of the problem of the Arab refugees and of our own obligations toward them. But, except to a limited degree, the answer lies, as I stated, not in repatriation but in resettlement. As a scientist and a student of the problem, I know the possibilities of development of the Middle East. I have long felt that the underpopulated and fertile acres in the river valleys of Iraq constitute both a seductive invitation to neighboring countries and a massive opportunity for development and progress in the Middle East. Similar opportunities exist also in northern Syria and western Transjordan. In that development the government of Israel will make its contribution.

For all that you have done, Mr. President, in facilitating the establishment and recognition of my country—beginning with your plea for the admission of 100,000 Jewish refugees—I again express the profound gratitude and thanks of the people of Israel. Your leadership has been a source of inspiration and encouragement to us. And under your leadership I look forward in the long future to warm and friendly relationships between the government of the United States and the government of Israel.1

Yours sincerely,

Ch. Weizmann

1 President Truman sent a brief acknowledgment on April 27, in which he expressed his appreciation of “your frank conversations in regard to things pending with regard to Israel. “I hope everything will work out in a satisfactory manner and we can eventually get a lasting peace in the Middle East.”

Memorandum by the Director of the Office of Near Eastern and African Affairs (Satterthwaite) to the Deputy Under Secretary of State (Rusk) 501.BB Palestine/4–2649

[Document 612]

Memorandum by the Director of the Office of Near Eastern and African Affairs (Satterthwaite) to the Deputy Under Secretary of State (Rusk)1

secret [Washington,] April 26, 1949.

Subject: United States Position Regarding Jerusalem

The Palestine Conciliation Commission which meets in Lausanne today will resume its consideration of some kind of international regime for Jerusalem on the basis of the December 11 Assembly Resolution. It will be necessary to give some directives to Mr. Ethridge and for this purpose four possible alternatives are outlined at the end of this paper for your consideration.

Until now the discussions with Israel and Transjordan on this subject have led to no agreement, except that both parties reject any far-reaching scheme of internationalization. The Prime Minister of Israel flatly stated to the Commission at Tel Aviv 7th of April “that the Israeli Government accepted without reservation the international regime for the holy places, but maintained that Jerusalem outside the holy places should be a part of the State of Israel”. He added that the State of Israel “would take its case on the Jerusalem question to the General Assembly”.

A recent telegram from Mr. Ethridge (Palun 127)2 outlines a proposal which combines certain elements of the French paper and various unofficial suggestions by the USDel which Mr. Ethridge thinks represents a sound basis for the Commission’s recommendations to the General Assembly. This combined draft, which is the basis of Alternative 2 below, is based on a minimal international obligation for Jerusalem under which a United Nations Administrator appointed by the General Assembly would have direct control over the holy places, including power to control access to them and decide disputes regarding them. The Jewish and Arab authorities respectively would be responsible for the day-to-day administration over their respective zones. Jerusalem would be demilitarized and formal assurances given by the two parties regarding inviolability of demarcation lines. This proposal appears to follow fairly closely the line indicated by the Secretary to Mr. Sharett on April 5.

This memorandum sketches four possible approaches to the Jerusalem problem.

Alternatives

1. International control of holy places alone.

The PCC might recommend that it was inadvisable or impossible to give concrete expression to the international interest in Jerusalem other than by providing for United Nations control of specified holy places in the Jerusalem area. This control could be exercised by a United Nations Administrator designated by and responsible to the General Assembly. The Administrator would have power to make regulations for use of holy place guards. The expenses of the Administrator, an appropriate staff, and the guards would be met by the United Nations budget. This arrangement for United Nations control of the holy places would be subject to approval by the General Assembly and would come into force when accepted by the Governments of Israel and Trans-Jordan; these Governments, it is presumed, would partition Jerusalem, aside from the holy places, by agreement between themselves, and such direct discussions are now actually in progress. The resolution of the General Assembly approving the above arrangements for the holy places could contain provisions regarding access to the holy places.

2. United Nations administration of holy places, partition of Jerusalem, and international undertakings covering the area.

In Palun 127 the United States Delegation to the Palestine Conciliation Commission has suggested a plan which goes somewhat further than the previous alternative but falls short of a true international regime for the City of Jerusalem. Under this plan the holy places in the Jerusalem area would be subject to the regime outlined in Alternative 1 above. In addition, the remainder of Jerusalem would be partitioned into Arab and Jewish zones, to be administered by Trans-Jordan and Israel, respectively. Persons living in one of the zones would have the citizenship of the state administering that zone. Jerusalem would be demilitarized. There would be international undertakings that the Declaration of Human Rights, approved by the General Assembly in December 1948, should be taken as a standard for the conduct of administration in the two zones. There would be an international administrative council, four from each zone and two neutral, to advise the two groups of zonal authorities on common services, coordination of police functions, city planning, economic arrangements, and other matters of municipal concern. There would be a right of access across the zones of Jerusalem to the holy places for all persons determined by the United Nations Administrator to be entitled to frequent these places. For the most part, local courts would perform judicial functions in their respective zones. There might be a mixed tribunal to handle civil cases in which there was zonal diversity of parties. There should be an international Court of Justice to decide questions concerning the interpretation and application of the arrangements for Jerusalem. This tribunal would give its opinion upon request by the authorities of either zone or by the United Nations Administrator. Opinions of the tribunal should be regarded as binding on the zonal authorities and the Administrator. All of the above arrangements for Jerusalem would be embodied in an instrument perhaps called a Statute. This Statute would first be approved by the General Assembly. It would come into force upon deposit with the Secretary General of acceptances by the Governments of Trans-Jordan and Israel. Finally, the Statute would provide that it could be amended or revoked by the General Assembly in a further exercise by that body of its dispositive power over Jerusalem.

3. United Nations trusteeship for the Old City.

A third alternative has been suggested, in which the arrangements referred to above in Alternatives 1 and 2 would be augmented by placing the Old City of Jerusalem under the international trusteeship system of the United Nations. The Old City, about one square mile which is now occupied by the Arabs, contains important Christian, Jewish and Moslem shrines. Under such an arrangement the United Nations Organization itself could be the administering authority for the trust territory, pursuant to Article 81 of the Charter. Under this alternative, the provisions with respect to holy places in the Jerusalem area would be the same as those outlined in Alternatives 1 and 2. The actual administration of the trust territory would presumably be carried on by a United Nations Administrator and staff provided for by the Trusteeship Council, but its public utilities would be assimilated to the other parts of the city. Trusteeship over the Old City of Jerusalem alone would have serious political disadvantages from the Arab point of view.

4. Two trusteeships for Jerusalem.

A fourth alternative would be to institute the arrangements contemplated in Alternative 3 by means of placing the Arab zone of Jerusalem under Trans-Jordanian trusteeship and the Jewish zone under Israeli trusteeship. The provisions of Alternative 1 with respect to holy places might be retained, with a United Nations Administrator controlling them. During Secretary Acheson’s talk with Foreign Minister Sharett of Israel early in April, the Secretary suggested trusteeship as a possible solution for the Jerusalem problem. Mr. Sharett, while not committing himself or purporting to express the views of his Government, indicated that he thought trusteeship might provide a solution and that the idea deserved to be looked into. If Trans-Jordan and Israel were to become administering authorities over two trust territories in Jerusalem, problems would be raised by the seating of these two countries on the Trusteeship Council when they are admitted to membership in the United Nations. Not only would Israel and Trans-Jordan be admitted to the Council, but two more nonadministering powers would have to be elected to the Council. Enlargement of the Trusteeship Council would probably impair somewhat the efficiency of that organ, More important, however, the problems of the two Jerusalem trust territories would be so different from the problems of the other trust territories that it is questionable whether it would be appropriate to place Jerusalem under trusteeships and introduce into the Trusteeship Council two or four states having no experience with colonial problems. Naturally Israel, Trans-Jordan, and the two additional nonadministering powers would have a voice in all matters coming before the Trusteeship Council. It appears from Palun 127 that the United States Delegation to the Palestine Conciliation Commission doubts the advisability of trying to accomplish through trusteeships the objectives of the international community concerning Jerusalem.

Recommendations

The Offices which join in this memorandum believe that Alternative 2 would be preferable to any of the others. There are several reasons which point toward this conclusion: 1. The United States Delegation to the Palestine Conciliation Commission regards a plan along the lines of Alternative 2 as constituting the most realistic and desirable plan under the circumstances.

2. Such a plan would give expression to the interests of the international community in Jerusalem.

3. At the same time it would not involve the United Nations Organization in substantial expenses or administrative responsibilites.

4. This plan, perhaps with certain modifications and adjustments, would seem to be possible of acceptance by the respective parties.

5. The plan would avoid certain difficulties for the Trusteeship Council which it is believed would result from a plan comprising two trusteeships for Jerusalem.

If you concur, we think instructions in the sense of the above should be sent to Mr. Ethridge. If you feel that the Jerusalem problem requires further consultation within the Department at the present stage, it is suggested that you might wish to meet at an early date with officers of NEA, UNA and L to discuss this problem in order to reach a Departmental decision on the instructions which should be sent to Mr. Ethridge.

1 Sent also by Leonard C. Meeker of the Office of the Legal Adviser, and Durward V. Sandifer, Acting Director of the Office of United Nations Affairs.

2 Identified also as telegram 300, April 16, from Jerusalem, p. 920 [Pg. 920 includes portions of Doc. 597 and Doc. 598].

The British Embassy to the Department of State 867N.113/5–1949

[Document 613]

The British Embassy to the Department of State 1

secret

Palestine Arms Embargo

In view of British treaty relations with certain of the Arab states and of the British Government’s concern about internal security in the Middle Eastern countries, the Foreign Office have been giving thought to the question whether the time has not come, now that armistice agreements have been signed, for the Palestine arms embargo to be lifted. Mr. Bevin thinks that, as Dr. Bunche has announced that he considers his mission complete, there will be no need to discuss the matter with him, but Mr. Bevin would like to learn the views of the United States Government on this question.

2. Mr. Bevin is convinced of the urgent need to make some immediate and favourable response to repeated Arab requests for arms. Now that armistice agreements covering the whole front in Palestine have been signed, and in view of the declaration which Mr. Bevin made at the signing of the Atlantic Pact to the effect that it did not minimise either British interest in or determination to support others not included in the Pact with whom the British Government had had long years of friendship and alliances, there appear to be no sufficient arguments to justify continued British refusal to supply the armaments requested. This is particularly so in the case of Egypt where, as the State Department know, the first steps towards technical military talks between the British and Egyptian authorities are now being taken. The British Ambassador at Cairo considers that the talks cannot succeed unless the arms embargo is raised, at least so far as Egypt is concerned. In order to secure British military requirements there, the British Government must be prepared to assist the Egyptian Government to build up their own military strength. The British Government cannot hope to persuade any Egyptian Government to agree to their requests unless they can prove conclusively that they are willing to help in the development of strong, well trained and well equipped Egyptian armed forces. Mr. Bevin believes that Mr. Acheson will agree that a military agreement with Egypt would have an important effect on the stability of the whole of the Middle East.

3. The need to fulfil British treaty obligations to Iraq and Transjordan is, in Mr. Bevin’s view, hardly less pressing than in the case of Egypt. There is reason to fear trouble in Arab Palestine from the ex-Mufti’s irregulars, who must now be disbanded, as well as from the Kurds in Iraq. The British Government therefore feel that the least they can do is to permit the supply of certain quantities of war material to Egypt, Iraq, and Transjordan and, if necessary, to the other Arab states for internal security and training purposes. The British Government would ask for suitable guarantees that these supplies would not be used for offensive purposes in Palestine. Such supplies would, however, in any case amount to so little that any resumption of fighting against the now well-equipped Israeli army would be out of the question.

4. Mr. Bevin is sure that Mr. Acheson will agree that it cannot have been the intention of the United Nations to make it impossible for the Arab states to keep order within their own frontiers, yet this has been the effect of the embargo, notably in Iraq. In view of the approval given by the Acting Mediator some time ago to the supply of war material by France to Syria for internal security, and of the fact that Dr. Bundle’s functions have virtually come to an end, the British Government would be prepared, provided they had the support of the United States Government, to proceed on the lines suggested above without further reference to the United Nations.

5. It may be that the United States Government, if they are in general agreement with these arguments, would prefer to deal with the matter in one stage by raising the embargo altogether forthwith. The British Government would not object to this. But since it might be held necessary to obtain a United Nations resolution for that purpose, there are perhaps advantages in going no further than the proposal made in paragraphs above. In this connexion the British Government would see no objection to the supply of war material by the United States to Israel for internal security purposes.

6. The British Government would be grateful for the views of the United States Government on this question as soon as possible.

[Washington,] 27th April, 1949.

1 Handed to Secretary Acheson by British Ambassador Franks on April 29; see Secretary Acheson’s memorandum of conversation, April 29, p. 958 [Pg. 958 is part of Doc. 618].

Memorandum of Conversation With the President, by the Secretary of State 501.BB Palestine/4–2849

[Document 614]

Memorandum of Conversation With the President, by the Secretary of State

secret [Washington,] April 28, 1949.

Item No. 2—Letter from Dr. Weizmann

The President showed me a letter from Dr. Weizmann,1 a copy of which will come to us today.

The letter referred to a request that we assist by talking with other members of the United Nations on the subject of admission of Israel to the United Nations. The President agreed that Dr. Weizmann’s attitude on refugees was not satisfactory and thought that we were not in a position to bring pressure on other members of the United Nations.

I related to the President my last meeting with Ambassador Elath and Mr. Eban.2

1 Dated April 26, p. 947 [Pg. 947 includes portions of Doc. 610 and Doc. 611].

2 See Secretary Acheson’s memorandum of conversation, April 26, p. 944 [Pg. 944 includes portions of Doc. 609 and Doc. 610].

Mr. Mark F. Ethridge to the Secretary of State 501.BB Palestine/4–2849: Telegram

[Document 615]

Mr. Mark F. Ethridge to the Secretary of State

secret Lausanne, April 28, 1949—11 a. m.

PCC 1. Palun 136. From Ethridge. Scheduled commencement PCC meeting with Israel and Arab states at Lausanne April 26 held up 24 hours on account delayed arrival interested delegations. On April 27 PCC met separately with Israeli Delegation consisting of Gershon Hirsch and Eliahu Sassoon, with Egyptian Delegation consisting of Abdel Chafey el Labab and Mahmud Rhmazi and with Lebanese Delegation consisting of Fuad Bey Amoun and Mohamed Ali Hamade. PCC meeting with Syrian Delegation consisting of Adnan Atassi planned April 28. PCC informed Transjordan Delegation will arrive this week. Saudi Arabia will not attend, but will accept such arrangements as other Arab states make with Israel. Iraq refused at Beirut to attend and has not yet sent expected informal observer. Yemen understood maintain same position as Saudi Arabia.

Substance of remarks by Israeli Delegation indicated Israel had not altered its position re refugees and Jerusalem as stated by Ben Gurion, Sharett and Comay. Hirsch made no allusion whatsoever to conciliatory statement re refugees nor manifested any disposition to work with PCC on possible plans for internationalization of Jerusalem. On contrary Hirsch stressed conclusion of peace with Arab states was primary objective. Refugee question and Jerusalem could not be discussed in advance, but could be considered during peace talks. Hirsch and Sassoon strongly urged PCC recommend to GA that it not debate refugees and Jerusalem at Lake Success while they were being considered at Lausanne. Hirsch believed if full debate took place at Lake Success public declarations on refugees and Jerusalem would undoubtedly be required which would have important effect on quiet negotiations at Lausanne. Hirsch stated that there was no disposition on part of Israeli Delegation now to discuss current questions at Lausanne if debate took place at Lake Success. It was made clear, nevertheless, that little progress could be expected at Lausanne in interim.

Hirsch also indicated Israeli Delegation would be unable to exchange views with Syrian Delegation before present Israeli-Syrian armistice negotiations were concluded. Peace talks with Arab States should be limited in each case to subjects of common concern. Egypt, for example, had no more right to discuss Jerusalem than Persia or Turkey. Israel hoped, therefore, that pertinent agenda would be arranged between Israel and various Arab States. PCC, on other hand, might have its own agendas with Israel and Arab States respectively.

Egyptian and Lebanese Delegations both stated their presence at Lausanne indicated cooperation with PCC and desire for peace. Both considered, however, that solution for refugee problem and Jerusalem were essential before peace talks could progress. Discussion re territorial questions was premature at this stage. Amoun indicated, however, that Lebanese Delegation was ready to discuss Jerusalem and Holy Places with Jerusalem Committee immediately.

Following meetings with Israeli, Egyptian and Lebanese Delegations, PCC considered Israeli request that PCC recommend to GA that it not debate such questions as refugees and Jerusalem while PCC was discussing at Lausanne. PCC decided it would be presumptuous on its part to make such recommendation and felt that if it were subsequently necessary to submit special or periodic report to GA such reports should be confined to statement of Israeli and Arab cooperation with PCC and degree of acceptance of provisions of GA resolution December 11.

[Ethridge]

The Secretary of State to the Legation in Switzerland 501.BB Palestine/4–2849: Telegram

[Document 616]

The Secretary of State to the Legation in Switzerland

confidential Washington, April 28, 1949—7 p. m.

544. Unpal 85. For Ethridge. Elath Apr 28 gave Dept copy cable sent by Sharett Apr 27 to Dr. Mohn1 and you. Fol salient points.

Israeli Govt much concerned over Syrian unwillingness to withdraw forces occupying Israeli territory. Israel agreed withdraw forces from Leb during Israeli-Leb armistice negots and negot with Syria can make no progress unless Syrian Govt prepared accept same principle. Syrian delegation appears using presence Syrian troops on Israeli soil as means bringing pressure on Israel agree to what is liable become permanent alteration in frontier between two countries. Israel bound insist withdrawal Syrian troops as essential condition conclusion armistice agreement. Israeli Govt also disturbed by press reports concerning Syrian intention mobilize immed 20,000 additional men and inclined view this may be cover for new aggressive action contemplated against Israel. Under circumstances Israel sees little profit in discussing final settlement with Syrian delegation Lausanne and so long as no progress is made in Israeli-Syrian armistice negots owing Syrian Govt refusal accept polit boundary as armistice demarcation line Israeli delegation Lausanne will be instructed not enter formal or informal conversations with Syrian reps.2

Elath bespoke Dept’s assistance persuading Syrian Govt agree withdrawal troops. Dept stated US only recognized Syria Apr 27 and Dept doubted advisability approaching Syrian Govt this matter at present. Informed Elath that believed preferable await outcome such efforts as Dr. Mohn might make this regard but would reconsider situation if no progress made Israeli-Syrian negots next few days. Dept stated belief it essential Israeli-Syrian armistice agreement be speedily concluded so that Syria could effectively participate in Lausanne talks.

Acheson

1 Paul Mohn, Chief Political Adviser to Mr. Bunche.

2 Mr. Sharett’s message of April 27 was summarized by Mr. Ethridge in his telegram from Lausanne of April 29. Mr. Ethridge also added that “PCC decided April 29 inform Foreign Minister that SC and Bunche were responsible for armistice agreements and PCC had no jurisdiction. “My personal opinion is armistice agreement between Syria and Israel should if possible be concluded prior Lausanne but that Israel argument without validity based on understanding Syrian line in Israel established before truce whereas Israel’s line in Lebanon established after truce. Furthermore past armistice agreements were concluded without prejudice political settlement.” (Palun 138, 501.MA Palestine/4–2949)

This telegram was repeated to Damascus as No. 184 and to Tel Aviv and New York. Mr. Bunche informed the United States Mission at the United Nations that private military talks between the Israelis and Syrians to discuss armistice lines and reduction of forces had broken down at the first meeting on April 27 (telegram Delga 63, April 29, 5:32 p. m., from New York, 501.BB Palestine/4–2949).

The President to Mr. Mark F. Ethridge, at Jerusalem 501.BB Palestine/4–2949

[Document 617]

The President to Mr. Mark F. Ethridge, at Jerusalem

[Washington,] April 29, 1949.

Dear Mark: I appreciated very much your letter of the eleventh and I was particularly interested in the attitude of the Arabs with regard to the present situation.

I am rather disgusted with the manner in which the Jews are approaching the refugee problem. I told the President of Israel in the presence of his Ambassador just exactly what I thought about it. It may have some effect, I hope so.

Sincerely yours,

[Harry S. Truman]

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Secretary of State 867N.113/4–2949

[Document 618]

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Secretary of State

secret [Washington,] April 29, 1949.

Subject: Palestine Arms Embargo

Participants: Sir Oliver Franks, British Ambassador

The Secretary of State

Mr. John D. Hickerson, Director for European Affairs

Sir Oliver Franks came in to see me at 12 noon today by appointment made at his request. He handed me the attached self-explanatory memorandum dated April 27, 1949 entitled “Palestine Arms Embargo.”1 Sir Oliver summarized briefly the contents of this memorandum, stressing the British Government’s concern about internal security in the Middle East countries and stating that Mr. Bevin is convinced of the urgent need to make some immediate and favorable response to repeated Arab requests for arms. Sir Oliver stated that in all cases except Egypt the arms would be entirely for the maintenance of internal security. As regards Egypt, he stated, the first steps toward technical military talks between the British and Egyptian authorities2 are now being taken and the British Government proposes to furnish the Egyptian Government, in order to secure British military requirements there, assistance in building up Egypt’s own military strength.

I inquired whether the British Government contemplates talking to Dr. Bunche about this matter. Sir Oliver replied that his government did not contemplate approaching Dr. Bunche about this in view of his announcement that he considers his mission complete. I also inquired about the time element and Sir Oliver replied that while his government regarded the matter as urgent, he did not believe that he could mention any particular time element within which they desire to act.

I inquired whether he had any information about the type and quantity of arms involved. Sir Oliver replied that he had very limited information on this subject. He went on to say that he understood that nothing more than small arms would be involved for countries other than Egypt. For Egypt the British Government contemplates supplying not only small arms but probably some light artillery and some light tanks.

I told Sir Oliver that we would examine his memorandum carefully and sympathetically and get in touch with him later about it, I pointed out that I had inquired about timing largely for the reason that the furnishing of arms to Middle East countries by the British Government may introduce an element of importance in connection with the consideration in Congress of our Military Assistance Pact. Sir Oliver commented that this had probably not been considered in London and that he would call Mr. Bevin’s attention to this aspect of the matter which he himself considered as one of importance.

Sir Oliver commented in passing that it was not clear whether his government contemplated formal action for lifting of the Palestine Arms Embargo by UN action or whether, if the U.S. Government agreed, his government simply contemplates assuring the Middle East governments in question that the arms will be furnished without formal action by the UN.

1 See p. 952 [Pg. 952 includes portions of Doc. 612 and Doc. 613].

2 For documentation on this subject, see pp. 186 [Pg. 186 is part of Doc. 81] ff.

The Secretary of State to Certain Diplomatic and Consular Offices 501.BB Palestine/4–2949: Circular telegram

[Document 619]

The Secretary of State to Certain Diplomatic and Consular Offices 1

secret Washington, April 29, 1949—5 p. m.

Unrealistic and intransigent attitude of both Israel and Arab states re agreement to repatriation and resettlement, respectively, of Arab refugees has created problem of serious concern to USG and major obstacle to PCC’s task of implementing Dec 11 res with respect to refugees. Coincidental with PCC meetings Lausanne, Dept considers it essential that strongest diplomatic approach be made to both sides in endeavor to soften their respective attitudes this question and to support PCC in its task. We are suggesting similar approach to Arabs by UK Govt.

Pls make earliest approach to PrimMin and FonMin of Govt to which you are accredited along fol lines:

USG continues support principle of repatriation of refugees so desiring in accordance GA res of Dec 11. On Apr 5 Secy made strong representations to Israeli FonMin re Pres’ conviction of necessity for early Israeli agreement to repatriation; Pres on Apr 25 took occasion Weizmann’s visit to press him rerepatriation; Secy made similar approach to Israeli Amb Apr 26. USG will continue use best efforts vis-à-vis Israel this regard. However, USG is in full agreement with PCC’s second progress report to UN, which emphasizes likelihood that not all refugees will decide return to their homes and consequent necessity obtaining agreement in principle by Arab states to resettlement those not desiring repatriation.

Earliest beginning to liquidation this question essential in view rapid depletion UNRPR funds. Since establishment UNRPR, UN members have contributed generously to alleviation plight of refugees, and have relieved Arab states of large measure enormous burden of relief. However, unless evidence is forthcoming that both sides are cooperating with PCC in endeavoring liquidate problem, and that concrete progress is being made therein, there is likelihood further aid would not be forthcoming from international sources, and that legislatures UN member states would be unwilling agree to further extension assistance.

Ref is made to recommendation of PCC in its progress report that Israel and Arab states might undertake program of public works which would make possible return of refugees and early absorption those not desiring return to their homes. USG notes with interest PCC’s expressed willingness recommend favorable action on such a request by UN organs if Israel and Arab states should apply for technical and financial aid in preparing and executing such a program.

USG deeply hopeful Arab states will give early indication their willingness to contribute to resettlement of those not desiring return Israel. This would immeasurably facilitate ability PCC to formulate effective plans for disposition refugee question as whole, and would be important element in influencing attitude of UN member states towards possibility further assistance.

At meetings with PCC in Lausanne, USG considers both Israel and Arab states have significant responsibility for cooperating with PCC in obtaining agreed settlement to permit earliest feasible liquidation this problem, and avoid its perpetuation as threat to peace, stability and development of all Near Eastern states.2

Acheson

1 At Jidda, Cairo, Baghdad, Damascus, Beirut, and Amman, presumably for action; and to London and Jerusalem and to Bern for Mr. Ethridge, for information.

2 The Department additionally informed London, on April 29, that “McGhee’s survey of Arab refugee situation, and reports of our diplomatic missions and PCC emphasize fact that no progress possible re liquidation problem until political atmosphere improved by Israeli agreement to principle repatriation and Arab agreement to principle resettlement. USG therefore proposes employ coordinate and continuing diplomatic pressure both sides, in order provide maximum support PCC discussions Lausanne. It would be of considerable value if FonOff would instruct diplomatic missions approach Arab Govts soonest in endeavor obtain their agreement to principle accepting for resettlement those refugees who do not desire return to Israel.” (Telegram 1473, 501.BB Palestine/4–2949)

The Consul at Jerusalem (Burdett) to the Secretary of State 501.BB Palestine/4–3049: Telegram

[Document 620]

The Consul at Jerusalem (Burdett) to the Secretary of State

secret Jerusalem, April 30, 1949—1 p. m.

342. Colonel Dayan yesterday furnished following information:

(1) Activities of special committee—at last meeting Arab delegation stated they were proceeding to Lausanne and proposed special committee suspend work until their return. Israeli “put pressure” on Transjordan stating would not discuss peace or other questions at Lausanne unless Transjordan conformed to armistice agreement and continued special committee talks. Transjordan agreed appoint other representatives to continue work.

[Here follows remainder of telegram primarily concerning action taken by the special committee, principally the movement of traffic on vital roads and the operation of the railroad, and on territorial settlement in Jerusalem. Concerning the latter point, the Trans-jordanians were said to have “refused discuss any territorial changes stating that should be considered at Lausanne. Dayan emphasized negotiations for territorial changes should be on basis what each party now holds and not on what held before war or ownership.”]

Burdett

The Minister in Syria (Keeley) to the Secretary of State 867N.01/5–149: Telegram

[Document 621]

The Minister in Syria (Keeley) to the Secretary of State

secret Damascus, May 1, 1949—10 a. m.

259. Transparent hypocrisy in Sharett’s cable of April 27 to Dr. Mohn (Deptel 184, April 281 ) is doubtless already evident to all concerned but full comment is nevertheless given in hope of helping to clarify atmosphere and hasten armistice agreement so that broader aspects of problem may be realistically approached.

Israeli contention that natural boundary desired by Syria as armistice demarcation line might become permanent alteration in frontier between two countries seeks to confirm Syria’s conviction that if Syria retires to old political frontier as armistice demarcation line, Israel will subsequently accept no alteration in that frontier particularly as Syria knows of no offer of Israel to withdraw from Western Galilee or other areas outside partition frontiers as earnest of willingness to have final sovereignty all such areas for determination in peace talks. Without holding any brief for Syria’s “right” to frontier rectification, what is sauce for goose should be sauce for gander.

As evidence of their alleged sincerity let both parties retire simultaneously from areas not contemplated by partition resolution leaving such areas under UN supervision pending determination of sovereignty by peace conference. Otherwise let status quo be accepted as provisional for armistice purposes with clear understanding that armistice demarcation lines are tentative only and subject to confirmation or rectification by peace conference. Thus latter may proceed in more hopeful atmosphere.

Re McDonald’s comment in Tel Aviv Embassy telegram 314, April 292 to Department re Israel’s sincerity yet unwillingness to yield even to extent of leaving disputed frontier area for subsequent determination, might it not properly be asked what profit it for Syria to enter into peace negotiations with Israel if only benefits Syria can hope to obtain therefrom, slight rectification of frontier, is relinquished without any quid pro quo or other guarantee before peace talks begin. Considering US policy as outlined by Jessup November 20 (Deptel 57 February 25) we can scarcely in good conscience ask Syria to relinquish small salient within partition frontier while remaining silent over Israel’s retention even provisionally of extensive area outside partition frontier in Western Galilee conquered by Israel during and in violation of truce. Surely if Israel’s professions of desire for peace are genuine, she should be willing to make some concession as earnest thereof as Syria has already done (Mytel 256, April 283 ), or at least to leave all controversial issues for determination by peace conference.

Sent Department 259; repeated Bagdad 47; Tel Aviv 22; London 70; Paris 55; Bern 1 for Ethridge; New York for USDel 1. Pouched Amman, Beirut, Cairo, Jerusalem, Jidda, Athens, Ankara, Moscow.

Keeley

1 This was a repeat of No. 544 to Bern, p. 956 [Pg. 956 includes portions of Doc. 615 and Doc. 616].

2 Not printed.

3 Not printed; it reported that Syrian Prime Minister Zaim had “Intimated willingness as part general settlement including realistic frontier adjustments accept quarter million refugees if given substantial development aid in addition to compensation for refugee losses.” (890D.01/4–2849) Telegram 256 also noted that the Prime Minister “reiterated his earnest desire to liquidate Palestine debacle by pursuing henceforth policy of give and take provided he not asked to give all while other side takes all.” It concluded that there was a “real opportunity for rapid settlement of Palestine problem if only US Government will exert itself to bring Israelis to face situation realistically and in spirit of fair compromise.”

The Chargé in Transjordan (Stabler) to the Secretary of State 501.BB Palestine/5–149: Telegram

[Document 622]

The Chargé in Transjordan (Stabler) to the Secretary of State

secret Amman, May 1, 1949—3 p. m.

193. During call on Prime Minister this morning I conveyed to him views of US Government regarding refugee question as contained in Depcirtel April 29, 5 p. m. and left him aide-mémoire on subject.

Prime Minister expressed appreciation for these views and for fact that US Govt is continuing to press Israel regarding acceptance repatriation principle in accordance GA Resolution December 11 He said Transjordan accepted in principle resettlement of refugees not desiring return their homes and was well aware of necessity for resettling such refugees. Transjordan Govt recognized that not all refugees would elect to return their homes. However, Transjordan still maintained its position of insisting that Israel accept principle of repatriation of refugees who do desire return their homes. Settlement of refugee question which he regarded as urgent factor in solution of Palestine problem would be made much easier if refugees had free choice of whether to return to their homes or to resettle in Arab states or elsewhere.

Tawfiq Pasha commented that while he had adopted common line with other Arab states regarding repatriation principle at Beirut meetings with PCC, he had in separate conversations with Ethridge and McGhee expressed willingness and awareness regarding resettlement principle. He felt such parallel approach was realistic as on one hand it did not work against common line of Arab states and on other hand it did provide positive line in assisting PCC work out overall solution to problem.

Prime Minister pointed out that one of essentials in solution refugee question was matter of boundaries. He hoped that UN and US would adhere to partition principle and that Israel would be obliged accept settlement on this basis. He stated that it was clear that solution refugee question would be simpler if Arabs should be compensated by Israel for territories over and above those allotted to Israel by November 29 Resolution. Return to Arabs of such territories would make resettlement much less difficult.

Prime Minister continued that he hoped have opportunity hold further talks with McGhee regarding possible assistance to Transjordan in technical and financial fields. He mentioned number projects and indicated Transjordan Govt might prepare certain concrete proposals. He assured that whatever assistance was received would be put to profitable use in connection Transjordan development.

In conclusion I emphasized to Prime Minister great importance which US Govt attached to acceptance by Arab states of resettlement principle and urged he use his influence with other Arab states in this regard. I also emphasized that US would, as indicated in President’s message of April 21 to King, continue press Israel regarding acceptance repatriation principle. Prime Minister thought this was realistic approach and would endeavor to do what he could regarding other Arab states.

Sent Department, repeated Geneva for USDel PCC, pouched Arab Capitals, London, Jerusalem, Tel Aviv.1

Stabler

1 The Department’s reply, on May 16, requested Amman to “express Dept’s appreciation to PriMin for his cooperative and humane attitude towards acceptance resettlement principle. However, you shld endeavor convey to him idea that, while USG deeply hopeful that TJ will be prepared receive refugees up to its absorptive capacity, in its own interests TJ shld keep in mind natural limiting factors of country and should not over-extend itself in this connection.” The reply gave the Department’s tentative estimates that “maximum potential absorptive capacity TJ together with area of central Pal presently under Arab mil occupation wld permit assimilation of not more than 150,000–200,000 refugees … Moreover, assimilation this number possible only on basis intensive development TJ and Arab Pal over two or three year period.” (Telegram 60, 501.BB Palestine/5–1649)

Memorandum Prepared Presumably in the Office of the Coordinator on Palestine Refugee Matters (McGhee) 867N.48/4–2249

[Document 623]

Memorandum Prepared Presumably in the Office of the Coordinator on Palestine Refugee Matters (McGhee)

secret [Washington,] May 2, 1949.

Palestine Refugee Problem

notes for discussion with president

Of the attached papers the most important is Policy Recommendations: No’s. 1 and 8 are the critical recommendations.

No. 1: The real question is how far we go in putting pressure on the Israelis to repatriate a considerable number of refugees (at least 200,000), which Ethridge feels necessary for success of the Lausanne talks and which is believed to be necessary for any ultimate solution of the refugee problem. So far the strong talks given the Israelis by the President and the Secretary on this subject have not resulted in tangible concessions. The present issue is whether we go further through such action as holding up remainder of Eximbank loan ($49,000,000) and withdrawing Eximbank Mission.

No. 8: This represents an internal decision on the part of the executive. It means that, subject to Congressional approval, reasonable assistance from other UN nations and cooperation from the states concerned, we have decided that we intend to “see through” financially a minimum refugee program, before we raise Arab hopes through assuming leadership in an economic survey group to be created by the PCC. If there are not adequate loans forthcoming from the International and Exim Banks, we intend to request our share as a grant from Congress. Final decision should, of course, be made on the basis of the best advice we can get from Congressional leaders and Bank officials. Ethridge needs such a decision in order to know how far to go in holding out hope to Israel and the Arab states for assistance in repatriation and resettlement, as an inducement to get them to face these issuer realistically and constructively. The range of grant funds that the US might be called upon to make is believed to lie between $25,000,000 and $50,000,000 a year for 3 years, depending upon ultimate cost, amount of Israeli compensation, amount available from the Banks and amount contributed by other UN states.

Memorandum of Conversation With the President, by the Secretary of State 867N.48/5–249

[Document 624]

Memorandum of Conversation With the President, by the Secretary of State

secret [Washington,] May 2, 1949.

Subject: Palestine Refugee Problem

I went over the main points of Mr. McGhee’s memorandum1 with the President, directing his attention specifically to the tentative financial commitments which might be involved.

The President believed that it would probably be necessary for him to make the commitments (subject to Congressional action) but that before he did so he would like to have this matter laid before him in a memorandum which he could submit to the Bureau of the Budget and the Secretary of the Treasury, so that there could be orderly consideration of these new proposed commitments. If we can get such a memorandum to the President tomorrow, he believes that he could have the matter considered and possibly acted on at the Cabinet meeting on Friday. Until that is done he does not believe that it would be proper for me to agree, even tentatively, as this might be misleading.

1 Presumably the memorandum of April 22, p. 934 [Pg. 934 includes portions of Doc. 607 and Doc. 608].

The Minister in Syria (Keeley) to the Secretary of State 501.BB Palestine/5–249: Telegram

[Document 625]

The Minister in Syria (Keeley) to the Secretary of State

secret Damascus, May 2, 1949—8 a. m.

261. Mytel 256, April 28.1 When I orally communicated text Depcirtel April 29, 5 p. m. to Prime Minister Zaim last evening he reminded me that several days ago he had expressed his desire speed solution Palestine problem and had stated his willingness to accept as part comprehensive settlement of Palestine conflict quarter million or more Arab refugees for resettlement provided they are compensated for their losses and Syria is given adequate financial aid necessary to resettle them. He reiterated his sincere desire for prompt agreement with Israel and his willingness to enter direct negotiations with Israel to that end. He went on to say that as Syria, Transjordan and Egypt are Arab states most directly concerned in Palestine; problem, he is willing meet with Abdullah and Farouk in effort to reach common basis for realistic approach to Israel.

While eager to give concerete proof, of his sincerity already evidenced by his proffered concessions, he emphasized that unless Israel also manifests spirit of compromise stalemate will continue since Arab states cannot be expected to make all the concessions.

He laughed at Sharett’s fear that mobilization 20,000 recruits could be immediate threat to Israel. Call up is internal measure to take potential trouble makers off streets. Without arms and other equipment they could be used only as labor battalions and will, he said, be so used. Israel has, he added, nothing to fear from Syria if it comes to reasonable terms. Others had created debacle; he wishes earnestly to liquidate it so as to get on with more important things: internal development and preparation against Soviet menace which he insists is real threat of moment.2

Sent Department 261; repeated Beirut 56; Baghdad 49; Tel Aviv 24: London 72; Paris 57; Bern 3 for Ethridge. Pouched Amman, Cairo, Jerusalem, Jidda, Athens, Ankara, Moscow.

Keeley

1 Not printed, but see footnote 3, p. 962 [Pg. 962 includes portions of Doc. 621 and Doc. 622].

2 Chargé Patterson, on May 3, discussed the content of the circular telegram of April 29 with the Egyptian Prime Minister. The latter was reported to have stated that the “Lausanne talks were based upon UN’s December 11 resolution whereby principle of repatriation established. Egypt insisted this principle should be reaffirmed by all participating Lausanne conversations, Zionists in particular. Once principle of repatriation shall have been established as basis of conversations Egypt and Arab States (Prime Minister believed) would at once get down to study of practical aspects of problem.” (telegram 430, May 3, 6 p. m., from Cairo) Minister Pinkerton discussed the circular telegram with the Lebanese Minister and received his assurances that the “Lebanese delegation Lausanne meetings with PCC has been given widest instructions to cooperate with PCC in finding answer problems. He reiterated that [Lebanon?] is already overpopulated and is organized on confessional lines so delicately balanced that acceptance permanent settlement any refugees here would be impossible.” (Telegram 217, May 4, noon, from Beirut) Nos. 430 and 217 are filed under 501.BB Palestine/5–349, /5–449, respectively.

The Ambassador in Israel (McDonald) to the Secretary of State 501.BB Palestine/5–249: Telegram

[Document 626]

The Ambassador in Israel (McDonald) to the Secretary of State

secret Tel Aviv, May 2, 1949—1 p. m.

323. Two hours prior receipt April 29 of Deptel 250, April 28, Ford1 and I talked at Foreign Ministry about almost identical subjects. Share distressed2 Israel’s desire to make conciliatory statement but was embarrassed by Colonel Zasuk’s insistence “rectify” international frontier under guise armistice negotiations, thus endangering peace.

Later, April 29, at Kaplan3 tea for Export-Import Bank experts, I talked with Shiloah of Foreign Office who said Israel is puzzled by Department’s suggestion “conciliatory gesture about boundaries” because if there is to be no independent Arab state in Palestine and no one considers such possibility, hence Israel’s yielding on boundaries could only mean parceling out Palestine territory among neighboring Arab states, a result never contemplated in November 29 GA resolution. In reply, I urged my desire prompt talk with Sharett and Ben-Gurion together.

April 30 morning, when I took General Donovan4 to Sharett’s residence, I told latter of contents of Deptel 250, April 28, and my wish confer with him and Prime Minister. Foreign Minister agreed try for early date but said absence Prime Minister Jerusalem attending Zionist action SG committee and coming May Day and Independence Day celebrations during first half this week make such conference difficult. I am continuing to press for it soonest.

I believe Israel officials because of their realization of national advantage of close US cooperation and ultimate cooperation with Arab states’ desire meet President and Department’s views as far as Foreign Minister and Prime Minister consider politically possible. I will continue utilize every formal and informal opportunity press US views in hope securing desired statement soon. Am hopeful on Jerusalem and refugees but pessimistic on boundaries.

McDonald

1 Richard Ford, Counselor of Embassy in Israel.

2 These two words should read “Sharett stressed” (copy in Tel Aviv post files, lot 56–F 31, 350 Israel).

3 Eliezer Kaplan, Israeli Finance Minister.

4 Maj. Gen. William J. Donovan, until 1945 Director of the Office of Strategic Services; at this time on an extended tour of the Near East.

The Secretary of State to the Legation in Switzerland 501.BB Palestine/5–249: Telegram

[Document 627]

The Secretary of State to the Legation in Switzerland 1

secret Washington, May 2, 1949—8 p. m.

566. Unpal 88. For Lausanne. Re Palun 1272 Dept considers Secretariat working paper re Jerusalem constitutes sound basic approach and hopes that in due course it can be made basis future work in preference French proposals.

Dept also approves suggestion providing compulsory arbitration controversies re fulfillment by states concerned of obligations undertaken re Jerusalem area. We consider that tribunal should be given jurisdiction such controversies on motion UN Administrator or authorities either zone. Our position at this stage should be that decisions should be legally binding.

Dept understanding that UN would bear expenses of UN Administrator, his staff, guards for Holy Places, international tribunal, and other expenses appropriately chargeable. Authorities governing local zones would bear local costs, and costs their participation in mixed bodies.

Acheson

1 This telegram was repeated to Jerusalem.

2 Also identified as telegram 300, April 16, from Jerusalem, p. 920 [Pg. 920 includes portions of Doc. 597 and Doc. 598].

The Minister in Switzerland (Vincent) to the Secretary of State 501.BB Palestine/5–349: Telegram

[Document 628]

The Minister in Switzerland (Vincent) to the Secretary of State

secret Bern, May 3, 1949—11 a. m.

661. Palun 139. During past week PC met separately with Syrian delegation and Transjordan delegation headed by Fawzi Pasha Mulki. Both indicated desire to cooperate for Near East peace. Commissioners, advisers, and Azcarate also had numerous separate discussions with individual members of Israeli and Arab delegates. PCC’s underlying impression is Israel and Arab states are sincerely desirous of making peace arrangements soonest but are maneuvering for position.

Israeli delegation is seriously concerned re question of Israeli admission to UN. It fears extensive UN debate may delay and even prevent Israeli admission at this GA session. It continues to suggest PCC recommend GA not debate such matters as refugees and Jerusalem in view Israeli and Arab talks with PCC at Lausanne. PCC has, however, maintained position stated in Palun 136.1 Israeli delegation is also communicating with Tel Aviv re possible conciliatory statement on refugees. Partial drafts thus far seen are evasive. US delegation hopes satisfactory statement will result but fears Ben-Gurion’s strong views will prevent. Israeli delegation has given no indication of working with BCC’s committee on Jerusalem re plans for internationalization of Jerusalem area.

Arab delegations are keenly aware of their present tactical position. Arab delegations are not yet ready to meet with Israeli delegation for this reason and because of general reluctance to move quickly. It seems unlikely Arab delegations will engage in substantive discussion with Israeli delegation either directly or through PCC until UN debate on Israeli admission is concluded. Arab delegations appear willing, however, to discuss all questions with PCC.

PCC therefore plans to continue to talk with individual delegations and will endeavor to draw up agendas of points which may eventually serve as framework for Israeli-Arab discussion either through PCC or directly. It is also hoped PCC might draw up certain preamble material on which Israel and Arab states could agree and which would serve as point of departure for further discussion as was case at Rhodes.

Eytan, now heading Israeli delegation, also approached Ethridge re Israeli-Syrian armistice negotiations expressing view that if agreement were signed with mandate frontier as armistice line Israel would be willing make border rectifications in peace talks. Syrians are already familiar with this argument and are probably unlikely to forego present bargaining advantage. In order resolve impasse US delegate suggests Syrians might withdraw to frontier while Israelis withdraw from equivalent area in Israeli territory. Area evacuated could then be considered as neutral pending and without prejudice to effect settlement.

Vincent

1 Also identified as telegram PCC 1, April 28, from Lausanne, p. 955 [Pg. 955 is part of Doc. 615].

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State 501.BB Palestine/5–349: Telegram

[Document 629]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State

secret London, May 3, 1949—5 p. m.

709. Proposal contained Deptel 1473, April 29; repeated Bern 556 discussed with Michael Wright and Beith of Foreign Office. Both agreed that UK approach Arab states re principle resettlement might have beneficial effect but felt that in making it, account should be taken differing circumstances countries concerned. Wright pointed out Transjordan has already agreed to accept refugees while there is little likelihood that appreciable numbers could be resettled in Egypt, Lebanon and Saudi Arabia. He also remarked Arab states would presumably be reluctant voluntarily give up remaining bargaining weapon by subscribing to resettlement principle. We pointed out that approach did not envisage consideration number each country would be called on to absorb but merely agreement to a principle. Moreover, Arabs should be willing to do so in return for Israeli acceptance principle repatriation.

Our comments appeared to overcome Wright’s objections, and he said he would immediately refer proposal to Bevin with recommendation that it be approved.1

Sent Department 709; repeated Bern 36.

Douglas

1 London, on May 4, advised that Mr. Bevin had given his approval and that the Foreign Office had sent instructions to British missions in Arab capitals “directing them to inform respective governments that UK fully supports representations made by US representative re agreement principles resettlement.” (telegram 1740, 867N.01/5–449) The Department informed London on May 4 that the “Views you presented to FO as reported Embtel 709 of May 3 timely and coincide Dept thinking. Irrespective great difference ability individual Arab States absorb refugees essential they as group make progress toward recognition principle which will permit states who can to take such action at appropriate time without breaking Arab line. … Essential that both [Arabs and Israelis] make progress toward compromise position and US and UK should assist in achieving this end with all means available.” (Telegram 1515, 501.BB Palestine/5–349)

Memorandum by the Secretary of State to the President 867N.48/5–449

[Document 630]

Memorandum by the Secretary of State to the President

secret Washington, May 4, 1949.

Subject: Repatriation of Arab Refugees from Palestine

At our meeting on Monday1 you directed me to submit to you the estimated cost for a program of repatriation and resettlement of the Arab refugees from Palestine. This was for the purpose of having the estimated cost subjected to orderly consideration by the Budget Bureau and the Treasury Department before the matter came to you for decision.

You will recall that the matter comes up at the present time not in connection with any announcement of detailed figures, but with Mr. Ethridge’s desire to lay some plan for solution of the problem before the Delegates meeting at Lausanne. Mr. Ethridge did not wish to do this unless the United States Government would agree in principle to substantial United States financial assistance in carrying out the program. He felt, and we agreed, that he was wise in this, that to make a proposal and later have it fail for lack of financial support would affect the United States interests adversely in the Middle East.2

Dean Acheson

1 See Secretary Acheson’s memorandum of May 2, p. 965 [Pg. 965 includes portions of Doc. 623, Doc. 624, and Doc. 625].

2 Attached to this memorandum is a second memorandum dated May 4, sent to President Truman by Secretary Acheson, which dealt with the estimated cost of the Palestine refugee problem. It is not printed; for the version of May 9, which superseded it, see p. 983 [Pg. 983 includes portions of Doc. 639 and Doc. 640].

The Secretary of State to the Secretary of Defense (Johnson) 867N.48/5–449

[Document 631]

The Secretary of State to the Secretary of Defense (Johnson)

Washington, May 4, 1949.

My Dear Mr. Secretary: Reference is made to Secretary For restal’s letter dated September 23, 1948, in which he transmitted a memorandum from the Joint Chiefs of Staff1 concerning the relief of the Arab refugees from the Palestine hostilities, who numbered at that time approximately 300,000.

As you will recall, on November 19, 1948, the General Assembly approved a resolution calling for a $32,000,000 program for the relief of Palestine refugees, to be raised by voluntary contributions from the member states of the United Nations. The resolution recognized that “the alleviation of conditions of starvation and distress among the Palestine refugees is one of the minimum conditions for the success of the efforts of the United Nations to bring peace to that land”. The enabling legislation for a United States appropriation of $16,000,000 as our contribution to such a program was signed by the President on March 24, 1949.

The United Nations relief program is expected to terminate by the end of 1949, when the funds at its disposal will be exhausted. No provision now exists for continuing assistance to the refugees from international sources after termination of the present program. It is recognized, however, that the need for assistance will continue beyond 1949, and that the administrative and material resources of the Arab states and of voluntary relief organizations are wholly inadequate to support an assistance program of this magnitude.

For some time the Department has been studying the question of the long range disposition of the refugees, who now number at least 700,000. The consistent refusal of Israel and the Arab states to agree in principle to the repatriation and resettlement, respectively, of the refugees, has rendered it impossible for the Palestine Conciliation Commission, which is charged by the General Assembly with facilitating settlement of the problem, to initiate any measures looking towards its progressive liquidation. A concerted diplomatic approach to both Israel and the Arab states is being undertaken by the Department, in concert with the United Kingdom, in an effort to secure the agreement of both sides to repatriation and resettlement on the scale required.

Assuming that these political obstacles can be overcome, however, there is no possibility under present conditions of any appreciable absorption of the refugees into the economies of the Arab states, already seriously weakened by internal economic difficulties, without increasing unemployment and depressing the already low standard of living. Absorption of the refugees on a self-supporting basis can only be achieved by raising the economic potential of the countries involved, through increase in the amount or productivity of arable land and creation of new employment opportunities.

In the Department’s opinion, any continuing program of assistance would have to be based on three primary considerations. First, it should be formulated on a work relief basis rather than on the basis of direct relief. Such a program would raise the morale of the refugees, would result in the accomplishment of useful work directed towards their resettlement, towards raising the economic potential of the states involved and towards a progressive reduction and eventual elimination of the need for external assistance. Second, in order to secure the cooperation of the Arab states, any solution of the problem should be formulated within the broader framework of the interests of the countries concerned, with special reference to their economic development. Third, any outside assistance should be made available under the auspices of the United Nations.

On the basis of the preceding considerations, it is apparent that considerable financing from external sources, both in the form of direct grants for work relief projects and loans for economic development purposes, are required for solution of the problem. The financial requirements for such a program, which will require a minimum period of three years, are tentatively estimated at $250,000,000–$300,000,000 from all sources. These funds should be provided by the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development and/or the United States Export-Import Bank, in the case of projects meeting their requirements; by the United Nations, its specialized agencies and related international organizations; and the remainder by grants and loans from the governments of interested United Nations member states.

From the political point of view, the Department considers that failure to resolve the refugee problem would serve to perpetuate conditions of insecurity and unrest in the Near East, and that the refugees would serve as a focal point for the breeding of political extremism of both a leftist and a rightist character. From an economic standpoint, transfer of full responsibility for custodianship of the refugees to the Governments of the Arab states, even if they agreed to accept it, would constitute an insupportable strain upon the local economies, and thereby further aggravate political unrest and instability.

In order to formulate more precisely the nature and extent of this Government’s interest in the refugee problem, and the degree to which we should participate in effecting a solution, an appreciation of the probable effects of the refugee problem upon our military and strategic interests in the Near East would be of considerable value to the Department.

It would be appreciated if you would transmit the foregoing to the Joint Chiefs of Staff, with the request that such an estimate be prepared for the Department’s guidance.

Sincerely yours,

Dean Acheson

1 A partial quotation from the letter of then Secretary of Defense Forrestal and the full text of the Joint Chiefs of Staff memorandum of September 22, 1948, are included in telegram Telmar 19, September 28, 1948, to Paris, Foreign Relations, 1948, vol. v, Part 2, p. 1427.

Memorandum by the Director of the Office of Near Eastern and African Affairs (Satterthwaite) to the Secretary of State 501.MA Palestine/5–449

[Document 632]

Memorandum by the Director of the Office of Near Eastern and African Affairs (Satterthwaite) to the Secretary of State

secret [Washington,] May 4, 1949.

Subject: Visit of Israeli Ambassador.

Discussion:

The Israeli Ambassador, Mr. Eliahu Elath, has an appointment with you at 4:15 this afternoon. He is under instructions from his Government to deliver to the Secretary a copy of a statement which has been prepared for Israeli representatives to make before the ad hoc Committee of the United Nations General Assembly when the question of the admission of Israel to the United Nations is discussed by that Committee. The background of this matter is briefly as follows:

One of the most important problems which must be cleared up before a lasting peace can be established in Palestine is the question of the disposition of the more than 700,000 Arab refugees who during the Palestine conflict fled from their homes in what is now Israeli occupied territory and are at present living as refugees in Arab Palestine and the neighboring Arab states. The December 11, 1948, resolution of the United Nations General Assembly on Palestine resolved that the refugees wishing to return to their homes and live at peace with their neighbors should be permitted to do so at the earliest practicable date. The Israelis have consistently maintained that the solution of the Arab refugee problem lies not in repatriation but in resettlement in the Arab states. Representatives of the Arab states, on the other hand, have insisted that a prerequisite to a final peace in Palestine is the acceptance by Israel of the principle of the repatriation of those Arab refugees who desire to return to their homes.

Arab and Israeli representatives are now meeting in Lausanne, Switzerland, with the Palestine Conciliation Commission to discuss a final peace settlement. Mr. Mark Ethridge, the American member of the Commission, believes that the question of the refugees is the key to the success of the Lausanne meeting and has been urging the Israelis to make a conciliatory statement accepting the principle of repatriation. If the Israelis do this, Mr. Ethridge believes the Arab representatives will be influenced to conclude a final peace with Israel.

The Department, through the Embassy in Tel Aviv and here in Washington, has been backing up Mr. Ethridge on this point. When Israeli Foreign Minister Sharett was in this country the Secretary emphasized to him the desirability of Israel’s making a conciliatory statement concerning the refugees and the President recently spoke in the same vein to President Weizmann of Israel.

The case of the admission of Israel is now up before the United Nations and several members thereof have expressed displeasure that Israel has so far disregarded the section of the December 11 General Assembly resolution concerning the repatriation of the Arab refugees.

Under these circumstances, the Israeli Government has apparently decided to make some kind of a statement on refugees in the ad hoc Committee of the General Assembly. Since the Secretary urged upon Mr. Sharett the desirability of making such a statement, the Israeli Government desires that a copy of the statement be furnished the Secretary.

Recommendation:

It is probable that the statement will not be satisfactory from our point of view in that it will not be the kind of firm acceptance of the principle of repatriation which we would like to see the Israelis make. Under these circumstances, it would be most undesirable if Israeli representatives at Lausanne and in the United Nations were to seek to give the impression that the statement had been submitted to the United States Government before it was made and had been “cleared”. It is therefore recommended that during the Ambassador’s visit you limit yourself to listening to what he has to say, to accepting the statement without reading it in his presence, and to thanking him for the Israeli Government’s courtesy in making a copy of the statement available to us. If it is impossible to avoid reading the statement in the Ambassador’s presence, it is suggested that you inform him that you will wish to consider the statement thoroughly with the officers of the Department concerned with the matter.

As today is the first anniversary of the independence of Israel, it is suggested that you congratulate the Ambassador upon this event.

Mr. Mark F. Ethridge to the Secretary of State 501.BB Palestine/5–449: Telegram

[Document 633]

Mr. Mark F. Ethridge to the Secretary of State

secret Bern, May 4, 1949—11 a. m.

676. Palun 140. On May 3, Dr. Walter Eytan as head of Israeli delegation Lausanne, made first formal appearance before PCC for purpose presenting “latest” views of Israeli Government re such outstanding matters as refugees, Jerusalem, boundaries and procedure. Substance of Eytan’s remarks, particularly re refugees, again indicated Israel had not modified its position as stated by Ben Gurion (Palun 13)1 or Comay (Palun 126).2 Intransigence of Israeli position re refugees came as considerable surprise to PCC in view of more lenient line hinted by Eytan and other Israelis during past week (Palun 139).3 It was indicative to me that Secretary’s conversation with Sharett, McDonald’s instructions (Deptel 208)4 and Secretary’s conversation with Elath and Eban (Unpal 85)5 have apparently fallen on deaf ears. This is particularly disheartening because Arab representatives are increasingly indicating disposition to come to grips with situation. Fawzi Mulki of Transjordan delegation, for example, indicated in no uncertain terms last evening that Transjordan Government considered primary objective to be quick peace. Such matters as refugees and Jerusalem, although important, were secondary and would almost solve themselves as peace was achieved. Israelis apparently fail to appreciate importance of conciliatory approach toward outstanding problems. Arab fears re public opinion at home are deprecated. Maximum concessions from Arabs appear to be more important to Israelis than constructive conclusion to recent conflict which would represent some meetings of minds. Eytan put Israeli case as follows: (a) Refugees: In order remove any possible doubt in minds of public or individual PCC members, Israel reiterates it accepts no responsibility for fact refugees are refugees. War in Palestine is real and only cause for present situation. Israel had nothing to do with flight of Arabs and sought to avoid creation refugee problem. Eytan said he had duty to emphasize Israeli view that Arabs and Arab states were responsible for war. Israel realizes, however, situation exists in Middle East in which 550,000 people, not 800,000 or more as reported, are homeless and views with concern for humanitarian and political reasons. As Israel is part of Middle East it is interested in contributing to solution of refugee problem. Israel alone could not handle problem; nor could Transjordan. Physical return to Israel is impossible socially and practically. On November 29, 1947, Israel was prepared for large Arab minority. If there had been no war matters would have developed differently both politically and economically. Flight of Arabs has made Israel Jewish territory which returning Arabs would not recognize. Partial exchange of population which has thus resulted is healthier in long run. Experience shows large minorities are troublesome and lead to instability. To return Arabs would be backward step socially and politically and would make matters worse.

Israel would be prepared to contribute to refugee assistance in 3 ways, providing some plan for large-scale international action re refugees were undertaken: (1) Return of presently separated families; (2) Compensation; (3) Technical assistance. Eytan analyzed Israeli contribution as follows:

General: Unless resettlement and rehabilitation of refugees with international assistance were to be considered further discussion with PCC would be fruitless. Israel believes Arab refugees should be resettled under Arab rule for social, political, economic and religious reasons. Israel doubts whether returning Arabs would be content under Israeli rule. Eytan doubted Israel would issue conciliatory statement indicating possibility of repatriation and if it did that Arabs would come back. Eytan cited fact that Arabs from Arab villages transferred to Israel under Israeli-Transjordan armistice were moving out of own free will and in complete absence of force or persuasion which had been strictly enjoined. Eytan doubted whether returning Arabs would be willing to accept obligations such as service in Israeli army.

(1) Return of Presently Separated Families: Israelis prepared to study whether scheme can be arranged with Arab states under which Israel would take part of refugees. Time for declaration in terms of numbers has not arrived as figure depends on scheme. Large-scale international help will be required. Israeli delegation is authorized to go into question on this basis. Israelis prepared to reunite separated families based on formula of close relationship.

(2) Compensation: Israelis prepared to pay compensation for loss of land owned and cultivated by Arab farmers. Lands owned but not cultivated would not be compensable. Israel believes compensation should be handled in reasonable way by payment into common fund for refugee use and to avoid squandering by individuals.

(3) Technical Assistance: (a) Israelis willing to place its experts at disposition of management of overall resettlement scheme. Arabs have few technicians and Israelis can help. Israel cannot, however, give technical assistance to isolated efforts but only to some general Near East scheme.

(b) Jerusalem: Israeli delegation will talk with Jerusalem Committee re Jerusalem and holy places. Otherwise, Israeli views were well known to PCC.

(c) Territorial settlement: Israel prepared to discuss frontiers with legitimately interested countries. Gaza strip would be of interest to Egypt and Transjordan but not Syria. Israel did not consider it necessary to settle all details or some political boundaries at Lausanne. Some boundary questions could be discussed in normal fashion between individual states later.

(d) Arab declarations: Israel feels PCC has exerted strong pressure on it as though Israel were “in dock”. Israel is not responsible for situation in Palestine. Israel considers major concession is due from Arab states with whom real guilt for war lies. Arab states lack courage to state they are seeking peace. Arab states are not interested in peace but in ridding themselves of refugee problem. PCC could ask Arab delegations to issue declaration re peace aims which would clear atmosphere. Thus far Arab states have been pampered. Israel would welcome Arab statement and believes Arabs would respond to PCC request.

Ethridge

1 Presumably Palun 133, identified also as telegram 312, April 20, from Jerusalem, p. 925 [Pg. 925 includes portions of Doc. 601 and Doc. 602].

2 Identified also as telegram 291, April 13, from Jerusalem, p. 911 [Pg. 911 includes portions of Doc. 591 and Doc. 592].

3 Identified also as telegram 661, May 3, from Bern, p. 968 [Pg. 968 includes portions of Doc. 627 and Doc. 628]. In a press conference held at Lausanne on April 30, Mr. Eytan made a statement on the matter which was released by the Israeli Office of Information in New York on May 2. Mr. Eytan was said to have recognized “that the refugee problem is one of the main problems confronting this conference. The Israeli delegation has come prepared to tackle it with sincerity, and above all, in the spirit of realism. We believe it to be soluble. We are prepared to help in finding a solution and to cooperate with the UN and the Arab states in its implementation, on the assumption that cooperation with the Arab states will extend to other spheres too. The solution, however, is inseparable from the general peace settlement with the Arab states.” (telegram Delga 70, May 2, 7:25 p. m., from New York, 501.BB Palestine/5–249)

4 Not printed, but see footnote 2, p. 894 [Pg. 894 includes portions of Doc. 577 and Doc. 578].

5 Identified also as telegram 544, April 28, to Bern, p. 956 [Pg. 956 includes portions of Doc. 615 and Doc. 616].

The Ambassador in Israel (McDonald) to the Secretary of State 867N.01/5–449: Telegram

[Document 634]

The Ambassador in Israel (McDonald) to the Secretary of State

confidential   us urgent Tel Aviv, May 4, 1949—2 p. m.

332. At state dinner May 3 Sharett asked me report to Department in strictest confidence that special meeting Israel-Syrian armistice negotiators to be held May 5 without presence UN officials at request Syria. Foreign Minister regards this as crucial test. He pleads for US good offices [garble] urge Colonel Zaim not insist on “rectification” of frontier. If this demand is withdrawn, Foreign Minister optimistic agreement armistice and prospect of peace negotiations.

Comment: I hope Department can act promptly.1 End Comment.

New subject: Foreign Minister told me that Israel expects issue either New York or Lausanne new and comprehensive refugee statement. Comment: I hope but I cannot be sure it will be conciliatory. End comment.2

McDonald

1 The editors have found no evidence in the Department of State files that it ordered the exercise of the good offices of the United States in this matter. On May 7, the Department advised Tel Aviv of its anxiety to receive information concerning the outcome of the Israeli-Syrian meeting of May 5 (telegram 280, 867N.01/5–449). In reply, on May 10, Ambassador McDonald stated he had been advised by General Riley that the “meeting was complete failure. Neither side would budge.” (telegram 347, 867N.01/5–1049)

2 Presumably the statement by Mr. Eytan as reported in supra.

The Consul at Jerusalem (Burdett) to the Secretary of State 867N.01/5–449: Telegram

[Document 635]

The Consul at Jerusalem (Burdett) to the Secretary of State

secret Jerusalem, May 4, 1949—3 p. m.

351. Abdullah Tel, commenting on Jewish attack near Beit Safafa, characterized it clear breach armistice and SC imposed truce. Asserted King and Transjordan Government most disturbed over precipitous action Jews when Transjordan had done everything possible meet Israeli demands. Explained Colonel Dayan after consulting Tel Aviv gave Legion “ultimatum” to withdraw from area allotted Jews by specified hour. Dayan offered delay operations only if Trans Jordan would immediately appoint new delegates to special committee arid convene committee night May 1 to complete discussion questions oil agenda. Amman refused appoint delegates immediately but gave Legion orders withdraw from area assigned Jews and take every precaution avoid incidents. Villagers resisted. Tel thought Jewish attack might be warning of what would happen in triangle if delay in timetable occurred. Was strongly critical of Arab delegates on special committee for accepting line giving areas inhabited by Arab villagers to Jews. Felt relinquishment of territory immediately after Egyptian withdrawal created especially unfavorable impression on Palestine Arabs. Said understood tentative agreement reached in special committee re Latrun and free access on Scopus and Bethlehem roads but position of Transjordan Government not yet known.

Sir Hugh Dow, British Consul General, wondered whether Jews seeking pretext seize additional territory. Felt action boded ill for turnover of section in triangle since Jews might claim Legion not able maintain order arid occupy large area. Reiterated his belief Israel so accustomed have its own way, concrete action as distinct from representations required before would cease efforts to expand.

Sent Department, repeated Amman.

Burdett

The Secretary of State to the Legation in Switzerland 501.BB Palestine/5–449: Telegram

[Document 636]

The Secretary of State to the Legation in Switzerland 1

confidential Washington, May 4, 1949—6 p. m.

us urgent

583. For Ethridge as Unpal 91. Israeli Amb called at Dept May 4 to deliver advance copy of statement on refugees which he said Eban would probably make before GA Ad Hoc Committee May 5.2 Said statement being made result US Govt suggestion.

Statement declares Arab states responsible for creation refugee problem. Israeli Govt believes solution inseparably linked with solution issues outstanding between Israel and Arab states and can only be found within final settlement creating conditions cooperation between Israel and its neighbors.

Israel anxious contribute solution problem. Study of economic, irrigation and other possible potentialities Arab states reveals greater possibilities for stable solution by resettlement Arab states rather than Israel. Israeli Govt thus contends resettlement in neighboring areas be considered as main principle of solution. “However, Israel will be ready to make its own contribution to a solution of the problem. It is not yet ascertainable either how many wish to return under conditions that may be prescribed by the Assembly or how many Israel can receive in the light of existing political and economic considerations.” Extent of Israel’s contribution settlement this problem will depend entirely on formal establishment peace and relations good neighborliness between Israel and Arab states.

Israeli Govt has already announced acceptance of obligations to make compensation for lands abandoned and previously cultivated. Reaffirms its obligation protect persons and property all communities living within its borders.

While indicating its readiness to do all possible contribute solution final settlement refugee problem, Israeli Govt hopes that those states which caused problem by their initiative in proclaiming war will face up squarely to their responsibilities and undeniable opportunities available to them for settling problem in manner beneficial their own economic needs. Immediate declaration by all govts their desire for early peace settlement would create favorable atmosphere for discussion this problem.

Acheson

1 This telegram was repeated to USUN New York, Tel Aviv, and London.

2 Mr. Eban addressed the Ad Hoc Political Committee on May 5 in connection with Israel’s application for membership in the United Nations. During the course of his address, he discussed various issues between Israel and its Arab neighbors, including the refugee question and the City of Jerusalem. A summary of his address is printed in United Nations, Official Records of the Third Session of the General Assembly, Part II, Ad Hoc Political Committee, Summary Records of Meetings, 6 April–10 May 1949, p. 227.

The Minister in Syria (Keeley) to the Secretary of State 867N.01/5–549: Telegram

[Document 637]

The Minister in Syria (Keeley) to the Secretary of State

top secret Damascus, May 5, 1949—10 a. m.

267. Mytel 260 May I.1 Zaim tells me and General Riley confirms that Counselor Tarazi of Syrian Foreign Office and Lieutenant Colonel Nasser meeting secretly on Syrian-Israeli frontier today Thursday with Shiloah and Colonel Yadin. Syrian representatives have broad powers and Zaim will also be available by telephone to instruct them if necessary to meet concessions with concessions. Moreover Zaim has reiterated to me his continued willingness personally meet Israelis representatives of equal rank (mytel 256, April 28)1 for direct discussions all outstanding issues.

Repeated Tel Aviv 26, London 74, Paris 59, Bern 5 for Ethridge PCC, Ankara 39, USUNDel New York 3, pouched Amman, Baghdad, Beirut, Cairo, Jerusalem, Jidda.

Keeley

1 Not printed.

1 Not printed.

The Chargé in Transjordan (Stabler) to the Secretary of State 867N.01/5–749: Telegram

[Document 638]

The Chargé in Transjordan (Stabler) to the Secretary of State

confidential Amman, May 7, 1949—2 p. m.

199. Legtel 194, May 4.1 King gave me following account this morning of his talk with Sharett May 5:

Meeting had taken place at Shuneh in presence of Transjordan Prime Minister. King began meeting by expressing pleasure that Sharett and Prime Minister had met and hoped agreement could be worked out.

Sharett said he gratified by appointment new Transjordan delegates to special committee as Israeli public opinion had been “shocked” to learn that committee talks suspended after meeting April 20. (Understood Transjordan representatives now Abdullah Tel and Hamad Farhan2 with Ahmad Khalil as advisor.)

Prime Minister expressed hope that outlines for peace settlement could be reached here to be implemented by delegates at Lausanne but said it appeared that Israelis proposed that only those points of interest to Israel be discussed this stage and that all Transjordan points be deferred to Lausanne. Sharett replied that on contrary Israel wished discuss and settle all points.

Sharett then stated particular concern of Israel over resumption work at potash plant and Rutenberg.3 Prime Minister countered by stating that Israel would have to agree to certain Transjordan demands before agreement could be reached on potash and Rutenberg.

Prime Minister then inquired whether Israel would agree to partition lines as basis for final settlement. Sharett stated that Arabs had never accepted partition and therefore it was now part of history.

At this point Prime Minister, who seemed to think Sharett had adopted somewhat “superior attitude” pointed out that he had never wanted war but that Jews through breach truce in Jerusalem, Deir Yassin and other incidents had forced him into it. Consequently Sharett had no right to talk to him as he would to Egyptians or others. Transjordan was entirely willing to agree to most of Israeli demands such as Latrun and Mt. Scopus but could only do so if Israel would agree to Transjordan demands. He said that most important thing was to arrive at peace settlement which was acceptable to people rather than to official bodies and which would guarantee future relationships. He did not want war and way to avoid it was firm and reasonable settlement. He pointed out Transjordan desire for outlet to sea and its concern re refugees. He was willing consider Latrun and Scopus situation if Israel would consider such matters as return Arab quarters Jerusalem.

Sharett replied that Israel was in agreement re peace and was also in agreement with Transjordan on other matters. Said that Israel agreed with Transjordan re undesirability internationalization Jerusalem and also agreed to Transjordan having outlet to sea. Re latter point stated Israel would give Transjordan free port at Haifa.

He indicated that Transjordan could not accept Haifa proposal and wanted outlet at Gaza through Beersheba. Sharett replied this not possible as it would cut Israeli territory. King then suggested Israelis should return Ramie and Lydda immediately so Transjordan could have outlet at Majdal or Ascalon.

King said meeting ended on friendly note but felt that no progress had been made. When I inquired whether he was hopeful that talks would lead to early and acceptable settlement he replied “I cannot answer yes or no—it depends on support I receive from US and others”. He indicated he would like to meet again with Sharett or Ben-Gurion.

Sent Department 199; repeated Jerusalem 99, Geneva for USDel PCC 10, London 34, Tel Aviv 8.4

Stabler

1 Not printed.

2 Secretary in the Transjordanian Government.

3 The Rutenberg Hydro-Electric Works were located at Naharim at the junction of the Jordan and Yarmuk Rivers. Chargé Stabler, on July 11, advised the Department of his recent visit to the Works, stating “It is understood that prior to the hostilities in May 1948, the Jordan Government and the Jewish Agency reached some form of agreement concerning the protection of the Hydro-Electric works. It is possible that the Jordan Government would have been able to observe this agreement if it had not been for the arrival of the Iraqi forces. When the Iraqi forces came into the area, the Israelis departed, but only after blowing up certain of the dynamos in the main dynamo building. Later the Iraqi finished the job, even removing numerous machines. … The area has been under the control of the Arab Legion since the departure of the Iraqi troops three months ago. All looting and damage has been stopped by the Legion and the area is under guard. … It is quite obvious that the Rutenberg Hydro-Electric works can only be operated again by an agreement between Jordan and Israel. Jordan, on its part, is incapable of operating such a works by itself and, moreover, the Israelis can control the flow of the Jordan. Israel, on the other hand, cannot commence operations of the works as all the buildings are in Jordan territory. In addition, Jordan can control the flow of the Yarmuk River. It would appear that it would take some time yet to reach an agreement on the operation of the Rutenberg Hydro-Electric Works as it remains, along with the Dead Sea Potash Works, an important bargaining point for Jordan.” (Despatch 65 from Amman, 890i.6463/7–1149)

4 Tel Aviv reported, on May 10, that the Foreign Office had confirmed the meeting of Mr. Sharett with King Abdullah on May 5 and had “informally indicated no progress had resulted from discussion which was described as ‘friendly but fruitless.’” (telegram 348, 867N.01/5–1049)

The Secretary of State to the Legation in Lebanon 501.BB Palestine/4–2949: Telegram

[Document 639]

The Secretary of State to the Legation in Lebanon

secret Washington, May 7, 1949—4 p. m.

225. Pls take early opportunity resume conversation reported urtel 217, May 4,1 expressing Dept’s appreciation over instructions to Lebanese delegation to cooperate fully with PCC at Lausanne in solving refugee problem, and Lebanese intention use its influence with Arab states to induce reasonable attitude.

You should inform FonMin that Dept is aware of sensitive Christian–Moslem balance and would regret any disturbance to Lebanon’s equilibrium. We believe, however, that Lebanon could agree to accept for permanent resettlement reasonable portion of refugees now in Lebanon, selected on basis half Christians half Moslems, in order maintain equilibrium. USG fearful that failure Lebanon indicate agreement to principle resettlement would materially lessen willingness other Arab states to share in burden which Lebanon has so generously assumed up to present, and might accordingly result in perpetuation large-scale refugee problem in Lebanon. US is therefore hopeful that in own interest Lebanon will express willingness in principle accept some refugees for permanent resettlement, as humane and constructive example to other Arab states to take similar action.

Inform FonMin we are continuing press Israel re repatriation and we agree that compensation by Israel is necessary.2

Acheson

1 Not printed, but see footnote 2, p. 966 [Pg. 966 includes portions of Doc. 625 and Doc. 626].

2 This telegram was repeated to Bern for Mr. Ethridge. Beirut replied on May 18, advising of the belief of the Foreign Minister that “it is unlikely Lebanon will be able receive many Palestine refugees for permanent settlement. For possible effect on other Arab states, however, he agreed in principle to accept as many as could be absorbed into Lebanon … He expressed belief that number can never exceed token or symbolic acceptance” (telegram 237, 501.BB Palestine/5–1849).

Memorandum by the Secretary of State to the President 867N.48/5–949

[Document 640]

Memorandum by the Secretary of State to the President

secret Washington, May 9, 1949.

Subject: Estimated Cost Palestine Refugee Program

1. An expenditure of $250–275 million over the next three years is estimated to be necessary for repatriation and resettlement of 700,000 Arab refugees on a self-sustaining basis (Tab A).1 Costs may be greater if a coordinated program cannot be carried out with full cooperation of the states concerned on the basis of sound planning and administration. The program as contemplated would involve capital development projects such as irrigation, rural industries and village development, as well as an interim relief and work program (Tab B).

2. Overall responsibility for the refugees should remain with Israel and the Arab states. Outside assistance should be under United Nations auspices. It is in the national interest of the United States, however, that the program be carried out successfully, and the United States should be prepared to aid Israel and the Arab Governments to this end through appropriate financial and technical assistance.

3. In order to assure success of the program the United States should be prepared to furnish as a grant that portion of the total cost that remains after loans from the International and Export-Import Banks, compensation by Israel and contributions by the states concerned, Great Britain and other United Nations states, and by private and commercial organizations. On the basis of estimated maximum and minimum contributions from these sources, it would be necessary to ask the United States Congress for a contribution to this program in the form of a grant of $120–150 million over the next three years, or $40–50 million a year. No plan will be made, however, involving contributions by the United States as a grant exceeding about 50 per cent of the total cost of the program, based on best available estimates of amounts likely to be forthcoming from the other sources listed above, without seeking new authority.

4. The segment of this assistance which the International Bank and the Eximbank may choose to finance is uncertain in view of the financial risks involved. For that reason participation of the banks is assumed to the extent of only $15 million as a minimum and $50 million as a maximum.2

Dean Acheson

[Annex 1]

Memorandum on the Palestine Refugee Problem 3

secret [Washington,] May 4, 1949.

Palestine Refugee Problem

financing repatriation and resettlement of palestine refugees

Approximately 700,000 refugees from the Palestine hostilities, now located principally in Arab Palestine, Transjordan, Lebanon and Syria, will require repatriation to Israel or resettlement in the Arab states.

1. Total costs of repatriation and resettlement of refugees are estimated at a minimum of $267,500,000, to be expended over a three year period. This includes $30,000,000 for repatriation to Israel, $160 million for resettlement in Arab states, $27,500,000 for direct and; work relief, and $50,000,000 for subsidiary development projects necessary to achieve balanced development of the economies of the Arab states.

2. If Israel will agree to and cooperate in the repatriation of 200,000 refugees, it is estimated (see Table I) that they can be returned to farms and villages in which dwellings have been rebuilt or restored, and that they can be supplied with farm animals, tools and utensils which have been lost or destroyed, with seed for the first planting and food enough to last until the first harvest, at an average cost of $150 per person. Approximately half of the estimated $30,000,000 cost of repatriation represents capital items which would restore the net worth of the Arab properties. The other half represents for the most part wages to be paid to the refugees for work leading to their resettlement, which would go to supply food, clothing and other basic necessities to the dependents of the workers until they become self-sustaining.

3. The 500,000 remaining refugees must be resettled in Arab states. In view of the fact that Transjordan, Arab Palestine and the Lebanon do not provide an economic basis for settlement of all the refugees now within their borders, additional land must be sought elsewhere. Among the Arab states which can be considered for large scale absorption of additional refugees only Syria offers land which can be prepared for resettlement on a self-sustaining basis over the next 2–3 years. Iraq cannot be counted upon for any substantial resettlement because of political difficulties and because development will take 5–10 years.

For projects similar to the Jezirah Valley and the Ghab Swamp in Syria and for development of the Jordan Valley in Transjordan, it is estimated (see Table II) that 500,000 persons can be settled on land newly acquired and irrigated at a cost of about $320 per capita. On that basis $160,000,000 would provide for about 85,000 families of six persons. Each family would be settled on 8 acres of land, given the facilities to build houses of the type to which they are accustomed, supplied with farm animals, seeds, simple tools and household utensils, and paid enough in wages to provide food, clothing and other necessities until the first harvest. Resettlement cost for nonagricultural refugees, who will in many cases require working capital as well as homes and other facilities, is assumed to be the same. Included in the cost are such items as schools, roads, water supply, sanitation, and other minimum community facilities. There is also an allowance for limited expansion of government administration and services in the new areas. About 40% of this cost or $64,000,000 involves capital items which will increase net worth.

4. Although every effort should be made to provide for the sustenance of the refugees through work payments, on resettlement projects, relief feeding will continue to be necessary for as many as a quarter of the refugees for the first year. In addition, although there is an ample wage component in the estimated resettlement cost to employ all able-bodied refugees, many jobs must go to local citizens and it is estimated that as many as a quarter of the employable refugees cannot work directly on resettlement projects in the first year. Even though such refugees are put to useful work it must be budgeted for separately. It is estimated that the proportion remaining on direct and work relief Should be halved in the second year, and halved again in the third year. On the basis of the cost experience of the UNRPR program of approximately $30.0 per person annually for direct relief, and an estimated cost of twice this amount for persons supported through work relief, the refugees on relief and work relief would require $15,750,000 the first year, $7,875,000 the second year and $3,937,500 the third year, or a total of approximately $27,500,000.

5. Capital outlays in addition to those required for refugee resettlement must be made if balanced development programs in the countries concerned are to be assured, and some consideration given to their own development requirements apart from those associated with refugees. For additional expenditures of the magnitude of $50,000,000, allotted to the various countries in accordance with a regional plan, it should be possible to increase chances for success of the program and to accomplish considerable agricultural and other development for the benefit of the present population of the area. This is the most flexible portion of the program and may be reduced if funds are not available.

6. A relatively small amount of financial assistance is counted on through International Bank and Eximbank loans. At the present time both institutions are cautious of lending to the governments of the Near East area. Where governments have specific revenues, such as oil royalties which can be assigned directly for debt service, the banks are inclined to regard loan applications more favorably; however, none of the countries concerned have oil production. Unfortunately Syria, which is the most immediate prospect for large-scale resettlement, has in prospect only transit fees from the Trans-Arabian Pipeline which may amount to less than $500,000 annually. Syria’s poor general financial condition, together with a drastic adverse trade balance, are other factors which make lending by either bank relatively difficult, Transjordan is not a member of the International Bank.

7. The minimum program capable of repatriating and resettling the refugees over the next three years will cost, as shown above, about $267,500,000. The United States will probably be called on to finance the total costs that remain after the following contributions, which are given as possible minimum and maximum figures in the light of the limited evidence available:

Loans from International and Exim Banks $15,000,000 to $50,000,000

Compensation from Israel 30,000,000 to 50,000,000

Contributions from other states and organizations 25,000,000 to 50,000,000

Assuming maximum contributions from these sources of $150,000,000 the United States contribution would be $117,500,000. Assuming minimum contributions from these sources, or $70,000,000, the United States contribution could still be limited to $150,000,000 by reducing capital outlays under Paragraph 5 above. A portion of funds appropriated under the “Point Four” Program would be applicable against this amount. Remaining funds would have to be sought through Congressional appropriations. It is assumed that expenditures would take place in three equal installments of $40–50,000,000 per year. It should be recognized that prolonging the program over a greater number of years may reduce annual costs somewhat, but would add considerably to the total cost because of the added direct and work relief that would be required.

[Annex 2]

Table I

Repatriation of 200,000 refugees in Israel ($150 per capita)
(in millions of dollars)

Item Total Cost Capital Items

Irrigation $5. 0 $1. 7

Dwellings 5. 0 . 2

Farm Tools and Utensils 3. 3 3. 3

Farm Animals 8. 1 8. 0

Assoc. Facilities, incl. transportation 8. 6 1. 8

Total $30. 0 $15. 0

[Annex 3]

Table II

Resettlement of 500,000 refugees in Arab states
($320 per capita)
(in millions of dollars)

Item Total Cost Capital Items

Land $14. 2 $14. 2

Irrigation 28. 4 9. 5

Dwelling’s 42. 5 2. 1

Farm Tools & Utensils 9. 2 9. 2

Farm Animals 23. 1 23. 1

Assoc. Facilities, such as Schools 17. 0 5. 1

Transportation costs, expansion of government facilities, etc. 25. 6 4. 2

Total $160. 0 $67. 4

1 Tabs A and B are not found attached to the Department’s record copy of the memorandum of May 9 but are attached to the one of May 4 (see footnote 2, p. 970 [Pg. 970 includes portions of Doc. 629 and Doc. 630]). It is the opinion of the editors that the same attachments accompanied both memoranda to the White House. Tab A is printed infra. Tab B, dated April 21 and entitled “Estimated Costs of Implementing Refugee Settlement,” is not printed.

2 This memorandum is identical to the one of May 4 (see footnote 2, p. 970 [Pg. 970 includes portions of Doc. 629 and Doc. 630]), except for paragraph numbered 3, which reads as follows in the version of May 4: “In order to assure success of the program the United States should be prepared to finance that portion not to exceed about 50% of the total cost that remains after loans from international sources and contributions by Israel, the Arab states, Great Britain and other UN states, and private and commercial organizations. On the basis of estimated maximum and minimum contributions from these sources, it win be necessary to ask the United States Congress for contribution to this program in the form of a grant of $120–150 million over the next three years, or $40–50 million a year.” Secretary Acheson discussed the estimated cost of the Palestine refugee program with President Truman on May 12. His memorandum of the conversation records that “The President said he would speak to the Director of the Budget about the matter this afternoon, in an effort to get us a prompt reply.” (Secretary’s Memoranda, Lot 53 D 444, Secretary’s Memos)

3 Presumably prepared in the Office of the Coordinator on Palestine Refugee Matters.

The Minister in Switzerland (Vincent) to the Secretary of State 501.BB Palestine/5–949: Telegram

[Document 641]

The Minister in Switzerland (Vincent) to the Secretary of State

secret Bern, May 9, 1949—noon.

699. Palun 142. For the Secretary from Ethridge. Have reservation on TWA flight leaving Geneva May 24 and feel that I must make it. Hope very much that deputy will be quickly designated.

Situation here, leaving aside reaction to US sponsorship of resolution of admission, on which we have no detail yet, is roughly this:

Jerusalem: Reported in separate telegram (see Palun 143)1 from Barco.2 General situation is that Jerusalem Committee about in agreement and we will have no difficulty in getting agreement in committee or Commission on basis of secretariat paper with some amendments. Tactically, however, it would be mistake to advance plan now because it would only confuse other issues. My idea is that plan should be put through Commission after other matters settled and I have discouraged Barco from pushing for agreement now. Feel sure that can be attained when time is ripe.

Negotiations: Although Arab States say they want to negotiate en bloc through Commission Sassoon has already made contact with Transjordan and Egyptian delegations. Both Israelis and Arabs have to think about meetings. Eytan thinks he is making some progress with them. Arabs have assured me that nothing substantive discussed and that they are determined to negotiate en bloc. I have responded that they have a right to do that if they desire but that would presuppose agreement among themselves on such questions as the disposition of Arab Palestine, the Gaza strip, territorial compensation from Israel for territory held beyond partition plan, disposition of refugees who would not be taken back or did not want to go back, and other problems. Obviously they have not agreed among themselves and wanted time to think over what I said. They have asked for a meeting with the Commission on Tuesday and in meantime have appointed Boulas of Arab Palestine Refugee Committee as liaison man among themselves.

Arabs have been urging Commission to present plan to them. They want to be in position to say that peace was imposed by UN. In fact two of them have told me that if I will draft a peace plan they will consider it as “instruction”. I have of course refused to do so both on behalf of the US and UN. I have told them that since we have pressed Israeli delegation in two public and several private meetings to reveal its position on all matters we must also press Arabs to reveal their position. The Commission would then undertake to ascertain any common ground and would have a basis for negotiation. If the viewpoints were irreconcilable and the two parties asked for it the Commission would present a working paper and agenda as basis for discussion.

Arabs are holding meetings over week-end to undertake to get together. All of them are most anxious for peace, particularly Egypt and Transjordan.

On the basis, no doubt, of Zaim’s statement to Keeley, Syria has modified her position. Zeineddine3 until yesterday held stubbornly to position Syria would not consider anything but refugees first. He is now willing to discuss refugees and territorial settlement jointly and expressed in private conversation with me Syria’s willingness to take up to 250,000 refugees providing Syria was compensated territorially. He says he has no instruction from Zaim to demand it but he regards Syria’s price as panhandle of Palestine, part of eastern Galilee and western Galilee to Acre. He disclosed that Syria is holding up armistice negotiations not because of minor rectification of border but in an effort to get in one agreement, whether in armistice or at Lausanne, cession of much greater territory.

Eytan has told me that Egypt had rather hand over Gaza strip with its 80,000 population and 245,000 refugees to Israel than to Transjordan. That confirmed by Transjordan representative who feels, however, that Egypt will hold on to Gaza strip and give it to nobody. Egypt is interested primarily in shortening her line with Israel which would be accomplished by return of southern Negeb to Arab control.

It is obvious that while Arab delegation are willing to tell me and perhaps other members of Commission what they want they have not yet brought themselves to where they will tell each other, except I am sure they have agreed that what is left of presently held Arab Palestine will go to Transjordan.

Arabs have frankly admitted that they are waiting outcome at Lake Success before getting into real negotiations. Egyptians said to me, “we have weapon and we are using it.” Commission feeling is that if Israel wins at Lake Success she will become hopelessly intransigeant and if she loses Israel will endeavor maintain her present position as best she can while looking forward to September session. Commission feels that if Arabs win they will feel more confidence but not intransigeance and will be more secure with public opinion at home to the point that they can go ahead with negotiations. In any case Lake Success has certainly delayed work of Commission and may further delay it after issue is settled.

When the USDel here has received detail of US sponsorship of resolution of admission will send reaction and comments. In meantime members are staying in their hotel rooms. [Ethridge.]

Vincent

1 Identified also as telegram 698, May 9, noon, from Bern, not printed.

2 James W. Barco, Adviser to the United States Delegation at Lausanne.

3 Farid Zeineddine, member of the Syrian Delegation at Lausanne and Acting Secretary-General of the Syrian Ministry for Foreign Affairs.

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in Israel 501.BB Palestine/5–949: Telegram

[Document 642]

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in Israel

secret Tel Aviv, May 9, 1949—7 p. m.

us urgent

282. Info reaching Dept re Syrian armistice negots indicates offer by Zaim of personal talk with Ben-Gurion re outstanding questions, but that possible offer has not reached Ben-Gurion.1 Pls bring this offer to notice Ben-Gurion in appropriate manner, indicating interest USG in view importance armistice agreement to success. Lausanne discussions.2

Acheson

1 New York, on May 8, had advised that “Zaim has offered talk personally with Ben-Gurion re armistice lines and other outstanding questions. … Bunche suspects that Zaim’s proposal may not have been brought to Ben-Gurion’s attention. Bunche suggests that it would be helpful if Department would manage to bring Zaim offer to notice of Ben-Gurion.” (telegram 573, 501.BB Palestine/5–849)

2 This telegram was repeated to New York and Damascus and to Bern for the U.S. Delegation at Lausanne. In reply on May 12, Ambassador McDonald stated he had spoken to the Israeli Prime Minister about a personal talk with the Syrian leader and was informed that he had known of this suggestion from the beginning (telegram 357 from Tel Aviv, 501.BB Palestine/5–1249).

The Department of State to the British Embassy 867N.48/5–1049

[Document 643]

The Department of State to the British Embassy

secret

Aide-Mémoire

The Department of State wishes to express appreciation to the Government of the United Kingdom for its views1 concerning a plan of operations which might be adopted with respect to settlement of the Palestine refugee problem. The Department of State is pleased to note the United Kingdom’s general agreement with the Proposed Plan of Action2 submitted by Mr. McGhee during his recent visit to London.

With reference to the specific comments of the United Kingdom concerning establishment of a survey group, the Department of State is of the opinion that adoption of the procedure suggested by the United Kingdom would imply the assumption of direct responsibility with respect to solution of the refugee problem by the United States in conjunction with the United Kingdom. This Government is not prepared to accept such direct responsibility for solution of the refugee problem. Moreover, it is considered that the establishment of a survey group by the Conciliation Commission is clearly within its terms of reference as set forth in the General Assembly Resolution of December 11, 1948, and that the Conciliation Commission would not be fully discharging its functions if it failed to take such action. The United States does not wish to undermine the authority of the Commission through unilateral or joint action within the range of the latter’s competence.

The Department of State agrees with the United Kingdom that the proposed survey group should be small, that it should consist of the best qualified experts obtainable, and that it should be free to make its survey without supervision or interference. It is assumed, however, that these objectives could be achieved under the auspices of the Conciliation Commission if United States and United Kingdom representatives were appointed by the Commission to keep positions in the survey group, in recognition of our special interests in the refugee problem. The United Nations Relief for Palestine Refugees may be cited as an example of a United Nations body which was established on sound organizational lines and has carried out its task without interference, essentially under American and British leadership.

The Department of State agrees that it would be desirable for the states concerned to associate themselves with and participate in the work of the survey group. Indeed, it is considered necessary for the success of the group that it be created as a result of the invitation of the states concerned and with their full cooperation, to assist them in carrying out developmental projects of their own choice.

In view of the urgency of the refugee problem, the Department of State agrees that first consideration should be given to projects for which basic surveys have already been made.

The Department of State recognizes that assistance to the states concerned for execution of the refugee program will be required over and above loans likely to be obtained from the International Bank and other fiscal institutions, and is gratified to note the assistance which the United Kingdom has already given Transjordan through the loan of a million pounds.

With respect to paragraph 4 of the United Kingdom statement,3 the Department of State is giving further consideration to the type of organization required to carry out any program recommended by the survey group, and the proper auspices for such an organization. The views of the United Kingdom will be carefully considered in this connection; however, it is not felt that final decision need be made at the present time.

Washington, May 10, 1949.

1 The British views were expressed in the form of a telegram from the Foreign Office to the British Embassy here. The Department copy of this document is undated but was received in Mr. McGhee’s office on May 2. It is filed with the Aide-Mémoire of May 10.

2 See annex 3, p. 939 [Pg. 939 is part of Doc. 608].

3 Paragraph 4 of the Foreign Office telegram cited in footnote 1 immediately above stated that the task of maintaining the refugees and organizing their resettlement should revert “to full and overt United Nations authority” and that a specialized agency of the United Nations would best carry out the function.

The Consul at Geneva (Troutman) to the Secretary of State 501.BB Palestine/5–1049: Telegram

[Document 644]

The Consul at Geneva (Troutman) to the Secretary of State

restricted Geneva, May 10, 1949—11 a. m.

410. Palun 145. From Ethridge. After PCC meetings with Arabs at Beirut and with Israel in Tel Aviv, commissioners had informal meetings with Israelis in Jerusalem re preliminary measures which Israel might take without prejudice its interests for purpose creating atmosphere favorable to success of Lausanne talks. During past week Israeli delegation has informed PCC re these measures as follows: (1) Israeli declaration re refugee problem: Recognizing refugee problem is one of main problems confronting conference. Israeli delegation prepared to tackle with sincerity and in spirit of optimism. We believe problem to be soluble and are prepared to do everything possible to help in arriving at solution. We shall cooperate with UN and with Arab States in implementing solution of problem on assumption that cooperation with Arab States will extend to other spheres as well.

(2) Israeli declaration re proprietary rights of refugees and payment of compensation: Pact that absentee property has been placed under custodian (see paragraph 5) indicates Israel’s general attitude. Israel accepts principle of compensation for land abandoned and previously cultivated. Proprietary rights of refugees are recognized by Israel for purposes of such compensation but recognition does not bind government as far as concerns use or restitution of lands involved. Government reserves right to enact legislation for more rational use of absentee property and for purpose of guarding against speculation in such property without prejudice to payment of compensation or to such limited measures of repatriation as may be agreed upon.

(3) Israeli declaration re rights of minorities: Israel fully respected rights of minorities within its border and would punish anyone infringing these rights.

(4) Israeli assurance re blocked accounts: Israel has no intention of confiscating blocked Arab accounts in Israeli banks. Funds would be available to proper owners on conclusion of peace, subject to such general currency regulations as may be operative at time.

(5) A suspension of application of absentee law: Law at present in force placing of refugee property in category of “enemy property” under custodian. Custodian acts as trustee for absentee owners whose property is administered in their interest and as far as possible preserved against deterioration after manner of similar custodianships in other countries.

(6) Undertaking re deterioration of refugee property, see paragraph 5.

(7) Employment of certain number refugee workers in Israel, e.g., port of Haifa, orange groves, et cetera: under consideration by Israeli delegation.

Re return of presently separated families (Palun 140)1 Eytan has informed PCC following its request Israel would be willing as preliminary measure to take census by inviting Arabs resident in Israel to furnish details concerning relatives who are now refugees and who would wish and be eligible to apply for repatriation under conditions stated (genuine relatives of close degree of consanguinity and commencement of repatriation not to begin until final Israeli DPS [sic] Arab settlement). [Ethridge.]

Troutman

1 Identified also as telegram 676, May 4, from Bern, p. 975 [Pg. 975 is part of Doc. 633].

The Consul at Geneva (Troutman) to the Secretary of State 501.BB Palestine/5–1049: Telegram

[Document 645]

The Consul at Geneva (Troutman) to the Secretary of State

confidential Geneva, May 10, 1949—11 a. m.

411. Palun 146. From Ethridge. PCC members and Israeli delegates recently discussed informally possibility of commencing Israeli-Arab negotiations through device of preamble of general principle in which both parties could agree. It was thought such an agreement would create favorable atmosphere and provide point of departure for further discussions and for further agreement. Bunche utilized this device to initiate discussion and agreement at Rhodes.

Eytan recently provided PCC with rough draft which might serve as basis for discussion on principles governing future relations and territorial settlement between Israel and Arab states. Israeli delegation did not consider itself bound to accept draft and presented as preliminary suggestion to facilitate negotiations. Draft agreement consists of preamble and two articles. Preamble cites pertinent paragraphs GA Resolution December 11 and PCC meeting at Lausanne. First article refers to Palestine war, Middle East peace and UN charter. Three principles affirmed: (1) Continued observance Armistice agreements;

(2) Eight to security, freedom and sovereignty;

(3) Agreement prerequisite to establishment diplomatic relations and economic cooperation.

Second article contains definition, of boundaries (in blank), undertaking to respect such boundaries, reservation re subsequent boundary changes, contact between frontier authorities to prevent incidents, settlement of frontier disputes by peaceful means through negotiations and arbitration.

PCC was of opinion draft preamble beginning statement of general principles rather than detailed formulation would prove more acceptable to Arab Delegates at this stage. PCC considered Article 1, subparagraphs 1 and 3 unnecessary and unwise respectively. PCC believed it would be preferable to consider agreement along lines of Article 2 after it proved possible to bring Arabs to agreement on less controversial matters.

Present PCC thinking tends to short agreement containing preamble and one article. Preamble would cite GA Resolution December 11 and Lausanne meeting. First and only article would declare intention not to resort to threat or use of force in settlement to any dispute arising from situation in Palestine and to settle any such dispute or question by peaceful means.

PCC draft is being informally discussed with Israeli and Arab delegates. [Ethridge.]

Troutman

The Ambassador in Iraq (Crocker) to the Secretary of State 867N.01/5–1049: Telegram

[Document 646]

The Ambassador in Iraq (Crocker) to the Secretary of State

secret
priority Baghdad, May 10, 1949—1 p. m.

263. In striking contrast to meeting with Foreign Minister reported Embtel 260, May 7,1 was my conversation with Prime Minister Nuri yesterday. Speaking dispassionately, Nuri expressed views along following lines: 1. First and foremost necessity to solution Palestine and attendant problems is determination territorial boundaries.

2. If some authorities would guarantee Israel would be made to abide by November 29, 1947 and December 11, 1948 UNGA Resolutions, real hope for liquidation Palestine problem would ensue.

3. Implementation such policy would automatically create living space in such places as Western Galilee and Lydda and Ramleh areas to permit absorption as much as 350,000 refugees.

4. Such considerable reduction in number refugees would enable Arab States examine how best they could help in solving problem of remaining refugees.

5. Coincidentally, fullest possible economic development would enable Iraq (a) settle during first four or five years bulk nomadic Iraqi tribesmen who wish make homes in fixed areas and own land and (b) plan on settling Palestine refugees after needs Iraqi tribesmen are met.

6. Such economic development should create conditions which would make possible five or six years hence adoption policy envisaging considerable refugee immigration into Iraq.

7. If UN fails take necessary action in time to stop Israel’s constant flaunting [flouting] of solemn UN resolution, probably only help Iraq might extend would be to consider advisability arrange voluntary exchange on pro rata basis of Iraqi Jews for Palestine Arabs.

8. Expulsion Iraqi Jews to make room for Arab refugees not policy Iraqi Government would normally adopt as Iraq treats its Jews as Iraqi nationals entitled same rights as Iraqi Arabs. If pressed too hard, however, firebrand Iraqis might take matter into own hands and cause untold misery to thousands innocent persons.

Citing foregoing as some of reasons why he hoped UN would take effective measures to make Israel abide by earlier UN resolutions, Nuri expressed wish to help liquidate Palestine problem. His unwillingness participate Lausanne meeting springs from his sincere conviction that UN has done little to make Israel accept its decisions while at same time has done everything possible make Arabs accept fait accomplis created by Israeli violations UN resolutions. Now is time for UN rectify situation and enable Arabs work towards development stability and security in Middle East.

Comment: Nuri, who suffered fainting spell in Majlis2 two days ago and appeared far from well yesterday, spoke with true ring of sincerity. If we could satisfy him that UN will make Israel accept UN decisions, he would probably be best man in Iraq to help us move ahead in trying solve Palestine and refugee problem. If, however, we persist pressing Iraq to fall in line without exacting positive commitment from Israel in advance, we fear that his attitude because fear of internal upheaval will harden and our task will to that extent become even more difficult.

Sent Department 263, repeated London 93, Jerusalem 25, Tel Aviv 20, Bern 5 for Ethridge, pouched Arab capitals.

Crocker

1 Not printed; it advised that Ambassador Crocker had communicated to Foreign Minister Jamali the substance of the circular telegram of April 29 (p. 959 [Pg. 959 includes portions of Doc. 618 and Doc. 619]). The Foreign Minister was said to have “countered with number unrealistic and intransigent remarks indicating Iraq adamantly opposed taking any measure help alleviate refugee problem.” (501.BB Palestine/5–49)

2 The Iraqi Parliament.

Editorial Note [Document 647]

Editorial Note

The General Assembly, on May 11, considered the proposal to admit Israel to membership in the United Nations. Senator Austin noted that the Ad Hoc Political Committee of the Assembly had recommended the proposal by a large majority and that the United States was cosponsor of the draft resolution to effect the admission. The text of his statement is printed in the Department of State Bulletin, May 22, 1949, page 655.

The Assembly voted 37 to 12 in favor of the draft resolution. There were 9 abstentions, including the United Kingdom and Turkey. The United States, the Soviet Union, and France were among those voting affirmatively. The President of the Assembly thereupon declared that Israel had been admitted to the United Nations. The Assembly’s proceedings on May 11 are printed in United Nations, Official Records of the Third Session of the General Assembly, Part II (hereinafter cited as GA (III)), Plenary Meetings, pages 330, 331. The text of resolution 273 (III) of May 11 appears in GA (III), Resolutions, 5 April–18 May 1949, page 18.

Hassouna Pasha, Under Secretary of the Egyptian Foreign Office, expressed to Chargé Patterson on May 12 “disillusioned acquiescence in an accomplished fact with regret that UN had found precipitate action necessary in respect of new state which had not yet shown regard for international obligations, respect for which customarily precedes recognition or acceptance into a fraternity of nations.” (Telegram 466, May 12, 5 p. m., from Cairo, 501.BB Palestine/5–1249)

The Israeli Ambassador (Elath) to the Secretary of State 501.BB Palestine/5–1149

[Document 648]

The Israeli Ambassador (Elath) to the Secretary of State

Washington, May 11, 1949.

My Dear Mr. Secretary: I should like to express the deep gratitude of my Government for the invaluable support given by the United States in the discussion of Israel’s membership application in the Ad Hoc Committee of the United Nations. I believe that the draft resolution gained enormously in effectiveness and prestige through the formal association of the United States with it.

I should like you to know that the conversation which Mr. Eban and I were privileged to have with you on April 26th has had a deep effect on the Israeli Government. In formulating our attitudes on the various outstanding problems, we took care to keep certain principles in mind. In the first place we strongly upheld the right of the General Assembly to be regarded as the ultimate moral arbiter in issues of deadlock or difficulty. It was made clear by our representative again and again that in so far as we find difficulties in the December 11, 1948, Resolution we aspired to resolve them by agreement, not by defiance. We shall stretch ourselves to the utmost to bring our policy in conformity with United Nations resolutions, or if necessary, to seek authority for any divergences by appeal to the General Assembly itself.

I believe that our delegation was successful in impressing upon the United Nations that the Jerusalem question required the discussion and exchange of new proposals, which, while in accord with the December 11th Resolution, take proper account of realities and of the welfare and sentiment of the population. We were gratified to understand from you on April 26th that in your view any international regime established in Jerusalem should have as its primary concern the protection and control of Holy Places and religious institutions, rather than actual administration of the City, which now enjoys the blessings of peace and orderly life, both in its Arab and Jewish sections. We have been able, with nothing but the influence of argument and discussion, to satisfy the apprehensions of most of the Catholic countries of Latin America. Seventeen out of twenty of these countries have supported our application under no kind of pressure but that of explanation and debate.

Every approach to a genuine peace discussion brings nearer the hope of a successful settlement of the refugee problem. Throughout the Ad Hoc Committee’s discussions our representative maintained the view, upheld by the Conciliation Commission, that the “final solution of this problem will be found within the framework of the economic and social rehabilitation of all the countries of the Near East.” We have endeavoured in all our recent statements to avoid any negative attitudes, and we look forward to an agreement at Lausanne defining the exact contribution of each Government concerned, as well as of the international community. We have noted the Conciliation Commission’s judgment that “the refugee problem cannot be permanently solved unless other political questions, notably the question of boundaries, are also solved.” Accordingly, our delegation at Lausanne has taken the initiative in asking for an immediate discussion and settlement of outstanding territorial questions. You may have observed that in the debates of the Committee our representative, mindful of our conversation with you, pledged Israel to a settlement of boundaries by agreement through the same methods of negotiation and reciprocal concessions which has had beneficial results in the armistice negotiations. All governments understand that an attitude of give and take may be necessary if an agreed settlement is to be reached at an early date.

It is our hope that the atmosphere of the peace conference at Lausanne will enable our Government to explore the paths of conciliation in more detail and with greater freedom than could possibly be done at a public forum, such as the General Assembly. The United States may have noticed that our delegation at Lake Success austerely refused to seek any immediate tactical advantage by obscuring the real difficulties still outstanding. Despite the sharp and critical scrutiny which our policy of candour invited, we insisted on bringing our difficulties and reservations into the open light of day. It is therefore all the more significant that an impressive majority of disinterested international opinion has expressed its confidence in Israel in full and detailed knowledge of difficulties which we have neither dissembled nor concealed.

I should like to assure you in conclusion, Mr. Secretary, that the settlement of outstanding questions by agreement with the Arab States under the auspices of the United Nations remains the over-riding objective of my Government’s policy.

Accept [etc.]

E. Elath

Mr. Mark F. Ethridge to the Secretary of State 501.BB Palestine/5–1249: Telegram

[Document 649]

Mr. Mark F. Ethridge to the Secretary of State

restricted Lausanne, May 12, 1949—3 p. m.

Palun 148. During past four days informal talks have taken place between PCC, Israel, Arab delegations re signature protocol which would permit Israeli Arab talks through PCC to commence. Arab delegation desired that: (1) first objective conversations be solution refugee question; (2) attached map showing [19]47 partition lines be used as base for territorial talks. Israeli delegation was willing adopt device protocol with map showing partition lines. PCC in agreement but did not wish restrict talks to refugee question only. Arab delegation after delay several days during which Syrian delegation apparently took obstructive line finally agreed PCC formulation.

On May 12 PCC Israeli Arab delegations separately signed protocol with map attached.

Protocol is as follows:

“The UN PCC anxious achieve quickly possible objectives GA resolution 11, December 1948 re refugees, respect for their rights and preservation of their property, as well as territorial and other questions, has proposed to Israeli delegation and Arab States delegation that working document attached hereto be taken as basis for talks with Commission.

The interested delegations have accepted proposal with understanding that exchanges of views which be carried on by Commission with two parties will bear upon territorial adjustments necessary to above indicated objectives.”

Map consists of Palestine outline on which [19]47 partition lines for Jewish State, Arab State international area of Jerusalem are indicated. Map is not labelled “plan of partition”.

Israeli delegation signed with reservations that: (1) Israeli delegation could not be party to any exchange of views with Syrian delegation until armistice agreement was concluded;

(2) No communication re protocol was made to press and;

(3) Signing in no way prejudiced right of Israeli delegation to express itself freely on matters at issue on which it fully reserved its position.

PCC has no objection to reservations but pointed out: (1) Protocol would be applicable to direct Israeli-Syrian talks when governments themselves wished commence;

(2) UN official press reports will probably appear in future as past re conference PCC matters (Re Palun 147).1 PCC and its press officer would not in such circumstances be barred from replying or commenting and;

(3) Both Israeli and Arab Delegations had right to free expression their position at all times.

Arab delegations met reservation of Israeli delegation re Syria by reaffirming their right to discuss all matters re Palestine with PCC. Israeli Arab talks through PCC under protocol may thus continue.

PCC also decided to establish subcommittee for general matters including particularly territorial questions. States members of PCC will be represented by De la Tour Dupin for France, Yenisey for Turkey, Wilkins for US. Israeli Arab views re territorial questions under protocol will be sought by commission.

Ethridge

1 Identified also as telegram 412, May 10, 11 a. m., from Geneva, not printed.

The Consul at Jerusalem (Burdett) to the Secretary of State 867N.01/5–1249: Telegram

[Document 650]

The Consul at Jerusalem (Burdett) to the Secretary of State

secret Jerusalem, May 12, 1949—4 p. m.

363. During call with Hare on French Consul General Neuville, latter expressed following views:

[Here follow two paragraphs giving these views.]

Comments:

1.—Military observers agree Israel could easily take remainder Arab Palestine by force.

2.—Legion could probably suppress any disturbances by Palestine Arabs at present unless aided from outside.

3.—Statements of Neuville confirm reports from Consulate General of widespread and growing, although partly concealed resentment against Transjordan. Press and radio statements recently more open in their criticism and emphasize both giving up to Israel of Arab land and appointment by King Abdullah of puppets to “represent” Arabs of Palestine.

4.—Although Consul General not able agree entirely that Palestine Arabs would prefer union with Israel, following factors tend make this attractive: Failure Transjordan protect their interests versus Israel, realization great military superiority Israel, failure Abdullah provide them voice in determining own fate, consciousness of personal nature Transjordan Government and relative backwardness Transjordan as whole, more favorable economic opportunities in Israel, especially higher priced markets for agricultural products, possibility such union would permit return large numbers refugees to both Arab Palestine and areas now under Israel control.

Sent Department 363, repeated Baghdad 25, Beirut 70, Damascus 27, London 11, Geneva 10 (for USDel PCC), pouched Amman, Cairo, Jidda.

Burdett

The United States Representative at the United Nations (Austin) to the Secretary of State 501.BB Palestine/5–1249: Telegram

[Document 651]

The United States Representative at the United Nations (Austin) to the Secretary of State

confidential
urgent New York, May 12, 1949—4:17 p. m.

587. Bunche has sent Vigier a revised compromise proposal for settlement Israeli-Syrian discussions along the following lines: (a) Truce lines to be the armistice lines;

(b) A demilitarized zone to be established on Auja model in Egypt agreement. Syrians to withdraw to their frontier. Israelis also to withdraw. For those points on which it is not possible to persuade Israelis to withdraw, a radical reduction of forces to effective strength should be established;

(c) Demilitarized zone to be under UN supervision again on Egypt armistice model. Israeli civil officers to operate in zone;

(d) Syrians to withdraw by stages from demilitarized zone;

(e) If absolutely necessary, Israelis might be allowed one or two outposts in demilitarized zone. This would be last resort, however.

Bunche says he is working on Syrians and believes that they will agree to foregoing plan. He has warned them that they cannot hope for a more favorable settlement if negotiations break down and the question goes to SC. The essential for them is that Zaim have a face-saving device such as Israeli withdrawal or drastic reduction of forces.

Bunche has talked with Eban, who indicated Israel’s unwillingness to make any withdrawals or reduction of forces alleging that possibility of Syrian outpost being left in demilitarized zone should apparently be discussed in negotiations and would nullify withdrawal. Bunche informed him and Vigier that any outposts which might be established should be in defensive force only and very few in number.

Bunche is using argument with Israelis that his plan will give them their major point which is to get the Syrians out of Palestine.

Bunche would appreciate any assistance possible from Department on foregoing proposals which will be presented at meeting tomorrow.

Austin

The Secretary of State to the United States Representative at the United Nations (Austin) 501.BB Palestine/5–1249: Telegram

[Document 652]

The Secretary of State to the United States Representative at the United Nations (Austin)

priority Washington, May 12, 1949—6 p. m.

268. Following is text of memorandum on Syrian-Israeli armistice talks left in Dept by Israeli Amb May 12.

1. During the fighting in northern Palestine Israeli troops occupied fourteen villages in Lebanese territory adjoining Eastern Galilee. Syrian troops occupied Israeli territory in two sectors, the first in the Huleh Region and the second between the Sea of Galilee and the Syrio-Palestinian frontier.

2. During the Lebanese-Israeli negotiations Lebanon demanded the restoration of the international frontier. The Mediator and his staff insisted on this point with the utmost vigor. Israel accepted this position, and the Lebanese-Israeli armistice was concluded through a unilateral withdrawal by Jewish forces from Lebanese soil.

3. In the Syrio-Israeli armistice discussions Israel has asked for the application of the same principle, namely, the restoration of the international frontier. Throughout the armistice negotiations With other states, while demarcation lines within Palestine have been fluid and subject to negotiation, the utmost concern has been expressed by United Nations representatives for the preservation of established international frontiers. Thus, a temporary Jewish encroachment into Egyptian territory was most speedily corrected and the utmost concern was devoted to maintaining the integrity of the Palestine–Transjordan frontier during any troop movements or armistice delineations. It may be said that whenever a truce line has been in the vicinity of an international frontier, the armistice line has been based upon the frontier and not upon the truce positions.

4. The Syrian delegation has persistently refused to base the armistice demarcation line on the international frontier and has openly asserted that Syria has claims for frontier revision in the final political settlement.

5. This Syrian position, inadmissible in itself under Article II, paragraph 4, of the Charter and under the precedents established in other phases of the truce and the armistice negotiations, is aggravated by the fact that the Syrian position on Israeli territory at Mishmar Hayarden is held in violation of truce. This is the only instance remaining in Palestine where any troops are in a position not authorized either under the truce or the armistice agreements.

6. Israel maintains its right to carry out the principle advocated in the Lebanese negotiations, namely, the withdrawal of Syrian troops to the frontier with Israel taking over control on its own territory previously occupied. Nevertheless in an effort to compromise, Israel has been willing to give consideration to a proposal whereby Syrian troops on withdrawing to the frontier would not be replaced by Israeli troops. The proposal is that the vacuum thus created should remain a demilitarized zone containing no forces of either side. This device has successfully solved deadlocks in other armistice discussions. For example, the disputed area at El Auja occupied by Israel troops and claimed by Egyptian forces was made a demilitarized zone. This compromise led to the successful Egyptian-Israeli armistice agreement.

7. This principle applied to the Syrian front would not prejudice the claims of either party in the final political settlement. If Syria has a territorial claim, that claim would not be prejudiced since no Israeli troops would be in occupation of the area. Similarly, Israel’s claim to maintain the present frontier would not be prejudiced by the fact of Syrian occupation. The matter, therefore, becomes very grave if Syria declines to accept this compromise and insists on maintaining its present positions intact. In conversations between the Acting Mediator and the Israeli delegation at Lake Success, the former has expressed sympathy for the compromise of the demilitarized zone. This may indeed by the only method of securing the main desires of each party. This Syrians could regard the armistice line as being where it is at the moment, while Israel’s main principle would be vindicated by the fact that no Syrian troops were on Israeli soil. It should be added that whereas Transjordanian, Egyptian and Israeli troops are at present in areas not allotted to them by the November 29th Resolution, none of them is on the territory of any existing state. Thus Article II, paragraph 4, of the Charter is nowhere infringed upon.

8. The new Syrian regime has recently been recognized by the United States, Great Britain, and France. These three governments should therefore be in a position to influence the Syrian government in favor of complying with the principles and precedents established before. These principles should not be applied when they redound, as in the Lebanese agreement, to Israel’s disadvantage and relinquished when they require an effort on the part of an Arab state.

9. The Syrian position at the moment is so difficult to defend within the principles of the Charter and of previous armistice practice that Israel would not hesitate to make a complaint to the Security Council. It would, however, be infinitely preferable for this matter to be settled by negotiation and agreement. It is clear, therefore, that all available international influence should be brought to bear in order to persuade the Syrian government to give the same weight to an established international frontier as has been given in all similar circumstances before.1

Acheson

1 The Department, on May 12, directed New York to bring telegram 268 to the attention of Mr. Bunche as soon as possible and to seek his attitude concerning “US approach Syrian Govt in effort persuade latter accept compromise proposal would be helpful,” in view of the apparent Israeli acceptance of the main principle of that proposal (telegram 265, 501.BB Palestine/5–1249).

The Consul at Geneva (Troutman) to the Secretary of State 501.BB Palestine/5–1249: Telegram

[Document 653]

The Consul at Geneva (Troutman) to the Secretary of State

confidential Geneva, May 12, 1949—6 p. m.

433. Palun 150. From PCC. On basis of assurance from Department that US would not sponsor resolution admitting Israel unless satisfactory assurance were given at Lausanne on points in question I told Arab delegation that their first reaction when announcement of sponsorship was made was renewed cynicism and intimation that I had misled them. Their more considered reaction is to feel that certainly Israel must have given more assurance to the State Department than it has given at Lausanne. I also hope very much that is true; otherwise I am afraid that what I say to Arabs in other respects will be discounted. If such assurances were received from Israel I would like most urgently to know what they are.

Am glad to report that Israeli delegates’ attitude since admission has not seemed to change for the worse. Eytan seems as anxious as ever, if not more so, to go ahead with negotiations and to speed them up. [PCC]

Troutman

The Secretary of State to the Legation in Syria 501.BB Palestine/5–1249: Telegram

[Document 654]

The Secretary of State to the Legation in Syria

confidential Washington, May 12, 1949—7 p. m.

us urgent

niact

209. USUN reports1 that Bunche has sent Vigier revised compromise proposal for settlement Israeli-Syrian discussions. Dept considers this probably fairest possible solution impasse.

For your info proposal is along following lines:

[Here follows a summary of points a, b, c, and d in telegram 587.]

Pls inform Syrian Govt soonest Dept sincerely hopes it can agree to foregoing plan. It is most unlikely that they could hope for more favorable settlement if negotiations should break down and question be referred to SC. Syrians stand to gain thru Israeli withdrawal and thru immeasurably improved prospects of reaching final settlement Lausanne which would result from armistice settlement.

Dept is making similar reps at Tel Aviv.2

Acheson

1 In telegram 587, May 12, p. 1000 [Pg. 1000 includes portions of Doc. 650 and Doc. 651].

2 In telegram 288, May 12, 7 p. m., not printed, the last two paragraphs stated: “Pls inform Israeli Govt soonest Dept sincerely hopes they can accept this compromise since it should result in withdrawal of Syrians from Palestine which is presumably their major objective, and immeasurably increase possibilities of reaching final agreement at Lausanne. “Also state Dept is likewise urging acceptance on Syrian Govt.” (501.BB Palestine/5–1249)

Telegrams 209 and 288 were repeated to New York.

The Secretary of State to the Legation in Switzerland 501.BB Palestine/5–1249: Telegram

[Document 655]

The Secretary of State to the Legation in Switzerland

secret Washington, May 12, 1949—7 p. m.

619. Unpal 98. For USDel, Lausanne. Re US cosponsorship resolution admission Israel (re Palun 1421 ) Dept concurred view USUN that admission Israel at this session in full accord with Charter and would help settlement Palestine question. US sponsored Israeli application in SC in Paris on Dec. 17, 1948 and again in NY on Mar. 4, 1949. Participation by US among several states to provide formal basis for GA action was not under circumstances of considerable political import whereas refusal to do so would be interpreted as conspicuous shift in our policy amounting to opposition to Israeli membership. Dept believes failure of Israeli application would militate both on Arab and Israeli side against settlement at Lausanne and in later negotiations. Since beginning of Palestine question in UN Arabs have repeatedly delayed acceptance realities of situation until events have moved them far beyond their own best interests. Further, they have intimated privately on several occasions that it would assist settlement if they could be presented with decision with which they would have to comply. When such imposed solutions were arranged, Arabs bitterly opposed and failed to translate such decisions into face-saving formulas for Arab domestic opinion. On Israeli side, Israel is now in position of having received from us support on all questions on which they are entitled to support and time has now come for them to produce basis for settlement. Dept does not believe that transitory question of joining in cosponsoring resolution affects substantially our ability to press Israel for reasonable attitude. If pressure is required, it must necessarily be more substantial in nature. Lastly, US prestige in UN has suffered through apparent changes of attitude on our part during history of this question. Dept considered we should avoid fresh round of confusion and irritation arising from equivocal position on Israeli membership.

Asst Secy Rusk telephoned Elath in NY Fri night subject refugees and called him into Dept on Wed to press for positive action on refugee question. Rusk insisted Israeli Del Lausanne should leave no doubt in PCC that Israel accepts repatriation as substantial element in solution refugee problem. He also urged that time has come for Israel to take second step presented by Secy to Sharett, namely, to begin actual repatriation prior to final determination of numbers to be repatriated and final political settlement. Elath is expected to furnish Dept with further information on early repatriation of families of Arabs now residing in areas under Israeli control as well as other repatriation which could be accomplished without security threat. Rusk stated it necessary for us to know Israeli views on refugees in order to make our own plans on economic and other matters regarding that area. Also insisted that solution of refugee problem should not be used as bargaining point for problems of boundaries and internationalization of Jerusalem. Elath agreed these issues should be kept separate.

Austin’s statement in plenary session on Israeli membership being repeated separate telegram.

Acheson

1 Identified also as telegram 699, May 9, from Bern, p. 988 [Pg. 988 is part of Doc. 641].

The United States Representative at the United Nations (Austin) to the Secretary of State 501.BB Palestine/5–1349: Telegram

[Document 656]

The United States Representative at the United Nations (Austin) to the Secretary of State

confidential New York, May 13, 1949—1:55 a. m.

Delga 112. Deptels 265 and 268 May 12.1 Bunche, on May 12, had very unfavorable reaction Israel memo re Syrian-Israel armistice talks because of memo’s inaccuracies, half truths and Israel unwillingness withdraw or reduce forces and permit mixed Armistice Commission control demilitarized zone, especially in respect civilian return to demilitarized area. He received essentially same note from Eban today and rebutted it strongly. Rather than approach to Syrians, Bunche wishes Department would urge acceptance his compromise (mytel 587, May 12) on Israelis who are the recalcitrants. Bunche made following specific comments re memo:

Lebanese agreement not a fair comparison for Syrian agreement since Israelis agreed withdraw from Lebanon as prior condition to negotiations in talk between Ben-Gurion and Bunche December 5. Also, Israelis were definitely outside Palestine invading Lebanon. Thus is not accurate to state that Mediator during armistice negotiation insisted vigorously on this point and Israel unilaterally accepted withdrawal.

Basis for all armistice negotiations has always been truce lines. Israeli incursion into Egypt was a truce violation in October. Bunche said he did not insist on established international frontiers and never heard of alleged principle that “whenever” a truce line was in vicinity of international frontier armistice line was based upon; frontier and not upon truce positions. Points out that this not true in Gaza, Auja, elsewhere in Negeb, or in Transjordan agreement. As result of other factors it happens to be true on Lebanese front.

It is absolutely not true that Mishmar Hayarden is held in violation of truce. Only Syrian violation was taking Hill 223 from which they have withdrawn.

Re statement that present dispute is only instance of nonconformity to truce or armistice agreement line, Bunche points to Western Galilee occupied by Israelis in October.

Israelis, in speaking of Syrian withdrawal, omit mention of their own withdrawal or radical reduction of forces on which Bunche has been pressing them hard. Thus it is misleading to state that at Lake Success Bunche has indicated sympathy for Israeli stand re demilitarized zone.

Last sentence paragraph 7 and general approach of memo indicate again Israeli claim that they should have all November 29 area plus what they have been able to seize. Points out this does not square with US position re necessity for compensation if adjustments to be made in November 29 lines.

Not mentioned in memo is Israeli claim that their civilians might return to any point in demilitarized zone. Bunche proposal is that Israeli civilians be allowed to return to Mishmar Hayarden, since it was a Jewish settlement, but that others return be controlled by Armistice Commission.

If Israeli-Syrian talks collapse and cannot be revived, Bunche will report to SC placing blame on Israelis. However, he does not envisage action in immediate future, expecting May 13 talks to be unfruitful but to be continued.

New subject:

Bundle informed from Tel Aviv through Mohn that Ben-Gurion willing meet Zaim only after conclusion Israeli-Syrian Armistice Agreement. Bunche observes there is nothing in this for Zaim.

Austin

1 Former not printed, but see footnote 1, p. 1003 [Pg. 1003 includes portions of Doc. 652, Doc. 653, and Doc. 654].

The Secretary of State to the Legation in Syria 501.BB Palestine/5–249: Telegram

[Document 657]

The Secretary of State to the Legation in Syria

secret Washington, May 13, 1949—4 p. m.

212. Urtel 256 Apr 281 and 261 May 2. Dept notes with interest marked progress you report re Zaim’s attitude resettlement Arab refugees. This is first concrete evidence Syrian willingness take large number refugees and is particular importance since Syria only Arab country except already willing Transjordan which can assimilate such number within reasonable time. If this opportunity can be exploited back of refugee problem can be broken. You shld take early opportunity discuss matter further with Zaim giving appropriate emphasis his expression of willingness accept quarter million refugees, which Dept regards as humane and statesmanlike contribution to solution this problem. Express hope Zaim will use his influence with other Arab states adopt similarly constructive attitude towards problem, within limits their absorptive capacity, in order assist PCC in permanent liquidation problem. Emphasize steps USG is taking to persuade Israel make appropriate concessions re repatriation (Depcirtel Apr 29), which it is understood will help Arab Govts in accepting responsibilities for resettlement. Development program along lines discussed during McGhee’s visit in Damascus well under way and Dept hopes advise you shortly details as finally approved. Meantime you shld avoid any direct offer US assistance while at same time indicating that door is open to appropriate approach through PCC, which has expressed willingness recommend favorable action re assistance requested. You shld in particular avoid any inference that USG is encouraging development projects as bribe to Arab states to accept refugees. Emphasis shld be placed on Israeli and Arab responsibility cooperate with PCC in obtaining agreed settlement refugee question in their own self interest, viz., creation condition for lasting peace in NE, elimination security threat of possible refugee dissidence or communist exploitation and contribution refugee manpower to development latent resources of recipient countries.2

Acheson

1 Not printed, but see footnote 3, p. 962 [Pg. 962 includes portions of Doc. 621 and Doc. 622].

2 This telegram was repeated to Bern for Mr. Ethridge and to London. The same day, the Department sent telegram 196 to Baghdad in reply to the latter’s 263 of May 10, p. 994 [Pg. 994 includes portions of Doc. 645 and Doc. 646]. It noted that Baghdad’s “discussions with Prim Min indicate for first time possible future change in Iraqi policy which wld permit immigration Pal refugees. Even if necessary wait 5 to 6 years as indicated in ref tel Iraq may prove of vital importance in ultimate solution refugee problem through resettlement of refugees not repatriated in Israel or assimilable in Transjordan, Syria, or Lebanon. Consequently, you shld take early opportunity discuss matter again with Prim Min giving emphasis to his statement that economic development of Iraq shld create conditions which would make possible considerable refugee immigration in future,” along much the same lines as telegram 212 (867N.01/5–1049).

The Minister in Syria (Keeley) to the Secretary of State 501.BB Palestine/5–1349: Telegram

[Document 658]

The Minister in Syria (Keeley) to the Secretary of State

secret
niact
priority Damascus, May 13, 1949—8 p. m.

281. General Riley informs me proposal set forth in Deptel 209 May 12, is no longer valid and that modification thereof already before delegations. At today’s meeting Israeli delegate requested interpretation certain Aspects current proposal before considering it and is presently seeking instructions Tel Aviv. In circumstances General Riley feels it would serve no useful purpose for me make representations indicated by Department; on contrary that such representations might well confuse situation.

Next meeting scheduled for Tuesday, May 17, when it is hoped modified proposal will be discussed in joint session.

General Riley suggests and I agree that I be authorized to support with Syrians, at moment we may jointly consider appropriate, whatever compromise seems fairly to safeguard interests both parties. Legation representations in support of Israeli-weighted proposal in sense penultimate paragraph Deptel 209 can only have stiffening effect.

Syria long ago became accustomed to its inability obtain justice in SC. For US to remind Syria that this situation likely to continue if she fails accept Israeli armistice terms will not. I feel sure, be persuasive, particularly in light of favor currently being shown Israel by US re Israel’s acceptance as UN member despite her continued disregard of resolution of December 11 and her failure otherwise fully to live up to standards of UN Charter.

Sent Department; repeated Tel Aviv 30. Department pass USUN New York 5. Pouched Amman, Baghdad, Beirut, Cairo, Jerusalem, Jidda, London, Paris, and Ankara.

Keeley

Memorandum by the Secretary of Defense (Johnson) to the Executive Secretary of the National Security Council (Souers) S/P–NSC Files, Lot 62 D 1

1 [Document 659]

Memorandum by the Secretary of Defense (Johnson) to the Executive Secretary of the National Security Council (Souers)2

top secret Washington, 16 May 1949.

NSC 47

Subject: United States Strategic Interests in Israel.

The Joint Chiefs of Staff position with respect to Palestine, formulated at a time when conditions therein were highly unsettled, was developed principally around the possibility of a United Nations’ decision to introduce military forces into that country with consequent possible involvement of United States and/or USSR troops. This policy has been overtaken by events in that the United States recognized the provisional government as the de facto authority of the new State of Israel on 14 May 1948 and fully recognized the State of Israel on 29 January 1949.

In view of the foregoing developments, the Joint Chiefs of Staff have prepared a brief study, from the military point of view, of United States strategic objectives in Israel in the light of the current situation, and I enclosed a copy3 thereof herewith. It seems to me appropriate, in the light of developments over the course of the last twelve months and in view of the conclusions reached by the Joint Chiefs of Staff, that the National Security Council re-examine and develop an up-to-date policy on the question of the United States position with respect to Israel. If the Council agrees, I further suggest that the preparation of an initial report on this subject be requested from the Secretary of State.

By separate communication, a copy of which is attached,* I am forwarding a copy of this memorandum and its enclosure to the Secretary of State for his information.

Enclosure

Study of United States Strategic Objectives in Israel 4

1. Such strategic importance as Israel possesses is due to its central location in the Eastern Mediterranean–Middle East area. The direct land routes (road and rail) between Turkey and the Cairo–Suez area pass through Israeli territory. In addition, the main land routes from the Caspian area of the USSR and from Iraq, Iran, and Saudi Arabia to Egypt and the Levant pass through or near Israel’s territory, as do the pipelines from the Middle East oil areas to the Mediterranean. Israel controls the land approaches to the Cairo–Suez area from the east, the border between Israel and Egypt being about one hundred and fifty miles east of the Suez Canal.

2. There is little possibility now or in the immediate future of Israel becoming an important base area since the country lacks the facilities to accommodate large forces or installations. Furthermore, there is little reason for major base development by the Western Democracies in Israel because of the more highly developed and more accessible Cairo–Suez area some two hundred miles to the West. However, the Israeli area does contain a fine, but small, artificial harbor at Haifa, and an excellent, although limited, system of well-developed airfields and air bases. In our hands, these air installations would be most useful in the interdiction of the lines of communication from the USSR to the Middle East oil resources with medium and short-range aircraft. In the hands of the Soviets, these fields would provide bases from which the Soviets could seriously interfere with our operations in that area.

3. From the viewpoint of tactical operations, Israel’s territory and its indigenous military forces, which have had some battle experience, would be of importance to either the Western Democracies or the USSR in any contest for control of the Eastern Mediterranean–Middle East area. It is estimated that in such a contest the USSR has the capability, and would probably attempt to secure or neutralize the oil facilities of the Middle East and to operate against the Cairo–Suez base area. The final line of strong defensive possibilities for the defense of the Cairo–Suez area is at the Jordan rift. Should Israel ally herself with the Western Democracies in the event of war with the USSR, full advantage could be taken of defensive positions in that country and of Israel’s forces for the defense of the Cairo–Suez area and for land operations to defend or to recapture the Middle East oil facilities. The cooperation of Israel would be of considerable assistance to the Western Democracies in meeting maximum Soviet capabilities in the Palestine area. Israel, as an ally or as a friendly neutral, would enable the United States to use the Cairo–Alexandretta railway for a limited time for the shipment of supplies to Turkey. Israel as an unfriendly neutral would deny us these advantages.

4. Communist domination of Israel would permit the USSR to control the Haifa terminus of one of the oil pipelines from the Middle East. It would interfere with our support of Turkey by land routes from the Cairo–Suez area. It would enable the USSR to infiltrate the Cairo–Suez area and would facilitate a Soviet land-offensive against that area.

5. The United States and Great Britain have practically the same strategic interests in the Middle East–Eastern Mediterranean area. However, the international reactions to the Palestine question have produced a complex, entangled political and psychological situation.

6. Israel, after a bitter conflict with the neighboring Arab states, has recently emerged as an independent Jewish nation. In general, the attitude of the of the United States in regard to this development can be considered as favorable to Israel. The United States and the USSR were the first to recognize Israel as a sovereign state. On the other hand, due primarily to her special relations with the Arab states, the United Kingdom has been slow to establish normal relations with Israel.

7. The new State of Israel has close ties with the United States because of our large and influential Jewish minority and is geographically well separated from Soviet-dominated countries. However, there is an opportunity for Communist penetration through Jewish immigration into the new nations from eastern Europe, the Balkans, and China. There are indications that significant numbers of immigrants who have passed through Communist indoctrination courses have already entered Israel. Israel’s foreign policy can at present be considered pro-Western although not necessarily anti-Soviet. However, Israel’s announced policy is one of neutrality in the “cold war.” Israel’s leaders have stated privately that their sympathies lie with the West but that for the present it is necessary for Israel publicly to assume a “neutral” position since the new state still needs Soviet support in the United Nations, and desires to facilitate the emigration to Israel of Jews now in the “Iron Curtain” countries.

8. There is considerable agitation for a Mediterranean counterpart of the North Atlantic Pact. Greece, Turkey, and the Arab states have been mentioned as possible members. In spite of Arab opposition to Israel, the strategic location and military strength of the latter make it almost mandatory that Israel be a member, providing the participation of Saudi Arabia and Iran is not precluded by such action, if the pact is aimed to resist Soviet aggression.

9. Israel is surrounded by her defeated foes who are still unfriendly. The United Kingdom has been and still is the proponent of the Arab states. As an expedient in the international field, Israel may accept friendly overtures from other great powers, including the USSR. Thus, Israel may become a danger or an asset depending upon the nature of her future relations with the Soviets and with the Western Democracies.

10. The British have governed Palestine under mandate and have close ties with some of the neighboring Arab countries. They have military personnel, together with treaty rights, in Egypt, Transjordan, and Iraq. In the event of global war, the United States would probably wish to use facilities in the Cairo–Suez area in conjunction with the British. Hence, any negotiations or arrangements having strategic implications with regard to Israel should be coordinated with the British.

11. Certain expressions of views by the Joint Chiefs of Staff relating to the Eastern Mediterranean and the Middle East have bearing on United States strategic interests in the new State of Israel. These views are stated below for ready reference: a. From the point of view of the military considerations, the security of the Eastern Mediterranean and the Middle East is of critical importance to the future security of the United States; and

b. The stability of the Middle East, including assurance that the peoples of this area will not turn to the USSR and against the United States, is a vital element in United States security.

conclusions

12. a. In the light of the foregoing, it is concluded that United States security interests with respect to the new State of Israel are: (1) That Israel should be oriented towards the Western Democracies and away from the USSR;

(2) That Communist infiltration should be blocked and domination of Israel by the USSR should be prevented;

(3) That the differences between the new Israeli state and the neighboring Arab states should be reconciled at least to the extent that Israel and the Arab states would act in concert to oppose Soviet aggression; and

(4) That from the United States military point of view it would be advantageous if British relations with Israel were such that a common approach could be taken by the United States and the United Kingdom in achieving mutual objectives with respect to Israel.

b. In view of the interests of the United Kingdom in the Cairo–Suez area, her over-all position in the Middle East–Eastern Mediterranean area, and the general similarity of United Kingdom and United States security interests there, and regardless of the political attitude of the United Kingdom toward Israel, any steps taken by the United States to protect our security interests in Israel should be coordinated with the British.

1 Lot 62 D 1 is a serial and subject master file of National Security Council documents and correspondence for the years 1948–1961, as maintained by tbe Policy Planning Staff of the Department of State.

2 Submitted by Admiral Souers to the National Security Council with his note of May 17.

3 Below.

* Not reproduced herewith. [Footnote in the source text.]

4 This study bears no date.

The Minister in Switzerland (Vincent) to the Secretary of State 501.BB Palestine/5–1649: Telegram

[Document 660]

The Minister in Switzerland (Vincent) to the Secretary of State

secret Bern, May 16, 1949—3 p. m.

741. Palun 151. For the Secretary and McGhee from Ethridge. Your pouched letter of May 31 and proposed plan of action dated April 272 will be commented upon specifically in separate telegram and certain revisions suggested. Meantime here are what we regard as important elements of situation at moment: (1) It is important for political reasons here that French and Turks in Washington also be approached for clearance of plan. They understood at Beirut that conversations would be held in Washington, and Frenchman this morning raised point that nothing had been heard from his government about such conversations. In addition to importance in getting plan through PCC, possibility exists that France might give material help. In discussion Thursday night with Harriman,3 he indicated that under certain conditions ways might be found for French Government to help financially. Conversation at British Foreign Office also opened possibility that McCloy might be able to find way through consortium to underwrite help that is not now bankable. Urge quickest consultations with both French and Turkish representatives in Washington, even though such consultations produce little.

(2) It seems to me still necessary to reconcile our position with British. While they have approved general plan, they apparently still do not want to go through UN. Believe all of us agree that it is preferable that help be given that way.

(3) It is also highly desirable to provide some minor funds as soon as possible to put refugees to work. With small amount of capital new villages built by refugees could be started in Arab Palestine and light public works projects instituted with the idea that they would fit into major projects later. Commission is convinced that unrest among refugees growing and likely to explode if idleness continues. Very little money would be required to start employment and in any case, would be necessary to bridge gap between UNRPR and initiation of any large project. Could private organizations or individuals or oil companies be induced to put up some funds now? Specific projects could be recommended fairly quickly by technical committee which Commission is sending out and by refugee organizations which already have some projects in mind. Would of course need to be closely supervised.

(4) My own idea of procedure would envision skipping one step you have in mind in the plan of action. Instead of creating a survey committee in advance of major board, my feeling is that after proper commitments from Arabs and Jews, PCC should call for setting up of ME development board which could then set up its own survey committee, using such information as the PCC technical committee now in formation would have assembled in the meantime.

(5) Agree heartily with paragraph 15 of conclusions, particularly first sentence, also with statement that maximum commitments from Israel to repatriate and agreement by Arabs to accept refugees should be forthcoming before major plan is advanced. Situation here is that we have almost arrived at point where both those commitments will be forthcoming. Am convinced that Israel, because of pressure applied by US and UN debate, is willing to take more refugees then she was two months ago. We are still pressing and will press for her to take 250,000 in addition to those already in Israel or final total of 400,000 which is less than number under 1947 partition plan. It is likely that if she agrees to that figure or anything approaching it, she will herself ask for help.

Arabs have already been told and have already admitted in private conversations that they will have to take refugees. My own attitude is that Israel should first take the maximum number possible; that, secondly, as many as possible, depending upon economic factors, should be settled in Arab Palestine and that balance must be distributed between Syria and Transjordan. Am convinced that both Syria and Transjordan are prepared between them to take somewhere rising 400,000, but they naturally do not want to commit themselves until Israel has given her final figure. Even then they will not want to commit until they are assured of outside help. I am unable to give that commitment as matters stand. However, I am sure a secret commitment can be secured from them if they know that in turn help will be forthcoming from the outside. It has therefore become most urgent and imperative for me to have a commitment from the State Department and the President somewhat along this general line:

In the spirit of the President’s statement of October 4, 1946,4 in accordance with US policy re Palestine as stated at the UN, and in the spirit of point 4 of his inaugural address, the President reaffirms his position that if a final settlement can be found for the Palestine question and a peace concluded between the nations which have recently been at war, he is willing to recommend to Congress a plan for economic assistance for the development of the ME, and in the meantime to make available through UN and other sources such technical and financial assistance in the settlement of economic and refugee problems as may be possible.

If I could have that commitment, I could say to the Israelis that it is conditioned upon their absorbing at least 400,000, to the Arabs that it is conditioned upon their requesting help for resettlement of balance.

Matters here have reached such a state of urgency that it is necessary for us to have some commitment as quickly as possible. It would greatly contribute to peace in the ME if we could have it. [Ethridge.]

Vincent

1 Copy not found in Department of State files. Possibly it was similar in content to Mr. McGhee’s letters of April 29; see footnote 3, p. 938 [Pg. 938 is part of Doc. 608].

2 See annex 3, p. 939 [Pg. 939 is part of Doc. 608].

3 W. Averell Harriman, United States Special Representative in Europe for the Economic Cooperation Administration.

4 See President Truman’s telegram of October 3 to British Prime Minister Attlee, Foreign Relations, 1946, vol. iii, p. 701.

Draft Letter From the President to Francis Cardinal Spellman, Roman Catholic Archbishop of New York 867N.01/5–449

[Document 661]

Draft Letter From the President to Francis Cardinal Spellman, Roman Catholic Archbishop of New York 1

[Washington, undated.]

My Dear Cardinal Spellman: Thank you for sending me in your letter of April 292 an account of your conversation with Dr. Weizmann and Mr. Eban on the status of Jerusalem.3 As you know, this is a question which deeply interests me.

I wish to assure you that the United States Government firmly supports the principle of the internationalization of Jerusalem. The United States delegation voted for the General Assembly Palestine resolutions of November 29, 1947, and December 11, 1948. The latter resolved that the Jerusalem area should be placed under effective United Nations control and instructed the Palestine Conciliation Commission to present to the Fourth Regular Session of the General Assembly detailed proposals for a permanent international regime for the Jerusalem area which would provide for maximum local autonomy for distinctive groups consistent with the special international! status of the Jerusalem area.

In view of your deep concern with the matter, a brief account of some of the basic problems connected with the establishment of an international Jerusalem enclave will be of interest to you. Competent officials of this Government have estimated that the annual cost of a 4,000-man police force to maintain order in Jerusalem would be in excess of $30,000,000. Such a police force would of necessity have to be a well-organized and efficient body, particularly in view of the fact that a large segment of the inhabitants of Jerusalem is strongly opposed to the established [establishment] of an international regime which would [have] complete authority to regulate the daily activities of the populace. It is also of considerable importance that, under the Mandate, Jerusalem was not self-supporting but depended upon revenues from the rest of Palestine, revenues which would not be available to Jerusalem as an international enclave.

Experts of this Government who have appraised the likelihood of the contribution by the different nations of the large sums necessary annually for the administration of Jerusalem as an international enclave conclude that the countries most directly concerned would be unable or unwilling to provide the funds required. The international community is much interested in the status of Jerusalem because of concern for the free access to and protection and preservation of the Holy Places, but there are indications that the nations are not convinced of the necessity of establishing the kind of international regime which would exercise complete control over the day-to-day existence of the inhabitants of Jerusalem.

Under these circumstances, and in view of the fact that the General Assembly resolution of December 11, 1948, states that an international regime for Jerusalem “should provide for maximum local autonomy for distinctive groups consistent with the special international status of the Jerusalem area”, the United States Government has come to believe that it should be possible to work out an arrangement whereby Israel and Transjordan could accept a large share of governmental responsibility in the Jerusalem area under the overall supervision of some representation of the United Nations. This representation would be placed over the entire Jerusalem area, but its primary concern would consist of controlling the Holy Places and providing for their preservation and protection, and free access thereto. The United States Government has not reached a final decision on the question, and its attitude in this regard will in large measure be determined by the proposals to be made regarding the status of the City by the Palestine Conciliation Commission, upon which the responsibility for this task has been placed by the General Assembly.

Officers of the Department of State have, in discussing the status of Jerusalem with representatives of the Government of Israel, mentioned as one possible type of international regime for Jerusalem the establishment of a joint Israeli-Transjordan trusteeship under the United Nations trusteeship system. The discussions in question were, however, general and exploratory, and, as I have stated the final position of the United States Government will not be taken until the recommendations of the Palestine Conciliation Commission on Jerusalem have been made.

I certainly agree with you that there is considerable contrast between Dr. Weizmann’s readiness to admit some degree in internationalization for Jerusalem and Mr. Ben Gurion’s reported remarks concerning the City. However, I am sure you will have noted that Mr. Eban, in his statement before the ad hoc Political Committee of the General Assembly on May 5, admitted the possibility of an international regime applicable to the whole City of Jerusalem. In view of the attitude taken by Dr. Weizmann and Mr. Eban, it seems to me possible that Mr. Ben Gurion’s words may not have reflected the final position of the Israeli Government on this question.

Dr. Weizmann’s statement that any Arab refugee who so desired might return to Israel is difficult to reconcile with the position taken by Israeli representatives in discussions of the refugee problem with representatives of this Government. The former have been consistent in maintaining that the best solution of the refugee problem lies in resettlement outside of Israel. This Government believes that agreement by Israel to the repatriation of a good member of the refugees is essential to a lasting peace in Palestine. In his statement at Lake Success on May 5, Mr. Eban seemed to accept the principle of repatriation, and it is my earnest hope that when a final Palestine peace settlement is reached a sizeable number of the refugees will be repatriated.

The United States Government is profoundly indebted to Mark Ethridge for his outstanding patriotism in accepting the difficult assignment as United States Member of the Palestine Conciliation Commission. He has certainly been doing a splendid job.

I am grateful to you for giving me the benefit of your thoughts on the Palestine problem. I am fully aware of the extremely important Christian interest in Jerusalem, and I am, of course, in complete agreement with the desire of the Christian world for assured free access to the Holy Places and for their protection and preservation.

With my most sincere best wishes,

Sincerely yours

Harry S. Truman

1 Prepared in the Department of State and transmitted to President Truman by Secretary Acheson in his memorandum of May 17. The President sent the letter to Cardinal Spellman, presumably as drafted, on May 19.

2 Not printed.

3 Cardinal Spellman’s letter of April 29 to President Truman described his conversation with these Israeli spokesmen, who had been his dinner guests the previous evening. The guests had spoken of a type of internationalization of Jerusalem quite different from the one the President and the Cardinal had discussed at an earlier but undisclosed date. At that discussion, the letter stated, the President and the Cardinal had envisaged creation of an international enclave under United Nations rule, as decreed by the resolution of the General Assembly on November 29, 1947, and confirmed at the Paris session of the General Assembly in December 1948. The Cardinal expressed himself as being somewhat puzzled, therefore, at the information imparted to him by his guests that the Department of State had suggested to them what the Cardinal termed “a mitigated—so called ‘indirect’—internationalization” under which Jerusalem would be divided into two parts as trusteeships of the United Nations, with Israel and Transjordan as administering authorities.

The British Embassy to the Department of State 867N.113/5–1749

[Document 662]

The British Embassy to the Department of State

secret

Palestine Arms Embargo

The British Ambassador left with the Secretary of State an informal memorandum dated 27th April setting forth Mr. Bevin’s views on the Palestine Arms embargo in the light of British Treaty relationships with certain of the Arab States and of the British Government’s concern about internal security in the Middle Eastern countries.

2. Mr. Bevin has now heard that the King of Egypt has told the Egyptian Prime Minister to proceed with military talks with British representatives and that three Egyptian officers have been nominated for the purpose. Simultaneously the Egyptian Prime Minister has again pressed the British Government about the resumption of the supply of arms to Egypt. It is clear that very little progress can be made with the former without the latter.

3. Mr. Bevin also understands that, following the signature of armistices between Israel and the neighbouring countries, the United States Government are informing both Israel and the Arab Governments that they are prepared to accept trainees from the Middle East for training in the United States National Defence Establishment. This might perhaps be regarded as a step in the same direction.

4. Mr. Bevin recognizes that a connection might be made between the supply of arms to the Arab States by the British Government and discussions about a military assistance programme in connection with the North Atlantic Treaty. He has verified that the military equip-anent which the British Government might supply to the Arab States has long been earmarked and consists of purely British-type equipment. This equipment in no way corresponds with equipment being requested from the United States as a result of the North Atlantic Treaty. The supply of the latter would not enable the British Government to release any corresponding or equivalent types for use by the Arab States, which would in fact be incapable of using such equipment.

5. Mr. Bevin is most anxious to proceed at an early date as proposed in paragraphs 3 and 5 of the British Embassy’s informal memorandum of the 27th April and he would therefore be most grateful for Mr. Acheson’s views as soon as possible.

[Washington,] 17th May 1949.

Mr. Mark F. Ethridge to the Secretary of State 501.BB Palestine/5–1749: Telegram

[Document 663]

Mr. Mark F. Ethridge to the Secretary of State

confidential Lausanne, May 17, 1949—noon.

Palun 155. During past few days PCC has had further meetings with Israeli and Arab delegations separately. Discussion revolved around emergency steps which Israel was willing to take on basis of PCC memo (re Palun 1451 ) and activities of General Committee in relation to Israeli Arab PCC protocol (re Palun 148)2

Eytan restricted his remarks to general Israeli views on boundaries indicating specific details would be discussed with General Committee. Eytan said re refugees Israel was willing to do as much as it could, but that it could not handle problem alone and that its contribution would depend on extent of final settlement and on character of territorial arrangements. Eytan insisted Israeli view should be presented to Arabs by PCC. Eytan observed that admission of Israel to UN” formalized its rights under charter as well as its obligations. Charter is based on premise that UN members settle disputes by peaceful means. Israel would welcome statement to this effect by Arabs and suggested PCC obtain it. Charter is also based on sovereign equality of its members. Israeli admission to UN should thus facilitate Arab problem of working and negotiating with Israel.

Eytan remarked re boundaries that partition was based on independent states in Palestine, but [he] did not mention economic union or internationalization of Jerusalem. Arabs tried to prevent but failed as Jewish state was established and Arab was not. On November 29 GA did not divide Palestine between Jews and Arab states but between Jews and Arabs of Palestine. Arab states have no claim whatsoever on Palestine. Arab states are in temporary military occupation of Palestine. First task of General Committee is to face this situation of unlawful military occupation. Israeli delegation will insist on withdrawal of all Arab states. Principle of self determination should be observed for Arab Palestine. Future of Arab Palestine should be left to its inhabitants.

PCC observed in reply that if its first task was removal of Arab troops from Arab Palestine it might also be argued removal of Israeli troops from Arab Palestine would be required. Eytan conceded logic of argument, but expressed view Israeli occupation was legitimate whereas Arab occupation was not.

PCC also observed that assuming plebiscite for Arab Palestine was necessary or desirable, essential preliminary step would undoubtedly be return of refugees to their homes. Eytan did not reply or expand his remarks re this subject.

Comment: PCC has consistently pressed Arabs to consider refugee question in context of final settlement including territorial arrangement. PCC doubts wisdom of urging Arabs at this early stage in negotiations to issue unilateral statement re settlement of disputes by peaceful means since this objective may be accomplished through their agreement to preamble (Palun 146) and is actually demonstrated by their presence in Lausanne and continuance of talks through PCC.

Re withdrawal of Arab troops and plebiscite in Arab Palestine, GA resolution December 11 is silent on both subjects. Eytan virtually withdrew Israeli demand re withdrawal of Arab forces when faced with possibility of counter demand re withdrawal Israeli forces. Simultaneous withdrawal, although desirable, is beyond realm of practical possibility at this time. Plebiscite for Arab Palestine also seems impractical. Recent reports indicate, in any event, that Transjordan military administration is gradually being converted into Transjordan civil administration. In final analysis it seems equitable to argue that neither Israel nor Arabs have right to stipulate governmental structure of other, and thereafter to base their remarks re territorial change and other matters on such stipulation.

This morning Arabs vehemently held to their formal collective position that refugees return should be given absolute priority over other aspects of problem. PCC replied it continues press Israelis on refugee issue but, as this is unquestionably bound up with territorial settlement, PCC could not confine discussions purely to refugee matters.

Comment: PCC hopes move Arabs to more practical position when General Committee meetings begin, especially as there will then be opportunity for discussion with individual delegates. At moment Arabs are mainly occupied watching each other.

Israelis too may be induced to adopt more realistic approach when they realize UN debating tactics are of little value here where they are in reality dealing with Arabs only rather than with UN.

We also hope Israelis will realize prejudicial effect their present press tactics may have on progress of Lausanne talks (re Palun 147).3 Following confidential statement to PCC re withdrawal qf Arab troops Eytan related substance at press conference. USDel has pointed out to Israelis such tactics will not further negotiations and, if continued, might definitely prejudice them.

Ethridge

1 Telegram 410, May 10, from Geneva, p. 992 [Pg. 992 includes portions of Doc. 643 and Doc. 644].

2 Dated May 12, p. 998 [Pg. 998 includes portions of Doc. 648 and Doc. 649].

3 Identified also as telegram 412, May 10, 11 a. m., from Geneva, not printed.

The Secretary of State to the Legation in Syria 501.BB Palestine/5–1549: Telegram

[Document 664]

The Secretary of State to the Legation in Syria

confidential Washington, May 17, 1949—7 p. m.

217. Ur 281 May 13 third para. Connection possibility US representations re Israeli-Arab armistice agreements. Dept has worked closely with Bunche and, as in case Deptel 209 May 12, has not instructed US reps make representations until so requested by Bunche. Dept appreciates ur suggestion but view fact Bunche has the responsibility for conduct negots desires that question possibility and timing US representations be handled through prior consultation with him as heretofore.

View further revision Bunche proposal Dept concurs representation to Syrian Govt present time not desirable.

Acheson

The Secretary of State to the Israeli Ambassador (Elath) 501.BB Palestine/5–1149

[Document 665]

The Secretary of State to the Israeli Ambassador (Elath)

Washington, May 18, 1949.

Excellency: I have received Your Excellency’s letter of May 11, 1949, on the occasion of the admission of Israel to the United Nations. The sentiments which you expressed in connection with United States support of your country’s application for membership are greatly appreciated. The United States Government, which has consistently advocated the admission of Israel to the United Nations, was gratified at the outcome of the vote in the General Assembly and warmly welcomes Israel to the family of nations.

The Department has noted with interest your statement concerning the effect upon the Israeli Government of the recent conversation between you, Mr. Eban and myself. I am pleased that your Government does not underestimate the importance which the United States Government attaches to the points made during that conversation, especially the questions of the refugees, the status of Jerusalem, and the final boundaries.

Now that the problem of the admission of Israel to the United Nations has been resolved, this Government is convinced that the way has been cleared for positive progress towards a final peace. The question of the refugees seems to be the principal obstacle blocking the way to a Palestine settlement. The United States Government was gratified to note that the Israeli representative’s statements before the Ad Hoc Committee of the General Assembly gave assurances that Israel will contribute to the solution of the refugee problem and that it accepts the principle of repatriation. With the cessation of hostilities in Palestine, the security problem involved in the return of refugees to Israeli-controlled areas has greatly diminished and this Government sees no compelling reason why the repatriation of a significant number of refugees should not commence in the very near future, particularly to those areas which are outside the boundaries of Israel as defined by the General Assembly resolution of November 29, 1947.

The Arab states have greatly relaxed their previous position on the question of resettlement. Consequently, action by Israel along the lines of our recommendations would in all likelihood give the Arabs concrete proof of Israel’s desire for a lasting settlement and provide the impetus to bring the Lausanne talks to a successful conclusion. This Government firmly believes that a substantial measure of repatriation of refugees on the part of Israel is essential to a solidly-established peace in Palestine, and that, in the interest of the future relations between Israel and its neighbors, the wisdom of such a step is undeniable.

With regard to Jerusalem, it is felt that substantial progress has been made in bringing closer together the views of our two Governments on that problem. The responsibility, however, for formulating proposals concerning the type of international regime to be established has been placed by the General Assembly upon the Palestine Conciliation Commission, and therefore the final position of this Government on the matter will be taken in connection with the work of the Commission.

It is gratifying to note that Israel has pledged itself to a settlement of the boundary question by agreement through negotiations. This Government agrees that concessions will have to be made by both sides if an agreed territorial settlement is to be reached. You are of course well aware of the basic position of the United States on the boundary question.

This Government notes with pleasure your assurances of Israel’s acceptance of the General Assembly as the surpreme arbiter on outstanding problems, and of Israel’s desire to make the utmost effort to bring its policy into conformity with resolutions of the United Nations. This laudable attitude on the part of your country will be of substantial assistance in connection with the final settlement of the Palestine problem. The Israeli Government’s policy of seeking the settlement of outstanding questions by agreement with the Arab states under the auspices of the United Nations is fully in accord with that of the Government of the United States.

Accept [etc.]

Dean Acheson

Memorandum by the Coordinator on Palestine Refugee Matters (McGhee) to the Secretary of State 501.BB Palestine/5–1649

[Document 666]

Memorandum by the Coordinator on Palestine Refugee Matters (McGhee) to the Secretary of State

secret [Washington,] May 18, 1949.

Subject: Palestine Refugee Problem

1. Ethridge in Palun 151 of May 16 “For the Secretary” urgently requests decision re US financial backing of Palestine refugee program along lines submitted in your Memorandum for the President. Ethridge feels that he has almost arrived at the point where commitments can be obtained from both Israel and the Arab states to take refugees in the numbers required for satisfactory solution of the problem, if they can be assured of outside help.

2. It would greatly facilitate an agreement on this program if Ethridge could have word of the President’s decision before his departure from Geneva, now scheduled for May 24. He has conducted most of the basic negotiations with the Israelis and Arabs personally in private meetings and is in best position to get agreement.

3. If you could mention this to Clark Clifford at lunch today perhaps he could facilitate a decision by the President prior to your meeting with the President tomorrow or the Cabinet meeting Friday, without your having to raise the issue with the President again.1

1 In a memorandum of May 19 to the Director of the Office of Financial and Development Policy (Knapp), Wilfred Malenbaum, Chief of the Division of Investment and Economic Development, stated: “I gather the President, who has been shown the attached [telegram 741, May 16, from Bern, p. 1013 [Pg. 1013 is part of Doc. 660]] by Acheson, is about ready to buy Ethridge’s formula. (He is still awaiting reaction from Treasury and the Budget Bureau on our final cost estimates, although I gather that their answer may modify the magnitudes but not alter the basic decision to proceed.) I am worried about the formula Ethridge proposes because of our old fear that it may become too much of a U.S. program. At the minimum, any cable authorizing Ethridge to proceed should make clear the political dangers in other areas of publicity that can in any way be interpreted as a special U.S. assistance program for the Middle East. … We are talking with the International Bank and the Eximbank to see how great are their specific interests in projects which might be considered part of this program.” (501.BB Palestine/5–1949)

Report Prepared by the Committee on Jerusalem of the Palestine Conciliation Commission IO Files, A/AC.25

[Document 667]

Report Prepared by the Committee on Jerusalem of the Palestine Conciliation Commission

restricted [Lausanne ?,] 18 May 1949.

Com. Jer/W.18

Preliminary Draft

International Regime for the Jerusalem Area

i. general provisions

Article 1. The area of Jerusalem shall include the town of Jerusalem, together with the surrounding villages and towns, the most western of which is Ein Karim (including also the built-up area of Motsa), the most northern Shu’fat; the most eastern Abu Dis, and the most southern Bethlehem.

Article 2. The area of Jerusalem shall be divided into two zones defined hereafter as the Jewish zone and the Arab zone. The demarcation line between these two zones shall be as follows: …1

Article 3. The powers of the responsible authorities of the two zones may be exercised in respect of all matters not reserved by the present Plan to the exclusive competence of the international regime.

ii. organs

Article 4. The United Nations shall be represented in the area of Jerusalem by an Administrator appointed for five years by the General Assembly. He shall be responsible to the General Assembly and may be dismissed by it. The headquarters of the Administrator shall be “Government House”. The General Assembly shall appoint a Deputy Administrator on the proposal of the Administrator.

The Administrator and the Deputy Administrator shall not be residents of the area of Jerusalem or nationals of the State of Israel or of an Arab State.

Article 5. The Administrator and the Deputy Administrator shall be assisted by an Administrative Council. This Council shall be composed of nine members, three of whom shall be appointed by the responsible authorities of the Jewish Zone, three by the responsible authorities of the Arab zone and three by the Administrator. The latter will endeavour to ensure by his choice the representation of the principal communities other than Arab and Jewish in the area of Jerusalem.

Article 6. On behalf of the United Nations, the Administrator shall ensure: (1) the protection of and free access to the Holy Places, in accordance with the terms of Articles 12 to 14 below;

(2) the control of the demilitarization and of the neutralization of the area, in accordance with the terms of Article 15 below;

(3) the protection of human rights and of the rights of distinctive groups, in accordance with the terms of Article 17 below.

Article 7. The Administrator, assisted by the Administrative Council, shall ensure: (1) the coordination of measures for the maintenance of public order;

(2) the operation of the main services of common interest to the area of Jerusalem;

(3) the equitable allocation of the contributions of each zone towards expenditure in the common interests.

Article 8. The following matters shall be submitted for the approval of the Administrator, with whom the final decision shall rest: sales, exchanges and all other transactions relating to real estate and to rights connected therewith; the construction and demolition of buildings and alterations thereto; the laying-out of squares and public gardens; the opening up of new roads; public utility works.

Article 9. There shall be established in Jerusalem an International Tribunal composed of three Judges who shall not be residents of the area of Jerusalem or nationals of the State of Israel or of an Arab State. They shall be selected by the President of the International Court of Justice.

The Tribunal shall have jurisdiction with respect to: (1) cases of jurisdictional conflicts between administrative organs and courts of the one zone and administrative organs and courts of the other zone;

(2) cases submitted either by the Administrator or the responsible authorities of the Jewish or Arab zone involving claims that laws, ordinances, regulations, administrative acts or court decisions applying to the area of Jerusalem are incompatible with the present Plan.

The decisions of the Tribunal in all cases under paragraphs (1) and (2) of the present article shall be legally binding on the Parties;

(3) cases submitted by the Administrator concerning any matter specified in Parts III, IV, VI and VII.

(a) If the Tribunal deems that a dispute submitted under paragraph (3). of this Article is susceptible of decision on the basis of law, it shall decide on that basis, utilizing the present Plan; or any of the sources set forth in Article 38, paragraph 1 of the Statute of the International Court of Justice. Such decisions shall be legally binding on the Parties.

(b) If the Tribunal deems that the dispute is not susceptible of decision on the basis of law, it shall render an opinion ex aequo et bono, giving special consideration, where appropriate, to the principles and purposes of the United Nations, to important United Nations resolutions and declarations, and to important multilateral treaties. Such opinions shall be advisory in character.

Article 10. There shall be established in Jerusalem a Mixed Tribunal composed of three Judges, two of whom shall be appointed by the responsible authorities of the Arab and Jewish zones respectively. The third Judge shall be appointed by the. President of the International Tribunal and shall assume the chairmanship of the Mixed Tribunal. He shall not be a resident of the area of Jerusalem or a national of the State of Israel or of an Arab State.

The Mixed Tribunal shall have jurisdiction with respect to all civil cases in which the parties involved are not residents of the same zone or in which one or more of the parties involved are not residents of either zone. The Tribunal shall likewise have criminal jurisdiction with respect to all cases, of offenses committed in one of the two zones, in which one or more of the defendants is a non-resident of such zone.

Article 11, The Administrator shall be authorised, to recruit the number of guards necessary for the protection of the Holy Places, religious buildings and sites as well as for the protection of his headquarters and his staff and of any other place under his supervision and protection. He shall further be authorised to recruit the auxiliary administrative personnel necessary for the carrying out of his functions. Such guards and personnel may be dismissed by the Administrator. The expenses of the salaries and allowances of the Administrator, the Deputy Administrator, the members of the International Tribunal and of the Mixed Tribunal, the guards and the administrative personnel shall be borne by the United Nations.

iii. holy places, religious buildings and sites

Article 12. The Holy Places, religious buildings and sites in the area of Jerusalem and the routes giving immediate access to them, shall be placed under the exclusive control of the United Nations Administrator. The latter shall be empowered to make regulations to assure their protection and free access to them, and to station guards charged with the maintenance of order inside and outside them.

These Holy Places, buildings and sites, and their dependencies shall not be subject to any tax from which they were exempt on 29 November 1947. Their owners and occupiers shall not be subject to any tax which would place them in a less favourable fiscal situation than that which they occupied on 29 November 1947.

Article 13. The Administrator shall ensure for ministers of religion and to pilgrims free circulation throughout the area of Jerusalem. He shall have the power to negotiate and to conclude with all the interested States arrangements destined to facilitate the circulation of ministers of religion and of pilgrims who wish to enter or leave the area of Jerusalem.

Article 14. The Administrator shall decide disputes which may arise between religious communities or within a religious community in connection with Holy Places, religious buildings or sites. His decisions cannot be called in question in any court of the two zones. He shall further have the power to carry out necessary repairs to Holy Places when such repairs are urgently needed and the community or communities concerned, though having been called upon, do not carry out within a reasonable time the repair in question.

iv. demilitarization and neutralization

Article 15. The area of Jerusalem shall be permanently demilitarized and neutralized. There shall be no military or para-military forces or stocks of war material within the area.

The responsible authorities of the two zones shall give formal assurances with respect to the demilitarized character of their respective zones, and the inviolability of the demarcation line between the zones. These formal assurances shall include the following provisions: (a) Both regular and irregular forces will be withdrawn;

(b) All entrenchments and fortifications of a military nature of any kind will be destroyed;

(c) All military operations, ground or aerial, within the perimeter of the area of Jerusalem are prohibited as are all military operations, ground or aerial, which originate outside the area but might be capable of affecting places within the demilitarized area;

(d) The importation, exportation, stockpiling of arms or munitions of any type is prohibited within the area as is the maintenance of passage through the area of military personnel either combatant or auxiliary.

Any violation of the provisions of the present Plan or any attempt to alter the international regime by force shall immediately be reported by the Administrator to the Security Council.

Nothing in this article shall affect the right of the two parties to maintain within their respective zones police forces armed with normal police weapons, for the purpose of maintaining order and security. The number of police in each zone shall not exceed 1,000.

v. economic and financial provisions

Article 16. The responsible authorities of the Jewish and Arab zones shall be called upon to negotiate such arrangements of an economic and financial nature which may be appropriate in the circumstances, taking into consideration the necessity of facilitating commercial relations between the two zones.

vi. human rights and fundamental freedoms

Article 17. All persons in the area of Jerusalem shall enjoy the human rights and fundamental freedoms set forth in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights of 1948.

If the United Nations Administrator considers that any such rights are being interfered with, he may bring the matter to the attention and submit the case to the Tribunal as provided in Article 9 or, if necessary, bring the matter before the competent organ of the United Nations.

vii. special provisions

Article 18. The Administrator shall determine the conditions under which persons of any origin or of any nationality (including the citizens of the State of Israel or of an Arab State) who are not domiciled in the area of Jerusalem may be allowed to take up residence there. He shall deliver, prolong and suspend the necessary authorizations.

Article 19. The responsible authorities of the Jewish and Arab zones shall maintain in their respective zones only such agents and officials, and shall establish only such administrative organs and public services, as are normally necessary for the administration of municipal affairs.2

1 Omission in the source text.

2 There is available in the files of the Department of State a six-page memorandum sent to Mr. Barco at Lausanne by Durward V. Sandifer, the Acting Director of the Office of United Nations Affairs. It noted that the preliminary draft on Jerusalem had “been examined by officers of UNA, L, and NEA, who have collaborated in the following comments and suggestions.” The memorandum has the date “5/18/40” penned in and it is filed under 501.BB Palestine/5–1849. The editors speculate that the memorandum was actually sent later, inasmuch as the preliminary draft was dated May 18.

Mr. Mark F. Ethridge to the Secretary of State 501.BB Palestine/5–1849: Telegram

[Document 668]

Mr. Mark F. Ethridge to the Secretary of State

secret Lausanne, May 18, 1949—3 p. m.

Palun 157. I understand and accept views expressed in Unpal 981 but can hardly be expected to concur in view of commitment recorded in intel of April 282 on which I based my statements in PCC and my talks with both Israeli and Arab delegates at Lausanne.

I agree “Israel is now in position of having received US support on all questions on which they are entitled to support and time has not [now] come for them to produce basis for settlement.” We shall continue press them to reveal this basis ire refugees, territory and Jerusalem. It must be admitted, however, that US sponsorship of admission resolution in absence of assurances at Lausanne requested by us has weakened our position and muffled my voice.

This is demonstrated by past admission instransigence of Israeli delegation forecast in Palun 1423 on subject of refugees and territory. Israeli delegation has not indicated acceptance in any way of US policy re refugees and territory as stated by Mr. Acheson to Mr. Sharrett (reDeptel 208, April 64 ). Its present approach these problems indicates concentration on resettlement rather than repatriation and acquisition of additional territory rather than exchange. It is difficult furthermore to reconcile this approach with conciliatory responses of Elath to Rusk reported in Unpal 98. We hope, however, Department’s views will prevail after further consideration by Israelis, otherwise Arabs may conclude that no solution is good solution pending September GA. Results would be impasse at Lausanne, maintenance of status quo of armistice lines in Palestine and irreparable delay in essential preliminary steps for resettlement of refugees.

Ethridge

1 Identified also as telegram 619, May 12, to Bern, p. 1004 [Pg. 1004 includes portions of Doc. 654 and Doc. 655].

2 This circular telegram stated “We have informed USUN del New York US not now in position join in sponsoring res for admission Israel to UN. We first want from Israeli reps at Lausanne conference assurances re status of Jerusalem, refugees and territorial settlement, which would create favorable atmosphere for admission Israel.” (800.00 Summaries/4–2849)

3 Identified also as telegram 699, May 9, from Bern, p. 988 [Pg. 988 is part of Doc. 641].

4 Not printed, but see footnote 2, p. 894 [Pg. 894 includes portions of Doc. 577 and Doc. 578].

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in Saudi Arabia 867N.48/5–949: Telegram

[Document 669]

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in Saudi Arabia 1

secret Washington, May 18, 1949—7 p. m.

187. Reur 334 May 92 pls express Dept’s appreciation FonOff’s indication Arab states prepared to contribute to solution of refugee problem by resettlement. You shld seek early opportunity continue discussion this question with SAG, informing it that USG is making every effort urge Israel accept return those so desiring. In this connection USG noted with interest Israeli statements before ad hoc Committee GA that it is willing contribute solution of problem and that it accepts principle repatriation. We are now urging Israel give early indication that it will agree repatriate considerable number and that it will commence repatriation near future. Israel has, moreover, announced to PCC and ad hoc Committee GA its acceptance of obligations to pay compensation. Re SAG assurances that Arab states will arrange resettlement after refugees fully compensated, every effort will of course be made to speed process compensation. Of necessity, however, latter will be time-consuming legal process, involving detailed determination property rights and examination individual claims. USG therefore hopes that progress towards resettlement those so desiring will not be deferred pending completion this process, and that SAG will use its influence Arab League to bring about realistic and humane appreciation urgent need for commencing solution of problem.

Acheson

1 This telegram was repeated to Bern for Mr. Ethridge and to London, Damascus, Beirut, Cairo, and Baghdad.

2 Not printed; it described the Saudi Arabian Government’s current thinking in the following terms: “(a) USG should insist return to homeland those refugees willing live Israel. (b) Israeli Government should give guarantee obey UN decisions. (c) Refugees unwilling return should be compensated by those who took possession their properties, (d) After refugees fully compensated, Arab states will arrange resettlement.” (867N.48/5–949)

The Department of State to the British Embassy 867N.113/5–1949

[Document 670]

The Department of State to the British Embassy

undated

secret

Memorandum

The Department of State has reviewed the memoranda left by the British Ambassador during his calls of April 27, 1949 and May 17, 1949, relative to the Palestine arms embargo, and before reaching a decision with regard to the questions raised wishes to suggest that immediate conversations be undertaken between the United Kingdom and the United States. These conversations might include the following subjects: 1) Role of the United Nations in the matter (i.e., United Nations Resolutions and Mediator, effect on Palestine Conciliation Commission negotiations, et cetera.)

2) Basic needs of each country in the area for internal security.

3) Needs above those of internal security in connection with both Anglo–United States strategic planning.

4) Political objectives which might be achieved by relaxation of the arms embargo.

5) Coordination of any programs with the Military Assistance program proposed by the United States; possible effect on the proposed Military Assistance Program.

6) Timing, terms and conditions, including financing, of proposed shipments.

7) Possible coordination of any program with the French Government in order to insist that it does not duplicate shipments.

8) Decisions as to which country should make shipments to each State and what each country might contribute toward any plans formulated under point two above.1

1 This undated memorandum was drafted on May 16 but was not handed to the British until at least 3 days later. Mr. Satterthwaite, in a memorandum of May 19 to the Secretary or the Under Secretary, submitted the memorandum for approval and suggested that when it was handed to the British Ambassador, “you orally make clear that in suggesting these conversations we are not making any commitment relative to a change in our own arms export policy, and are particularly concerned with the possible effect of such a program on current negotiations at Lausanne and the military assistance program shortly to be put before Congress.” (867N.113/5–1949)

The Minister in Syria (Keeley) to the Secretary of State 501.BB Palestine/5–1949: Telegram

[Document 671]

The Minister in Syria (Keeley) to the Secretary of State

secret Damascus, May 19, 1949—10 a. m.

288. For George McGhee. Mytel 281 May 13. As both parties rejected modified Bunche proposal General Riley informs me negotiations adjourned indefinitely. Meanwhile Vigier and Riley hope work out another proposal that might have more prospect acceptance.

Considering Israeli intransigent attitude as exemplified by Prime Minister Ben-Gurion’s uncompromising refusal (Tel Aviv Embtel 342 May 9 to Department)1 Bunche’s invitation that he meet with Prime Minister Zaim (who in advance of invitation volunteered his willingness meet [Ben-]Gurion in effort cut Gordian knot), stalemate seems likely to continue indefinitely. While am convinced Zaim willing make generous concessions on other pending matters such as refugees, internationalization Jerusalem and boundaries elsewhere than slight rectification desired in Syrian-Israeli frontier in region of Lakes Hula and Tiberius, Zaim is unlikely yield everything without any quid pro quo as Israel seems to demand. To do so could well cost him his job and remove best hope so far of Syrian acceptance compromise settlement Palestine conflict.

General Riley’s suggestion (mytel 281) that US Government’s support of Mediator’s efforts be communicated to Syrians only when Riley and I consider moment propitious was not intended to by-pass Mediator but rather to face realities realistically (Deptel 217 May 17). Experience has shown that Bunche being far from scene of negotiations is often as much as 48 hours behind developments and consequently his recommendations and any diplomatic support requested by him often inapplicable to situation as it exists by time they reach scene of action.

Bunche’s departure before conclusion of Syrian-Israeli armistice was generally considered prematurely optimistic by those who understood Syrian internal problem and Israeli appetite. Because of ineffectiveness remote control, Legation believes Bunche should either return to scene of negotiations or relinquish initiative to those on spot. Legation favors Bunche’s return believing that only he on spot is likely to be able to force some sort of modus operandi for armistice that will permit talks to open for settlement broader problems including delimitation permanent Syro-Israeli frontier.

Those concerned with refugee problem should understand that Zaim expressed willingness (repeatedly reiterated) to accept quarter million or more refugees for resettlement was contingent on and part of general peace settlement.

Everyone who has discussed matter with Zaim is impressed by his sincerity and broadminded attitude toward Israel (far cry from stubborn intransigence previous Syrian Government) but his ardor is cooling in face of evident Israeli insatiability. While Zaim is at least trying to measure up to Kemal Ataturk’s stature (mytel 256 April 28)2 and is susceptible to moderating influence, it is unfortunately becoming increasingly evident (Tel Aviv 342) that Ben-Gurion is no-Venizelos. Yet unless Israel can be brought to understand that it cannot have all of its cake (partition boundaries) and gravy as well (areas captured in violation of truce, Jerusalem and resettlement Arab refugees elsewhere) it may find that it has won Palestine war but lost peace.

Should be evident that Israel’s continued insistence upon her pound of flesh and more is driving Arab states slowly (and perhaps surely) to gird their loins (politically and economically if not yet militarily) for long-range struggle that profiting by mistakes of past could make Israel’s task far harder than might be case if far seeing Israeli statesmanship were to grasp opportunities of moment to reach negotiated settlement on reasonable terms. Israel and its UN sponsors more than Arab states would stand to suffer most by indefinite prolongation current stalemate.

Sent Department 288, repeated Tel Aviv 33, USUN New York 6, Bern 8, for PCC; pouched Amman, Baghdad, Beirut, Cairo, Jerusalem, Jidda, London, Paris, Ankara.

Keeley

1 Not printed; it advised that Ambassador McDonald had conversed with the Israeli Prime Minister on May 8 on the subjects reported in Tel Aviv’s telegram 323, May 2, p. 966 [Pg. 966 includes portions of Doc. 625 and Doc. 626]. He commented that it was “Evident Israel not now prepared to go in public beyond recent statements on refugees and Jerusalem. Re boundaries it will not publicly suggest possibility yielding territory now held. This does not preclude possible concessions in bilateral talks with Transjordan at Lausanne.” (868.48/5–949)

2 Not printed.

The Secretary of State to the Legation in Switzerland 501.BB Palestine/5–1949: Telegram

[Document 672]

The Secretary of State to the Legation in Switzerland 1

secret Washington, May 19, 1949—1 p. m.

652. Unpal 106. For Ethridge. Fol are comments on your numbered paras Palun 151:2

1. On McGhee’s return neither French nor Turkish Embs had reed instrs re discussions with Dept on Pal refugee program as agreed with PCC at Beirut. Moreover, until decision made re US financial support for program Dept has desired proceed cautiously. Preliminary mtg was held May 9 with Benard of Fr Emb, which had in meantime recd instr to meet with Dept but had reed no substantive instrs. Benard raised no issues re proposed plan of action, and later exchange of technical info was agreed upon. Fol receipt Palun 151 mtg called May 18 with Turk and Fr Emb reps for gen discussion.

2. Several mtgs have been held with Brit Emb reps and info exchanged. No reply yet recd Dept’s Aide-Mémoire May 10 mailed you May 11, but AmEmb London in 1620 [1920] May 163 advises UK generally willing follow Dept’s lead. Dept agrees with you approach to refugee problem shld continue to be through UN and expects no difficulty with Brit assuming US and UK can play parts commensurate with their interests in problem and can be relatively free of close UN supervision.

3. Dept agrees desirability initiate limited work projects at earliest opportunity and will be glad receive recommendation PCG Technical Comm and explore all possible source funds including possibilities under UNRPR. It appears unlikely, however, that additional US grant funds can be obtained for this purpose from present session Congress, and other sources believed uncertain before new program agreed.

4. Dept agrees desirability skipping survey group phase if this cld accelerate program. However, until authoritative survey made, program approved and funds obtained there is little that proposed Development Board could do of operational nature. Head of survey group wld appear to require different capabilities than man to carry out program. Moreover, it is essential to get man of greater stature to head short survey and sell program to UN, US public and Congress than can probably be obtained for longer range administration of program. Until program developed it will be difficult ascertain type operating agency required, particularly with regard auspices and degree of centralization to be followed in execution program. Such an agency may require GA approval.

5. Dept pleased at your report that satisfactory commitments expected from Israel and Arab states shortly re repatriation and resettlement, respectively. For your info, all Dept plans call for financial assistance for repatriation as well as resettlement. Dept agrees your proposed allocation of refugees and strategy in gaining acceptance your plan. Dept aware that you need US commitment along lines given urtel before Israel and Arab states will agree accept definite number refugees. You will be advised soon as Pres has made decision.

Acheson

1 This telegram was repeated to London.

2 Identified also as telegram 741, May 16, from Bern, p. 1013 [Pg. 1013 is part of Doc. 660].

3 Not printed

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in Egypt 501.BB Palestine/5–349: Telegram

[Document 673]

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in Egypt

confidential Washington, May 19, 1949—7 p. m.

507. During call on SecState May 17, Egyptian FonMin 1 expressed disappointment re recent events in UN, but stated Egypt nevertheless desires pursue course of friendship with US on mutually satisfactory basis. Secy stated US reciprocates these feelings and desires encourage good relations between Egypt and US.

Secy then emphasized deep concern of USG re Arab refugees, stating that we are continuing urge Israel accept principles of Dec 11 res He said our representations had not been as successful as we wished, but that we had made some progress. We believe substantial number refugees shld return Israel but it is evident that a number could not. Latter wld have to be resettled elsewhere.

FonMin replied that Egypt was concerned with this problem, as factor which wld disturb peace entire NE. Expressed hope that all so desiring wld be permitted return. Egypt, as one of world’s most densely populated regions, had no room for additional immigrants, he added.

Secy stated he was aware of this, but felt Egypt cld play constructive role in Lausanne discussions. Problem wld require agreement between parties concerned, and USG hopes for Egypt’s cooperation. Khashaba Pasha stated in gen terms that Egypt prepared cooperate with US and other countries in helping achieve solution of refugee problem.

Pls take early opportunity pursue subject further with PrimMin, expressing Dept’s appreciation FonMin’s assurances cooperation as indicated preceding para and PrimMin’s assurances (urtel 430 May 3)2 that, once principle of repatriation was established, he was confident Arab states wld at once begin to study practical aspects of resettlement problem. USG hopes Egyptian reps Lausanne will be instructed by Egyptian Govt use their influence to bring about similarly constructive and realistic attitude on part of their colleagues.

USG fully appreciates difficulty Egypt wld have in absorbing great number refugees. However, if Egypt were to accept small number, it wld contribute to reduction of problem and make it easier for other states assume responsibility for those which they are able absorb. USG agrees with PrimMin that considerable number refugees will not wish return to Israel.

USG noted with interest Israeli Govt’s acceptance of principle of repatriation, in its statements before ad hoc Committee GA, and its assurances that it is prepared contribute to solution of problem. USG will continue use its best efforts induce Israel accept return substantial number and urge early commencement repatriation activities.

USG hopes Egypt will use its great influence in Arab world to urge Arab states adopt cooperative attitude towards this urgent problem, as important means contributing to its early solution.

Acheson

1 Ahmed Mohamed Khashaba.

2 Not printed.

The Secretary of State to the Legation in Switzerland 501.BB Palestine/5–1949: Telegram

[Document 674]

The Secretary of State to the Legation in Switzerland 1

confidential Washington, May 19, 1949—7 p. m.

655. For Ethridge. Israeli Amb Elath, discussing Arab refugees May 19 with McGhee, stated his Govt is in full agreement with USG that both repatriation and resettlement are required for solution of problem. He stated, however, that Israel not in position define number to be repatriated prior (1) formal conclusion peace and (2) assurances that plans have been made for resettlement fixed number, with necessary financing. If Israel repatriated portion and remainder were not resettled, security problem would be aggravated rather than relieved, and remainder Arabs wld insist on repatriation as well.

McGhee pointed out we consider repatriation substantial number, not merely token number, required to obtain favorable atmosphere for Arab cooperation in resettlement remainder, and to reduce problem to number capable assimilation on self-sustaining basis in Arab states within reasonable period. Only on basis agreement repatriation and resettlement adequate numbers cld PCC formulate plan for resettlement. It is obvious that USG, in responding to any request from PCC or UN, cld not agree extend assistance in support plan which it considers unworkable, and we consider resettlement number approaching 700,000 an unworkable plan.

McGhee agreed with Elath that problem was three-sided consisting agreement by Israel repatriation given number, agreement by Arabs resettlement given number, and formulation resettlement plan involving outside assistance. McGhee stated that agreement re repatriation appeared necessary first step in overcoming present impasse, but to be realistic considered it possible that agreement on all three points might be reached simultaneously at Lausanne. US considers that responsibility for problem rests with UN and PCC. Comment: it is believed Elath sought to convey that Israel prepared talk numbers for repatriation as soon as assurance received that Arabs wld agree resettlement remainder and outside financial assistance forthcoming. Financial assistance repatriation not discussed.

Acheson

1 This telegram was repeated to London and Tel Aviv.

The Minister in Switzerland (Vincent) to the Secretary of State 501.BB Palestine/5–2049: Telegram

[Document 675]

The Minister in Switzerland (Vincent) to the Secretary of State

secret
priority Bern, May 20, 1949—10 a. m.

769. Palun 160. From Ethridge. Israel’s full territorial demands upon the Arab states were laid on the table today.1 Back from a day with Sharett in Geneva, Eytan sought me out and in three-hour conversation, told me what Israel has in mind when she gives her position to the Commission, perhaps on Friday.2 Far from having modified her position, Israel has stiffened her demands.

I opened the conversation by saying to Eytan that I thought the time had come for frankness and that I hoped he had new instructions from Sharett since the conference here was in a virtual stalemate. He answered that far from having new instructions, Sharett was shocked by the Commission’s reaction to Israel’s position and that Sharett had instructed him to come back to Lausanne so as to tell the PCC again what should be “self-evident truth” of Israel’s position.

That position is this:

On Lebanon, Israel will have no demands at the moment. She is ready to accept the Polish3 armistice lines, which coincide, with however a proviso that if in the future either state desired to open negotiations looking toward border rectification it might be done. Inquiry on my part developed that Israel wants a slice of Southeastern Lebanon which she considers necessary to her development scheme, but is willing in some way not made known to compensate her for it. For the time being, however, no demands would be made and Eytan felt a quick peace could be made.

As to Egypt, Israel’s first demand would be for the political boundary between Palestine and Egypt, which would put the Gaza strip in Israel. That demand, said Eytan, would at least force Egypt to talk about the Gaza strip. I gathered that if Egypt says no, the demand will not be pressed. However, Israel is more and more in favor of having the Gaza strip and is willing to take both the refugees and normal population, with, however, the proviso that Israel would have a right to screen out and deport terrorists or Mufti followers. Eytan said he had just been authorized by Sharett to make the demand for the Gaza strip.

As to Syria, Eytan says Israel is not willing to negotiate and will have no demands until an armistice is signed. However, Israelis willing to accept the international frontier providing a second clause makes the same provision for later reopening for the rectification of the border.

As to Transjordan, Eytan repeated legal argument previously made to Commission, that no Arab state has a right to any territory in Palestine and that any Arab state that won territorial addition would be getting a bonus out of the war.

I told him that the Commission was not deluded at all by that argument; that we recognized it as an opening move with Abdullah to divide up the rest of Arab Palestine. Eytan said that of course Israel would have more demands as to territory in Arab Palestine and the new demands would not be based upon military considerations but upon the developmental scheme.

Engineers had been discontented with the Tulkarm triangle line because it still did not put Israel in position to bring water down from the north to the south without having to tunnel under mountains at prohibitive cost. The new demand would be directed toward shortening the waterline. Israel had in mind giving Abdullah a few villages around Latrun and in the south in return for the new strip in Samaria and in return for opening the Latrun road. He said there might be a few other minor concessions here and there on a “mutual” basis.

Eytan made clear that while intending to keep occupied areas such as Western Galilee, Israel has no intention of giving up any part of the Negev. He said that also there were many reasons for that position: (1) Israel was convinced that with water she could develop it: (2) there were psychological reasons and attachments which would make it impossible for any Israeli Government to give it up; (3) public opinion in no case would stand for what would obviously be a concession to the British, not to the Arabs; (4) there was no reason why the Arabs should have it when they could not develop it and put refugees there.

I asked Eytan about Israel’s intentions toward Lydda, Ramle and Jaffa. He said she had none except to keep them. Arabs in Jaffa beyond those already there were entirely out of the question and Lydda and Ramie had been filled up with immigrants and there was therefore no place for Arabs.

On the refugee question, I pointed out to Eytan that the Arabs still consider some concession on emergency measures as an evidence of Israel’s good faith. He answered that Israel had made concessions already beyond what she should have because Arab Governments are not interested in refugees so much as in exploiting their own interests, which in this case takes the form of forcing Israel into a bad negotiating position. Therefore Israel would do nothing more about refugees now.

Comment: Eytan told me that he recognizes the stalemate nature of negotiations here and is ready to make his position known to the full Commission. The Arabs are meeting today to determine whether they are willing to do that also. The US Delegation anticipates that when the Arabs know Israel’s position the conference is likely to break up. The Arabs feel that the Jews need peace more than they do and are willing to wait it out until September apparently.

Neither side seems to be ready for peace, despite protestations to the contrary. Certainly unless Israel modifies her demands, there is no possibility of peace on any basis heretofore envisioned by the State Department. There seems little likelihood that Israel’s demands will be modified. On the contrary, Eytan told me today that Israel is basing her policy upon the knowledge that Egypt and Syria are buying arms in Europe. He professes to know from whom and in what quantity.

Department’s comments will be welcome. [Ethridge.]

Vincent

1 The date referred to as “today” may be May 19, inasmuch as telegram 769 was presumably drafted on that day. Note that the Department referred to the date as May 19 in its telegram 682 to Mr. Ethridge on May 24, p. 1051 [Pg. 1051 includes portions of Doc. 688 and Doc. 689].

2 Mr. Ethridge, on May 23, advised from Lausanne that Mr. Eytan on May 20 had informed the PCC of the Israeli position along lines similar to those expounded by him as reported in Palun 160 (telegram Palun 162, 501.BB Palestine/5–2349).

3 An obvious garble; perhaps the words “Palestine–Lebanon frontier lines as” were intended.

The Secretary of State to the Legation in Switzerland 501.BB Palestine/5–2049: Telegram

[Document 676]

The Secretary of State to the Legation in Switzerland 1

secret Washington, May 20, 1949—1 p. m.

658. Unpal 109. For Ethridge. [Re] Palun 1532 Dept agrees all suggested changes Proposed Plan of Action Pal Refugee problem except elimination economic survey group which has been implicit in Dept plans and discussions with British since Embtel 128 of Mar 22 from Beirut. See also Deptel 652 (Unpal 106) of May 19. Such a group appears necessary to make authoritative recommendations re distribution of refugees, selection and priority of development projects, cost of program and sources of financing, and to provide an integrated regional economic and development plan. Group would, as indicated proposed plan, have a broader focus than refugees. Members of group, particularly head, must be outstanding in their respective fields and representative proper interests UN member states and Int orgs if their recommendations are to bear proper weight with GA, US Cong and public, other UN states, Int Bank and other Int and private orgs who can contribute to program. Wherever practicable it is envisaged having appropriate Int body furnish technical man, i.e., Int Bank would furnish financial expert. It is doubted if recommendations PCC staff technical group of type now being recruited would carry sufficient weight with all concerned to assure acceptance of program. Agree PCC staff technical group might carry to conclusion studies re refugee aspects of problem including initial studies on organization of any permanent refugee agency, if this is decision; however, Dept feels that broader economic aspects could be better dealt with by separate body such as envisaged as survey group.

Acheson

1 This telegram was repeated to London.

2 Identified also as telegram 742, May 16, from Bern, not printed; it suggested various changes in the wording of the proposed plan of action, p. 939 [Pg. 939 is part of Doc. 608].

The Secretary of State to the Legation in Switzerland 501.BB Palestine/5–2049: Telegram

[Document 677]

The Secretary of State to the Legation in Switzerland

secret Washington, May 20, 1949—1 p. m.

Unpal 110. For Lausanne. We agree (Palun 1531 ) ur proposal France and Turkey join US and UK in concerted program urge Israel and Arabs face refugee problem constructively through repatriation and resettlement. Pls outline to Yalcin and Boisanger genl nature our approaches Israel and Arabs (Depcirtel Apr 29, 5 p. m. and Unpal 85, Apr 28), informing them Dept concurs your view re desirability parallel approaches by French and Turkish Govts and requesting that they so inform their Govts earliest opportunity. In absence instrs this subject to French and Turk missions Washington, we believe approach by you speedier and more effective.

Acheson

1 See footnote 2, p. 1038 [Pg. 1038 includes portions of Doc. 675 and Doc. 676].

The Consul at Jerusalem (Burdett) to the Secretary of State 867N.01/5–2049: Telegram

[Document 678]

The Consul at Jerusalem (Burdett) to the Secretary of State

secret Jerusalem, May 20, 1949—2 p. m.

370. Day an called last night to discuss yesterday’s special committee sessions. Barco present. Committee meeting ended in complete deadlock and Dayan saw no prospects for agreement or usefulness in further negotiations. Asserted informally felt gloomier re prospects continued peace in Jerusalem than at any time since his arrival last August. Has advised Israeli Government to request UN to return Jewish sections Mt. Scopus to complete Israeli control under terms of agreement signed last July providing for UN protection on Mt. Scopus “until hostilities cease”. Then proposes inform Transjordan bluntly Israel intends to have free access by agreement or otherwise. Feels Transjordan bound by Article 8 of armistice agreement to grant free access and if refuses, Israel free take appropriate measures in view breach armistice.

At committee meeting Dayan suggested agreement on following lines: Israel to receive Latrun salient in return for territory in Beit Nabala region, free access to Mt. Scopus; Arabs to receive free access to Bethlehem on main road, electricity for Old City, use Tulkarm-Qalqiliya road until new section in Arab territory constructed. Arabs demanded as essential addition point return of Arab quarters in Israel hands and stated willing allow Jews return Jewish quarter Old City. Dayan argued special committee should consider only questions specified in Article 8 of armistice agreement and territorial changes in Jerusalem should await peace treaty. However, if Arabs insisted on changes now willing consider return of Arab quarters in exchange for equivalent territory northern Jerusalem to connect Mt. Scopus with Jewish sections.1

Comment—Only thing Israel considers essential Jerusalem in immediate future and determined to have, is free access Mt. Scopus. At least possibility exists will use force rather than wait for peace conference decision. Dayan stated would launch propaganda campaign in US against Transjordan for failure permit free access to cultural and humanitarian institutions after agreeing to do so in principle at Rhodes. Main Arab wish is return Arab quarters and they realize principal bargaining weapon is Mt. Scopus.

During conversation I suggested to Dayan possibility general agreement covering all Jerusalem problems. He definitely preferred leave territorial matters to peace conference but agreed would consider general over-all settlement now provided Arabs make territorial adjustment in north in return for some, but not all, Arab quarters in south. Felt Arabs would maintain present adamant refusal give anything except free access to Mt. Scopus in return for Arab quarters.

Two possible solutions apparently exist, one—general settlement covering all problems affecting Jerusalem area. Might take following lines: Israel to receive Latrun salient, territory north of Jerusalem built up area comprising land included in Hebrew University and Hadassah development plans and connecting with Jewish section of Sanhedriya, permission for Jews to return to Jewish quarter Old City with corridor through Mt. Zion assuring free access, free access to Wailing Wall and Jewish cemetery on Mt. Scopus. Arabs to receive territorial compensation in Latrun area in direction Beit Nabala, free use Nablus-Bethlehem Road, electricity for Old City and following sections southern Jerusalem: Mt. Zion, Deir Abu tor, Bakka, portion German colony, Ramat Eahel, Talpiyot, Allenby barracks, Alamein camp and section Beit Safafa now held by Jews. Exact size territory in both north and south Jerusalem subject to negotiations. Suggestion: uses as starting point areas now held, in belief neither UN nor US will force Israel start on basis areas held at end mandate. Consider above maximum Arabs can now expect receive Jerusalem and Department will note is considerably less than offered by Dayan last January. Israel building up old Arab quarters to increasing extent and populating them with new immigrants. Delay will make return Arab quarters progressively more difficult. Disadvantages proposal is that will take considerable time, involve major changes and exceed in scope task assigned special committee by armistice agreement.

Second—limited agreement to remain in effect only until permanent peace treaty signed. Israel to receive: Free access to Mt. Scopus, free use Latrun road. Arabs to receive: Free use Bethlehem road, electricity, free use Tulkarm-Qalqiliya road now in Jewish hands, free access to Arab College in Government House, neutral zone. Such agreement would meet principal Israeli demand and would conform to Article 8 Rhodes Armistice Agreement. Arabs would obtain considerable benefits but not their main desiratum. Would be simpler and easier to negotiate.

Consul General would appreciate learning which approach Department and USDel PCC consider preferable. Expect call Abdullah el Tel tomorrow with Barco and obtain his views on progress negotiations.2

Sent Department, repeated Amman 29, Geneva 12 (for USDel, PCC).

Burdett

1 Amman, on May 20, advised of information from Hashem Debbas, the King’s Chamberlain, that at the special committee meeting at Jerusalem on May 19, which lasted for 4 hours, the Israelis wished to discuss only two points—the Latrun salient and access to Scopus. Regarding the salient, the Israelis were said to be “only willing give in return use Bethlehem road. Transjordan representatives insisted that they would agree to both points only if Israel returned Arab quarters now Jerusalem. … Israelis indicated they would not consider any proposal relating to Jerusalem itself.” The Chamberlain informed that the next meeting would be held on May 29 but expressed doubt that progress would be made. Mr. Stabler commented that “Transjordan position re committee matters has stiffened considerably and no indication exists they propose modify stand. This Sue to difficulties caused by triangle agreement and by realization armistice precludes renewal hostilities by Israel to attain its ends. Moreover, government seems convinced it preferable to leave all negotiations this stage to Lausanne Conference and King apparently concurs this policy.” (Telegram 212, 867N.01/5–2049)

2 Mr. Ethridge advised, on May 31, that the American Delegation at Lausanne “doubts final solution for Jerusalem can be reached while general Palestine question is under discussion at Lausanne. Pending presentation by PCC of Jerusalem plan called for in December 11 resolution, USDel perceives no objection to limited agreement mentioned urtel 370 provided agreed to by both parties and provided they understand it to be interim arrangement pending GA decision on Jerusalem area.” (telegram 829, identified also as Palun 179, from Bern, 501.BB Palestine/5–3149)

Memorandum by the Acting Secretary of State 867N.01/5–2349

[Document 679]

Memorandum by the Acting Secretary of State

confidential [Washington, May 23, 1949.]

Meeting With President, Monday, May 23, 1949

arab refugee commitment

The President understands that he has made a commitment in this direction and desires it implemented in a realistic manner. He understands that this problem is a long-term one and that there is no immediately available solution which will remove it from the area of consideration and action for some time to come.

James E. Webb

The Consul at Jerusalem (Burdett) to the Secretary of State 867N.01/5–2349: Telegram

[Document 680]

The Consul at Jerusalem (Burdett) to the Secretary of State

confidential Jerusalem, May 23, 1949—1 p. m.

372. Mt. Scopus discussed with Abdullah Tel during call to introduce Barco 21st. Confirmed Dayan statements negotiations in special committee deadlocked but did not appear pessimistic re possible consequences. Indicated Transjordan desired leave question for settlement in peace treaty when could use free access as bargaining weapon in effort regain Arab quarters.

Stated Israeli wished agreement in special committee limited to free movement on roads but this of no real value to Arabs. Could not really use main Bethlehem road since not possible permit Arabs pass down street past their houses occupied by Jews without right enter. Also free access to Mt. Scopus equivalent to return of large Jewish quarters since would allow reestablishment thriving community. Re overall agreement involving exchange land in Mt. Scopus area for Arab quarters said impossible for Arabs give Israel corridor to Mt. Scopus since would cut Arab sections off from north. Admitted might be able cede small area land including police training depot but not connecting Mt. Scopus with Jewish sections except by road under Arab control. Reiterated Arabs given all could in Jerusalem.

Learned Arab Legion headquarters in Jerusalem has protested to UN against new fortifications Israeli reportedly effecting Mt. Scopus.

Comment—almost insurmountable difficulties agreement re Scopus again brought out by two talks. Only possible if work on premise Jerusalem area demilitarized and eliminated from any future conflict thus making military positions of no importance. Land bridge to Scopus from Jewish Jerusalem would place Arab sections at mercy of Israel and at same time would cut off possibility of expansion Arab quarters towards Ramallah, most logical direction. Would go a long way towards making Jerusalem entirely Jewish controlled city. Yet Israel certainly not willing give up Mt. Scopus and possesses necessary force at moment establish corridor. Also without strong outside pressure which appears most unlikely difficult believe Israel will relinquish any Arab quarters except for territorial gains north Jerusalem.

Sent Department 372, repeated Geneva 13 for USDel PCC; pouched Arab capitals.

Burdett

Mr. Mark F. Ethridge to the Secretary of State 501.BB Palestine/5–2349: Telegram

[Document 681]

Mr. Mark F. Ethridge to the Secretary of State

restricted Lausanne, May 23, 1949—3 p. m.

Palun 165. Be Paluns 1481 and 162.2 On May 21 Arab delegates informed PCC re May 12 protocol as follows: 1. Arab delegates reaffirms Palestine problem concerns all of them, equally.

[2.] Arab delegates are confident PCC will spare no effort see certain measures (refPalun 1663 ) are given full effect without delay.

3. Arab delegates consider refugee question most pressing of all under May 12 protocol. Delay may entail serious consequences for political, social and humanitarian reasons. Solution recommended by General Assembly resolution December 11 must be implemented in entirety soonest.

As first step Arab delegates ask refugees from areas defined May 12 protocol map (western Galilee, Jaffa area of Lydda, Ramle, Beersheba in [and?] area of Gaza) be enabled return their home forthwith. Also those refugees from Jewish Jerusalem.

Arab delegates, anxious personal security and free exercise their rights shall be assured refugees returning their homes until areas, mentioned have been evacuated by Jewish troops and authorities request PCC consider and put into effect in name [apparent omission] refugees.

4. PCC will doubtless consider in discussions certain measures taken by Jewish authorities in Jewish Jerusalem which obstruct settlement Jerusalem question.

Particularly important depts and services installed in Jerusalem in disregard General Assembly resolution December 11 shall be transferred elsewhere without delay.

Ethridge

1 Dated May 12, p. 998 [Pg. 998 includes portions of Doc. 648 and Doc. 649].

2 Not printed, but see footnote 2, p. 1036 [Pg. 1036 is part of Doc. 675].

3  Infra.

Mr. Mark F. Ethridge to the Secretary of State 501.BB Palestine/5–2349: Telegram

[Document 682]

Mr. Mark F. Ethridge to the Secretary of State

restricted Lausanne, May 23, 1949—3 p. m.

Palun 166. Ref Palun 145.1 On May 18 Arab delegates informed PCC as follows:

PCC having decided question of future measures re protection of rights and property of refugees be placed on agenda of General Comite. Arab delegates submit without prejudice to substance of question following demands: 1. Return of orange and fruit [orchards to?] growers, owners and workers.

2. Immediate unfreezing of Arab bank accounts.

3. Abrogation of absentee act and annulment of subsequent enforcing measures.

4. Suspension of all measures of requisition and occupation of Arab houses and lands.

5. Reuniting refugees belonging to same family.

6. Assurance of freedom of worship and respect of churches and mosques.

7. Repatriation of clergy.

8. Freeing of wakf property and free use thereof.

9. Assurance to returning refugees of security.

Ethridge

1 Identified also as telegram 410, May 10, from Geneva, p. 992 [Pg. 992 includes portions of Doc. 643 and Doc. 644].

The Chargé in Egypt (Patterson) to the Secretary of State 501.BB Palestine/5–2349: Telegram

[Document 683]

The Chargé in Egypt (Patterson) to the Secretary of State

secret Cairo, May 23, 1949—5 p. m.

501. Deptel 507 May 19, 7 p. m. sent via Tripoli received May 22. On preceding day refugee situation touched upon in conversation with Prime Minister, requested primarily to discuss subject matter Depair 227 April 20.1

On mentioning to Prime Minister my understanding that authorized representative Israeli Government had at Lake Success accepted in principle right of refugee repatriation, Prime Minister rather testily replied that application of acceptances in principle could be and might easily be so long delayed as to be valueless. Acceptance in principle and implementation in practice by Israelis were two entirely different things.

On chancing to meet Prime Minister evening 22nd, following receipt Deptel 507, I had opportunity briefly to allude to Khashaba Pasha’s discussion of refugee problem with Secretary State and to voice hope that Egypt, as a leader among Arab states, might give lead toward study and solution of refugee problem which, as Prime Minister had some weeks ago informed me, would inevitably involve resettlement as well as repatriation. I trusted Egypt, despite its over-population, might accept at least token number refugees for the inspiration and guidance of other Arab states less burdened with population. Interruption prevented my pursuing subject until at hour departure I again reminded Prime Minister [apparent omission], I shall seek another opportunity to revive subject.

British Ambassador,2 whom I accosted same evening on subject refugees, stated he had called on Prime Minister about 10 days ago but had found him apparently little disposed to admit any responsibility for plight of refugees or for initiative in alleviating such plight.

Prime Minister had informed British Ambassador, on being pressed for statement of his thoughts on handling relief problem, that prior to action by Arab states, Israelis should start repatriating Palestine Arabs to Israel and give compensation to those preferring resettlement. British Ambassador found Egyptians inclined to blame everyone but themselves for existing situation.

Continuing, British Ambassador stated Prime Minister had added expression of his desire that relief agencies should estimate number of refugees insisting on repatriation as well as those willing to be resettled.

It will be recalled by reference mytel 430 May 3 that Prime Minister had indicated to me that as soon as Israel had accepted in principle the Arab refugee right of repatriation the Arab states would initiate plans for breaking down refugee problem into its component parts with a view to solving it. To judge from Prime Minister’s remarks to Sir Ronald, Prime Minister is resorting to delaying tactics with new conditions in order stave off disagreeable necessity of spending time, energy and probably money in study of alien Arab problem which he would like to have devolve on others, presumably, UN, US and UK.

Foregoing recital not encouraging from standpoint of supplying evidence of lively Egyptian desire to cooperate in solution refugee problem but perhaps final word yet to be spoken.

Patterson

1 The editors are unable to identify this communication.

2 Sir Ronald Ian Campbell.

The United States Representative at the United Nations (Austin) to the Secretary of State 501.BB Palestine/5–2349: Telegram

[Document 684]

The United States Representative at the United Nations (Austin) to the Secretary of State

secret New York, May 23, 1949—6:35 p. m.

627. When sounded out at Department’s request re his return to Near East for Syrian-Israeli negotiations (Damascus 288, May 19), Bunche said that if he entered negotiations personally it would short circuit his immediate aim of forcing a meeting between Ben-Gurion and Zaim. He thought there was little use in further discussions between present Israeli and Syrian representatives; that the question needed to be taken to higher level.

Bunche, together with Riley, who came to New York today, is drafting a new set of proposals which will be available to USUN May 24 for comment prior to their dispatch to Vigier.

His plan is to send these to the field with a suggestion that Ben-Gurion and Zaim negotiate on this basis. Bunch will inform both parties that if his proposal for such negotiation is not accepted, he will turn the matter over to the SC. He will point out to Israelis that they will be in a very weak position in that event.

Bunche reiterated that Zaim must have a quid pro quo from Israelis because of his domestic situation. As Bunche recently informed Sharett, Israelis cannot expect Syrian withdrawal unless they are willing to make some concessions.

Austin

The Acting Secretary of State to the Legation in Switzerland 501.BB Palestine/5–2349: Telegram

[Document 685]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Legation in Switzerland

restricted Washington, May 23, 1949—7 p. m.

673. Unpal 113. For Ethridge. Fol exploratory suggestions put forward for your comment re composition proposed PCC Survey Group. Group would consist nine men as fols: 1) Chief: Outstanding US businessman with top level govt experience, not connected any partisan NE movement and with great prestige with US Govt. Cong, public, financial community and private organizations.

2) Deputy: Outstanding Brit national, preferably with long NE, but nonpartisan experience, possibly top civil servant who has received high honors.

[Here follow the remaining seven suggestions, comprising outstanding persons in the fields of finance, industry, and trade; agriculture; construction and public works; community services; administration; refugee problems and legal problems.]

Of substantive principals at least one shld be French. Other experts can be utilized as desired on loan or consultant basis from US (some possibly under Point 4), UK (some from BMEO), UN, and other member govts and int. orgs. Group would not be created, of course, until Israelis and Arab states assume appropriate responsibilities re repatriation and resettlement, respectively, and agreed to cooperate fully with Group. In connection with comments request your suggestions as to candidates, which also under consideration by Dept. Proposed terms of reference will follow.

Webb

The Acting Secretary of State to the Legation in Switzerland 501.BB Palestine/5–1649: Telegram

[Document 686]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Legation in Switzerland

secret Washington, May 23, 1949—7 p. m.

us urgent

niact

674. Unpal 114. (For Ethridge eyes only.) Ref ur Sec 5 para 2 Palun 151 May 16, US cannot, of course, give general commitment for development program in Near East in connection with refugee problem. Following shld, however, provide you support requested. Pres has made decision to recommend Cong that this Government will within UN framework support program for repatriation and resettlement Pal refugees which is satisfactory to US with financial and technical assistance subject to following conditions: 1. Upon plan forthcoming from PCC or UN that has reasonable chance for success at reasonable cost.

2. Upon full acceptance by Arabs and Israelis of responsibilities involved and upon their active cooperation in carrying out agreed plan.

3. Upon appropriate assistance from int and other sources. In this connection you should make clear to Arabs and Israelis and other PCC members that such US financial assistance as may be forthcoming will be contingent upon satisfactory contributions by other interested parties.

New approach to Cong for funds for refugee problem not possible this session; however, executive will put request before Cong at earliest opportunity following development satisfactory overall UN program, and informal agreement with other countries as to what their financial contributions will be. You are authorized utilize foregoing in effort obtain agreements by Israel and Arab states to repatriate and resettle respectively, number of refugees specified in Palun 151. You should, however, keep US commitment in as general and informal terms as possible and make no commitment as to specific US contribution. It should be clear that program contemplated by Pres consists for most part in relief and wage payments for refugees and cost of refugee resettlement projects, which will of course benefit countries concerned, but contains only limited development projects not associated directly with refugees. Dept desires not make any more formal undertaking or public statement at this time, but wld prefer oral commitment if possible. If, however, in your judgment written commitment becomes necessary, form of commitment shld be cleared with Dept.1

Webb

1 This telegram was repeated to London as No. 1789. It was also sent, on May 27, to Arab capitals and Tel Aviv “for background info only.” (circular telegram, 501.BB Palestine/5–2749) The Department, on May 27, authorized London to inform the Foreign Office of the substance of No. 1789 but directed the Embassy to “make clear to Brit that Pres’ decision does not prejudge or predetermine respective contributions to such program by US, UK and other interested parties. Dept believes question of principles to govern contributions by UK and other sources shld form subject early discussion between US and UK, perhaps in Washington.” (telegram 1846, 501.BB Palestine/5–2749)

Memorandum by the Assistant Secretary of State for Congressional Relations (Gross) to the Acting Secretary of State 867N.48/5–2449

[Document 687]

Memorandum by the Assistant Secretary of State for Congressional Relations (Gross) to the Acting Secretary of State 1

[Washington,] May 24, 1949.

Subject: Discussion with Senators Connally and Vandenberg Regarding the Palestine Kef ugee Problem.

George McGhee and I met with Senators Connally and Vandenberg2 on the afternoon of May 23 to outline the problem which was discussed with you on Friday. McGhee made a good presentation. The reaction of the Senators was, however, far from enthusiastic and it is quite clear that we may expect to have tough sledding with the proposition when it is ready for submission.

I told the Senators that this was simply a “reporting mission” on our part and that we were not contemplating the submission of any further Palestine refugee program for action at this session. Senator Vandenberg was somewhat more outspoken than Senator Connally in questioning the validity of the program, but both repeatedly asked how we could justify action which, in effect underwrote the situation brought about by the taking of houses and land away from the Arabs by the Israelis. This line of questioning suggests the great importance of making certain that in working out any arrangements involving the granting of funds by the United States, we must insist that the Israeli government does its full part and makes appropriate contribution to the solution of the problem.

1 Secretary Acheson was at Paris attending the Sixth Session of the Council of Foreign Ministers, which met from May 23 to June 20.

2 Tom Connally, Chairman of the Senate Committee on Foreign Relations, and Arthur H. Vandenberg, ranking Republican member of the same committee.

The Chargé in Transjordan (Stabler) to the Secretary of State 867N.01/5–2449: Telegram

[Document 688]

The Chargé in Transjordan (Stabler) to the Secretary of State

secret Amman, May 24, 1949—2 p. m.

215. Situation now developing with respect to special committee talks has many of earmarks which characterized “negotiations” on Arab triangle. Israelis are presenting strong and irrevocable demands as well as insisting on what Arabs should agree to receive in return. At same time Israelis are indicating that if their demands are not satisfied, they will obtain them by other means. Thus Israelis, in hope of intimidating Transjordan into acceptance, are starting familiar pressure treatment, including veiled threat of force. It cannot be doubted that Dayan’s visit to Jerusalem (Jerusalem telegram 370 to Dept1 ) was calculated attempt to have word conveyed to Transjordan that Israeli patience nearly exhausted.

It is true that at Rhodes Transjordan accepted in principle solution to matters mentioned in clause 2 Article 8 of Transjordan–Israel armistice agreement. (No mention need be made at this time of fact that Israeli refused discuss question of cease-fire until Transjordan had given agreement in principle to these points.) Such acceptance in principle still exists and Transjordan still willing to make agreements on these points provided Israel will satisfy certain Transjordan demands. It is one thing for Transjordan to state what it wishes to receive as compensation; it it another for Israel to state what Transjordan should be willing to receive. (For example, Israel seems intent on providing electricity for old city and on giving Arabs free use Bethlehem road. Israel does not appear interested in fact that Arabs have no particular desire for either.) Agreement on basis latter could hardly be defined as having been reached by negotiations, and consent in genuine meaning those terms.

Transjordan has been subjected to much criticism for giving in to Israeli demands in triangle area for it has been argued that if Transjordan resisted and Israel had resorted to force, world opinion would have been shocked and UN would have instituted measures to restrain Israel. However, it cannot be said that US response to Abdullah’s plea for assistance gave any such hopeful indication. As result this storm bitter criticism by Palestine Arabs and many others, both King and Governors, have been badly frightened and all indications point to fact they will refuse acquiesce in any further attempts at “blackmail”. It can be said that Transjordan would prefer Israelis to make good their demands by force rather than meekly submit to threat of force. Only possibility for reaching agreement now would be for Israel to curb its voracious territorial appetite and show some signs of “negotiations and consent in genuine meaning those terms.”

In adopting above policy there is no doubt Transjordan has support and encouragement from certain non-Arab quarters. I also feel that Transjordan would run grave risk, from Arab viewpoint, in submitting further to Israeli demands, notwithstanding blandishments regarding “final territorial disposition”. However it would not be surprising if Transjordan were even now subjected to criticism by some quarters for not being “reasonable” and for not giving in to Israeli demands in interests of “peace”.

Basically, Arab demands boil down to return of certain Arab quarters Jerusalem now held by Israelis and it is unlikely these demands can be altered. Much has been said to effect that it would be in Israel’s own interests to make some conciliatory gesture toward Arabs. Discussions regarding Jerusalem would seem to offer good opportunity to make this gesture, but so far Israel has not accepted this friendly advice nor has any power shown itself disposed to press Israel in this respect. If it is still not possible for Israel to consider return certain Arab quarters Jerusalem to Arabs without making unreasonable counter demands, then it would seem preferable to bring adjournment special committee, leave status quo in Jerusalem and permit Lausanne conference to deal with Palestine question, including Jerusalem, as whole.

It would appear impractical to adopt courses of action suggested by Jerusalem in its telegram 370. First proposal on overall settlement could hardly be carried out without participation of UN which is precluded from special committee talks by armistice agreement. Moreover, on third party mediation there would seem little chance either side would agree on division of territories concerned. Probably Israel would request areas in northern Jerusalem far in excess what it is prepared give Arabs in southern Jerusalem. Consequently another deadlock would ensue.

Agreement on basis second proposal would appear to be difficult if not impossible to reach as Transjordan would be giving up its principal bargaining point in return for those concessions in which it is not particularly interested. Once having given up this point there would be little, if any, chance of ever obtaining satisfaction its main demand. Israel on other hand would obtain desired free access to Mt. Scopus which it would gradually turn into its own definition of “free access”. Since at this time there appears to be little possibility that special committee, which seems to be operating in vacuum, can reach any peacefully arrived-at agreement, it would in my opinion be better to adjourn it sine die and without prejudice and hand over matters under its jurisdiction to PCC at Lausanne. In order to achieve this, however, it will be necessary for PCC and US to put pressure on Israel, which is at all times out to achieve its ends regardless of means. It would seem unfortunate, after all work which has been done to bring about peace in Jerusalem, to permit developing situation to imperil that peace.

Sent Department, repeated Bern 6 for USDel PPC, pouched Arab capitals, London, Jerusalem.

Stabler

1 Dated May 20, p. 1039 [Pg. 1039 includes portions of Doc. 676, Doc. 677, and Doc. 678]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Legation in Switzerland 501.BB Palestine/5–2449: Telegram

[Document 689]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Legation in Switzerland

top secret Washington, May 24, 1949—6 p. m.

us urgent

682. Unpal 116. Eyes alone for Ethridge from Rusk. Fol is draft note developed by Dept’s staff along lines to be handed Israeli Amb. in Washington. Text has not been considered by Acting Secy nor by Pres. To expedite matters, however, we would greatly appreciate your comments, to include (1) accuracy, (2) underlying policy, (3) your estimate whether note of this sort would strengthen your hand in Lausanne discussions, (4) any suggested modifications. For obvious reasons request utmost security this draft text. Dispatch of note presupposes basic decision to take specific steps, initially in the economic field, to demonstrate US determination to modify Israeli attitude.

“Excellency: I have the honor to inform Your Excellency that the Pres. of the US has instructed me to inform the Govt. of Israel as fols:

The Govt. of the US is seriously disturbed by the attitude of Israel with respect to a territorial settlement in Palestine and to the question of Palestinian refugees, as set forth to Mr. Mark Ethridge by Dr. Eytan on May 19, 1949 at Lausanne upon instructions of His Excellency the FonMin of Israel.1 According to Dr, Eytan, the Israeli Govt. will do nothing further about Palestinian refugees at the present time. In connection with territorial matters, the position taken by Dr. Eytan apparently contemplates not only the retention of all territory now held under military occupation by Israel, which is clearly in excess of the partition boundaries of Nov. 29, 1947, but an additional acquisition of further territory both within and outside Palestine.

As a mem. of the UN PCC and as a nation which has consistently striven to give practical effect to the principles of the UN, the US Govt. has recently made a number of representations to the Israeli Govt. concerning the repatriation of refugees who fled from the conflict in Palestine. These representations were in conformity with the principles set forth in the resolution of the GA of Dec. 11, 1948, and urged the acceptance of the principle of substantial repatriation and the immediate beginnings of repatriation on a reasonable scale which would be well within the numbers to be agreed in a final settlement. The US Govt. conceded that a final settlement of the refugee problem must await a definitive peace settlement. These representations, as well as those made concurrently to the Arab States concerning the resettlement outside of Palestine of a substantial portion of Palestine refugees, were made in the firm conviction that they pointed the way to a lasting peace in that area.

In the interests of a just and equitable solution of territorial questions the US Govt., in the UN and as a mem. of the PCC, has supported the position that Israel should be expected to offer territorial compensation for any territorial acquisition which it expects to effect beyond the boundaries set forth in the res. of the GA of Nov. 29, 1947. The Govt. of Israel has been well aware of this position and of the view of the US Govt, that it is based upon elementary principles of fairness and equity.

The US Govt. is deeply concerned to learn from Dr. Eytan’s statements that the suggestions both on refugees and on territorial questions which have been made by it for the sole purpose of advancing prospects of peace have made so little impression upon the Govt. of Israel.

The US attitude of sympathy and support for Israel has arisen out of broad Amer interests and principles, particularly out of its support for the UN and its desire to achieve peace and security in the Near East on a realistic basis. The US Govt. and people have given generous support to the creation of Israel because they have been convinced of the justice of this aspiration. The US Govt does not, however, regard the present attitude of the Israeli Govt. as being consistent with the principles upon which US support has been based. The US Govt. is gravely concerned lest Israel now endanger the possibility of arriving at a solution of the Palestine problem in such a way as to contribute to the establishment of sound and friendly relations between Israel and its neighbors.

The Govt. of Israel should entertain no doubt whatever that the US Govt. relies upon it to take responsible and positive action concerning Palestine refugees and that, far from supporting excessive Israeli claims to further territory both inside and outside Palestine, the US Govt. believes that it is necessary for Israel to offer territorial compensation for territory which it expects to acquire beyond the boundaries of the Nov. 29, 1947 res. of the GA.

The Govt. of Israel must be aware that the attitude which it has thus far assumed at Lausanne must inevitably lead to a rupture in those conversations. The US Govt. must state in candor that it considers that the Govt. of Israel must provide a basis for a continuation of such talks under the auspices of the PCC and that a rupture arising out of the rigid attitude of the Govt. of Israel would place a heavy responsibility upon that Govt. and people.

If the Govt. of Israel continues to reject the basic principles set forth by the res. of the GA of Dec. 11, 1948 and the friendly advice offered by the US Govt. for the sole purpose of facilitating a genuine peace in Palestine, the US Govt. will regretfully be forced to the conclusion that a revision of its attitude toward Israel has become unavoidable.”

[ Rusk ]
Webb

1 See telegram 769, May 20, from Bern, p. 1036 [Pg. 1036 is part of Doc. 675].

The United States Representative at the United Nations (Austin) to the Secretary of State 501.BB Palestine/5–2549: Telegram

[Document 690]

The United States Representative at the United Nations (Austin) to the Secretary of State

confidential
priority New York, May 25, 1949—1 p. m.

639. Following is note Bunche proposes to send Zaim on May 26 together with his draft proposal on armistice demarcation lines from Syrian-Israeli discussion. A somewhat similar note will be sent to Ben-Gurion at the same time. Bunche intends that this new compromise should be discussed by the existing delegations under Vigier’s chairmanship. If, as he expects, no progress is made at this level, he will address a renewed appeal to Ben-Gurion and Zaim to negotiate the armistice agreement personally, offering UN assistance for this purpose.

Bunche would appreciate US support for his proposal. Support will be particularly needed in Tel Aviv.

“1. Following personal consultation with General Riley who has just returned to Lake Success for this purpose, cable communications with M. Vigier, and a careful study of the negotiations thus far conducted, I have the honor to submit for the consideration of your government the following suggested draft article on the armistice demarcation line in the Israeli-Syrian draft armistice agreement.

2. In submitting this draft article as a compromise proposal, I realize that it does not fully meet the desires of either party as thus far expressed in the negotiations. But you will agree, I am sure, that no agreement is possible unless each party is willing to make some concessions and accept some compromises.

3. I am confident that this draft article is consistent with the basic purpose of the SC resolutions on Palestine, and particularly the resolution of 16 November 1948. It will separate the forces, thus reducing to a minimum the possibility of friction and incident. It will require some withdrawal by the armed forces of each party. It is purely a temporary arrangement, for the duration of the armistice and pending territorial settlement. The provision for a demilitarized zone, subject to the authority of the Chairman of the Mixed Armistice Commission and the observers attached thereto, fully safeguards the territorial claims, positions and interests of both parties for the final settlement. Neither party, therefore, can validly claim to lose advantage by accepting the provisions of this draft article, unless it be argued that there is no substitute for force and armed possession in the protection of a claim. As a representative of the UN, I cannot endorse any such view, and more particularly so since our experience with UN demilitarization of such highly strategic areas as Government House and Mount Scopus in Jerusalem, and the El Auja sector in the Negev, gives convincing proof that such arrangements work well and give full protection to the rights and claims of the interested parties.

4. I would emphasize that although vital interests of both parties are admittedly at sake in this agreement, it is an armistice and not a peace treaty we are negotiating. Neither party, therefore, is entitled to insist on final arrangements which must properly await the peace settlement, or which would clearly prejudice such settlement. The Israeli-Syrian armistice negotiations must not, in any way, impinge upon the settlement discussions now being conducted by the Conciliation Commission at Lausanne.

5. In formulating this draft, I have had in mind the stated fact that the armed forces of the Arab states entered Palestine for the sole purpose of protecting the rights and interests of the Arabs of Palestine. I can well understand that the desperate plight of the vast number of Arab refugees and the extensive territory now under the control of Israeli forces gives you grave concern and is a strong factor in determining your position as regards Palestinian territory now occupied by Syrian forces. But I submit that the provision for UN responsibility over the territory in the proposed demilitarized zone gives more than adequate protection to your interests and is much more consistent with the letter and spirit of the SC resolutions.

6. I earnestly appeal to you to give this draft your most serious and sympathetic consideration. It is my intention to call upon the delegations of the two parties to reconvene at an early date in order to continue their negotiations with this draft as a working basis.”

Following is draft article on armistice demarcation lines: “1. In view of the fact that the question of territorial settlement is one of the matters being dealt with in consultations with the UN Conciliation Commission now taking place at Lausanne, it is emphasized that the following arrangements for the armistice demarcation lines between the Israeli and Syrian Armed Forces are riot to be interpreted as having any relation whatsoever to ultimate territorial arrangements affecting the two parties to this agreement.

2. The armistice demarcation line herein defined is in response to the request of the SC in its resolution of 16 November 1948, and without prejudice to the rights, positions, interests and claims of either party to this agreement. In pursuance of the spirit of the SC resolution, the armistice demarcation line has been defined with a view toward separating the armed forces of the two parties in such manner as to minimize the possibility of friction and incident.

3. The armistice demarcation line shall be delineated on the map attached to this agreement as annex (blank). Where the existing truce lines as certified by the UN truce supervision organization run along the recognized international boundary between Syria and Palestine, the armistice demarcation line shall follow the boundary line. Elsewhere, the armistice demarcation line shall follow a line midway between the certified truce lines for the Israeli and Syrian forces.

4. The armed forces of the two parties shall nowhere advance beyond the armistice demarcation line.

5. a. Where the armistice demarcation line does not correspond to the international boundary, the area between the armistice demarcation line and the boundary, pending final territorial settlement between the parties, shall be established as a demilitarized zone from which the armed forces of both parties shall be totally excluded, it being understood that the Ein Gev and Dadara sectors shall also be included in the demilitarized zone.

b. The purpose of the demilitarized zone shall be to safeguard the territorial claims, positions and interests of both parties pending final territorial settlement and to separate widely the armed forces, while providing for the gradual restoration of normal civilian life in the area of the zone without prejudice to the ultimate settlement.

c. Any advance by the armed forces of either party into any part of the demilitarized zone, when confirmed by the UN representatives, shall constitute a flagrant violation of this agreement.

d. The chairman of the Mixed Armistice Commission established in article (blank) of this agreement and United Nations observers attached to the Commission shall be responsible for ensuring the full implementation of this article.

e. The withdrawal of such armed forces as are now found in the demilitarized zone shall be in accordance with the schedule of withdrawal annexed to this agreement and in any case shall be completed within ten weeks from the date on which this agreement is signed.

f. The chairman of the Mixed Armistice Commission shall be empowered to authorize the return of civilians to villages and settlements in the demilitarized zone and the employment of limited numbers of locally recruited civilian police in the zone for internal security purposes, and shall be guided in this regard by the schedule of withdrawal referred to in sub-paragraph (e) of this article.”1

Austin

1 New York, on May 27, advised of two revisions in the draft article on armistice demarcation lines, as follows: In paragraph 5a, the words “between Syria and Palestine” were to be added to the first sentence after the words “international boundary”; and a new paragraph 6 was to be added, reading “On each side of the demilitarized zone there shall be areas, as defined in annex __________ to this agreement, in which defensive forces only shall be maintained, in accordance with the definition of defensive forces set forth in annex _______ to this agreement.” (Telegram 652, 501.BB Palestine/5–2749)

The United States Representative at the United Nations (Austin) to the Secretary of State 501.BB Palestine/5–2549: Telegram

[Document 691]

The United States Representative at the United Nations (Austin) to the Secretary of State

secret New York, May 25, 1949—7:05 p. m.

644. Bunche and Riley were both of opinion last evening that disclosure of Israeli territorial aspirations to PCC will result in breakdown of Israeli-Syrian armistice negotiations. They also agree that this disclosure will probably wreck PCC talks and might also threaten armistice agreements.

Austin

Memorandum by the Acting Secretary of State 501.BB Palestine (E)/11–2349

[Document 692]

Memorandum by the Acting Secretary of State

secret [Washington, undated.]

Meeting With President, Thursday, May 26, 1949

palestine refugee program

I informed the President of the Congressional reticence about the Palestine refugee program. He instructed me to carry the program forward in spite of this and arrange for its submission.

The Chargé in Transjordan (Stabler) to the Secretary of State 867N.01/5–2649: Telegram

[Document 693]

The Chargé in Transjordan (Stabler) to the Secretary of State

secret Amman, May 26, 1949—noon.

216. British Minister informed this morning that King had received other message from Sassoon through Transjordan Minister Paris to effect that as Lausanne Conference not appear to be making progress toward peace settlement it would be desirable for Transjordan and Israel to undertake separate negotiations immediately. Prime Minister has taken line in which King apparently has acquiesced that separate negotiations while Lausanne Conference proceeding undesirable and Sassoon has been so informed. If Lausanne Conference fails, then matter of separate negotiations can be discussed again.

Kirkbride also told me that he had received personal note from King stating that postponement separate negotiations all very well but what would he do if Israelis attacked him. HM did not understand how French could supply arms and ammunition to Syria which not only did not have treaty with French but also did not have armistice, while UK refused give arms to Transjordan which had both treaty and armistice. Kirkbride commented that “Man in street” in Transjordan beginning grow restive about this situation. He has put matter up again with British Foreign Office. Comment—King has on numerous occasions mentioned to me possibility lifting arms embargo as result signature armistice. There is also some apprehension amongst people as to future if Israelis should choose use aggressive means to satisfy their demands. While criticism of US and UK continues, no increase in intensity has been noticed recently. End comment.1

Sent Department 216; repeated London 40, Bern for USDel PCC 7; Jerusalem 103, Damascus 41.

Stabler

1 Mr. Wright of the British Foreign Office discussed the question of ending or relaxing the arms embargo in the Middle East with Messrs. Hare, Kopper, and Jones at London on May 24. He noted that “Defense talks with Egyptians have begun but latter insist on early arms supply and it is abundantly clear UK cannot hope make progress with Egypt without some arms deliveries. Since Syria getting arms from France, and Israel from various sources, Foreign Office believes continuance strict US–UK observance embargo is becoming more and more futile and damaging to vital US–UK interests in Egypt. Both Transjordan and Iraq are also pressing for arms and Trevelyan of British Embassy Baghdad, coming London present Iraqi case for arms.” (Telegram 2043, May 25, 8 p. m., from London, 867N.113/5–2549)

Editorial Note [Document 694]

Editorial Note

On May 26, the Chargé in Transjordan, Wells Stabler, reported that after drafting telegram 216 ( supra) he received a personal letter concerning the Palestine situation from King Abdullah, the text of which he transmitted to the Department in telegram 217, May 26, 4 p. m. from Amman (867N.01/5–2649).

King Abdullah reviewed his position vis-á-vis Palestine in a conversation with Stabler on May 28 and made a “strong plea that US should take solution Palestine problem into its hands and should bring about imposition settlement based on partition or on aid [other?] plan equitable to both Transjordan and Israel.” (Telegram 222, May 30, 3 p. m., from Amman, 867 N.01/5–3049)

The Secretary of State to the Acting Secretary of State 865C.01/5–2649: Telegram

[Document 695]

The Secretary of State to the Acting Secretary of State

secret Paris, May 26, 1949—5 p. m.

2164. From Secretary. Bevin called on me this morning.1 [Here follow sections on Cyrenaica, printed in volume IV, page 557, and on Greece, printed in footnote 2, page 342 [Pg. 342 is part of Doc. 171].]

Bevin then took up question of shipment of arms to Egypt and other Arab states noting Israel gets all it wants and Arabs can buy from Czechs if British do not fulfill existing contracts. He said they were planning to go ahead with de jure recognition of Israel and then announce they would fulfill their arms contracts with Arabs. He dwelt particularly on troubled situation in Egypt, and their need to train Egyptian air force. I suggested they should take up propriety particular shipments with Bunche and informed him concerning our general thinking this problem. Bevin then took up situation of Arab refugees, hinting that Israeli intransigence might be due our encouragement. I told him about my talks with Sharett and of my and President’s talks with Weizmann stating emphatically we had taken strong lines on refugees and frontiers in which we had been far from encouraging them. Bevin said that they had rumors of possible renewed Jewish aggression. He then handed me elaborate paper on possible settlement Arab refugees in various Arab states which I am forwarding air pouch. He said he would not put this forward officially but hoped their thinking could be combined with ours. I told him we also had detailed plan under consideration in Washington.

I indicated to Bevin we would communicate our views to him on these several points.

[ Acheson ]

1 Messrs. Acheson and Bevin were attending the Sixth Session of the Council of Foreign Ministers which met at Paris beginning May 23.

Mr. Mark F. Ethridge to the Secretary of State 501.BB Palestine/5–2649: Telegram

[Document 696]

Mr. Mark F. Ethridge to the Secretary of State

top secret
niact Lausanne, May 26, 1949—7 p. m.

Palun 167. Consult Rusk for distribution. Reference Unpal 116.1 I consider underlying policy accurate. Note of this character would strengthen my hand at Lausanne. It may not be as effective now as it might been at earlier date as Israeli views regarding refugees and territory have crystallized such extent, both privately and publicly, that it may be difficult for them to change. I strongly recommend its despatch nevertheless, if we are to attempt to achieve a peace in theme which will not subsequently come apart at seams. I have several suggested changes: 1. First paragraph, first sentence: Omit “as set forth to Mr. Mark Ethridge by Dr. Eytan on May 19, 1949 at Lausanne upon instruction of His Excellency, the Foreign Minister of Israel” and substitute “as set forth by the representatives of Israel at Lausanne in public and private meetings”. Palun 1602 correctly reports Eytan’s views and views of his colleagues. There is no doubt they are views of Israeli Government but to avoid technical evasion we suggest substitute phrase.

2. First paragraph, second sentence: Add at end “although it has under consideration certain urgent measures of limited character”. Israeli Delegation recently informed PCC it had sent Tel Aviv for consideration urgent measures listed in Palun 166.3 Department is doubtless aware general Israeli approach to urgent measures of this character from Palun 145.4

3. First paragraph, third sentence: Omit “but an additional acquisition further territory both within and out Palestine” and substitute “but possibly an additional acquisition of further territory within Palestine”. Israeli Delegation May 26 revealed Israeli views regarding frontier with Transjordan which are being reported separately. In essence, Israeli Delegation proposes political boundary shall be boundary between former mandate and Transjordan; i.e. 1) southern end Lake Tiberias to junction armistice line with Transjordan border, east of Jenin and 2) middle of Dead Sea to Gulf of Aqaba. With regard to Central Palestine, present armistice lines from junction of armistice line with Transjordan border east of Jenin to middle of Dead Sea would be allowed to stand until it was determined whether Transjordan, independent government, international authority or some other form of government was in control. Modifications between Israel and that government might subsequently arise for discussion and its attitude would be determined by character of government. Meanwhile, Transjordan was in military occupation with which military changes might be discussed. Israeli Delegation stated it had not included Jerusalem area in its proposal.

Reference to Israeli acquisition outside Palestine would not strengthen note and would cause controversy. Israel desires small parts of Lebanon and Syria and possibly in Transjordan for economic reasons but will undoubtedly have to approach on exchange basis as international frontiers are involved.

4. Sixth paragraph, first sentence: Omit “both inside and outside” and substitute “within”.

Undoubtedly Department has considered question of reference to Jerusalem problem in note. I agree no reference should be made because PCC plan will be considered by GA in September. I suggest, however, that Department might orally suggest to Israeli Ambassador that final settlement Palestine question would be facilitated if meanwhile, Israeli Government were able to take such conciliatory steps regarding Jerusalem as action indicating Israeli Government was temporary trustee for Arab land and property within Jerusalem area and postponment transfer Israeli Government functions to Jerusalem.

Ethridge

1 Identified also as telegram 682, May 24, to Bern, p. 1051 [Pg. 1051 includes portions of Doc. 688 and Doc. 689].

2 Identified also as telegram 769, May 20, from Bern, p. 1036 [Pg. 1036 is part of Doc. 675].

3 Dated May 23, from Lausanne, p. 1044 [Pg. 1044 includes portions of Doc. 682 and Doc. 683].

4 Identified also as telegram 410, May 10, from Geneva, p. 992 [Pg. 992 includes portions of Doc. 643 and Doc. 644].

Memorandum by the Acting Secretary of State to the President 867N.01/5–2749

[Document 697]

Memorandum by the Acting Secretary of State to the President

top secret Washington, May 27, 1949.

Subject: Representation to Israeli Government on Territorial Settlement in Palestine and Question of Palestinian Refugees.

1. Israeli Position toward Final Settlement

Mr. Mark Ethridge, United States Representative on the Palestine Conciliation Commission, reports in a telegram dated May 20 (Tab A)1 that Israel has now put forth its full territorial demands upon the Arab States. Under authorization from the Israeli Foreign Minister, the Israeli representative at Lausanne has stated as follows: (1) While Israel makes no demands upon Lebanon at present, it would later like a portion of southeastern Lebanon considered necessary to Israeli development plans. The Israeli delegate said Israel would be willing to compensate Lebanon for this territory, but he did not specify in what way this would be done; (2) Israel desires to acquire from Egypt the Egyptian occupied Gaza strip, allotted to the Arabs under the partition resolution of November 29, 1947; (3) Israel makes no demands upon Syria at present, but will accept the international frontier with the proviso, also to be applied to Lebanon, that if either state desires to open negotiations in the future for border rectification, this may be done; (4) Israel will make further demands upon Transjordan for territory in Arab Palestine considered necessary to Israeli development plans. Israel has in mind giving Abdullah a few villages in return; (5) Israel will retain occupied areas such as Western Galilee and Jaffa, Lydda and Ramie allotted to the Arabs under the partition plan; (6) Israel will relinquish none of the Negev. The Israeli delegate subsequently, however, indicated to Mr. Ethridge the possibility that Israel might make some compensation in the Negev in return for the Gaza strip.

The Israeli delegate further stated that Israel will do nothing more concerning the Arab refugees at the present time.

2. United States Position

In the interest of achieving an equitable territorial settlement for Palestine, this Government has consistently supported the position that Israel should offer territorial compensation for any territorial acquisition which it expects to obtain beyond the boundaries allotted to Israel in the resolution of November 29, 1947. Moreover, since the General Assembly resolution of December 11, 1948 calls for the repatriation of those refugees desiring to return to their homes and live at peace, and in view of the impossibility of resettling the total number of refugees in the Arab States within a reasonable period of time and at a reasonable cost, this Government has recently made representations to the Israeli Government urging its agreement to repatriation of a subtsantial number of refugees and the immediate commencement of repatriation of some portion thereof. Despite the emphasis upon repatriation in the resolution of December 11, we have urged upon the Arabs the necessity for their agreement to the resettlement in the Arab States of a substantial portion of the refugees, in view of the fact that the return to their homes of all the refugees desiring to go back would be difficult because of the continuing arrival in Israel of large numbers of European displaced persons.

Our representations on these two questions have thus far met with no success with the Israeli Government. Israeli officials have in fact informed our representatives in Palestine that they intend to bring about a change in the position of the United States Government on the above points, through means available to them in the United States. There are also indications that the Israelis are prepared to use the implied threat of force to obtain the additional territory which they desire in Palestine.

3. Efforts of the Palestine Conciliation Commission

The Conciliation Commission has vigorously endeavored to persuade the Israelis and the Arabs to withdraw from their extreme positions concerning a final Palestine settlement. With respect to refugees, the Commission has succeeded in persuading the Arabs to give up their previous insistence upon repatriation as a prerequisite to negotiations on other outstanding issues, and in persuading certain of the Arab States to give favorable consideration to resettlement of a portion of the refugees. The Commission has failed to obtain any concessions from the Israelis on a territorial settlement or the refugee question. It is now the considered opinion of Mr. Ethridge that the conference at Lausanne is likely to break up when the Arabs learn of the present Israeli position toward a final settlement and that there will exist no possibility of peace on any basis heretofore envisioned by the United States Government unless Israel modifies its demands. Mr. Ethridge believes that such modification is unlikely.

4. United States Interest

The United States interest in the security and stability of the Near East has been a principal motivation of our efforts, both in the United Nations and on the diplomatic level, to urge both parties to the Palestine dispute to take measures leading to a sound and equitable peace. The strategic interests of the United States demand early termination of the present conditions of instability and mutual suspicion, which provide such a favorable atmosphere for Soviet penetration and exploitation of the Near East. The present instability will certainly continue if the Lausanne talks break down as a result of the new Israeli position, which is susceptible of interpretation by the Arabs as confirming their constant fears of Israeli territorial expansionism. Failure of the Israelis to modify their present demands will inevitably aggravate Arab distrust of Israel and bring about renewed Arab charges that the United States remains passive no matter how unreasonable the demands of Israel. The Department of State is firmly convinced that the Israelis as well as the Arabs must therefore be prepared to make some concessions, and that, if Israel will modify its present demands, a solution can be achieved which will be both advantageous to Israel and acceptable to the Arabs.

5. Recommendations

(a) The Department believes that the time has come to make a basic decision concerning our attitude toward Israel. The United States has given generous support to the foundation of the Jewish State, since we believed in the justice of this aspiration. We are convinced that there is no reason why the Jews and the Arabs cannot live together in peace in the Near East, providing they each adopt a reasonable attitude toward the other.

In the light of all the foregoing, the Department considers that it is now essential to inform the Israeli Government forcefully that, if it continues to reject the friendly advice which this Government has offered solely in the interest of a genuine peace in the Near East, this Government will be forced with regret to revise its attitude toward Israel. There is attached a draft note to the Israeli Government for your consideration (Tab B).2 This note has been discussed with Mr. Ethridge, who believes that it would strengthen his hand at Lausanne and strongly recommends that it be sent.

(b) If the Israeli Government does not respond favorably to this proposed representation, it will be necessary to take measures designed to convince Israel of the importance to this Government of a revision of Israel’s present policy. Such measures, in addition to a generally negative attitude in the future toward Israel, might include (1) refusing the request of the Israeli Government for United States technical advisers and for the training of Israeli officials in the United States; (2) withholding approval of the $49,000,000 as yet unallocated of the $100,000,000 earmarked by the Export-Import Bank for loan to Israel.

(c) Although the Department of State is convinced of the necessity of carrying out this plan of action in the light of our national interest in the field of foreign policy and strongly recommends that you approve this suggested course, the matter involves other important considerations, since the proposed course of action would arouse strong opposition in American Jewish circles. It is therefore suggested that you may wish to ask your advisers to give careful consideration to the possible implications of the above procedure.

The Department hopes that it will receive your reply on a most urgent basis if this Government is to achieve a modification of the Israeli attitude in time to save the Lausanne meeting. Mr. Ethridge informed the Department by telephone on May 23 that he does not believe the meeting can last much longer than a week under the present circumstances. Dr. Bunche and General Riley concur.

[ James E. Webb ]

1 Not found attached; the telegram referred to is presumably No. 769 from Bern, p. 1036 [Pg. 1036 is part of Doc. 675].

2 Not found attached; for note as actually sent, see telegram 322, May 28, to Tel Aviv, p. 1072 [Pg. 1072 includes portions of Doc. 704 and Doc. 705].

The Acting Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom 501.BB Palestine/5–2749: Telegram

[Document 698]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom

secret Washington, May 27, 1949—2 p. m.

1844. Urtel 2037, May 25.1 You may inform FonOff substance paras 1 through six inclusive of Tab A attached to memo to Pres dated May 9, but not para 7 or covering memo. You shld make clear to FonOff that financial estimates therein were obtained through analysis best US–UK technical info available to USG; that figures do not constitute in any sense an approved US program or specific US financial commitment and that figures are susceptible of reduction or expansion in light of number of obvious variables. We hope discuss foregoing soonest with Brit Emb Washington.

Reur para 1, we are aware of urgency formulating plans continuing refugee relief. We are sending you today by separate tel our suggestions re frame of ref for proposed Economic Survey Group, for FonOff’s comments. Functions of survey group would include determination number refugees unable receive direct or indirect support on wage payment basis and estimated costs direct relief for this category. Assuming political situation permits activation survey group near future, it could complete its overall recommendations to PCC, including action which wld be required by GA re continuing relief program, by Sept 1. Unless it becomes clear within few weeks that group cannot be activated near future, Dept wld not wish prejudge survey group’s conclusions by formulating independent plan for relief program outside context of overall plan for solution refugee problem.

Webb

1 Not printed; it advised that Messrs. Hare, Kopper, and Jones discussed the refugee question with officers of the Eastern Department of the British Foreign Office on May 24 and sought the Department’s permission to advise the Foreign Office of the contents of telegram 1789, May 23, to London, and the memorandum of May 9 to the White House (501.BB Palestine/5–2549). Telegram 1789 was a repeat of 674 to Bern, p. 1047 [Pg. 1047 includes portions of Doc. 685 and Doc. 686].

The Acting Secretary of State to the Legation in Switzerland 501.BB Palestine/5–2749: Telegram

[Document 699]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Legation in Switzerland

restricted Washington, May 27, 1949—4 p. m.

704. Unpal 119. For USDel, Lausanne. Herewith Dept’s suggestions for terms of ref proposed Econ Survey Group (or such designation as maybe decided upon) in form of draft res:

“ PCC

Desiring to implement paras 10 and 11 of GA res Dec 11 and to obtain info which will serve as basis for recommendations for further action by GA, member states, appropriate specialized agencies, and int orgs, and

Having noted declarations of reps of Israel and Arab States with respect to repatriation, compensation, and resettlement of refugees: 1. Hereby establishes, pursuant to authorization granted under para 12 of foregoing res, an Econ Survey Group to examine the econ situation in countries affected by the recent hostilities, and to make recommendations which will enable govts concerned to further such measures and development programs as are required to overcome econ dislocations created by the hostilities; to reintegrate refugees from the hostilities into econ life of area on self-sustaining basis within minimum period of time; and to promote econ conditions conducive to maintenance of peace and stability in the area;

2. Instructs Econ Survey Group to recommend an integrated program to achieve the foregoing objectives, including an operational plan for carrying out program recommended together with estimated costs and methods of financing;

3. Appoints fol persons to constitute Group (Unpal 113);

4. Bequests SYG to furnish such staff and services as Group may require;

5. Authorizes Group pursuant para 14 of GA res of Dec 11 to invite assistance those Govts, specialized agencies and internatl orgs which may be able facilitate its work through provision of expert personnel and technical info;

6. Requests Group to submit report to Comm not later than Sept 1, 1949.”

For your info, Dept believes Econ Survey Group might approach its task along fol lines:

In collaboration with govts concerned

(a) Explore measures which can be taken by govts concerned without outside financial assistance to achieve objectives para 1 above;

(b) On basis existing plans and surveys, examine proposals submitted by govts concerned for econ development and settlement projects requiring outside assistance which would make possible absorption of refugees into economy of area on self-sustaining basis in minimum time and with minimum expenditure;

(c) Examine other econ projects which can, with outside assistance, provide temporary employment for refugees not employed on development and settlement projects para (b);

(d) Examine such other development and settlement projects requiring outside assistance which, though not associated directly with employment and settlement of refugees, would serve to achieve objectives of para 1;

(e) Estimate number of refugees who cannot be supported directly or indirectly through employment envisaged under paras A–d, together with estimated period during which direct relief will be required and cost thereof;

(f) Study problem of compensation to refugees for claims for property of those who do not return to their homes, and for loss of or damage to property, with special reference to relationship of such compensation to proposed settlement projects;

(g) Study the problem of rehabilitation of refugees including matters concerning their civil status, health, education, and social services.1

Dept feels Commission discussion on compensation should be postponed pending report of Group (para f). Analysis problem compensation being made by Dept, will be forwarded next week.

Your comments requested re foregoing, which is being discussed with Brit.2

Webb

1 The Department, on August 11, added a paragraph h, which read as follows: “Propose organizational structure to achieve objectives para 1 within UN framework to coordinate, supervise and facilitate measures for relief resettlement, econ development and related requirements such as community service facilities hearing in mind interests of all govts concerned and probable sources available funds from within and without area.” (telegram 1097 to Bern, 501.BB Palestine/5–2749)

2 This telegram was repeated to London as No. 1848 and to New York, the latter for information. London, on June 2, advised that the British generally agreed with the suggested terms of reference and the Department’s interpretation of them (telegram 2157, 501.BB Palestine/6–249).

The Minister in Switzerland (Vincent) to the Secretary of State 501.BB Palestine/5–2849: Telegram

[Document 700]

The Minister in Switzerland (Vincent) to the Secretary of State

restricted Bern, May 28, 1949—10 a. m.

818. Palun 168. From Ethridge. Eytan on May 25 wrote PCC members individually along following line: (1). Israelis Delegate has informed PCC that two memorandums (summary of information contained in Palun 1451 and that contained in Palun 1662 ) were being studied Tel Aviv. Meanwhile Israelis have duty to draw PCC attention to basic misconceptions. Pity and mistake to derive conclusions from false premises and to attempt to find refugee solution on unrealistic assumptions.

(2) Important Arab Delegates understand war which their governments brought to Palestine had much of evil aftermath they must have been able to foresee. Fleeing Arabs abandoned property and homes precipitately. Whole villages fled including orange grove workers. Bank accounts were left intact. Clergy departed.

(3) Vacuum resulted. Urban and rural property destroyed. Armies moved in. War was bitter and destructive. It would be doing refugees disservice if refugees persist in belief that return would find homes, shops or fields intact. Difficult in certain cases to identify village sites.

(4) During war large numbers Jewish immigrants entered and now continues totalling over 250,000 in 1948. Intention of Israel to continue admittance as many as wish to enter.

(5) Shelter was difficult. Impossible if Arab houses were not empty. Israel took advantage of vacant houses. Jaffa, Lydda, Ramle, Beersheba, Safad, et cetera, are today almost wholly occupied by Jewish residents. War and refugee flight have changed face of country. Arab reference to suspension of requisition measures and occupation of Arab property is unrealistic. If sincere Arabs lack information re conditions in Israel. Foregoing is general but will be [made?] specific on request.

(6) Israel considers itself in no way responsible for fact refugees are refugees. Cause was war launched to kill Jewish state. Arab States are now attempting wash hands of evil created by them and to foist responsibility on intended victim. Tone of Arab memorandum referring to principles of humanity and justice ill befits representatives of only states that have ever taken up arms in attempt undo UNGA will. Tone suggests Arab Delegates perhaps unconsciously are deceiving themselves in approach Palestine problem.

(7) Important appreciate responsibility for constructive solution of refugee problem rests upon those responsible. In so far as Israel is prepared contribute within framework general peace settlement contribution can only be on lines applicable to solution elsewhere. Any Arab state offering resettlement will claim right to decide where and how, will not recognize right of individual refugee to particularize and will offer resettlement where and how consonant with domestic condition. If in eventuality envisaged Israel finds it possible to contribute toward refugee resettlement its terms will be same.

(8) No return to status quo ante since war and subsequent immigration have decisively and unalterably transformed aspect of country. Clock cannot be turned back. If resettlement in Israel at all, it will be on basis of existing economic and security situation. If Arab expects to return to house, trade or field, illusion should be dispelled. They no longer exist. If they exist they are probably occupied. Even if not occupied, Israel could not for security and many other reasons bind itself to restore. Resettlement in Israel would have to be on basis planned scheme devised for refugees as group and unrelated except for compensation to any proprietary rights claimed by individuals.

(9) Problem facing Arab Delegates and PCC is refugee question on basis existing situation in Israel and Arab States. Certain situation exists and only in context is any hope of workable solution. Attempt to recreate previous conditions of 1947 or 1948 is profitless and doomed failure.

(10) Frankness based on conviction success at Lausanne depends on full understanding of facts. Wishful thinking by Arab Delegates and failure realize actual situation will delay progress and ultimately lead collapse negotiations. Israeli Delegate does not suggest Arabs Delegates are deliberately blinding themselves. More likely lack of information causes misapprehension. Israeli Delegate does not suggest transmittal this letter to Arab Delegates but feels, however, it would be helpful if PCC negotiators with Arabs bear in mind possibility Arabs unaware revolutionary changes in abandoned refugee property. Israeli Delegate also feels it may be useful to explain present situation and consequences thereof.

Comment: USDel has summarized information contained this telegram to give Department indication present thinking Israeli Delegate re refugees. Eytan lectured PCC privately May 26 in same vein. With PCC agreement I told and wrote Eytan some of his assumptions and conclusions outlined this telegram at variance my views and no useful purpose in discussion. I regretted he considered it inadvisable transmit his views to Arab Delegates. Heretofore PCC endeavored assist parties to final settlement by transmittal views of each. Mutual understanding would facilitate settlement. PCC could not be expected embrace views of either for purpose of persuading other. I conceived GA resolution to assist Israel is to negotiate with Arabs rather than UN.

As result Eytan plans redraft letter for transmission to Arab Delegates. I consider important development for psychological reasons. It is hoped Israeli views drafted with Arabs rather than UN in mind will be more temperate and persuasive. [Ethridge.]

Vincent

1 Identified also as telegram 410, May 10, from Geneva, p. 992 [Pg. 992 includes portions of Doc. 643 and Doc. 644].

2 From Lausanne, dated May 23, p. 1044 [Pg. 1044 includes portions of Doc. 682 and Doc. 683].

The Minister in Switzerland (Vincent) to the Secretary of State 501.BB Palestine/5–2849: Telegram

[Document 701]

The Minister in Switzerland (Vincent) to the Secretary of State

restricted Bern, May 28, 1949—10 a. m.

819. Palun 169. From Ethridge. Reference Palun 165.1 Eytan on May 25 wrote PCC re Arab memorandum along following line: (1) Wide gulf separates views of Arab and Israeli delegates. Latter has taken wide view. Outstanding problems are organically linked. Piecemeal approach is impossible. Israel is willing to cooperate in solution of refugee problem if solution is seen organically as part of final settlement between Arab States and Israel.

(2) Arab Delegates have refused to talk overall settlement and have concentrated attention on one problem. This narrow view has lead to no results. Arab memorandum proposes return to homes of refugees from certain areas. Memorandum is particularist and unrealistic, characteristic of whole Arab approach and fails take account of present situation in Palestine or of aim of peace.

(3) Israeli Delegation has instructions to make every effort towards final liquidation of Palestine conflict, establishment of sincere peace and normal relations and stability of ME. Ultimate objective at Lausanne must be permanent peace. Within this context Israelis still prepared to cooperate with Arab Delegates in finding refugee solution. Arab Delegates appear, however, to have authority to discuss only one question. Their instructions seemingly disregard everything else as has been clear from start and is confirmed by Arab memorandum.

(4) Israeli Delegation suggests to PCC that determined effort should be made to persuade Arab Government to face problems at issue in spirit greater realism. Israeli Delegation is convinced peace is ultimate objective of parties and that PCC can demonstrate to Arab Delegates that present course has brought goal no nearer. Continued unrealistic demands cannot advance Arab or refugee cause. Proposals in Arab memorandum offer no sort of basis for negotiation.

(5) Israeli Delegation trusts PCC will find way to turn present talks into useful and realistic channels toward peace. [Ethridge.]

Vincent

1 From Lausanne, dated May 23, p. 1043 [Pg. 1043 includes portions of Doc. 680 and Doc. 681].

The Minister in Switzerland (Vincent) to the Secretary of State 501.BB Palestine/5–2849: Telegram

[Document 702]

The Minister in Switzerland (Vincent) to the Secretary of State

restricted Bern, May 28, 1949—10 a. m.

820. Palun 173. From Ethridge. Israeli representatives on May 26 informed general limits of [to?] PCC of Israeli proposal re frontier between Israel and Transjordan. Israeli representatives considered frontier should be considered in two categories: (1) Northern and southern sections; (2) Section east of “triangle” and Hebron.

Re first category Israel suggested frontier between Israel and Transjordan should be political boundary between Transjordan and Palestine under British mandate, i.e., from junction point of Transjordan-Syrian frontier in north to El Fatur in south and from middle of Dead Sea to Gulf of Aqaba.

Re second category Israel did not propose to discuss at present time as no determination had been made as to disposition of central Palestine. Israel would, however, accept present armistice line as boundary whether central Palestine was governed by Transjordan or independent authority. Israel had no ambitions in central Palestine. Israel planned to propose certain modifications in armistice lines but could only discuss with final established authority in central Palestine. Israeli attitude re modifications will change in accordance with character of governing authority, i.e., whether Transjordan, independent state or other authority. Israel did not wish to advance suggestions re its disposition. Israel wished give all interested including Arab states, Arab inhabitants and refugees opportunity to decide re future status of central Palestine.

Israeli proposal does not include Jerusalem area.

Meanwhile Israel regards Transjordan as occupying authority in central Palestine and will be able discuss military changes in armistice lines with Transjordan. [Ethridge.]

Vincent

The Minister in Switzerland (Vincent) to the Secretary of State 501.BB Palestine/5–2849: Telegram

[Document 703]

The Minister in Switzerland (Vincent) to the Secretary of State

secret Bern, May 28, 1949—11 a. m.

821. Palun 174. From Ethridge. Consult Rusk for distribution. In three hour closed meeting with Commission yesterday Eytan advanced idea that stalemate here could be broken to which his letter referred (reference Palun 1691 ) only by “imaginative broad plan” for resettlement of refugees, in which international responsibility as to finance would be chief factor. He suggested Commission advance proposal to both sides which would in effect lift refugee problem out of context of Lausanne meetings. He obviously had in mind program on which Department has been working.

I pointed out to him that in effect what he was proposing was that somebody else relieve Jews and Arabs of their responsibilities and pick up the check for it. He agreed that my remark was true if crude but said there was nothing reprehensible about it as it had happened a good many times before in world history. I replied that of course there was nothing reprehensible about it but any such aid should have proper base. I told him he knew very well US had been considering such aid but we felt there must be number of conditions attached to it.

First must be that Israel must satisfy US and other nations which might participate in such scheme that she had accepted her full responsibility as to number of refugees who would return as to civil rights guarantees to them, as to assurance of fair and just compensation to those who did not return and even to those who did return but in much less favorable circumstances. I pointed out President must go to Congress to ask for appropriations if he decided to make commitment (at no time indicating that any had been made) and he would certainly not make any recommendation that was not based upon what he conceived to be fair and permanent settlement in Middle East.

Second point I made was that Arab delegates must agree in principle they would accept refugees left over and that the Arabs had made it clear they would not make any such commitment until Israel herself had made some commitment on refugee problem beyond any she has made. Therefore, Arab position was in Israel’s hands also.

Third condition must be that such plan would be workable and acceptable to UN. Israel could not expect member nations of UN to accept plan which they did not regard as having been based upon acceptance by Israel and Arabs of their full responsibility toward refugees and bona fide intention their part to make settlement of refugees material factor in peace settlement.

Fourth condition is that other nations must participate, including Israel. If Israel looked at that condition she must realize other nations likely to contribute would be Britain and perhaps France. Even if US brought itself to sponsoring plan without exacting from Israel fulfillment of its duty he could not expect Britain to look with favor upon it in view of her connection in Arab world. Certainly same consideration would apply to France and Turkey.

I pointed out further that whole key to peace had been in Israel’s lands since January and still was and that while UN nations might be willing to buy peace in Middle East as I had suggested they wanted to be sure it was peace. Israel had primary responsibility in proving that.

Eytan said he understood US viewpoint clearly, took notes on it and indicated he wanted to communicate it to his government. He also agreed to consider document for Arabs (reference Palun 1682 ) that would expound Israel’s full position on refugee question. He contended that in making proposal for Gaza strip Israel had agreed to accept all refugees there, all normal population, other Arabs in Palestine and members of broken families. Total would be about as many as Israel agreed to accept under partition. He felt Israel would have discharged its full obligation if she did that.

I agreed that quantitatively she would have accepted her full obligation, but pointed out that he had made proposals with two conditions: international help and acquisition of Gaza strip. What was now lacking was statement to Commission as to how many refugees Israel would take if she did not get Gaza strip. He agreed to consult his government on alternative proposal.

Understand next Cabinet meeting in Tel Aviv is Tuesday. That meeting will probably determine in great measure whether Lausanne conference breaks up. Press reports we get from Palestine indicate that Foreign Office thinking there is that conference might as well break up and leave Israel free to make enforced peace with Transjordan. My own feeling is that Israel prefers that to accepting any responsibility for refugees or making any territorial concessions at all. [Ethridge.]

Vincent

1 Identified also as telegram 819, May 28, from Bern, p. 1067 [Pg. 1067 includes portions of Doc. 700 and Doc. 701].

2 Identified also as telegram 818, May 28, from Bern, p. 1065 [Pg. 1065 includes portions of Doc. 699 and Doc. 700].

Mr. Mark F. Ethridge to the Secretary of State 501.BB Palestine/5–2849: Telegram

[Document 704]

Mr. Mark F. Ethridge to the Secretary of State

secret Bern, May 28, 1949—11 a. m.

822. Palun 175. Consult Rusk for distribution. In private meeting last night with Fawzi Mulki of Transjordan Delegation, he told me Arab Delegates will not make any further concessions here. He said their attitude was based on several factors: 1. They felt they had made concessions in signing protocol (reference Palun 1481 ) acknowledging partition as fact and as basis for further negotiation; in being willing to accept what they regarded as minor concessions on refugee problem as set out in their 9–point memo (reference Palun 1662 ) without demanding more substantial concession now; and in indicating in point 3 of their May 21 memo (reference Palun 1653 ) that they were willing to go into territorial talks, even if their method was to back into such talks. On contrary, they argued that Jews have given nothing and are demanding more. No Arab politician could dare make any further concessions.

2. Neither Egypt nor Syria cared in circumstances whether they made peace, and Lebanese had taken position that it would go along with, but not ahead of, other Arab states. They want peace on basis they regard as decent, that is, one that would not overthrow their governments. He said armistice agreements had badly shaken Arab world and Arab politicians had been able to explain them away only by saying armistice lines were not peace lines. To give more now than armistice lines called for would be to wreck Arab governments, and Arab politicians could not be expected to do that.

3. Transjordan’s attitude had modified and hardened considerably because of experience in Tulkarm triangle and in Jerusalem area. Fawzi Mulki felt that by their excessive gun-point demands Jews, while pretending so [sic] friendship with Abdullah, had actually lowered his prestige to point where he could no longer help them in peace making. He said feeling was shared by all Abdullah’s advisers and even by King himself and was responsible for failure of mixed committee at Jerusalem and for King’s refusal to approve separate meetings between Mulki and Sasoon at Lausanne. Mulki says Transjordan is determined that unless Jews make some concessions by which Transjordan can rescue some of her prestige he doubted whether any peace could come and he personally would not sign such peace. “All the King can do is dismiss me,” he said, “I will not face wrath of people of Transjordan and Arab world by signing away more than we have already given. The Jews have been too clever.” Fawzi Mulki said he would continue to try here and would discuss with Arab Delegates question of asking commission to make proposals before breaking up.

Fawzi Mulki said there would, of course, be no trouble in getting commitments from Arab Governments on accepting refugees providing Israel made satisfactory commitment. He says Arabs have already agreed among themselves they will have to accept refugees and even Iraq has given some encouragement.

Ethridge

1 Dated May 12, p. 998 [Pg. 998 includes portions of Doc. 648 and Doc. 649].

2 Dated May 23, p. 1044 [Pg. 1044 includes portions of Doc. 682 and Doc. 683].

3 Dated May 23, p. 1043 [Pg. 1043 includes portions of Doc. 680 and Doc. 681].

The Acting Secretary of State to the Embassy in Israel 501.BB Palestine/5–2849: Telegram

[Document 705]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Embassy in Israel

top secret
priority
niact Washington, May 28, 1949—11 a. m.

322. Pres desires you deliver following note classified secret immediately to Ben-Gurion.1

“Excellency: I have the honor to inform Your Excellency that the Pres of the US has instructed me to inform the Govt of Israel as fols:

The Govt of the US is seriously disturbed by the attitude of Israel with respect to a territorial settlement in Palestine and to the question of Palestinian refugees, as set forth by the representatives of Israel at Lausanne in public and private meetings. According to Dr. Eytan, the Israeli Govt will do nothing further about Palestinian refugees at the present time, although it has under consideration certain urgent measures of limited character. In connection with territorial matters, the position taken by Dr. Eytan apparently contemplates not only the retention of all territory now held under military occupation by Israel, which is clearly in excess of the partition boundaries of Nov 29, 1947, but possibly an additional acquisition of further territory within Palestine.

As a mem of the UN POC and as a nation which has consistently striven to give practical effect to the principles of the UN, the US Govt has recently made a number of representations to the Israeli Govt. concerning the repatriation of refugees who fled from the conflict in Palestine. These representations were in conformity with the principles set forth in the resolution of the GA of Dec 11, 1948, and urged the acceptance of the principle of substantial repatriation and the immediate beginnings of repatriation on a reasonable scale which would be well within the numbers to be agreed in a final settlement. The US Govt conceded that a final settlement of the refugee problem must await a definitive peace settlement. These representations, as well as those made concurrently to the Arab States concerning the resettlement outside of Palestine of a substantial portion of Palestine refugees, were made in the firm conviction that they pointed the way to a lasting peace in that area.

In the interests of a just and equitable solution of territorial questions the US Govt, in the UN and as a mem of the PCC, has supported the position that Israel should be expected to offer territorial compensation for any territorial acquisition which it expects to effect beyond the boundaries set forth in the res of the GA of Nov 29, 1947. The Govt of Israel has been well aware of this position and of the view of the US Govt that it is based upon elementary principles of fairness and equity.

The US Govt is deeply concerned to learn from Dr. Eytan’s statements that the suggestions both on refugees and on territorial questions which have been made by it for the sole purpose of advancing prospects of peace have made so little impression upon the Govt of Israel.

The US attitude of sympathy and support for Israel has arisen out of broad American interest and principles, particularly out of its support for the UN and its desire to achieve peace and security in the Near East on a realistic basis. The US Govt and people have given generous support to the creation of Israel because they have been convinced of the justice of this aspiration. The US Govt does not, however, regard the present attitude of the Israeli Govt as being consistent with the principles upon which US support has been based. The US Govt is gravely concerned lest Israel now endanger the possibility of arriving at a solution of the Palestine problem in such a way as to contribute to the establishment of sound and friendly relations between Israel and its neighbors.

The Govt of Israel should entertain no doubt whatever that the US Govt relies upon it to take responsible and positive action concerning Palestine refugees and that, far from supporting excessive Israeli claims to further territory within Palestine, the US Govt believes that it is necessary for Israel to offer territorial compensation for territory which it expects to acquire beyond the boundaries of the Nov 29, 1947 res of the GA.

The Govt of Israel must be aware that the attitude which it has thus far assumed at Lausanne must inevitably lead to a rupture in those conversations. The US Govt must state in candor that it considers that the Govt of Israel must provide a basis for a continuation of such talks under the auspices of the PCC and that a rupture arising out of the rigid attitude of the Govt of Israel would place a heavy responsibility upon that Govt and people.

If the Govt of Israel continues to reject the basic principles set forth by the res of the GA of Dec 11, 1948 and the friendly advice offered by the US Govt for the sole purpose of facilitating a genuine peace in Palestine, the US Govt will regretfully be forced to the conclusion that a revision of its attitude toward Israel has become unavoidable.”

Please report time of delivery niact in order that Department may furnish copy to Elath.2

Webb

1 At 7 p. m., May 27, the Department sent a telegram to Secretary Acheson at Paris, numbered Telac 23. The editors have been unable to locate a copy in the files of the Department but presume it transmitted the text of the note to be delivered to the Israeli Prime Minister. The Secretary replied the following day, stating “Agree with text and dispatch.” (Actel 20, 501.BB Palestine/5–2849) Actel 20 was received in the Department at 10:17 a. m., May 28.

2 A marginal notation states that this telegram was “cleared with the White House 5/27/49.” Mr. Satterthwaite, on May 30, handed to the Israeli Chargé Uriel Heyd, the text of the United States note to the Israeli Government. The latter made no comment after reading the note. Mr. Satterthwaite “made no comment other than to emphasize the fact that the note had been delivered under the instructions of the President.” (Memorandum of conversation by Mr. Satterthwaite, 867N.01/5–3049)

Israeli Ambassador Elath called on Acting Secretary Webb on May 31 just prior to his departure for a visit to Israel. The prime subject of their discussion was the United States note. Mr. Webb records that “With strong emotion in his voice the Ambassador said he prayed to God that the United States Government would not underestimate Israeli determination to preserve the security of Israel at all costs. It would be a tragic thing, he said, if the friendly relations between our two countries should be altered because the United States Government insisted on a course of action which would threaten Israeli security. He expressed the fervent hope that this would not come to pass.

“I said that I was sure the Israeli Government realized that the United States Government would not send such a note without prior and careful consideration of all the aspects involved. I referred to the friendly relations between our two countries, and to the United States desire to see these relations continue, and I said that it was out of the deep friendship of the United States for Israel that we had made the recommendations which we believed would lead to a lasting: peace in the Near East. I reiterated that what was necessary was a sincere desire by all the parties to bring about a genuine peace.” (Memorandum of conversation, 501.BB Palestine/5–3149)

The Ambassador in Israel (McDonald) to the Secretary of State 501.BB Palestine/5–2949: Telegram

[Document 706]

The Ambassador in Israel (McDonald) to the Secretary of State

top secret
niact
priority Tel Aviv, May 29, 1949—6 p. m.

406. ReDeptel 322, May 28. During half hour conference (Ford also present) May 29 with Prime Minister and Foreign Minister at former’s home they read slowly note from President. At end of reading Foreign Minister said “this grave note calls for considered answer which we shall prepare.”

Prime Minister then expressed following: US is world power which helped us much before and after state set up. US has right to “have a say.” But note ignores two fundamental facts:

1. November 29 resolution never carried out by UN, US or Middle East States. It contemplated two states, Israel and independent Arab Palestine, united by customs and other ties at peace with one another and neighbors. Prime Minister unable recall any strong action by US or UN to enforce November 29 or prevent aggression by Syria, Egypt, Lebanon and Iraq. Instead embargo encouraged aggressors against Israel whose very existence was in danger. Had Jews waited on US or UN they would have been exterminated. Israel was established not on basis November 29 but on that of successful war of defence. Hence note’s suggestion is today unjust and unrealistic for it ignores war and continued Arab threats which make November 29 boundaries impossible.

2. Solution refugees can be considered only as part peace settlement. Arab States refuse make peace and on May 4, Israel’s independence day, threatened renewal war. So long as this attitude persists refugees are potential enemies of Israel. If war were renewed could Israel appeal to US to send arms or troops for defence against refugees fighting on side of aggressors? Upon whom does US ask Israel to rely?

In impassioned conclusion “off the record” Prime Minister said: “US is powerful and we are weak; we could be destroyed; but we do not intend to commit suicide by accepting November 29 settlement in today’s fundamentally changed conditions.”

Comment: Manner of Prime Minister’s response and unusual reticence of Foreign Minister indicated extreme seriousness their reception of President’s note. When Prime Minister opined that this was strongest representation yet sent by US to Israel I agreed but otherwise made no comment. There is no grounds however, for confidence Israel will accept without substantial reservations fundamentals of US position. I anticipate Israel’s formal reply soon. End comment.

McDonald

Memorandum by the Acting Secretary of State 501.BB Palestine/5–3149

[Document 707]

Memorandum by the Acting Secretary of State

top secret [Washington, May 31, 1949.]

Meeting With President, Tuesday, May 31, 1949

note to the israeli government

I indicated to the President the substance of the reports we have received as to the reaction of the reaction of the Israeli Government to our recent note, and he expressed real interest. I feel very sure that he has no doubts as to the wisdom of the course being followed.

J[ames E.] W[ebb]

The Ambassador in Israel (McDonald) to the Secretary of State 501.BB Palestine/5–3149: Telegram

[Document 708]

The Ambassador in Israel (McDonald) to the Secretary of State

top secret Tel Aviv, May 31, 1949—noon.

408. Herlitz1 of Foreign Office at residence my invitation May 30 in an hour’s informal talk said: 1. “Gaza plan” had been first suggested by Ethridge to Eytan. Then Israeli Cabinet after long debate voted, with two abstentions, to accept Gaza-Rafa strip and its 250,000 to 300,000 Arabs.

2. Egypt had privately indicated its willingness relinquish strip.

3. Task of repatriating and resettling on Israeli soil this “vast number” of Arab refugees was considered as “gigantic” involving “severe personal sacrifice all Israeli people”.

4. Lausanne “was not on verge failure”. Ethridge was “naturally impatient for results” but Arabs “not” preparing go home. On contrary they sending for families and renting homes Lausanne.

5. Foreign Office and Prime Minister hopeful that strong representation made by US to Israel was also being made to Arab states in appropriate form.

Comment. As Herlitz talked I remained silent feeling that Deptel 322, May 28, could not be strengthened by any commentary of mine. End comment.

McDonald

1 Esther Herlitz, Acting Director of the American Division of the Israeli Foreign Office.

The Consul at Jerusalem (Burdett) to the Secretary of State 867N.01/5–3149: Telegram

[Document 709]

The Consul at Jerusalem (Burdett) to the Secretary of State

restricted Jerusalem, May 31, 1949—2 p. m.

388. Transjordan–Israel special committee met Jerusalem 29th and will meet again June 7. No progress made on major issues but agreement reached to permit Arabs harvest crops in lands of triangle given Israel for additional week.

Talks by ConGen with both Israel and Transjordan delegates show considerable pessimism as to possibility any progress. Bergman1 states submit specific plan for exchange territory in north for Arab quarter in south but doubts Arab proposals will form acceptable basis for discussion.

Sent Department 388; repeated Geneva 17 for USDel PCC; pouched Arab capitals.

Burdett

1 Presumably Abraham Bergman, District Commissioner for Israeli Jerusalem.

The Secretary of State to the Acting Secretary of State 501.BB Palestine/5–3149: Telegram

[Document 710]

The Secretary of State to the Acting Secretary of State

top secret Paris, May 31, 1949—7 p. m.

2202. Webb from Acheson. Bevin Conv Four. Bevin discussed Palestine question with me this morning. He referred to their conversations in New York with Bunche who had agreed they could supply small arms but said he could not go further pending conclusion Syria and Israeli armistice. Bunche had prepared draft for SC but not yet ready to submit it. Bevin chiefly concerned situation arising from Israeli claims to territory both sides upper Jordan which would give them complete control of all water resources. UK hopes for four-party agreement on water development permitting settlement 100,000 refugees and leaving adequate water for Israel. He suggested we secure help of Bank and perhaps Conciliation Commission to study common use of water under joint auspices. Bevin further amplified previous arguments regarding defense arrangements with Egypt and other countries. He emphasized they must have an agreement with Egypt if trouble comes. He had settled the question of water resources and was making progress on Sudan and Ethiopia. UK has sent Slim1 and Egyptians have appointed three of their best people to discuss plans. Bevin thinks if he now lets Egyptians have such arms for training as he can properly send under Bunche’s ruling, he could stall for a couple months before supplying other arms but would need to give some assurance further action within that time. Bevin thinks much depends on settling Syrian and Israeli difficulty. He is asking Schuman2 to use his influence with Syria. UK ready to spend considerable sterling various refugee projects.

I told Bevin in very strict confidence that we had given stiff note to Israel and were awaiting their formal reply. I stressed necessity for avoiding any reference to our note. I emphasized our belief very important British avoid raising issue by sending arms while outcome this step of ours is awaiting.

Bevin considered this very helpful and then raised Transjordan question. Wright reported Transjordan received recent note from Israel maintaining demands for Syrian withdrawal, asserting Conciliation Commission had failed and requesting direct negotiations in Jerusalem between Transjordan and Israel parallel to Lausanne discussions. Abdullah told British he was defenseless but would be accused by other Arabs of going behind their backs if he agreed to Jerusalem talks. Bevin had not previously received this information but commented UK should tell him not to enter Jerusalem talks. If Israelis attack Arab Legion it would be serious new matter for UN. In such case Bevin would feel bound to release the munitions held at Amman and expressed hope US would agree he should do so although he would not release it unless Israelis first attack. Bevin added Abdullah has also asked their advice whether they should now incorporate Palestine territories which he is administering. Bevin would like to have them do this so their treaty would apply to these territories also. Wright said their legal people believed they could argue treaty applies now without incorporation on basis de facto administration. Bevin specifically requested our views on question Transjordan incorporation of territories and I told him I would secure word for him as soon as possible.3 Bevin expressed sympathetic understanding US political problem in face of domestic pressures and strong desire to avoid any break in our common front. I answered affirmatively Wright’s specific question whether we agreed they could go as far as Bundle’s authorization re shipment of arms.

[ Acheson ]

1 Field Marshal Sir William J. Slim, Chief of the British Imperial General Staff.

2 Robert Schuman, French Foreign Minister.

3 In Telac 32, May 31, 4 p. m., to Secretary Acheson at Paris, the Department had speculated that Mr. Bevin might “inquire re US attitude on disposition central part of Pal now occupied by Transjordan troops. Dept’s policy on this is to favor incorporation area in Transjordan. Suggest Bevin be so informed.” (740.00119 Council/5–3049) Presumably, this telegram reached Secretary Acheson too late to be used in his conversation with Mr. Bevin.

The Acting Secretary of State to the Legation in Transjordan 867N.01/5–2649: Telegram

[Document 711]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Legation in Transjordan

secret Washington, May 31, 1949—7 p. m.

69. In replying to King’s letter subject ur 217 May 26 you shld state that there is no truth whatsoever in allegation that US rep PCC interested in no other problem but that of refugees. Inform King USG, as mem PCC and nation deeply interested in peace and stability Near East, diligently working for just and equitable solution of all problems involved in Pal situation and for success Lausanne talks. In furtherance establishment peace USG has heretofore approached both sides on several factors involved and will continue do so whenever believes such approaches constructive.

You shld express appreciation for King’s views concerning US role in final Pal settlement and state USG determined vigorously seek equitable settlement within framework UN.

You shld tactfully remind King that US policy re arms established as result UN arms embargo. Express hope that continued peace in Pal and progress toward final settlement may produce circumstances which will lead to UN decision lift embargo.

In conclusion you shld express appreciation for constructive attitude shown by Jordan re final Pal settlement and particularly for King’s assurances concerning his peaceful intentions.

Webb

The Acting Secretary of State to the United States Representative at the United Nations (Austin) 501.BB Palestine/5–3149: Telegram

[Document 712]

The Acting Secretary of State to the United States Representative at the United Nations (Austin)

confidential Washington, May 31, 1949—7 p. m.

296. In event Syrian armistice case brought before SC we are considering desirability SC recommend parties submit dispute arbitration, naming Bunche arbitrator. Procedures looking toward persuasion of parties would have been exhausted by time case brought before SC and recommendation arbitration would seem appropriate. Parties will find some difficulty in rejecting proposal since armistice would not involve permanent territorial settlement.

Would appreciate your views and unless you see objection suggest you discuss this with Bunche.

Webb

The Acting Secretary of State to the Legation in Switzerland 867N.01/5–3149: Telegram

[Document 713]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Legation in Switzerland

secret Washington, May 31, 1949—11 p. m.

Unpal 124. For USDel, Lausanne. Dept appreciates reasons for concern Jerusalem expressed Jerusalem tel 370 May 20 and Amman tel 215 May 24 and also substantial contribution these tels our understanding Jerusalem situation. Dept inclined to feel present procedures will not be productive results and that new approach desirable. Following suggestion draws on both reftels.

PCC might call upon both sides to accept its appointee as chairman Special Comite but with ultimate power as arbiter. Terms of reference would need definition which shld generally include territorial delimitations and public utilities in Jerusalem to extent solutions required in final peace settlement.

Appointee would have as first function serving as chairman Special Comite and assisting parties to reach agreement.

Second function would be to arbitrate any differences on which agreement not reached within agreed period.

As third function it would be understood that agreement of parties or arbitral award on matters covered by terms of reference would form basis corresponding section of PCC detailed proposals on Jerusalem.

In prelim discussions fol names have been suggested for Arbitrator: Charles De Visscher, Belgian Judge of ICJ, and Dr. Azcarate.

Your comments and those of Jerusalem and Amman are invited but you may take this suggestion before PCC, or individual members if you see fit.1

Webb

1 This telegram was repeated to Amman as 71 and to Jerusalem as 262. Mr. Ethridge replied, on June 3, that the American Delegation doubted the practicality of the procedure suggested in Unpal 124 “because it seems unlikely procedure could be completed before September GA. Agreement of Israel and Transjordan to change constitution of special committee and terms of reference and agreement re chairman-arbitrator would involve lengthy negotiations. … It therefore seems preferable follow procedure suggested in Palun 179.” (telegram Palun 183 from Lausanne, 501.BB Palestine/6–349) Regarding Palun 179, see footnoted, p. 1041 [Pg. 1041 is part of Doc. 678].

Editorial Note [Document 714]

Editorial Note

The short name “Transjordan” has hitherto been used in the Foreign Relations series to designate the territory ruled by King (formerly Emir) Abdullah. On June 1, 1949, there appeared in the Jordanian Official Gazette (No. 984) a notice by Prime Minister Tewfik Abul Houda, which, as supplied to the editors by the Bureau of Intelligence and Research in the Department of State, read as follows:

“It is to be remembered that the decision of the Houses of Parliament which was taken on May 25, 1946, and which declared the independence of this country said that the name of this Kingdom is the ‘Hashemite Kingdom of the Jordan’. The Jordan Constitution, published at the beginning of February, 1947, approved this decision. However, it is noticed that the name of Transjordan is still applied to this Kingdom, and certain people and official institutions still use the old name in Arabic and foreign languages, which makes me obliged to point out to all who are concerned that the correct and official name which should be officially used in all cases is: ‘Al-Mamiakeh Al-Urdunieh Al-Hashemieh’ and in English ‘The Hashemite Kingdom of the Jordan.’

“I beg the Minister of Foreign Affairs to inform all foreign legations in Amman, the Jordan legations in foreign countries, and the Secretary of the United Nations of this official name.” (890i.01/6–149)

The editors, accordingly, have decided to use hereafter the short designation “Jordan” in the annotating of documents in the Series.

Yussef Haikal, the first Jordanian Minister to the United States, presented his credentials to President Truman on June 1; see Department of State Bulletin, June 12, 1949, page 765.

The Secretary of State to the Acting Secretary of State 501.BB Palestine/6–149: Telegram

[Document 715]

The Secretary of State to the Acting Secretary of State

top secret
priority Paris, June 1, 1949—10 a. m.

Actel 30.1 For Rusk2 from Jessup.3 ReEmbtel 2202, May 31, Bevin Conversation 4.

Michael Wright last night supplemented and partially corrected Bevin’s statements to Secretary on Palestinian question. First essential point UK position re Syrian-Israeli frontier is desirability agreement in principle before frontier fixed that water will be used for benefit four states under joint auspices. They worried American engineer Hayes project for local use water by Israel. UK thinks if agreement reached on equitable use of water both sides of actual frontier, the line will settle itself. They do not suggest UK or US express any opinion concerning location frontier.

Re arms supplies, Wright emphasized Bevin considers essential making some definite promise to Egyptians re future deliveries presumably after two-month interval as indicated reftel 2202.

Re Transjordan, Wright made British request more specific. They must give immediate advice to Abdullah on Jerusalem negotiation and on incorporation Palestine territories. They hope US representative would convey US views to Abdullah direct or that at least we would tell UK, first, whether we believe he should stick to Lausanne talks and refuse separate negotiations Jerusalem; second, whether we would approve incorporation Palestinian territories. If we do not approve immediate incorporation, do we have objection British announcing now theory stated reftel 2202 that they consider their treaty applies to the administered territories without incorporation. Of course, what they want is something to help Abdullah’s morale short of supplying; arms and ammunition. Wright suggested it would also be helpful if we could tell Abdullah we would take very serious view of resumption of fighting whether started by Israelis or by Arab Legion.

Wright stated Bevin further inquires whether we think it would be useful for Wright to go to Washington at time of Secretary’s return to Department with view to further discussion Near Eastern questions.

Bevin dining privately with Secretary tonight. If you can send even partial replies any UK questions on any of points raised by Bevin, Secretary would be glad communicate information to him this evening.

Your niact Telac 324 just received. Anything further still welcome. [Jessup.]

Acheson

1 As originally received in the Department of State this telegram was numbered 2218. It was subsequently corrected to Actel 30.

2 Dean Rusk became Deputy Under Secretary of State on May 31.

3 Ambassador at Large Philip Jessup, Alternate Member of the United States Delegation at the Sixth Session of the Council of Foreign Ministers.

4 Dated May 31, not printed, but see footnote 3, p. 1078 [Pg. 1078 includes portions of Doc. 710 and Doc. 711].

The Acting Secretary of State to the Secretary of State, at Paris 501.BB Palestine/5–3149: Telegram

[Document 716]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Secretary of State, at Paris

top secret
priority
niact Washington, June 1, 1949—1 p. m.

Telac 38. Fol replies questions ur 2202 and 2218 May 31.1

1. Dept agrees re desirability agreement in principle before frontier delineation that water resources will be used benefit all states concerned. Will so inform Ethridge requesting his views re feasibility obtaining such agreement at Lausanne. Economic Survey Group which PCC plans activate near future wld resurvey water resources in question with view their equitable use by all states concerned for development and refugee settlement purposes.

2. Dept believes Abdullah shld not enter into reference separate conversations with Israel parallel to Lausanne talks, and is instructing Leg Amman so to advise King. According to info from Amman King has practically made up mind take same decision.

3. View Jordan now administering Pal territory Dept believes shld be feasible proclaim incorporation near future, with proviso re final boundary settlement at later date, but believes essential consult Ethridge before making final decision view possible effect on Lausanne talks. Also consulting Ethridge re extension Brit treaty to Pal territory and will advise urgently.2

4. Dept believes Wright visit Washington would be helpful. Would be interested learn what specific topics he would like discuss.

Webb

1 The latter is dated June 1; see footnote 1, p. 1081 [Pg. 1081 is part of Doc. 715].

2 These matters were raised with Mr. Ethridge in telegram Unpal 125, June 1, 7 p. m., to Lausanne (501.BB Palestine/6–149); its content closely paralleled that of telegram 72 to Amman of the same date, infra.

The Acting Secretary of State to the Legation in Jordan 867N.01/5–3049: Telegram

[Document 717]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Legation in Jordan 1

top secret
priority
niact Amman, June 1, 1949—7 p. m.

72. View Sassoon communication Abdullah asserting Lausanne talks have failed and requesting direct negotiations between Jordan and Israel parallel to Lausanne discussions, Dept desires you informally advise King US Govt believes Lausanne talks have by no means failed and it essential no party take action likely undermine discussions. Accordingly, US Govt in most friendly spirit desires suggest it would not be advisable for Jordan enter reference separate negotiations.2 US Govt approves position taken by King and reported ur 222 May 30.

Dept desires your views urgently on fol.

Bevin has informed Secy Abdullah has asked UK advice whether he should now incorporate Pal territories administered by Jordan. Bevin would like have Jordan do this so that Brit treaty would apply these territories also. UK legal advisers believe they could argue treaty applies now even without incorporation on basis de facto administration. If US does not approve immediate incorporation, Brits desire know whether we object their announcing they consider UK–Jordan treaty applies to administered territory without incorporation. Bevin seeking something raise Abdullah’s morale short of supplying arms and ammunition and would like US reply soonest.3

Dept urgently investigating legal implications.

Webb

1 The Department transmitted the substance of this message to Jerusalem in telegram 263, June 1, 7 p. m., which was repeated to Tel Aviv as No. 330 (501.BB Palestine/6–149).

2 Mr. Rockwell, on June 16, analyzed the reasoning of the Department in sending telegram 72. His memorandum stated in part: “Although no agreement had been reached at Lausanne, largely because of the rigidity of the Israeli position, the Department felt that Sassoon was totally incorrect in stating that the talks were a complete failure. The Department also believed that it was essential to give the strongest support to the Conciliation Commission, which was attempting to reach an equitable agreement between the parties and offered all the necessary facilities to the parties for reaching such an agreement. Under the circumstances, separate talks seemed totally unnecessary, and likely to lead to circumstances similar to those under which Transjordan was forced to give up considerable territory in order to achieve an armistice with Israel. Accordingly, the Department, in the interests of a just settlement, suggested to King Abdullah that he not enter the separate talks with Israel.

“An additional motive for the Department’s approach to King Abdullah was the possibility that Israel and Transjordan, by negotiating together on the question of Jerusalem without the presence of the Conciliation Commission, might reach an agreement concerning the City which would disregard the international and Christian interests in Jerusalem and in the Holy Places.”

Mr. Rockwell’s memorandum was transmitted to Acting Secretary Webb in a memorandum of June 16 by Messrs. Rusk and Satterthwaite, which stated that “This matter has been taken up with Mr. Connelly and Mr. Niles at the White House by Mr. Franklin D. Roosevelt, Jr.” (867N.01/6–1649)

3 Chargé Stabler, in reply on June 3, gave his view that “incorporation Arab Palestine in Transjordan at this stage would have adverse effect on Lausanne talks and on Palestine Arabs and would contribute to additional difficulties between Transjordan and certain Arab states. Moreover, I believe that US and UK, whose advice and support it would soon be known had been sought and obtained, would lay themselves open to criticism for countenancing action of this nature ‘out of court’.” However, to show some form of support to Abdullah, he saw “no reason United States Government should interpose any objection to British announcement that they consider UK–Trans Jordan Treaty applies to administration territory without incorporation,” should the Department be satisfied that the arguments of the British legal advisers were sound (telegram 230, June 3, noon, from Amman, 867N.01/6–349).

Memorandum, Presumably Prepared by Ambassador at Large Philip C. Jessup 867N.01/6–249

[Document 718]

Memorandum, Presumably Prepared by Ambassador at Large Philip C. Jessup 1

top secret Paris, June 2, 1949.

In answer to a number of the points raised by Mr. Bevin with the Secretary and amplified by Mr. Wright to Mr. Jessup, the following preliminary comments can be made: 1. It is agreed that it would be desirable to secure agreement in principle before delineation of Israeli’s frontiers that water resources will be used for the benefit of all states concerned.

2. It is agreed that Abdullah should not enter into the suggested separate conversations in Jerusalem parallel to the Lausanne talks, and the United States Legation at Amman has been instructed so to advise the King.

3. It is agreed that it would be feasible for Transjordan to proclaim the incorporation of the administered Palestine territory in the near future with a proviso regarding the final boundary settlement at a later date. However, final decision on this point and also on the advisability of announcing the extension of the United Kingdom Treaty to cover the administered territories is reserved pending further consultations now in progress.

4. Further details will be communicated by the United States Embassy in London to Mr. Wright.

1 Secretary Acheson sent the text of this memorandum to the Department in his telegram Actel 35, June 3, 9 a. m., from Paris, with the statement that he had handed Mr. Bevin the memorandum “Today” (740.00119 Council/6–349).

The Consul at Jerusalem (Burdett) to the Secretary of State 501.BB Palestine/6–249: Telegram

[Document 719]

The Consul at Jerusalem (Burdett) to the Secretary of State

secret Jerusalem, June 2, 1949—4 p. m.

395. Approach to Jerusalem settlement advanced in Deptel [Unpal] 124 to Lausanne [Bern]1 appears excellent in principle. Would involve direct negotiations under PCC appointed chairman and mutual agreement between parties to greatest extent possible. Questions not agreed on to be arbitrated by chairman whose decision binding. Procedure should provide maximum satisfaction to local populations, solution disputed points with maximum equity and result conforming to UN resolution re Jerusalem. Terms of reference could be so defined that settlement could form part of PCC proposals for Jerusalem now under consideration and so limited that special committee would not conflict with Jerusalem sub-committee of PCC. Believe essential negotiators work on premise entire area of Jerusalem will be permanently demilitarized and neutralized. In addition to territorial delimitations and public utilities, committee should consider “right of passage” to such places as Scopus and holy places and “right of residence” by Jews and Arabs in each other’s zone while intimately bound up with location territorial demarcation line. Account also should be taken of fact settlement reached would become part of permanent peace treaty and must fit into overall framework of treaty.

Necessary [to] estimate reactions parties directly involved.

[Here follow the estimates that Jordan would probably welcome the proposals, especially the provision for arbitration; that the Palestinian Arabs, with objections, would probably accept the proposals; and that the Israelis would likely be opposed, anticipating greater benefits by direct negotiations. There also follow personal comments on possible arbitrators.]

Sent Department 395, repeated Geneva 19 for USDel PCC, Amman 30.

Burdett

1 Dated May 31, p. 1079 [Pg. 1079 includes portions of Doc. 711, Doc. 712, and Doc. 713].

Mr. Mark F. Ethridge to the Secretary of State 501.BB Palestine/6–249: Telegram

[Document 720]

Mr. Mark F. Ethridge to the Secretary of State

top secret Lausanne, June 2, 1949—4 p. m.

Palun 181. Consult Rusk for distribution.

1. Reftel 717, May 31.1 I regret McDonald is apparently refraining from using his influence with Israeli Government to underline President’s and Department’s approved position regarding Palestine as set forth in Deptel 682, May 24. We need all help we can get, particularly in Tel Aviv.2

2. I also regret apparent importance which McDonald attaches to Herlitz’ remarks. Miss Herlitz recent graduate Eytan’s civil service school, is acting chief of North American Section of Foreign Affairs; and while it may be assumed she speaks officially, I doubt if as much weight may be given her remarks as those of Ben-Gurion, Sharett, Comay (all whom must be available in Tel Aviv) and Eytan.

3. In this connection, it is clear from record Ben-Gurion first mentioned Gaza strip proposal which was subsequently officially presented by Eytan in Lausanne (reference Paluns 133 April 20, 142 May 9, 160 May 20 and 162 May 21 [23]3 ).

4. What is date and source of information Egypt willing relinquish Gaza strip? This has always been considered possible by me and some Arabs but chief of Egyptian delegation, who has spoken to me with greatest frankness, has never even hinted at it. Any possibility of developing this project at present was torpedoed by Eytan’s release to press of official proposal to PCC. Egyptians could hardly be expected acquiesce under such circumstances.

5. No comment on point 3 with which I agree. I might add same problem confronts Arabs and UN as well.

Ethridge

1 Not printed: it repeated telegram 408, May 31, p. 1076 [Pg. 1076 includes portions of Doc. 708 and Doc. 709].

2 President Truman read the first paragraph of Palun 181 on June 13; for his reaction, see footnote 2, p. 1125 [Pg. 1125 is part of Doc. 753].

3  Palun 162 not printed, but see footnote 2, p. 1036 [Pg. 1036 is part of Doc. 675].

Mr. Mark F. Ethridge to the Secretary of State 501.BB Palestine/6–249: Telegram

[Document 721]

Mr. Mark F. Ethridge to the Secretary of State

secret Lausanne, June 2, 1949—5 p. m.

Palun 180. For McGhee. Agree with proposals re refugees including survey group whose functions not clearly understood here when we recommended elimination. In light explanations consider most important.

Re commitments: Arab states assured me commitments re resettlement will be forthcoming when Israel makes her commitment re repatriation. Hopeful that will come about after Tel Aviv meetings now in progress. Eytan communicated my talk (Palun 1741 ) to Tel Aviv and left last night for consultations there.

Re approach by mission: In view Arab statements, most useful time for approach would be after Israel has made her commitment. It will be, perhaps disappointing in that Israel will say if she cannot have Gaza strip she will take only small number refugees. In that event us both here and in Washington will have to insist on greater number but it will probably still be necessary to persuade Arabs take greater number than they now contemplate.

[Here follow two paragraphs, dealing with the composition of the survey group, said to be “excellent,” and “next steps.”]

Reservation: I have one important reservation to all proposals re refugees. We do not think any commitment should be made until it is clear that both Arabs and Jews are in process reaching agreement re territorial settlement. In other words, if interested powers are committed to liquidating refugee problem, territorial problem itself may remain unsolved because use2 of intransigence of parties. Both refugee and territorial problem should be solved simultaneously if possible in order increase possibility of successful solution.3

Ethridge

1 Identified also as telegram 821, May 28, from Bern, p. 1069 [Pg. 1069 includes portions of Doc. 702 and Doc. 703].

2 The editors suggest that the word “use” should not appear in the text.

3 The Department of State replied on June 7, setting forth its agreement “re desirability simultaneous solution territorial questions and refugee problem, but desires underscore necessity for positive progress towards solution refugee problem near future, in view importance time element with respect to GA and Congress. We therefore hope will be possible activate Economic Survey Group soon as Israel and Arabs firm up respective commitments re willingness accept specific numbers refugees and indicate willingness accept and cooperate with Survey Group. Survey activities cld then proceed concurrently with negots for final territorial settlement.” (telegram Unpal 137, 501.BB Palestine/6–249)

The Secretary of Defense (Johnson) to the Acting Secretary of State 867N.20A/6–349

[Document 722]

The Secretary of Defense (Johnson) to the Acting Secretary of State

top secret Washington, 3 June 1949.

Dear Mr. Secretary: This is with further reference to your letter of 6 April 1949 concerning the provision of American technical assistance in the organization and training of the Israeli Army.

You will recall that on 30 April 1949, I forwarded an interim informal reply1 to your letter in which I set forth the conclusions of a legal study by the Secretary of the Army of the questions involved, and stated that I was seeking the views of the Joint Chiefs of Staff on broad policy considerations that were involved. I now have the views of the Joint Chiefs of Staff and have, in addition, discussed this matter, among others, with Mr. Eliahu Elath, the Israelian Ambassador.

Based upon the legal study of the Secretary of the Army, the views of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, my discussions with Mr. Elath and consideration of this general subject in my office, I believe the following factual conclusions may be stated in response to the several questions contained in your letter of 6 April 1949.

a. It would be impossible for a retired officer of the regular Army to participate as an individual in the provision of technical assistance in the organization of the Israeli Army. This follows from the provisions of Article I, Section 9, Clause 8 of the United States Constitution which forbid any person holding any office from accepting any emolument, office or title of any kind from any foreign government, or its other agencies or instrumentalities.

b. It would be legally possible for a Reserve officer not on active duty to accept a position with, or engage himself as, a military adviser to the Government of Israel, provided he did not actually enter the military service of Israel, and provided that such action did not at the time contravene that provision of the United States Code which states that any citizen of the United States who accepts and exercises a commission to serve a foreign government in war against any state with whom the United States is at peace shall be fined not more than two thousand dollars, or imprisoned for not more than three years, or both.

c. It would be possible for a Reserve officer not on active duty to resign his commission and accept a position with, or engage himself as, a military adviser to the Government of Israel, provided that such action was not at the time in violation of the aforementioned provision of the United States Code.

d. A military mission to Israel could be established by the President under the authority of the Act of 19 May 1926, as amended. The authority to take such action exists only “during war or declared emergency”, but for the purposes of the particular law, World War II has not been terminated. Thus, although as indicated in your letter of 6 April 1949, permanent authority for the establishment of such a mission is lacking, interim authority does exist. Moreover, the draft of foreign military assistance legislation prepared by the Foreign Assistance Correlation Committee provides for the deletion of the clause quoted above so that this legislation, if enacted, would permit the establishment of such a military mission in peacetime.

The Joint Chiefs of Staff are of the opinion, and I concur, that from the standpoint of the National Military Establishment, the only suitable method of providing the kind of technical assistance requested would be through a military mission. Although legally possible, as indicated above, we do not think it advisable that this government should, in any wise, sponsor or support the acceptance by Reserve officers, or by Reserve officers who have resigned their commissions, of positions as military advisers to the Government of Israel. Therefore, if the Israeli Government should undertake to employ such individuals, it should be made abundantly plain that such employment is in no wise under the sponsorship of the United States Government, and that such individuals cannot be supplied with assistance or support of any kind by the National Military Establishment. The reasons for this position can be concisely stated: In the first place, we could not associate ourselves with any arrangement which attempted to establish a military mission by indirection at a time when, for reasons hereinafter discussed, the official establishment of such a mission would be inadvisable. In the second place, we believe it would be anomalous to have any element of expressed or implied United States Government sponsorship of such individuals in a situation where United States military control over such individuals was completely lacking.

Similarly, we do not believe it would be advisable at this particular time to establish a United States military mission to Israel, although such action might well be desirable at a later date. From a military standpoint, and as indicated in my letter to you of 16 May 1949,2 it would be advantageous to foster the orientation of Israel to the United States. From a military point of view, however, this should not include the initiation of any action, such as the establishment of a military mission to Israel, which might expose the United States to the possibility of overt involvement in the Jewish-Arab conflict. Our strategic interests in the Middle East would certainly suffer if Israel should become involved in a resumption of the armed conflict with her neighbors after our establishment of a military mission with the Israeli Government. Consequently, any action of this kind would be inadvisable until after conditions with respect to Israel and the Arab League have become so stabilized that risk of further conflict in that area is remote. It should be added, moreover, that the Joint Chiefs of Staff are of the opinion that the Israeli Army is not presently in any dire need of foreign technical assistance in its organization and training.

Whenever conditions in the Middle East are stabilized, we are of the opinion that, should the Government of Israel still desire a military mission, the over-all question of military missions to the nations of the Middle East should be taken up with the British Government, in view of the fact that the United States and United Kingdom have generally similar security interests in this area. In addition, if such a military mission were to be established, the Joint Chiefs of Staff are of the view, in which I concur, that its personnel should consist of active duty officers, rather than retired officers.

In arriving at the foregoing conclusions, we have recognized that the policy of the United States Government toward Israel is one of friendly support, and our opinions with regard to the question of technical military assistance are, therefore, offered solely from the military point of view and without specific knowledge as to what the limits of present governmental policy may be. However, within these limitations, we recommend that definitive action on the Israeli request be deferred until stability in the Middle East area has been assured, and until, at that time, the British attitude on the larger question of technical military assistance to the various nations in that area has been explored.

Sincerely yours,

Louis Johnson

1 Not printed.

2 Not printed, but see the last paragraph of the enclosure to Secretary Johnson’s memorandum of May 16 to Admiral Souers, p. 1012 [Pg. 1012 is part of Doc. 659].

The Acting Secretary of State to the Secretary of State, at Paris 501.BB Palestine/6–249: Telegram

[Document 723]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Secretary of State, at Paris

top secret
niact Washington, June 3, 1949—7 p. m.

Telac 50. Ref para 3 Telac 38 June 1. View Ethridge negative reaction immediate incorporation Pal territory now administered by Jordan or extension Brit treaty to this territory (ref Palun 182 June 2 being rptd you1 ), Dept believes desirable inform Bevin US considers advisable no action be taken above two points present time. You may wish make available to Bevin Ethridge’s opinions.2

Webb

1 As Telac 52, June 3, 7 p. m., not printed.

2 Secretary Acheson, in reply from Paris on June 6, stated: “We communicated to Bevin today point[s] made Telac 50 repeating your reftels to Holmes in London requesting inform Michael Wright. Embassy London instructed to follow up on Wright visit Washington.” (telegram Actel 44, 501.BB Palestine/6–649) Julius C. Holmes was Counselor of Embassy in the United Kingdom.

The Acting Secretary of State to the Legation in Switzerland 501.BB Palestine/5–2849: Telegram

[Document 724]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Legation in Switzerland 1

top secret Washington, June 4, 1949—2 p. m.

Unpal 133. For USDel, Lausanne. For your info only, since USG regards refugee problem as overriding factor in determining eventual disposition Gaza strip (Palun 174 May 28), USG would approve incorporation area in Israel as part final territorial settlement provided this cld be achieved by negot with and full consent Egyptian Govt and provided territorial compensation made to Egypt according Pres’ formula if Egypt desires such compensation. Event transfer to Israel, USG considers fol provisions wld be essential to safeguard refugees and residents Gaza strip: (1) clear and unequivocal assurances by Israeli Govt concerning acceptance refugees and resident population Gaza strip as legitimate cits Israel with same rights and same protection accorded Jewish cits, and Israeli Govt undertaking that its civil and military authorities will respect spirit and letter of such assurances; (2) provision for UN supervision of transfer of area and of subsequent status and treatment of population for appropriate period of time.

In opinion Emb Cairo (Palun 181 June 2) without consulting Egyptian auths, Egypt might well be willing cede Gaza strip to Israel provided latter assumes refugee burden, since area wld ultimately become administrative and financial liability to Egypt. Azzam Pasha2 (Cairo A–565 May 163 rptd you) expressed similar views. Emb considers it probable Egyptian Govt wld reserve final decision until formal peace negots and wld use as bargaining point.

Webb

1 This telegram was repeated to London and Cairo.

2 Secretary-General of the Arab League.

3 Not printed.

The Acting Secretary of State to the Legation in Switzerland 501.BB Palestine/6–649: Telegram

[Document 725]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Legation in Switzerland

secret Washington, June 6, 1949—3 p. m.

Unpal 134. For USDel, Lausanne. In recent conversation in Dept Bunche expressed view that Middle East arms embargo should be lifted upon conclusion Syrian armistice. His proposed res (Palun 95)1 intended to have this effect. In formulating its position on this question Dept would be interested in your views as to whether lifting the embargo would have any serious effect prospects achieve peaceful settlement Palestine conflict.2

Webb

1 Identified also as telegram 132, March 24, from Beirut, not printed, but see footnote 1, p. 869 [Pg. 869 is part of Doc. 556].

2 Mr. Ethridge, in reply on June 8, stated: “USDel believes SC should discontinue certain provisions of outstanding resolutions including arms embargo following conclusion Israeli-Syrian armistice agreement. USDel does not believe such action would have serious effect on peaceful settlement. USDel hopes it will be possible avoid prolonged debate in SC on lifting embargo and that it will be handled as discontinuance of one of several provisions.” (telegram Palun 187 from Lausanne, 501.BB Palestine/6–849) The following day, the United States Mission at the United Nations gave its view that “it would be most unwise precipitously and completely to lift ME arms embargo in near future (re Unpal 134). A dangerous armaments race might result if all controls are taken off by SC and there is no agreement among principal potential arms suppliers. Arms sales should somehow be limited not only with regard to war potential but also having in mind economic burden and need for refugee assistance and economic development. There are too many warning signals to overlook, including current tense situation at demilitarized Government House, the frequent boastful military attitude of Israelis expressed in New York, Washington, and Israel. Some Arabs also obviously champing at the bit to secure arms and assume military posture. It seems almost certain that an uneasy situation will prevail in ME for long period, even assuming reasonably successful outcome of Lausanne discussions.”

The Mission also gave its opinion that limited arms for police forces might be made available, noting that Mr. Bunche had approved at least one Egyptian application to purchase sidearms for police purposes (telegram 693 from New York, 501.BB Palestine/6–949).

Regarding the difficulties at Government House, see footnote 1, p. 1098 [Pg. 1098 is part of Doc. 732].

Memorandum by the Acting Secretary of State 501.BB Palestine/6–749

[Document 726]

Memorandum by the Acting Secretary of State

top secret [Washington,] June 7, 1949.

Meeting With President, June 7, 1949

israeli propaganda in palestine case

I informed the President of the activities of certain agents of the Israeli Government and he requested me to stand completely firm in the position we have taken. If necessary, he is agreeable to the Department informing the Israeli Ambassador that, unless such activities cease, our note will be immediately released and the Department will take action to clear up any possible misunderstanding that has been created.

James E. Webb

The Acting Secretary of State to Certain Diplomatic and Consular Offices 711.00111 Armament Control/6–749: Circular telegram

[Document 727]

The Acting Secretary of State to Certain Diplomatic and Consular Offices 1

secret Washington, June 7, 1949—6 a. m.

View UK desire permit supply certain quantities arms and ammunition to Egypt, Iraq, and Jordan and if necessary to other Arab states for internal security and training purposes, UK Govt recently approached US Govt re possibility lifting Near East arms embargo. Dept has informed Brit Emb that it is belief of US Govt that it would be untimely for UK to deliver “military equipment” to Arab states without change in SG truce res or without agreement of Bunche.

With regard to shipment of weapons and ammunition for internal police as opposed to military purposes, Dept suggested UK might wish discuss subject with Acting Mediator, Dept understands from Brits their reps subsequently approached Bunche and obtained his approval limited shipment of arms to Arab states for internal police purposes.

Webb

1 At Arab capitals and Ankara.

The Acting Secretary of State to the Legation in Switzerland 501.BB Palestine/6–349: Telegram

[Document 728]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Legation in Switzerland 1

secret Washington, June 7, 1949—8 p. m.

Unpal 139. For USDel, Lausanne. Dept has fol questions and comments on Palun 1792 and 183,3 Jlem 19, Jun 2,4 and Amman 15, Jun 4.5

Your endorsement in Palun 170 [179] of “limited agreement” mentioned Jlem tel 370, May 20, appears to refer second suggestion that tel. We have two queries as to this. First, we are not clear as to procedure evnvisioned for reaching such agreement. Agreement of this scope appears to come within terms reference existing special comite which seems unable make progress. Second, as stated in Jlem tel, this proposal does not contain principal pt [point?] demanded by Arabs. We accordingly need further clarification as to how this solution cld be brought about.

It was existing impasse that led to Depts suggestion that parties be called upon adopt new procedure involving slightly altered terms reference explicitly including territorial adjustments. Suggestion wld be based upon need peaceful solution, failure efforts negot agreement, and offer impartial procedure which wld result solution based on equity and having backing internatl community. Admitting one or both parties might reject procedure, they wld nevertheless find this difficult in face argument just mentioned and their reaction and arguments might themselves pt way further proceedings.

A possible compromise resulting from such suggestion might be that suggested Amman reftel which basically similar except for omission arbitral function. Wld seem preferable attempt arbitration and if impossible recede this position.

Amman suggestion in Legtel 215, May 24, that special comite be adjourned and that Lausanne conference deal with Jlem as whole wld be acceptable if PCC has necessary technical info and if it desires take on negot added problem on which previous negots unsuccessful.6

Dept appreciates considerations Palun 183 but envisions PCC wld make proposal including broadly stated terms reference and suggestion high caliber arbitrator. Parties shld indicate acceptance or rejection rather quickly or time limit cld be set. If acceptance conditioned on modification terms reference or selection arbitrator, these cld be taken up expeditiously and if not successful project cld be dropped. Time limit cld also be set for conclusion proceeding. In view reaction Jlem and Amman we withdraw suggestion Azcarate but think Judge ICJ wld be appropriate since Court in adjournment until fall. In addition De Visscher, Judge Klaestad of Norway wld seem appropriate choice.

Dept continuing maintain open position this question and invites comments.

Webb

1 This telegram was repeated to Jerusalem and Amman.

2 Identified also as telegram 829, May 31, from Bern, not printed, but see footnote 2, p. 1041 [Pg. 1041 is part of Doc. 678].

3 Dated June 3, from Lausanne, not printed.

4 This was a repeat of telegram 395, June 2, from Jerusalem, p. 1084 [Pg. 1084 includes portions of Doc. 718 and Doc. 719].

5 This was a repeat of telegram 233, June 4, 3 p. m., not printed, but see footnotes 3 and 4, p. 1108 [Pg. 1108 includes portions of Doc. 738 and Doc. 739].

6 In reply on June 13, Mr. Hare set forth the belief of the United States Delegation that it would be “premature for PCC take on Jerusalem problem in absence of agreement on general Palestine question.” (telegram Palun 200 from Lausanne 501.BB Palestine/6–1349)

Memorandum of Telephone Conversation, by the Director of the Office of Near Eastern and African Affairs (Satterthwaite) 501.BB Palestine/6–849

[Document 729]

Memorandum of Telephone Conversation, by the Director of the Office of Near Eastern and African Affairs (Satterthwaite)

secret [Washington,] June 8, 1949.

I called Mr. Ethridge at Mr. Rusk’s suggestion to explain the difficulties we are encountering in finding a successor and to ask if he would be good enough to remain in Lausanne a few days longer in order to enable us to make final arrangements about a successor. This, we thought, might make it possible for him to complete the present phase of the talks.

Mr. Ethridge said first before replying he wanted to report on developments there. Mr. Eytan returned about an hour ago and immediately released a copy of an article in today’s Palestine Post under the by-line of its diplomatic correspondent. Eytan has requested that copies of this article be circulated tonight. The gist of this article is that it can be stated authoritatively that in spite of impressions to the contrary there has been absolutely no change in the policy of the Israeli Government with respect to the questions of boundaries and refugees and that nothing has happened to alter the attitude of the Israeli Government in the slightest.

Mr. Ethridge said that he is seeing Eytan in about one hour. The Arab delegations have asked to see him tomorrow morning about the Jerusalem situation. Fawzi el Mulki has told him that unless the Israeli troops are withdrawn from the neutral zone surrounding the Government House it will be impossible for him to carry on any further conversations.

Mr. Ethridge then went on to explain that he and his staff were at the moment considering making the following suggestions to the Department. If I understood them correctly in spite of a very bad connection it was to the effect that the Commission propose an adjournment to mid August, when it would meet again at Lake Success. In the meantime a small staff would be retained which would be available to the parties if they had further suggestions. In this case Mr. Ethridge could, of course, continue as U.S. Representative.

Mr. Ethridge has already cabled the text of the Palestine Post article. He did not indicate that he would be cabling the foregoing suggestion to us now. Rather he requested that we phone him at 11 o’clock tomorrow morning our time (4 p. m. Lausanne time). He apparently feels that in all probability the talks will “blow up” tomorrow.

With reference to our request that he stay on a few days, he said that he would, of course, if necessary although it would be inconvenient for him. Since Hare has full information concerning all aspects of the problem, he seemed to feel that Hare could tie up the loose ends as well as he.

Mr. Ethridge also reported that Mr. Sassoon has told many people in Lausanne about our note. Cy Sulzberger1 is about to arrive in Lausanne and will no doubt hear about the note. Mr. Ethridge does not intend, of course, to discuss the matter with Sulzberger. He does, however, intend to give him background information concerning the situation in view of the fact that Sassoon has been talking so freely. I said that we would, of course, have no objections to this.

1 A reporter for the New York Times.

The Acting Secretary of State to the Embassy in Israel 501.BB Palestine/6–849: Telegram

[Document 730]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Embassy in Israel 1

top secret Washington, June 8, 1949—11 a. m.

344. Dept gathered from conversation with Shiloah June 6 that Israeli Govt is under impression that note which Pres recently directed be delivered Tel Aviv was in large part motivated by Israeli offer at Lausanne to take Gaza strip and refugees therein. Shiloah said Govt was “astonished that it should be accused of territorial expansionism” because of this offer.

Pls take earliest opportunity disabuse appropriate Israeli officials this misconception, leaving no doubt in their minds that dispatch of note was occasioned by rigid Israeli position, as set forth by Eytan, on refugee question and overall territorial settlement, despite reiterated US suggestions these matters arising out of concern for peace and stability NE and based on principles fairness and equity.

With regard to Gaza strip, state that US sees no reason why area might not be incorporated Israel as part final territorial settlement provided this cld be achieved by negot with and full consent of interest Govts and providing equitable territorial compensation made to those Govts if desire such compensation.

Webb

1 This telegram was repeated to Bern for the American Delegation at Lausanne.

Mr. Mark F. Ethridge to the Secretary of State 501.BB Palestine/6–849: Telegram

[Document 731]

Mr. Mark F. Ethridge to the Secretary of State

restricted Lausanne, June 8, 1949—11 a. m.

Palun 188. Information contained Deptel 727, June 21 is further evidence Israeli tactics revealed Palun 1842 toward objective breaking up Lausanne Conference and blaming PCC. PCC has made it clear it would welcome direct talks if parties would consent. All delegations on PCC including particularly USDel have encouraged direct talks. Thus far, however, Arabs have refused because Israel’s unyielding position and because first private meetings between Israelis and Arabs were released by Israelis to press. Basic reasons for failure of either direct or indirect talks are those outlined in Palun’s 174 and 175.3

Specific instances Israeli misrepresentations are: 1. Paragraph 2 reftel is similar attacks in Israeli press designed discredit PCC. Boisanger has been to Paris; Yalcin to London but PCC has continued to meet and delays have usually been attributable to failure either side make or answer reasonable proposals. For example Israeli Government has not yet given complete answers to Arab proposals regarding urgent measures first broached early April and again confirmed recently (Palun 166).4

2. Each sentence in Paragraph 3 is inaccurate even including statement Arabs and Jews have been slipping off to Paris to talk. Arabs assure me Sassoon has undertaken to lure them away but they will not play his game as he promises nothing. He has however, been in contact with Abdullah through Paris (reference Palun 184).

3. First sentence Paragraph 4 is generally untrue. There has been no divergence views between members PCC. As to second sentence Arabs have not yet reached stage of discussing territorial compensation officially. Private conversations with them indicate, however, their eventual acceptance necessity therefor.

4. Arabs have thus far refused consider Israeli territorial proposals including Gaza strip project pending constructive action by Israelis regarding refugees. Arabs privately consider Israeli Gaza strip project unacceptable as it trades refugees for territory.

It is most unfortunate that an already difficult task should be complicated by inaccurate reports. Although Sassoon with whom have discussed these reports denies sending Shiloah such information, I have impression both Sassoon and Shiloah are deliberately muddying the waters.

Ethridge

1 Sent to Bern for Mr. Ethridge, not printed; it gave excerpts from telegram 668, June 1, 7:45 p. m., from New York, not printed, describing a conversation by John C. Ross with Messrs. Eban and Shiloah the same day. (Nos. 727 and 668 are both filed under 501.BB Palestine/6–149)

2 Dated June 4, 11 a. m., from Lausanne, not printed.

3 Identified also as telegrams 821 and 822, May 28, from Bern, pp. 1069 [Pg. 1069 includes portions of Doc. 702 and Doc. 703] and 1071 [Pg. 1071 includes portions of Doc. 703 and Doc. 704], respectively.

4 Dated May 23, from Lausanne, p. 1044 [Pg. 1044 includes portions of Doc. 682 and Doc. 683].

The Chargé in Jordan (Stabler) to the Secretary of State 867N.01/6–849: Telegram

[Document 732]

The Chargé in Jordan (Stabler) to the Secretary of State

top secret Amman, May 8 [June 8], 1949—11 a. m.

236. Legtel 217, May 26. During call on King this morning I asked him whether there had been any further developments re Sassoon’s message. HM indicated that Transjordan Minister Paris had been instructed to reply to Sassoon’s message that Transjordan Government considered Israel’s demand that Transjordan troops leave Palestine without prejudice to Transjordan rights in Arab Palestine and that while Transjordan interested in reaching peace agreement it not interested in direct negotiations. (Foreign Minister had earlier told me that Transjordan Government had summarily rejected Sassoon’s proposal.) In reporting his talk with Sassoon as result above instructions, Transjordan Minister Paris said Sassoon had proposed that Transjordan and Israel agree on peace terms calling for following boundaries: (a) Northern and southern boundaries to follow old international frontiers; and (b) East-West boundary to follow present armistice lines with adjustments in Jerusalem and Latrun areas. Israel unwilling give up any area it now holds, but would be willing consider return certain refugees to Ramie and Lydda which would remain under Israeli sovereignty. King said this of course not acceptable.

At this point, I conveyed to HM Department’s views as expressed in Deptel 72, June 1. King listened attentively and indicated his agreement these views. However, he pointed out that there are only two courses of action to be followed in settling Palestine question—either peace or war. HM does not want war and is desirous of reaching peace settlement. But if US unable to bring about just and reasonable peace, then US must not deny him right to have arms and ammunition for self-defense. He reiterated that US could be sure that these arms and munitions would be used for self-defense only.

HM then referred to Israeli attack evening June 6 in “Hill of Evil Counsel” area Jerusalem1 as evidence Israeli intentions not peaceful. He expressed concern re possibility Israelis planned take further aggressive action Jerusalem. Transjordan Government had requested Gen. Riley come to Jerusalem and he expected there this morning.

(King’s Chamberlain later said special committee meeting scheduled for June 7 had been called off pending settlement situation growing out of Israeli attack.)

Sent Department 236, repeated Bern 16 (for USDel PCC), Jerusalem 112.

Stabler

1 Chargé Stabler, on June 8, reported information from Jordanian sources that an Israeli detachment had moved into the Arab College and Agricultural School near Government House and had placed minefields and barbed wire along the northern and western approaches to Government House and that General Riley had referred the matter to Mr. Bunche as a violation of the Israeli-Jordanian Armistice. Similar sources also informed the Charge that a number of shooting incidents had occurred in the triangle area. Mr. Stabler “strongly” recommended that the Department urge restraint on the Israeli Government and that the Conciliation Commission hasten implementation of the proposed plan of action regarding the Special Committee, lest peace in Jerusalem become problematical (telegram 238 from Amman, 501.BB Palestine/6–849). Regarding the proposed plan, see Unpal 133, June 4, to Bern, p. 1090 [Pg. 1090 includes portions of Doc. 723 and Doc. 724]. The Department, on June 10, expressed to the U.S. Delegation at Lausanne its serious concern about the Chargé’s report and “strongly” urged it to “consider possibilities PCC exerting control over this situation before recess.” (Unpal 143 to Bern, 501.BB Palestine/6–1049) Mr. Hare replied, on June 13, that “USDel does not believe PCC is either in practical or official position to exert control over situation referred to in Unpal 143. … PCC has neither the organization at Lausanne or Jerusalem to handle such matter. Even if PCC could handle, GA resolution December 11 makes no provision for its jurisdiction of matters arising under truces or armistices pending transference such function by SC to PCC.” (Palun 199 from Lausanne, 501.BB Palestine/6–1349)

Consul Burdett, on June 8, advised that Israeli seizures near Government House “now considered by Consulate General serious and carefully planned Israeli move” and that the Arabs had immediately protested to the United Nations and had stated that they would not attend further meetings of the Mixed Armistice Commission until Israeli troops were withdrawn. Mr. Burdett expressed himself as being “convinced strongest measures should be taken to force withdrawal Israeli troops from Govt House area. UN now faced with complete cessation negotiations in Jerusalem and probable repercussions at Lausanne. … fact Israel able carry through such move with impunity will only make final settlement much more difficult by demonstrating again to Arabs unwillingness UN curb Israel and by enticing Israel to further such acts.” (telegram 402 from Jerusalem, 867N.01/6–849)

The Chargé in the United Kingdom (Holmes) to the Secretary of State 501.BB Palestine/6–849: Telegram

[Document 733]

The Chargé in the United Kingdom (Holmes) to the Secretary of State

top secret London, June 8, 1949—1 p. m.

2205. 1. Substance Paris’ 367, June 6 delivered June 7 to Michael Wright (see Telac 50 and Telac 52).1

2. Wright said UK will make no move for time being re extensions British treaty but that it would have to watch situation from day to day. Foreign Office most anxious learn (a) Israeli reply US démarche mentioned by Secretary (paragraph two Paris’ 2202, June 2 [May 31] to Department), and (a) possible steps Lausanne by Israelis (paragraph one Palun 182, June 2).

3. Re steps by Transjordan towards incorporation. Wright said he thought British Ambassador Kirkbride Amman would be able steady situation since he has been authorized tell Abdullah that UK will supply internal security arms (paragraph one Amman’s 234. June 6 to Department2 ). Arms supply will begin next week along lines paragraph three, Embassy’s 2177, June 3.3 Bevin excised from list some additional “doubtful items” in order conform strictly Bunche concept.

4. Re Ethridge observation Palun 182 that UK probably considers Negev gone anyhow, Wright said Foreign Office very much in dark re developments Lausanne and very conscious deep Transjordan discouragement re Israel. Nevertheless Foreign Office continues to hope that pressure upon Israel to make territorial concessions Negev would be successful because in British eyes importance land communication between Egypt and Transjordan is in no way lessened.

5. Wright asked time formulate thoughts re visit Washington which in any case will be impractical before return Sir William Strang4 from Middle East June 18.

Sent Department 2205, repeated Paris 405 (for Secretary), Bern 55 (for Ethridge and Hare).

Holmes

1 These telegrams to Paris are dated June 3. The former is printed on p. 1090 [Pg. 1090 includes portions of Doc. 723 and Doc. 724]; the latter, not printed, repeated the text of Palun 182, June 2, from Lausanne. No. 182 contained Mr. Ethridge’s view that unilateral incorporation of Arab Palestine by Jordan “would probably provoke Israelis to take same action as to all territories they occupy and freeze situation as it is. That would effectively put off any concession in Negeb or elsewhere. British probably feel Negeb is gone anyhow and they are undertaking to protect Transjordan in negotiations on Arab Palestine. But, from American point of view, we are still pressing for concession in Negeb. Until we get a yes or no on that seems to US Delegation that we should not encourage any action that would prejudice American policy.” (501.BB Palestine/6–249)

2 Not printed; in paragraph one, Mr. Stabler reported information conveyed to him on June 4 by British Ambassador Kirkbride that as a “result Anglo-American talks British Government has decided to supply ‘internal security arms’ to Jordan, Iraq and Egypt.” (890i.24/6–649)

3 Not printed; this paragraph stated that “Small arms and small arms ammunition only would be involved at this stage.” (867N.113/6–349)

4 Permanent Under Secretary in the British Foreign Office.

The Ambassador in Israel (McDonald) to the Secretary of State 867N.01/6–849: Telegram

[Document 734]

The Ambassador in Israel (McDonald) to the Secretary of State

top secret
niact Tel Aviv, June 8, 1949—6 p. m.

439. Personal attention of President and Acting Secretary. Current press reports from Washington, New York, and Lausanne tend confirm judgment Israeli officials (given me privately, see Embtel 429, June 71 ) that United States is moving towards policy which will ask of this country surrender of at least portion southern Negev as “compensation” for its retention of territories Israeli armies have conquered outside November 29 partition area.

Though Department has given no specific indication that demand for surrender of Negev tip is its policy, I can see no other territory to which this insistence could be logically applied. From point of view of American and British strategic interests it would be advantageous if Britain could be guaranteed land bridge (either through Transjordan or Egyptian occupation) from Sinai desert to Transjordan; and only such possible bridge is, of course, southern Negev.

Two considerations should, however, I think give us pause before Department and President commit themselves irretrievably to this policy.

1. I am as convinced, as I have ever been of anything, that Israeli Government will not yield any portion of southern Negev unless forced do so; and this force will have to be military force or such a degree of economic pressure as would be tantamount to war.

2. In its resistance to giving up southern Negev tip, Israel would have at least full moral support of Soviet Union.

New subject: Reply President’s note (Deptel 322, May 28) promised for this afternoon.

McDonald

1 Not printed.

The Acting Secretary of State to the Embassy in Israel 501.BB Palestine/6–849: Telegram

[Document 735]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Embassy in Israel

niact
confidential
priority Washington, June 8, 1949—7 p. m.

347. Fol is draft article on Israeli-Syrian armistice demarcation lines which Bunche has instructed Mohn and Vigier to deliver Tel Aviv and Damascus.

“1. In view of the fact that the question of territorial settlement is one of the matters being dealt with in consultations with the UN Conciliation Commission now taking place at Lausanne, it is emphasized that the following arrangements for the armistice demarcation lines between the Israeli and Syrian Armed Forces are not to be interpreted as having any relation whatsoever to ultimate territorial arrangements affecting the two parties to this agreement.

2. The armistice demarcation line herein defined is in response to the request of the SC in its resolution of 16 November 1948, and without prejudice to the rights, positions, interests and claims of either party to this agreement. In pursuance of the spirit of the SC resolution, the armistice demarcation line has been defined with a view toward separating the armed forces of the two parties in such manner as to minimize the possibility of friction and incident.

3. The armistice demarcation line shall be delineated on the map attached to this agreement as annex (blank). Where the existing truce lines as certified by the UN truce supervision organization run along the recognized international boundary between Syria and Palestine, the armistice demarcation line shall follow the boundary line. Elsewhere, the armistice demarcation line shall follow a line midway between the certified truce lines for the Israeli and Syrian forces.

4. The armed forces of the two parties shall nowhere advance beyond the armistice demarcation line.

5. A. Where the armistice demarcation line does not correspond to the international boundary between Syria and Palestine, the area between the armistice demarcation line and the boundary, pending final territorial settlement between the parties, shall be established as a demilitarized zone from which the armed forces of both parties shall be totally excluded, it being understood that the Ein Gev and Dadara sectors shall also be included in the demilitarized zone.

B. The purpose of the demilitarized zone shall be to safeguard the territorial claims, positions and interests of both parties pending final territorial settlement and to separate widely the armed forces, while providing for the gradual restoration or normal civilian life in the area of the zone without prejudice to the ultimate settlement.

C. Any advance by the armed forces of either party into any part of the demilitarized zone, when confirmed by the UN representatives, shall constitute a flagrant violation of this agreement.

D. The chairman of the Mixed Armistice Commission established in article (blank) of this agreement and United Nations observers attached to the Commission shall be responsible for ensuring the full implementation of this article.

E. The withdrawal of such armed forces as are now found in the demilitarized zone shall be in accordance with the schedule of withdrawal annexed to this agreement and in any case shall be completed within ten weeks from the date on which this agreement is signed.

F. The chairman of the Mixed Armistice Commission shall be empowered to authorize the return of civilians to villages and settlements in the demilitarized zone and the employment of limited numbers of locally recruited civilian police in the zone for internal security purposes, and shall be guided in this regard by the schedule of withdrawal referred to in sub-paragraph (E) of this article.

6. On each side of the demilitarized zone there shall be areas, as defined in annex (blank) to this agreement, in which defensive forces only shall be maintained, in accordance with the definition of defensive forces set forth in annex (blank) to this agreement.”1

Webb

1 This telegram was repeated to Damascus. The Department of State, in telegram 238, June 8, 6 p. m., to Damascus, expressed its belief that the Bunche “proposal is most practical solution current difficulties and desires you take earliest opportunity strongly urge FonMin or PrimMin in your discretion to accept proposal. You shld state USG has instructed you make this approach in sincere belief proposal is real contribution to lasting peace in Pal and will remove one major obstacle in way of final settlement.” (501.BB Palestine/6–849) Telegram 238 was repeated as No. 346 to Tel Aviv for action. Minister Keeley, on June 15, conveyed the sense of telegram 238 to Prime Minister Zaim. The latter stressed “Syrian willingness continue armistice negotiations and said he had instructed Syrian delegation to show greatest possible compromising spirit since … he is sincerely anxious to reach satisfactory modus Vivendi with Israeli at earliest possible date.” Mr. Keeley cautioned, however, that “stalemate likely unless some means can be found to restore Syrian faith in UN ability to control Israeli without which Syrian Government will understandably be reluctant to make concessions that could have domestic repercussions embarrassing to it but which may be necessary to reach agreement with Israel.” (telegram 327, June 16, 8 a.m., from Damascus, 767N.90D/6–4649)

The Government of Israel to the Government of the United States 501.BB Palestine/6–849

[Document 736]

The Government of Israel to the Government of the United States 1

top secret [Tel Aviv,] June 8, 1949.

The Government of Israel has given very careful and serious study to the note delivered by the American Ambassador in Tel Aviv on May 29, 1949. While deeply appreciating the keen personal interest taken by the President of the United States in the fortunes of Israel and the Middle East, the Government of Israel regrets that the terms of the note appear to be based on a misunderstanding of the position adopted by the Government of Israel and by its delegation at Lausanne.

The Government of Israel cannot possibly accept the contention that its line has been “to reject the basic principles set forth by the Resolution of the GA of December 11, 1948”. The cardinal injunction of that resolution is the call made in Article 5 upon the governments concerned “to seek agreement by negotiations, conducted either with the Conciliation Commission or directly, with a view to the final settlement of all questions outstanding between them.” This course the Government of Israel has consistently pursued. It has continually and on its own initiative made direct approaches, before and during the Lausanne Conference, to representatives of Arab states with a view to exploring the possibility of peace negotiations. It has given its full cooperation to the Conciliation Commission for the purpose of effecting a comprehensive peace settlement. The Government of Israel is satisfied that Mr. Eytan and his colleagues have actively and unswervingly followed this line.

If today the position at Lausanne is one of virtual stalemate, this is due entirely to the attitude adopted in concert by the Arab states concerned. Their delegations have persistently refused even to meet the delegation of Israel under the Commission’s auspices. None of them has declared itself willing to discuss outstanding problems in the context of a lasting peace settlement. All the concrete suggestions and the offers made by the Israeli Delegation through the Commission have so far remained unanswered. In these circumstances the Government and people of Israel would deeply resent any suggestion that a rupture in the conversations, if it should occur, would be due to Israel’s “rigid attitude”. In the face of this contrast between Israel’s continued readiness to negotiate peace and the Arab states’ obstinate refusal to do so, the Government of Israel is perplexed by the expression of concern on the part of the United States Government “lest Israel now endanger the possibility” of arriving at a peaceful settlement.

As for the general attitude of the Government of Israel to the provisions of the GA Resolution of December 11, 1948, it may be pointed out that it was to elucidate this very subject that the representative of Israel was invited to appear before the Ad Hoc Political Commission [Committee] on May 5, 1949.2 The Government of Israel had instructed Mr. Eban to set forth fully its views on all points at issue and it may be deduced from Israel’s subsequent admission to the membership of the UN that his explanation—all of them strictly in relation to the December Resolution—were considered satisfactory by the GA.

The US Government is criticizing the attitude of Israel on two specific counts: (1) The final territorial settlement; (2) the solution of the Arab refugee problem.

On the first count, what appears to be a factual misconception should first be eliminated. The Government of Israel is at a loss to understand the reference in the note to the alleged contemplation by Mr. Eytan of “an additional acquisition of further territory within Palestine”. The only suggestion for any such extension of Israel territory—viz. for the incorporation within it of the Gaza-Rafa area with all its present Arab population, including the refugees—came not from the delegation of Israel but from Mr. Ethridge, the US member of the Conciliation Commission.

On the main issue of Israel’s boundaries, the Government of Israel is fully aware of the view expressed by the US representatives in the UN and at Lausanne that Israel should be expected to offer territorial compensation for any areas acquired by it beyond the boundaries laid down in the GA Resolution of November 29, 1947. The Government of Israel must respectfully point out that this view does not represent a UN policy. It forms no part of the Resolution of December 11, 1948. On the contrary, a proposal to introduce into that Resolution a provision for the giving-up by Israel of an area in the Negev in return for Western Galilee was rejected by the Assembly. Paragraph 5 of the Resolution, quoted above, left the field open for a territorial settlement between the parties completely unprejudiced by any a priori principle.

The principle of territorial compensation, related to the 1947 award, is one which the Government of Israel cannot accept. That territorial award was based on a series of assumptions which failed to materialize. The hopes of peaceful implementation were erased by the Arab revolt from within and the Arab invasion from without. The Arab state of Palestine and the economic union did not come into being. The Resolution of November 1947 was indeed a source of tremendous encouragement to the Jewish people, and the part played by the US in promoting its acceptance by the Assembly will never be forgotten. Yet in the decisive struggle which preceded and followed the termination of the British mandate, the Resolution itself proved of little avail. The state of Israel evolved out of chaos and bloodshed. It had to uphold its integrity and independence alone and unaided, fighting against overwhelming odds. Nothing has occurred to invalidate the justice of the assignment to Israel of the areas included in the Jewish state by the 1947 Resolution. On the other hand, the war has proved the indispensability to the survival of Israel of certain vital areas not comprised originally in the share of the Jewish state. In his report to the GA, the late UN Mediator as long ago as last September stated: “The constant question—is not whether it may be advisable to review and revise the Resolution of November 29, 1947. It has already been outrun and irrevocably revised by the actual facts of recent Palestine history”. In any case, the Government of Israel cannot agree that the act of aggression committed by the Arab states in defiance of the Charter and of the GA calls for a territorial reward.

On the question of Arab refugees, the Government of Israel feels bound to restate the basic facts of the situation. It was never part of the Jewish design to force Arabs out of the country. The Jewish authorities accepted the plan of November 29, 1947, in full knowledge that it entailed the presence within the Jewish state of a very considerable Arab population. They were ready to mold the administrative structure and economic policy of the state accordingly. What produced the Arab exodus was the war on Israel. The exodus was partly spontaneous, partly decreed from above by Arab leaders and commanders. The population which fled was that from the midst of which the first murderous attacks on the Jews were launched. The alleged menace to its future was invoked by the aggressors in justification of their invasion of Palestine from outside. The refugees are thus members of an aggressor group defeated in a war of its own making. History does not record any case of large-scale repatriation after such experience.

Moreover, the exodus has wrought a profound change in the ethnic pattern and economic structure of Israel. What was to have been started as an almost equally balanced Jewish-Arab country has become an overwhelmingly Jewish society. The Arab economy lies in ruins. All the energies of Israel are focused on the absorption of the large-scale immigration now in progress, the task which so largely motivated the UN Resolution on Palestine and in particular its support by the UN. New social and economic processes are gathering momentum in Israel, and the wheel of history cannot be turned back. It is inconceivable that the Government of Israel should find itself able to undertake in one and the same breath the absorption of mass Jewish immigration and the reintegration of returning Arab refugees. Both are problems of resettlement involving stupendous efforts on the part of the state and the double burden is far more than Israel can bear. Nor are the returning Arab refugees likely to feel, in the long run, happy and secure in the new setting.

Israel is by no means unmindful of the humanitarian aspect of the problem. It has gone much further than many other nations when faced with a similar situation. It has declared itself ready to pay compensation for land abandoned, to reunite families separated by the war, and generally to make its contribution to the solution of the problem by resettlement. Such a contribution must needs be limited by two compelling considerations; first, national security, and second, economic feasibility. Israel cannot in the name of humanitarianism be driven to commit suicide. Nor can Israel be forced to adopt methods of rehabilitation which would be economically ruinous and self-defeating.

In its earnest desire to approximate its policy on Arab refugees as closely as possible to the terms of the Resolution of December 11, 1948, the Government of Israel has gone as far as the self-preservation of the state of Israel would permit. That trend has been given full expression in the statements of Mr. Eban to the Ad Hoc Political Commission [Committee] and of Mr. Eytan to the Conciliation Commission. May it be recalled that the December Resolution does not provide for repatriation in absolute terms. It states in paragraph 11 that “the refugees wishing to return to their homes and live at peace with their neighbors should be permitted to do so at the earliest practicable date”. It is submitted that practicability must primarily be tested by the touchstones of security and economic realism.

Certain limited, though not negligible measures of repatriation have actually been carried through in recent months and others are under urgent consideration. Anything more substantial, if it should at all prove feasible on economic grounds, must await the restoration of peace. The security consideration is here paramount. Israel received no armed assistance from the UN when it fought for its very existence and it would be idle for it to rely on such help in the future.

The Government of Israel earnestly trusts that on further consideration of the problem the US Government will agree that the Arab states cannot have it both ways by explicitly declaring, on the one hand, that it is not part of their purpose to conclude peace with Israel, and demanding, on the other hand, an immediate solution of the refugee problem at the expense of Israel. The exodus is a direct consequence of their criminal invasion. They should not be allowed to shirk their crucial responsibility and to represent the plight of the refugees as an isolated phenomenon, artificially torn out of its real context. The Government of Israel observes with deep satisfaction that the US Government shares its view “that the final settlement of the problem of refugees must await a definitive peace settlement”. But as long as the Arab states do not evince any readiness even to discuss peace, any significant measure of repatriation is clearly impracticable. The Government of Israel is conscious of no conflict between this attitude and the principles of the Charter, which seeks to guarantee a secure existence to all peace-loving nations.

The Government of Israel regards the friendship of the Government and people of the US as an asset of Israel’s foreign relations than which none is higher in value. It hopes that the consideration of the present reply will restore the sympathetic understanding of the US Government for the problems and anxieties facing Israel.

1 Transmitted to the Department by Tel Aviv in telegram 441, June 8, midnight, which began as follows: “ReDeptel 322 May 28. Foreign Minister handed me following reply, dated June 8, to President’s note at residence at 9 p. m. today: “Excellency, I am directed by the Prime Minister to request you to transmit the following communication to the President of the United States:”

Telegram 441 ended with: “Signed Moshe Sharett, Minister Foreign Affairs.”

2 See footnote 2, p. 979 [Pg. 979 is part of Doc. 636].

Memorandum by the Deputy Under Secretary of State (Rusk) to the Under Secretary of State (Webb) 501.BB Palestine/6–949

[Document 737]

Memorandum by the Deputy Under Secretary of State (Rusk) to the Under Secretary of State (Webb)1

top secret [Washington,] June 9, 1949.

Subject: Israeli Reply to United States Note.

Discussion:

Telegram No. 441 of June 8 from Tel Aviv2 conveys the reply of the Israeli Government to the note which the President directed Ambassador McDonald to deliver to Prime Minister Ben Gurion.

The reply in effect rejects the cardinal points of the United States; note concerning the territorial settlement and disposition of the Arab refugee problem. It states that the United States position on the territorial question does not represent a policy of the United Nations and that the Government of Israel cannot accept the principle of territorial compensation related to the 1947 boundaries. With regard to the refugees, the note repeats the familiar arguments blaming the Arab states for the plight of these people and stating the reasons why in the opinion of the Israeli Government it is impossible for a large number of refugees to return to their homes. The note maintains that Israel has gone as far as it is possible for it to go under the present circumstances in regard to repatriation and reiterates the position that nothing more can be done until a final peace settlement is reached.

Although firmly rejecting the points made in the United States note, the Israeli note is not aggressive in tone and concludes with the hope that consideration of the Israeli reply will restore the “sympathetic understanding of the United States Government for the problems and anxieties facing Israel”.

The basic positions of the United States and Israel thus remain unchanged, and there is no reason for the United States to abandon the firm position it has taken as regards Israel. You may wish to inform the President this morning that the Department will immediately consider what steps should next be taken and will shortly make recommendations to him as to a possible course of action with regard to this problem.

1 Sent also by Mr. Satterthwaite.

2 See footnote 1 to Tel Aviv telegram, June 8, p. 1102 [Pg. 1102 includes portions of Doc. 735 and Doc. 736].

The Acting Secretary of State to Certain Diplomatic Offices 501.BB Palestine/6–949: Circular airgram

[Document 738]

The Acting Secretary of State to Certain Diplomatic Offices 1

secret Washington, June 9, 1949—9:10 a. m.

We transmitted to Ethridge, our rep on UN Palestine Conciliation Comm, as well as to our reps in Jerusalem and Amman,2 our further comments on our suggestion that PCC appoint a rep to chair meetings of special comm. of Israeli-Jordanian reps, with ultimate power of arbiter. We stated our suggestion based on need for peaceful solution, failure of current efforts to negotiate agreement for Jerusalem, and offer of impartial procedure which would result in solution based on equity and having backing of international community. We feel would be difficult under this procedure for parties to reject our suggestion. With reference suggestion our rep in Amman3 that our suggested procedure be adopted except for omission of arbitral function, we feel arbitration should be attempted and, if unfruitful, it would be possible to recede from this position. We also believe that suggestion that Lausanne conference deal with Jerusalem problem4 as a whole would be acceptable if PCC has necessary technical info and if it desires take on these added negotiations.

Webb

1 This airgram, although prepared as a circular message, was sent only to the Embassy in the United Kingdom.

2 In Unpal 139, June 7, to Bern, p. 1093 [Pg. 1093 is part of Doc. 728].

3 As sent in telegram 233, June 4, 3 p. m., not printed.

4 This suggestion had been made in telegram 233 from Amman.

The Acting Secretary of State to the United States Delegation at Lausanne 501.BB Palestine/6–949: Telegram

[Document 739]

The Acting Secretary of State to the United States Delegation at Lausanne

secret
niact Washington, June 9, 1949—7 p. m.

Unpal 141. For Ethridge. In event definitive political discussions shld be suspended for extended period, we are deeply concerned over critical delay in activation proposed Economic Survey Group and implementation its terms of reference, since according to present plans further UN and Congressional action wld be based on Group’s recommendations.

In your opinion, is there any possibility prior your departure of extracting sufficient commitment Israel and Arab states to permit immediate formation of Group, without reference remainder of political negotiations? As minimum conditions, such commitment would appear require agreement Israel and Arabs repatriate and resettle respectively substantial number refugees prior to or at least by time of and as part of final peace settlement (without designation of specific numbers at present time if such designation cannot be obtained), and assumption both sides primary responsibility therefor subject to outside assistance; it wld also require both sides to request or accept, cooperate with and otherwise facilitate tasks of Economic Survey Group along lines set forth in Group’s stated objectives (Unpal 119, Deptel 704 to Bern, May 27 numbered para 1). It shld be made clear both sides that Group’s functions wld be wholly non-political in character, designed solely to expedite final settlement, and that USG wld require fullest cooperation both sides with objectives and activities of Group as pre-condition to extension any US economic aid to Near East through UN or otherwise.

If you consider such commitment adequate and obtainable, how wld you propose PCC issue resolution (Unpal 119) or otherwise establish Group? It is believed that nominations for Group cld be furnished you on short notice. Pls advise Dept urgently diplomatic support which US might extend to obtain foregoing objectives.

Webb

Memorandum by the Acting Secretary of State 501.BB Palestine/6–1049

[Document 740]

Memorandum by the Acting Secretary of State

top secret [Washington,] June 10, 1949.

Meeting With President, Thursday, June 9, 1949

israeli reply to united states note

The President read the attached memorandum1 with respect to the Israeli answer to our note, and expressed satisfaction that the Israelis appeared to be reacting well to the essential objectives which he and the Department are trying to achieve. He informed me that he had let it be known by a number of Jewish leaders who had called on him that unless they were prepared to play the game properly and conform to the rules they were probably going to lose one of their best friends.

1 The memorandum of June 9, p. 1107 [Pg. 1107 is part of Doc. 737].

Memorandum by the Department of State to the President 867N.01/6–1049

[Document 741]

Memorandum by the Department of State to the President 1

top secret Washington, June 10, 1949.

Subject: United States Relations with Israel.

On June 8 Israel replied to the United States note which Ambassador McDonald delivered in Tel Aviv upon your instructions on May 29. The reply firmly rejected the points made in the United States note concerning a final territorial settlement and the disposition of the refugee problem. Under the circumstances, the following course of action vis-à-vis Israel is suggested.

1. Immediate adoption of a generally negative attitude toward Israel. This would include: refusing Israeli requests for United States assistance, such as for the training of Israeli officials in this country and the sending of United States experts to Israel; maintenance of no more than a correct attitude toward Israeli officials in this country and toward American organizations interested in promoting the cause of Israel; and failing to support the position of Israel in the various international organizations.

2. Export-Import Bank Loan. The Export-Import Bank should be immediately informed that it would be desirable to hold up the allocation of the $49,000,000 as yet unallocated of the $100,000,000 earmarked for loan to Israel.

3. United States Contributions to Israel. The time is appropriate to undertake explorations as to whether it is proper, now that a Jewish state has been established as an independent foreign country, for United States contributions to the United Jewish Appeal and to other Jewish fund-raising organizations to continue to be exempt from income tax as having been made for charitable purposes. Such contributions are now of direct benefit to a sovereign foreign state.

4. Reply to Israel Note. A reply to the Israeli note will be drafted, answering the points made and reiterating the United States expectation that Israel will take action along the lines suggested by the United States.

1 Drafted by Mr. Rockwell.

The Ambassador in Israel (McDonald) to the Secretary of State 501.BB Palestine/6–1049: Telegram

[Document 742]

The Ambassador in Israel (McDonald) to the Secretary of State

top secret
niact Tel Aviv, June 10, 1949—10 a. m.

443. ReDeptels 344, 346,1 347, June 8 and further re Embtel 441, June 9 transmitting Israel’s reply to President’s note (Deptel 322, May 28).

Ford and I June 9 conferred hour with Foreign Minister who invited me visit his office. Herlitz and Leo Kohn2 also present.

1. Sharett noted press reports from Washington quoting Acting Secretary and said: “we here besieged for news”. Nonetheless, Foreign Office has admitted merely “exchange of views”. Sharett “will say no more unless US prefers and takes initiative fuller news”. Israel “would not oppose publication of notes”.

Comment: Publication of notes would, I think, be unfortunate because certain arouse strong public feeling. Morning June 10 Foreign Office had no explanation Israeli statement Lake Success June 9. End comment.

2. Sharett followed up Israel note on two points:

a. Boundaries. (Deptel 346, June 8). In conference with Secretary Acheson in New York3 Foreign Minister had accepted former’s phrase “mutual adjustments” boundaries in sense of “minor adjustments” and not “compensations or exchanges”. “Could not have possibly thought of concessions to Lebanon, Syria or Egypt as rewards for their unsuccessful war of aggression”. Sharett thought Secretary Acheson’s words “mutual adjustments” referred primarily to boundary between Israel and Arab Palestine. Is “sorry if Secretary misunderstood”.

Comment: Noteworthy that Sharett emphasized twice evident satisfaction Department’s conclusion that territorial “compensation” Gaza strip would depend on “desire” other government’s “such compensation”. End comment.

b. Refugees. “Measure of repatriation actually carried out” totalled approximately 24,000 divided nearly equally between Galilee and Negev. Total Arabs now in Israel 150,000. Measures “under urgent consideration” include specific permission to “round out families” and more “general permission return of women and minor children of Arabs resident in Israel”.

Comment: Sharett’s manner of presenting these admittedly limited concessions was possible indication Israel’s softening on refugees. End comment.

3. ReDeptel 344, June 8, Sharett emphatically denied Eytan had ever used any expression indicating Israel had desire further territorial expansion except in connection with Ethridge’s suggestion “Gaza plan”. Foreign Minister emphasized there is no justification charge Israel’s position was “rigid”.

Comment: No doubt Sharett feels Israel wrongly charged with “rigidity”. End comment.

4. ReDeptels 346, 347, June 8, Sharett said cabinet would discuss Bundle’s proposal “within two hours”. Israel would attend armistice meeting tenth. Major obstacle in acceptance is demilitarization of Ein Gev. I argued this minor compared with larger issues. Foreign Office telephoned June 10, 9:30 a. m. Riley reported Syrians unable attend today.

Comment: Despite Foreign Minister’s protest I believe even chance Israel acceptance Bunche plan. End comment.

McDonald

1 Telegram 346 was a repeat of 238 to Damascus, not printed, but see footnote 1 to telegram 347, June 8, p. 1102 [Pg. 1102 includes portions of Doc. 735 and Doc. 736].

2 Political Adviser to Mr. Sharett.

3 Presumably the conversation of April 5; see Mr. Acheson’s memorandum of that date, p. 890 [Pg. 890 is part of Doc. 577].

The Minister in Switzerland (Vincent) to the Secretary of State 501.BB Palestine/6–1049: Telegram

[Document 743]

The Minister in Switzerland (Vincent) to the Secretary of State

secret
priority Bern, June 10, 1949—3 p. m.

909. Palun 194. From Ethridge. No progress made so far in reconciling Arab and Israeli positions and no possibility obtaining commitment of type outlined Unpal 1411 before my departure.2 Also practically no prospect obtaining such commitment in course subsequent PCC discussions here. However, I have some ideas oh subject which hope discuss on arrival Washington June 14 and suggest Department delay action till then. [Ethridge.]

Vincent

1 Dated June 9, to Lausanne, p. 1108 [Pg. 1108 includes portions of Doc. 738 and Doc. 739].

2 Mr. Ethridge left Lausanne on June 10. He was succeeded on a temporary basis by Raymond A. Hare.

The Minister in Switzerland (Vincent) to the Secretary of State 501.BB Palestine/6–1049: Telegram

[Document 744]

The Minister in Switzerland (Vincent) to the Secretary of State

restricted Bern, June 10, 1949—3 p. m.

912. Palun 192. From Ethridge. On June 8 Eytan returned Lausanne from Tel Aviv after week’s absence during which it was common knowledge Israel was reexamining its position regarding Israeli-Arab talks through PCC. On June 9 Eytan lectured PCC at length on manner in which talks should be conducted and made general restatement of Israeli position regarding outstanding matters including refugees and territory. Eytan’s remarks indicated Israel had not modified its position in any way, shape or form.

Summary of Eytan’s remarks follows: (1) Conduct of talks: Eytan believed stalemate existed at Lausanne. General dissatisfaction reflected in irresponsible talk, gossip, threats and recrimination. Difficulty must be surmounted and fresh start made. Patience and frankness were necessary.

(2) General approach: PCC members and Arabs say Israel asks unreasonable. Outstanding problems between Israel and Arabs were discussed during Israel admission debate at Lake Success. Eban made full statement. GA admitted Israel. It follows GA was satisfied with Israel’s attitude on outstanding problems.1 We are acting in conformity with Eban statements at Lausanne. If others think us unreasonable it must be in another context.

(3) Reality in Israel: Conditions in Israel have changed since November 292 and continuing change rapidly. Jaffa, for example, is no longer Arab and in some sections no longer exists. Automatic Arab talk regarding return of refugees is unrealistic. Such talk will not advance Lausanne discussions one inch.

(4) Middle East peace: Israeli objective at Lausanne has been restoration of Middle East peace. But other questions including refugees, territory and compensation are subsidiary. Arabs want peace also. Thus far main obstacle has been sustained refusal of Arabs to negotiate peace. Refusal is main cause for present deadlock.

(5) Refugees: Detailed Israeli position known to PCC. Israel very much concerned regarding refugee problem in Palestine and Middle East. Tendency in world since World War I has been to eliminate minority problems. Minority problems cause national and international unrest and conflict. UNSCOP did not consider exclusion of Arabs and Jews from Jewish and Arab states respectively because it assumed peaceful implementation. War resulted. Exodus occurred. Grave minority problem for Jewish state thus solved itself by events. Israel never contemplated removal of Arabs. In light of world’s tragic experience during past 30 years Israel believes “recreation of minority within Israel—as Arabs insist—would be retro-step for peace of Middle East and of world”. Israel will, however, contribute as much as it can in context of general peace settlement.

Eytan proposed supply PCC with summary of statements by Arab leaders calling for revenge. Eytan cited recent discussion in Egyptian Parliament regarding 72 million pound budget for arms. In such circumstances Israel considered it unreasonable to permit return of refugees. Every government which has elementary regard for its people will adopt attitude similar Israels.

(6) Territory: Israel accepted May 12 protocol as basis for discussion. Israeli principle is GA principle of mutual adjustment of borders to common advantage of each party by free negotiation. Israel cannot accept “purely arbitrary mathematical proportion of formula”. Partition resolutions of November 29 are not sacrosanct. Israel is not bound to adhere. Partition was based on peaceful implementation. War results. Only Jewish state appeared. Arab state did not. Arabs are, however, entitled to state. Israel cannot agree that because Arabs failed to establish state3 other Arab states are entitled to territory. It’s too contrary UN principles to reward states which attempted to upset UN resolution by force. Decision along such lines would undermine UN and world peace. If there were Arab state Israel’s territorial position would now be different. Israel is prepared, however, to discuss its frontiers with each of its present neighbors. Eytan considered direct talks with Arabs essential for any territorial arrangement.

(7) Israeli efforts at Lausanne: Eytan recapitulated various proposals and suggestions of Israeli delegation toward progress of Lausanne talks. Eytan recalled steps reported in Palun’s 145, 146,4 162,5 173.6 Eytan stated points outlined in Palun 146 still formed basis Israeli thinking. Failure to receive response regarding preamble was grave disappointment. Arabs had not answered territorial proposals. Israeli delegation may be prepared to put forward further suggestions if useful. To help meeting, Israel is prepared to make free zone at Haifa for import and export without Israeli duty. Israel may make other suggestions to help other Arab states. Israeli efforts are fundamentality different than Arab efforts which consist entirely of demands.

(8) Future steps: (a) Israel continues accept May 12 protocol; (b) present despondency should be overcome; (c) Eytan would be glad state Israeli case directly to Arab delegates.

[Ethridge]
Vincent

1 The Department, on June 15, commented on this point as follows: “Dept believes entirely unwarranted construe GA debate and decision re admission Israel as endorsement their policy before PCC.” It then cited Mr. Eban’s statement before the Ad Hoc Committee on May 5 (see footnote 2, p. 979 [Pg. 979 is part of Doc. 636]) that only the provisions of Article 4 of the Charter were relevant in considering an application for membership and that it was “unjust withhold consent admission on grounds difference opinion on solution certain internatl problems.” (telegram Unpal 151, 501.BB Palestine/6–1049)

2 The date in 1947 that the General Assembly voted to approve the partition of Palestine.

3 In Palestine.

4 Both dated May 10; identified also as telegrams 410 and 411 from Geneva, pp. 902 [Pg. 902 includes portions of Doc. 586 and Doc. 587] and 993 [Pg. 993 includes portions of Doc. 644 and Doc. 645], respectively.

5 Not printed, but see footnote 2, p. 1036 [Pg. 1036 is part of Doc. 675].

6 Identified also as telegram 820, May 28, from Bern, p. 1068 [Pg. 1068 includes portions of Doc. 701 and Doc. 702].

Mr. John C. Ross to the Secretary of State 501.BB Palestine/6–1049: Telegram

[Document 745]

Mr. John C. Ross to the Secretary of State

confidential New York, June 10, 1949—3:04 p. m.

709. Bunche has report from Riley in Jerusalem that Dayan has informed him that there was a misunderstanding and that he will withdraw Israeli troops from demilitarized zone around Government House, replacing them with MP’s. A partition of area will be arranged by Riley following NAC meeting June 11. Foregoing message from Riley followed a previous one which indicated belligerence and hostility on Dayan’s part. Reason for change not apparent.

Bunche says he does not understand motives for Israeli actions Government House zone since it obviously endangered their broader objectives. He does feel, however, that it was a deliberately planned action since Dayan is not a hot-headed or impetuous person.

Ross

Editorial Note [Document 746]

Editorial Note

Ambassador McDonald, on June 11, cabled to the Department, for the personal attention of the President and the Acting Secretary, that “Press and private reaction here to incomplete reports from Washington and elsewhere of contents of President’s note indicate complete unanimity that: (1). US has no right moral or legal for its ‘demands’; (2). Such demands must be ‘resisted’.” He concluded by urging that “further US views not be expressed in terms of imperatives as in concluding paragraphs President’s note unless President and Department are prepared to use extreme measures ultimate effort [effect] of which no one could now foresee.” (telegram 445 from Tel Aviv, 501.BB Palestine/6–1149)

Later the same day Ambassador McDonald sent a followup cable to the Department for the personal attention of Clark Clifford at the White House. After referring to his telegrams 439, June 8, page 1100 [Pg. 1100 includes portions of Doc. 733, Doc. 734, and Doc. 735], and 445 [Pg. 445 includes portions of Doc. 243 and Doc. 244], he stated: “Motivated only by my grave concern Department, with best intentions of causing Israel to make what seems to Washington ‘reasonable and necessary concession’ on refugees and boundaries, our government so embittered Israel opinion that Ben-Gurion and Sharett would be forced despite their will and better judgement to resist US demands. Israel concessions with refugees are possible if request for these is not again put in form of demand. But under no circumstances except use of overwhelming force will Israel yield any part of Negev. …

“This telegram and two referred to above have been written in full remembrance of your final words to me when I was leaving White House before coming Israel.” (telegram 446 from Tel Aviv, 867N.01/6–1149)

The Acting Secretary of State to the Embassy in Egypt 887N.01/6–1149: Telegram

[Document 747]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Embassy in Egypt

secret Washington, June 11, 1949—2 p. m.

573. Egyptian Amb called on ActSec June 10 at own request and left memo1 re lifting arms embargo. He stated Egypt greatly desires lifting of restrictions which as result embargo it has imposed on trade navigation, pointing out no serious fighting has occurred for six months and stating Arab states have no aggressive intentions.

He said sole concern Arabs is just settlement Pal question, to which major obstacle is Israel’s aggressive attitude. While Arabs originally opposed partition, they now willing accept it although cld not state fact publicly. Arab states have two major objectives, settlement refugee problem and final settlement which wld protect them against Israeli aggression. They desire all of the UN resolutions to be observed, particularly res calling for repatriation refugees. They also feel Pres’ principle territorial compensation shld be observed. In response to query as to whether Amb felt independent Arab state cld be established in Pal, he stated this was matter which wld have to be settled by Arab states.

ActSec emphasized importance which USG attaches to Israeli Arab cooperation in achieving final solution. USG does not wish negots Lausanne to fail. Amb stated Egypt doing all possible to make negots succeed.

To specific query re his Govt’s position on Israeli offer accept Gaza refugees in return acquisition Gaza strip,2 Amb said Egyptian Govt regards proposal as “cheap barter”. He stated first step is to permit those refugees in Gaza so desiring to return their homes, but had no suggestion re disposition remainder. He further stated Egypt wld wish make proposals re frontier rectification, which wld not involve large amount territory but wld be designed secure strategically defensible frontier for Egyptian and Israeli security. Did not state when these proposals wld be put forth.

ActSec stated question re arms embargo wld require careful study on part of Dept, pointing out it involved not only US regulation but SC truce res. Amb agreed, and indicated Egypt did not wish raise contentious argument in SC re question but desired prior discussion with SC members before raising question in SC.

Amb then took up subject training Egyptian officers in US. ActSec explained we had recently informed NME 3 we no longer have any objections to training Israeli and Arab officers. However NME has very limited quota for foreign students and therefore needs of many countries require consideration. Moreover because security considerations, many courses open only to Amcits. ActSec stated we are anxious be helpful in matter but quite possible NME cld not place all students which Egyptians might wish send to US.

Pls take early opportunity discuss disposition Gaza strip with Egyptian Govt, requesting its views re Israeli offer. You shld emphasize to Egyptian Govt US concern re refugees that area, which has no economic potential for future settlement, and ask Egyptian Govt its plans re disposition those who do not wish return Israel, since latter might be considerable number. You might in this connection obtain Egyptian views with regard frontier in light Ambs reference to strategic rectification in order that we might explore possibility of exchange of Gaza strip for frontier rectification further south.

Rpt reply to USDel Lausanne.4

Webb

1 Dated June 10, not printed.

2 Mr. Eban informed Mr. Ross during the afternoon of June 10 that “following Rhodes armistice discussions with Egypt, Abdul Munim Mustapha, head of Egyptian delegation, had first raised question of Israel taking over Gaza strip. This discussion was inconclusive. Subsequently on April 30, presumably, Eban said, because Egyptians had talked in same sense, Ethridge at Lausanne in conversation with Eytan had suggested Israel take over Gaza strip Including the 250,000 refugees therein (this is figure Eban used). The idea of taking over this number of refugees shocked Eytan who, however, reported matter to his government which, after much consideration and in sincere effort to get something tangible started at Lausanne, instructed Eytan to make proposal of May 20.” (telegram 712, June 10, from New York, 501.BB Palestine/6–1049)

3 See letter of April 6, p. 898 [Pg. 898 includes portions of Doc. 582 and Doc. 583].

4 This telegram was repeated to Bern as No. 778 (Unpal 145), for the American Delegation at Lausanne. Charge Patterson, on June 14, reported that prior to receipt of telegram 573, i.e., on June 11, he had brought up the question of the Gaza strip proposal with Foreign Minister Khashaba. The latter’s views “were to effect that while Egypt contemplated retention no portion Palestine as such Egypt required most effective frontier for defensive purposes. This frontier stated to be GazA–BeershebA–Dead Sea line. Responsive to my question Minister admitted that Egypt at present not willing cede Gaza coastal strip to Israel in return for Israel’s offer assumptions charge 200,000 or more refugees in GazA–Rafa strip.” (telegram 578 from Cairo, 867N.01/6–1449)

The Consul at Jerusalem (Burdett) to the Secretary of State 867N.00/6–1149: Telegram

[Document 748]

The Consul at Jerusalem (Burdett) to the Secretary of State

secret Jerusalem, June 11, 1949—6 p. m.

409. Present tense situation Jerusalem attributable in large part to failure reach agreement in Special Committee on questions both Jews and Arabs consider essential. Break in deadlock likely to result in quick relaxation and barring complete failure Lausanne eliminate in immediate future present danger resumption hostilities Jerusalem. Essential element is speedy solution through simplified procedure.

Consulate General considers not advisable refer question to Lausanne. Would thus become involved in whole peace treaty procedure with consequent long delays, personnel at Lausanne not familiar with details of problem and would have start all over again, extent of disagreement would not be diminished by simple reference to Lausanne. Same issues must be resolved regardless locale. Arbitration procedure would also involve delay, arbitrator would not be familiar with question, and Israel at least could be expected refuse accept principle arbitral award.

Consulate General therefore, suggests following approach combining certain features Department and Amman proposals. Settlement Government House matter necessary prerequisite. Bequest by Special Committee to MAC to hold series extraordinary sessions under direct chairmanship General Riley. Section 3, Article 12 of Armistice permits changes in agreement by mutual consent. Both sides to present concrete plans for settlement along lines outlined below and under terms of reference specifically providing for territorial exchange. Riley would be able give publicity to proceedings and also use his prestige to facilitate agreement on terms he considered equitable.1 At same time PCC and/or US Government should point out to respective governments (or if preferred to local authorities) in friendly manner necessity reaching agreement swiftly thus eliminating this great cause possible trouble. Israel again should be specifically admonished against use force or threats and ill effect present series incidents pointed out. Also could be told that because concessions made in past by Arabs and as measure of assistance in refugee problem, PCC and US hope will be able adopt generous attitude on quarters. In note to Transjordan, disadvantages of stalling should be forcibly brought out (although this may avoid causing Transjordan trouble with other states or Palestine Arabs delay certainly does not contribute towards peaceful settlement which is prime US objective). Transjordan also should be cautioned against excessive demands and inclination lure single issue of Scopus to recoup past losses of disproportionate nature. In this case Transjordan has shown tendency expand demands as Israel showed willingness make concessions. For example willing at one time trade access to Scopus for access to Arab College (Amman telegram 208, May 18 to Department) which Jews perfectly willing grant.

Consulate General believes best chances of success offered by final settlement on following basis: Israel to obtain free access to Scopus by new road from Sanhedriya in direction of “French Hill” plus territory vicinity Sanhedriya might also be given but need not constitute “land bridge.” Arabs to receive in addition to Bethelehem road and electricity return certain Arab quarters and certain Jewish areas in South. Arabs must recognize not possible obtain wall their old quarters and area likely regain steadily diminishing. Baqa quarter now opened to new immigrants and once such persons settled down extremely difficult dislodge. Crucial point of course is amount area in North to be exchanged for quarters in South but Consulate General feels that with constant pressure by PCC, Riley and perhaps interested governments possible reach solution.

Above procedure advanced in interest speed, to avoid further stalling and to provide for use present UN machinery avoiding complications of setting up new committee. Consulate General considers lines settlement mentioned will meet to maximum extent possible in limited agreement of nature under consideration desires of both parties.

Sent Department, repeated Amman 36, Geneva 27, Tel Aviv 52.

Burdett

1 Chargé Stabler, on June 17, gave his support to the suggestion regarding the Special Committee as set forth in telegram 409 (telegram 250 from Amman, 867N.01/6–1749).

The Minister in Syria (Keeley) to the Secretary of State 501.BB Palestine/6–1149: Telegram

[Document 749]

The Minister in Syria (Keeley) to the Secretary of State

secret Damascus, June 11, 1949—7 p. m.

322. Views in Deptel 238, June 81 delivered to Vice Prime Minister and Foreign Minister Arslan 1 p. m. today. He asked me to thank Department for its advice but said its interest in seeking cause of peace in Palestine might be more effective if weight its influence were brought to bear upon Israel to respect its international engagements and thus help create atmosphere favorable to armistice and peace negotiations.

Contending that as small area Palestine territory now occupied by Syria was taken in fighting against Israeli before truce whereas Israel holds unchallenged vast areas occupied during truce, suggested demilitarization on Syrian front is scarcely equitable measure. Arslan admitted current Bunche proposal nevertheless seemed to offer best basis yet suggested for discussion and he had accordingly authorized Syrian delegation to reenter negotiations. However, as experience has taught Syrians to be wary of any agreement that depends upon Israeli respect for UN guarantees he thought moment inpropitious to hope for agreement. Even Bunche must consider it unfortunate that Israeli had chosen this time to underscore their cynical disregard for their pledged word by entering and fortifying demilitarized Government House zone in Jerusalem.

This latest aggression took place, said Arslan, even while Bunche in personal message to Zaim earnestly appealed for most serious and sympathetic consideration his draft proposals assuring him that “UN responsibility over territory in proposed demilitarized zone gives adequate protection to Syrian interests” and citing Government House among others as example of UN demilitarized area which “gives convincing proof that such arrangements work well and give full protection to rights and claims of interested parties.” Bunche must today be sadly disillusioned man, said Arslan.

Typical of their incomprehensible arrogance latest Israeli aggression has not only jeopardized Syrian Israeli armistice negotiations, but has put wind up in all Arab circles, said Arslan. Added he has warned other Arab capitals that Government House may be first move in conquest of Jerusalem itself if not remainder of Palestine which now effectively within Israeli control.

As Prime Minister Zaim had shortly before my call on Arslan expressed similar views to Foreign Minister I feel that no useful purpose would be served by seeking to deliver Department’s message to Zaim or otherwise trying further to pressurize Syrians into accepting Bunche proposal until some effective means are found and applied to guarantee Israeli respect for its engagements and for UN authority. To pressurize Syrians in face of Israeli action at Government House (Jerusalem’s Contel 401, June 72 and sequence to Department) would I feel sure be interpreted by Syrians only as further evidence of our alleged pro-Israeli attitude and weaken such influence as we still have with them which might better be reserved for more propitious moment such as when Israel itself can be brought to show more accommodating spirit. My French colleague, with whom I am keeping close contact, fully shares my views in this regard. Zaim told him that while inclined to accept Bunche proposal if Israeli respect for UN guaranteed pledges better assured than recent unfortunate experience has given reason to expect, he is disinclined to commit Syria before presidential referendum June 25 (mytel 315, June 8).2 To do so might well cause disturbing repercussions which he is not prepared to risk during crucial pre-election period.

[Here follow four paragraphs dealing primarily with Mr. Arslan’s denunciation of Israel’s aggressive attitude.]

If despite unfavorable atmosphere indicated above Department desires me to urge upon Zaim acceptance Bunche proposal it would be helpful to have its reasons why Syria should not let Government House incident influence its acceptance of similar UN guarantee of proposed demilitarized areas on Syrian-Israeli frontier.3

Sent Department 322, repeated Baghdad 61, Beirut 72, Jerusalem 48, London 84, Paris 68, Tel Aviv 37, Amman 32, Ankara 44, Bern for PCC 13, Cairo 41, Jidda 26.

Department pass Army, Navy, Air.

Keeley

1 Not printed, but see footnote 1 to telegram 347, June 8, p. 1102 [Pg. 1102 includes portions of Doc. 735 and Doc. 736].

2 Not printed.

2 Not printed.

3 The Department, in reply on June 16, directed Damascus to “urge upon Zaim acceptance Bunche proposal” and to “point out that as result intervention such officials UN as Bunche and Riley Israeli troops have now been withdrawn” from the Government House area (telegram 248, 501.BB Palestine/6–1149).

The Chargé in Jordan (Stabler) to the Secretary of State 867N.01/6–1249: Telegram

[Document 750]

The Chargé in Jordan (Stabler) to the Secretary of State

secret Amman, June 12, 1949—11 a. m.

243. According to reliable military’ source here number of incidents along entire Jordan-Israeli front have increased rapidly in past few days with ten such incidents being reported on June 10 alone. Casualties are also reported.

Legion troops at Latrun report “extraordinary” Israeli movements opposite them and believe Israelis are preparing some kind of attack on Latrun salient.

Same military source also reports greatly increased Israeli military activity “in and immediately behind” Jerusalem with two Israeli brigades—fourth and sixth—and armored cars in Jerusalem area. (According to Rhodes agreement only two battalions, but no armor, are allowed in Jerusalem.) Local authorities are seriously concerned that Israelis may be planning further operations in Jerusalem area, such as seizure Mt. Scopus or Latrun or both. Legion source stated few days ago that while Legion could cope with local incidents, it could not cope with any general outbreak of fighting.

Jordan Government has brought above (except for Latrun report) formally to attention Riley.

Comment—In view Israeli action in Government House area and above indications they are planning further aggression, I would now recommend that Department should make immediate representations Tel Aviv along lines suggested in penultimate paragraph Legtel 239 June 91 without awaiting further word from Bunche. I fear that probably protracted attempts by Riley to settle situation will only give Israelis more time in which to prepare further aggression. US should therefore make it quite clear to Israel at this time that troops must be withdrawn and that any further aggressive acts will not be tolerated.

End comment.

Sent Department 243, repeated Bern (for USDel PCC) 22, Jerusalem 119, London 46, Beirut 48, Baghdad 65, Damascus 50, Cairo 29.2

Stabler

1 Not printed; that paragraph read: “In meantime I strongly urge Department to recall its telegram 37, March 25 and President’s message to Abdullah (Deptel 38, March 28) and urgently consider possibility, in event Riley and Bunche should feel such step desirable, making representations in most forcible terms to Israeli Government to effect that Israeli troops must be withdrawn at once and unless Israeli will give undertaking to renounce agency of force to achieve its demands, US Government will be obliged to reconsider its attitude toward that state which has received up to this time unstinting US support.” (867N.01/6–949) Regarding telegram 38, see footnote 1, p. 878 [Pg. 878 includes portions of Doc. 563 and Doc. 564].

2 The Department, on June 14, replied that it was keeping in close touch with Mr. Bunche, “who has intervened directly, is taking strong line, and at present does not desire US assistance.” (telegram 78, 501.BB Palestine/6–1349)

The Minister in Switzerland (Vincent) to the Secretary of State 501.BB Palestine/6–1249: Telegram

[Document 751]

The Minister in Switzerland (Vincent) to the Secretary of State

restricted
priority Bern, June 12, 1949—noon.

920. Palun 197 from Hare. On July 11 Eytan again appeared before PCC for further discussion of matters mentioned Palun 192.1

Boisanger opened meeting by criticizing certain of Eytan’s June 8. statements including unwarranted comparison Bundle’s success with that of PCC, Eytan’s allegation that PCC had opposed direct negotiations as well as unjustified Jewish press attacks on PCC.

Hare put 3 questions to Eytan regarding June 8 statement: 1. Did Israelis anticipate action on Arab memos (Palun 165 and 1662 which might help break ice for further negotiations)?

Eytan replied memo mentioned Palun 166 under sympathetic study but sidestepped memo mentioned Palun 165;

2. How did Israelis reconcile position regarding minorities in light paragraph 11 GA resolution December 11?

Eytan replied Israel did not interpret GA resolution as “categorical imperative.” GA debate November 1948 indicated “point of view close to that of Israeli Govt.” Israel believed paragraph 11 linked return refugees with peace settlement. Some clauses of paragraph 11 are not “practical of implementation”;

3. Did Israel distinguish regarding territory allotted Jewish state November 29 and territory subsequently occupied for purpose of final territorial adjustment and is latter subject to relinquishment or exchange?

Eytan replied evasively reiterating “mathematical approach does not commend itself to my govt.”

Yalcin expressed belief these questions important and he personally not satisfied with replies.

Eytan then made 4 suggestions: (1) Conference work retarded by limited authority of Arab delegations which appear able discuss only refugees. Could not PCC send member or high official of secretariat to Arab capitals and for appearance sake to Tel Aviv to explain situation and attempt remedy this deficiency;

(2) GA resolution December 11 clearly established authority for direct contact between parties. As 6 months have passed PCC entitled speak with vigor to Arab delegation or Arab Govts regarding direct contact;

(3) PCC should establish 5 subcommittees: general terms of peace, frontiers, refugees, Jerusalem, economic and allied matters, all of which should meet jointly with Israeli and Arabs.

(4) Eytan pointed out present discussions based on May 12 protocol but suggested as possible additional approach that armistice agreements conclude under November 16 resolution form common ground and might be made fruitful basis further talks.

Yalcin and Boisanger immediately replied rejecting practically all Eytan’s suggestions. Regarding first suggestion Arabs had full authority to negotiate and real difficulty lay in failure of Israelis to live up to December 11 resolution.

Regarding second direct contact useless until basic groundwork laid. Also resolution did not require them negotiate directly.

Regarding third no use establish subcommittees until substantial basic agreement.

Regarding fourth Yalcin did not understand Eytan’s suggestion and expressed opinion that May 12 protocol was in effect and might therefore be dangerous shift this agreed basis to armistice agreements.

Hare said his initial reaction essentially [similar?] to Yalcin’s and Boisanger’s. Eytan’s suggestions embodied thoughts which merited careful consideration. Hare hoped Eytan would be able express further ideas of constructive nature.

Eytan disappointed but said would endeavor develop further ideas.

Repeated Paris as 56 for immediate delivery to Mark Ethridge at Hotel Crillon. [Hare.]

Vincent

1 Also identified as telegram 912, June 10, from Bern, p. 1112 [Pg. 1112 includes portions of Doc. 742, Doc. 743, and Doc. 744].

2 Both dated May 23, from Lausanne, pp. 1043 [Pg. 1043 includes portions of Doc. 680 and Doc. 681] and 1044 [Pg. 1044 includes portions of Doc. 682 and Doc. 683], respectively.

The Acting Secretary of State to the United States Delegation at Lausanne 501.BB Palestine/6–1249: Telegram

[Document 752]

The Acting Secretary of State to the United States Delegation at Lausanne

top secret
niact Washington, June 12, 1949—1 p. m.

Unpal 146. In recent conversation with Sec, Bevin expressed concern re situation arising from Israeli claims to territory both sides upper Jordan which would give them complete control all water resources. He stated UK hopes for four-party agreement re water development to permit settlement 100,000 refugees TJ and leave adequate water for Israel. Michael Wright supplemented remarks emphasizing that first basic point UK position re Syrian-Israeli frontier is desirability prior or separate agreement in principle before frontier fixed that waters of Jordan Valley will be used benefit Israel, TJ, Syria, Lebanon under joint auspices. UK believes that if agreement reached re equitable use water, frontier line will settle itself. UK does not suggest US–UK express any opinion re location frontier.

UK pointed out that conflicting plans exist for use of waters, since TJ is studying plan for construction Jordan–Yarmuk canal to provide land for refugee settlement, and Israel has now received final plans from Hays and associates providing for diversion most or all Jordan water for Israel before it reaches TJ.

Dept informed Sec of its concurrence re desirability agreement in principle before frontier delineation that water resources will be used benefit all states concerned.

What is USDel’s opinion re possibility obtaining such agreement near future? If obtainable, such agreement might expedite territorial settlement. If Economic Survey Group cld be activated an important function cld be conduct resurvey water resources in question with view their equitable use by all states concerned for development and refugee settlement purposes.

Webb

The Ambassador in France (Bruce) to the Secretary of State 501.BB Palestine/6–1249: Telegram

[Document 753]

The Ambassador in France (Bruce) to the Secretary of State

top secret Paris, June 12, 1949—1 p. m.

2413. From Ethridge. USDel at Lausanne commenting separately on Israel note.

(1) If there is to be any assessment of blame for stalemate at Lausanne, Israel must accept primary responsibility. Commission members, particularly USRep, have consistently pointed out to Prime Minister, Foreign Minister, and Israeli delegation that key to peace is some Israeli concession on refugees. USDel prepared memo months ago of minor concessions which could be made without prejudice to Israel’s final position, pointing out that such concessions would lay the basis for successful talks at Lausanne. Israel has made minor concessions with reservations, but has steadfastly refused to make important ones and has refused to indicate either publicly or privately how many refugees she is willing to take back and under what conditions. Israel’s refusal to abide by the GA assembly resolution, providing those refugees who desire to return to their homes, etc., has been the primary factor in the stalemate. Israel has failed even to stipulate under what conditions refugees wishing to return might return; she has given no definition of what she regards as peaceful co-existence of Arabs and Jews in Israel and she consistently returns to the idea that her security would be endangered; that she can not bear the economic burden and that she has no responsibility for refugees because of Arab attacks upon her. I have never accepted the latter viewpoint. Aside from her general responsibility for refugees, she has particular responsibility for those who have been driven out by terrorism, repression and forcible ejection.

(2) The statement, “the Government of Israel is at a loss to understand the reference in the note to the alleged contemplation by Mr. Eytan of ‘an additional acquisition of further [territory] within Palestine’ ”is a falsehood. Also the statement that the GA [Gaza?] proposal was first advanced by me. As previously reported it was first advanced by Ben Gurion and so reported to the Department at the time. In appearing before the general committee Sassoon and Lifschitz presented Israel’s claim for more of Arab Palestine and used the Hayes (TVA) project map to justify proposed new boundaries with Arab Palestine. It was made clear that the proposed canal must be all inside Israel, which would mean that further territory, including Tulkarm and the northwest corner of the Triangle, must go to Israel. In addition members of Israeli delegation have told me that their demand for withdrawal of Arab troops was designed to establish bargaining position with Abdullah so that Arab Palestine could be further divided. Comay said, “we will point out to Abdullah that he is getting a bonus out of the war.” Ben Gurion told me (see telegram re Tiberias talk;1 do not have reference here) Israel wanted the entire western shore of the Dead Sea. Sharett told the commission in his first meeting that strip from Haifa to Tel Aviv must be widened back to Samarian Hills for security reasons. Under threats Israel took over Tulkarm area villages. By force she has taken over new territory in Jerusalem.

(3) I leave to the Department whether Israel’s admission to UN sanctified what she is doing. Personally, I do not see how the argument can be accepted. Israel was state created upon an ethical concept and should rest upon an ethical base. Her attitude toward refugees is morally reprehensible and politically short-sighted. She has no security that does not rest in friendliness with her neighbors. She has no security that does not rest upon the basis of peace in the Middle East. Her position as conqueror demanding more does not make for peace. It makes for more trouble.

(4) As to Gaza strip: I have felt since it was first mentioned that it could be a basis for settlement of refugee problem to extent of Israel’s responsibility and also a basis for territorial settlement. I have pointed out consistently that it is a good proposal providing it is accompanied by a quid pro quo: some part of the Negev. I have also pointed out that a concession in the Negev is more than a satisfaction of strategic concepts; it is a major point in Arab thinking. One thing that will make for eternal friction in the Middle East is to drive the wedge into the Arab world.

There never has been a time in the life of the commission when a generous and far-sighted attitude on the part of the Jews would not have unlocked peace. Perhaps they are too close to the siege of Jerusalem to see it now. As an advocate of the new state I hope they come on it eventually. Otherwise there will be no peace in the Middle East, no security for Israel and no possibility of lifting the economic blockade with which she must remain a remittance-man nation.2

Repeated Bern 37 for USDel Lausanne. [Ethridge.]

Bruce

1 See telegram 312, April 20, from Jerusalem, p. 925 [Pg. 925 includes portions of Doc. 601 and Doc. 602].

2 Acting Secretary Webb met with President Truman on June 13. His memorandum of conversation stated: “The President read the enclosed telegram from Ethridge, No. 2413, with great interest, and was particularly impressed by the last paragraph. “He also read the first paragraph of Palun 181 and indicated that he would leave it to my discretion as to whether to send a strong message to Ambassador McDonald insisting on his support.” (Secretary’s Memoranda, Lot 53 D 444) Palun 181 is dated June 2, p. 1085 [Pg. 1085 includes portions of Doc. 719 and Doc. 720].

The Acting Secretary of State to the Secretary of State, at Paris 501.BB Palestine/6–1249: Telegram

[Document 754]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Secretary of State, at Paris

top secret
priority
niact Washington, June 12, 1949—10 p. m.

Telac 78. Fol re Pal (Actel 63 June 121 ).

(1) General Pal Situation. As you know from Ethridge, Lausanne talks appear completely stalemated and PCC about to recess. Israeli Govt has made non-aggressive but completely negative reply to note which Pres directed be delivered Tel Aviv. Pres convinced firm line must be maintained and Dept now considering measures which might be taken to emphasize necessity modification Israel viewpoint to open way to settlement. Reply to Israeli note will be drafted in consultation Ethridge. In view PCC stalemate, now appears necessary US play more direct role re Pal settlement. US role would continue to seek basis of settlement among parties and not on basis preconceived notions of our own. After reply to Israeli note and certain steps to underline seriousness our purpose, we have in mind making strong specific suggestions both sides, particularly re: boundaries and refugees. Since precise proposals only in formative stage and depend upon further consultations Ethridge, Bunche, Israeli and Arab reps, suggest you limit yourself to informing Bevin negative character Israeli reply, that US Govt determined to maintain firm position and keep pressure on all parties, and that we are now considering what further steps should now be taken.

(2) Jordan situation. Dept giving further study extension Anglo-Jordan treaty to Pal territories now occupied by Jordan, in light of PCC stalemate and recent Israeli move Jerusalem. Essential point is UK attitude should Israelis seize upon extension treaty as excuse for grabbing more of Arab Pal. Israeli military could probably reach Jordan river in few days, probably before UK could get into action militarily. UK problem would then be to counterattack with forces not now in that area or to fail honor extension of treaty. View limited UK mil strength Jordan and divided UK public opinion re Pal, together with sharpest possible reaction large segments US public opinion, such decision by UK has most serious and far-reaching implications. You might by questioning draw out Bevin’s own view of implications and UK line of action in event Israel–Jordan hostilities. Bevin should not rely upon US approval or support for all consequences treaty extension nor should he overestimate US influence with Israel. Past record suggests Israel has had more influence with US than has US with Israel; this particularly true on military matters since Israeli armament has come from eastern Europe and illicit traffic over which we have had no control. Believe US as member PCC should concentrate on negotiated settlement and not become involved with explosive issue extension Anglo–Jordan treaty unless situation reaches more of crisis stage than present. These are tentative views, subject to further study and consultation here.

(3) Israeli move Jerusalem. Judging from available reports Israeli move into Govt House neutral zone was violation spirit not letter Israeli–Jordan armistice agreement. Presence Arab civilians and military in or near area gave Israelis good pretext. Situation confused and Gen. Riley attempting bring parties to agreement on withdrawal forces both sides and partition area. Meeting reps both sides under chairmanship Riley likely in day or so. We understand Israelis may agree withdrawal troops from newly-occupied area and replacement by civilian police. View fluid situation Dept has taken no action and plans not to do so unless requested to by Bunche, who kept fully informed by Riley. Suggest Bevin be informed sense above.

Webb

1 Not printed; in this telegram from Paris, Secretary Acheson stated in part: “Bevin’s secretary also stated Bevin wished talk with me again Monday or Tuesday regarding general Palestine situation, Transjordan situation, and recent Jewish aggressive moves in Jerusalem. Any guidance from Department would be appreciated.” (740.00119 Council/6–1249).

Editorial Note [Document 755]

Editorial Note

The Palestine Conciliation Commission sent its third progress report from Lausanne on June 13. Mr. Hare, on June 17, transmitted a summary to the Department, noting that the report covered the period from April 9 to the departure of Mr. Ethridge from Lausanne. He described the conclusions of the report as follows:

“Immediate problem facing PCC consists in linking together negotiations on refugee problem and territorial questions. Pressure exerted by Arab delegations in favor of negotiations on refugee question combined with Israeli pressure in favor of territorial negotiations threaten to create situation in which it would be difficult to arrive at agreement on solution of these fundamental problems. PCC concentrating for moment on this problem. PCC is endeavoring to arrest tendency by leading respective delegations to discuss refugee and territorial questions. Solution must relate not only to general aspect including repatriation, resettlement and rehabilitation but also to more immediate and no less important preliminary measures re safeguarding of refugee rights and property.” (telegram 608, identified also as Palun 216, from Geneva, 501.BB. Palestine/6–1749)

The text of the third progress report is printed in GA, 4th sess., Ad Hoc Political Committee, Annex, Volume II, page 5.

Mr. Raymond A. Hare to the Secretary of State 501.BB Palestine/6–1349: Telegram

[Document 756]

Mr. Raymond A. Hare to the Secretary of State

top secret Lausanne, June 13, 1949—11 a. m.

Palun 198. USDel has following comment on Israeli reply to President’s note (ref Deptel 761):1

General: Israeli reply should be read in conjunction Eytan’s statement before PCC reported Palun 192.2 Eytan put Israeli attitude re refugees and territory even more categorically. Return of refugees would be “retrograde step.” Re territory, Israel cannot accept “purely arbitrary mathematical proportion or formula.” USDel regrets that Israel unwilling approach refugee problem constructively through repatriation and resettlement and that Israel also unwilling consider territorial arrangement in terms fairness and equity. USDel notes with even greater regret Israel reply makes no reference whatsoever to support for UN and desire achieve peace and security on realistic basis as stated President’s note. USDel reluctant conclude Israel does not share these objectives with US. USDel suggests US would be on strong ground in emphasizing these points in such further action which may be taken in matter.

Paragraph 1: Balance note proves Israeli position Lausanne has not been misunderstood as arguments advanced in Israeli reply are same those put forward Lausanne.

Paragraph 2: President’s note made no reference to paragraph 5 GA resolution December 11 re conciliation although US might well have added that Israeli proposals at Lausanne were not of character to promote agreement with view final settlement all questions with Arabs. President’s note confined itself to refugees and territory.

Paragraph 3: Israeli reply is not accurate. Paragraph 5 GA resolution December 11 provides for "Negotiations conducted either with Conciliation Commission or directly.” Arab delegates have not thus far found it possible meet officially with Israeli delegation, (approximately 20 characters garbled)3 meeting between Sassoon of Israel and Abdul Monem of Egypt appeared in press as result Israeli leak convinced Arabs further meetings premature. Official public meetings would be still more difficult for Arabs because of Arab public opinion. Virtual stalemate at Lausanne should be laid at door of both Israelis and Arabs. Following signature of May 12 protocol (Palun 148)4 Israelis advanced extremely [garble] proposals (Paluns 1625 and 6 ) but made no proposal re refugees other than limited measures mentioned Palun 145.7 Arabs advanced refugee proposals (Palun 166)8 but made no proposal re territory other than suggestion advanced Palun 165.9 Israelis have either failed take action or have not answered Arab memos re refugees and territory.

Arabs have not answered Israeli proposals re territory. USDel believes, however, that on balance Arab position more nearly in line protocol May 12 than Israeli and that at present stage negotiations next move up to Israelis and their failure act principal cause stalemate.

Paragraph 4: USDel perceives neither reason nor logic in Israeli deduction that GA considered Eban’s explanations satisfactory because admission followed.

Paragraph 6: What Israelis at loss to understand in this paragraph is apparently quite clear in eighth paragraph in which it is stated “the war has proved indispensability to survival of Israel of certain vital areas not comprised originally in share of Jewish state.” Israeli territory proposals advanced officially to PCC include western Galilee, Jaffa, area between Ramie Lydda Beersheba, areas north Gaza strip and south of Auja along Egyptian frontier, corridor to Jerusalem and other smaller areas throughout Palestine. Re Gaza strip Ethridge did not advance as previously indicated Palun 181.10

Paragraph 7: President’s note did not present US position re territory as UN policy but as US policy. Rejection last fall of certain paragraphs of GA resolution December 11 might be considered in any event to be superseded by admission resolution which recalled GA resolution November 29. It may also be noted that Sharett on again being informed of US policy by Secretary on April 5 (Deptel 208 to Tel Aviv11 ) replied that “he was familiar with our views on boundary questions, was hopeful an agreed solution could be reached and did not see any insurmountable difficulty.”

Paragraph 8: Please see comment on seventh paragraph. Present paragraph as worded seems tantamount to unilateral revision GA resolution November 29, judicial findings re aggressors and award. It seems also to reject US views that territorial arrangement should be based on elementary principles fairness and security. US delegation fails understand why either Israel or Arabs have anything say about government of territory controlled by other.

Paragraphs 9, 10 and 11: USDel considers one-sided overstatement of developments in Palestine. It should be added for balance that Israelis attacked in Haifa, Jaffa and Acre before end British mandate and that incidents such as (approximately 10 characters garbled)12 massacre accelerated refugee flight. Former Arab economy with Israelis not entirely in ruins as small Arab farmers could certainly return to their lands. Israel knows full well that neither US nor any other state expects it to tackle unaided reintegration of Arabs who elect return. Israeli measures on humanitarian grounds have thus far proved negligible. Israel has restricted compensation for land abandoned to that previously cultivated (Palun 145). Israel has made reunion contingent on census, close relationship and final settlement (Palun 145). Israeli contribution to resettlement consists only of technical experts (Palun 14013 ).

Paragraph 12: Israeli measures consist almost entirely of those listed Palun 145. USDel believed Department will agree these measures are hardly likely endanger self-preservation Israel. USDel also believes additional measures listed Palun 166 could be considered falling within this category. Second paragraph of President’s note would seem also to indicate US has not considered repatriation “in absolute terms” but has approached refugee problem on basis both repatriation and resettlement.

Paragraph 13: Please see paragraphs 9 through 12.

Paragraph 14: Arabs might submit almost similar paragraph by substituting “Arab states” for “Israel” and “territory” for “refugee” throughout.

Paragraph 15: No comment.

Hare

1 Dated June 9, 3 p. m., not printed; it transmitted the text of telegram 441, June 8, from Tel Aviv. Regarding 441, see footnote 1 to Tel Aviv telegram, June 8, p. 1102 [Pg. 1102 includes portions of Doc. 735 and Doc. 736].

2 Identified also as telegram 912, June 10, from Bern, p. 1112 [Pg. 1112 includes portions of Doc. 742, Doc. 743, and Doc. 744].

3 As in the source text.

4 Dated May 12, from Lausanne, p. 998 [Pg. 998 includes portions of Doc. 648 and Doc. 649].

5 Not printed, but see footnote 2, p. 1036 [Pg. 1036 is part of Doc. 675].

6 Identified also as telegram 820, May 28, from Bern, p. 1068 [Pg. 1068 includes portions of Doc. 701 and Doc. 702].

7 Identified also as telegram 410, May 10, from Geneva, p. 992 [Pg. 992 includes portions of Doc. 643 and Doc. 644].

8 Dated May 23, from Lausanne, p. 1044 [Pg. 1044 includes portions of Doc. 682 and Doc. 683].

9 Dated May 23, from Lausanne, p. 1043 [Pg. 1043 includes portions of Doc. 680 and Doc. 681].

10 Dated June 2, from Lausanne, p. 1085 [Pg. 1085 includes portions of Doc. 719 and Doc. 720].

11 See footnote 2, p. 894 [Pg. 894 includes portions of Doc. 577 and Doc. 578].

12 As in the source text.

13 Identified also as telegram 676, May 4, from Bern, p. 975 [Pg. 975 is part of Doc. 633].

Mr. Raymond A. Hare to the Secretary of State 501.BB Palestine/6–1349: Telegram

[Document 757]

Mr. Raymond A. Hare to the Secretary of State

secret Lausanne, June 13, 1949—4 p. m.

Palun 201. Regarding internationalization of Jerusalem. Department may wish discuss with Ethridge working paper and give USDel further instructions. In particular USDel desires Department’s views on legal basis UN administration Jerusalem. Talks with Israeli representatives have elicited evidence Israel prepared oppose any provisions in derogation Israel “sovereignty” over Jewish zone of city. Specifically their greatest objection to provisions for UN administrators authority over questions of demilitarization and human rights as infringing rights of Israeli citizens by differentiating between one Israeli citizen and another on basis locus of residence. In addition they oppose idea of administrator or municipal councils having any jurisdiction over common services except on basis ad hoc consultation with Israeli officials for advice only.

USDel believes that these and similar questions will be constant source trouble in future unless question of sovereignty is settled definitively in statute. We favor provision that sovereignty rests with people of Jerusalem but that UN is repository or custodian thereof and that under statute the exercise of certain attributes of sovereignty will be delegated to authorities of state adjoining the respective zones. Such provision if adoped would be consistent with continuing UN responsibility for Jerusalem and make more difficult future actions inimical to UN authority under color of right. At same time no practical difference need result in day-to-day exercise of municipal authority in respective zones by authorities of adjoining states. Difficulties in overcoming Israeli opposition to such a concept which interposes obstacle to possible plans for future expansion are apparent. Transjordan may also oppose.

Hare

Mr. John C. Ross to the Secretary of State 501.BB Palestine/6–1349: Telegram

[Document 758]

Mr. John C. Ross to the Secretary of State

secret New York, June 13, 1949—8:18 p. m.

720. Following is summary of information obtained from Bundle’s staff on June 13.

In answer to specific question, Bunche does not request assistance from us in respect to Government House zone problem. He says that if Riley is unsuccessful, he may call for help.

Syrian-Israeli armistice negotiations postponed to June 14 or 15 since Vigier and Riley in Jerusalem, and Dayan has just been named to head armistice negotiation delegation. Israelis have already agreed to new date, which is to be finally set after situation re demilitarized zone at Government House is settled. Vigier has cabled Bunche that settlement of Jerusalem demilitarized zone affair is indispensable prior condition for Syrian-Israeli armistice agreement. He has transmitted a note from the Syrians to Bunche which states that Syria cannot ignore the new Israeli aggression in Jerusalem which constitutes a violation of the armistice agreement. It states that Syrians can have little hope for favorable issue from the armistice negotiations since Israelis infringe demilitarized zone agreements, and no guarantees appear to hold firm. Syrian note refers to Israeli promise to Riley of mutual withdrawal from demilitarized zone and its alleged subsequent violation.

In reply to foregoing, Bunche has cabled that the Syrian position is extreme and unwise. He recalled that there have been violations of agreements by both sides in the past, and that it has been the responsibility of the UN to correct these violations. In the present instance the UN is making such correction. He further observes that if the criterion of compliance with agreements were used, neither side would qualify for participation in further negotiations. He also said he must challenge the implication that the UN is unable or not willing to carry out its commitments. He finally observed that recriminations were not helpful for the upcoming negotiations.

Bunche also cabled Israelis today that he considered incident at Government House would have harmful repercussions on the armistice negotiations at present critical stage. He termed affair a deplorable incident and urged that every step be taken urgently to rectify situation so that armistice negotiations may proceed soonest. Said it was understandable that Syrians wish efficacy of demilitarized zones and that UN could not guarantee sanctity of such zones. Cabled that there was no question but that UN had a special status at Scopus and Government House in connection with observation of demilitarization. Zones could only be altered by mutual agreement of parties. Pointed out that Rhodes armistice delegations of both parties could testify that no armistice agreement would have been possible were it not for the UN supervision of demilitarized Government House and Scopus zones. Pointed out that the lines of both zones were determined by the SC truce arrangements. Any change in these lines could be made only by mutual agreement. Unilateral change was violation of SC truce. While he had no responsibility of supervision of armistice, as acting mediator, he still had responsibility for SC truce. If lines were altered unilaterally and Israelis persisted in such truce violation, he would have no recourse except to report matter to SC.1

Eban informed Reedman this morning, in Bunche’s absence, that he was confident that Jerusalem situation would be straightened out. However, Eban alleged that UN had no business in being in Jerusalem demilitarized zone. In effect, he said that it was UN itself which had violated the armistice agreement. Reedman informed USUN that he had pointed out to Eban that armistice agreement provided that any change in lines must be made by mutual agreement. However, even in event of mutual agreement, UN as third party present in zone must be informed even if only by courtesy. Also referred to SC truce line provisions. Eban also argued that demilitarized zone lines had been altered by Israeli-Jordan agreement. Alleged that there had been no Jordan protest until it had been stirred up by other Arab states.Reedman was able to cite spontaneous Jordanian protests against Israeli action.

Eban, in letter to Bunche, dated June 10, received by latter today, asked him to use his influence on Jordanians to implement Article 8 of armistice agreement relative to Scopus. Stated that no progress had been made in negotiations. He did not offer any information regarding issues at stake or course of discussions. Since there is no UN observer at special committee meetings, Bunche is almost completely uninformed re status of these discussions.2

Ross

1 New York, on June 14, reported further on Mr. Bunche’s views on this matter as follows: “While UN has no responsibility re the armistice supervision since agreements are self-contained entities, the SC truce and cease fire arrangements are still in effect. Bunche has responsibility for reporting to SC on these and can therefore bring present situation to attention of SC as violation of November 30 cease-fire agreement.” (telegram 724, 501.BB Palestine/6–1449)

2 New York advised, on June 14, that “Bunche this noon requested US support for his urgent request to Israelis that they withdraw from Government House demilitarized zone.” It also reported that “Eban agreed fully with Bunche that UN was rightfully in demilitarized zone on request of parties and could only be asked to leave if mutual agreement on disposition of zone reached between parties.” (telegram 724, 501.BB Palestine/6–1449)

Mr. John C. Ross to the Secretary of State 501.BB Palestine/6–1349: Telegram

[Document 759]

Mr. John C. Ross to the Secretary of State

confidential
priority New York, June 13, 1949—11:30 p. m.

723. Bunche informed USUN this evening that at MAC meeting Riley and Jordan voted for proposal that both sides should withdraw from demilitarized zone in Jerusalem, but Israelis voted against, therefore proposal failed.

Bunche informed us that he is calling Eban in tomorrow to tell him bluntly that Israelis must withdraw from demilitarized zone or he will immediately resign as Acting Mediator and inform SC that reason is Israeli violation of agreement. Bunche says he will state publicly that there is no point in his attempting to negotiate a Syrian-Israeli armistice agreement if the Israelis are not going to observe such agreement. Upon his return to New York this evening, he reviewed the entire situation and is thoroughly disgusted with Israeli policy re Jerusalem demilitarized zone. He terms policy as “criminally crooked”, stating that there could be no doubt that whole basis of armistice agreement was that Israeli-Arab lines should remain as they were unless changed by mutual agreement.1

Ross

1 Jerusalem reported, on June 14, that “At conclusion 6-hour meeting yesterday MAC passed resolution providing for simultaneous withdrawal troops of both sides by 1000 hours GMT today … Resolution stated both sides violated armistice by moving troops into neutral zone. Riley cast deciding vote siding with Arab Delegation against Israel.” (telegram 417, 501.BB Palestine/6–1449) Later the same day, Jerusalem reported an unofficial statement by a United Nations officer that Israeli and Arab forces had withdrawn from the Government House zone on schedule (telegram 421, 501.BB Palestine/6–1449).

The Secretary of Defense (Johnson) to the Secretary of State 867N.48/6–1449

[Document 760]

The Secretary of Defense (Johnson) to the Secretary of State

secret Washington, 14 June 1949.

My Dear Mr. Secretary: In reply to your letter of May 4, 1949, concerning the probable effects of the Arab refugee problem upon our military and strategic interests in the Near East, the views of the Joint Chiefs of Staff have been obtained and I wish to give you the position of the National Military Establishment on this matter.

The primary significance for the Military Establishment of the Arab refugee problem lies in the strategic importance of the Middle East to the U.S. and its security interests. This area is important not only from the point of view of actual military operations, but for its valuable petroleum resources which may be essential to the conduct of a future war. As the Joint Chiefs of Staff have frequently indicated, either unfriendly control of that area or the failure of the United States to retain the orientation of the area toward the West could, in the event of a global war, have profound effect upon the course of such a war.

It follows that all reasonable political and economic effort toward the maintenance and improvement of friendly relations with the nations of the Middle East is justified. It follows, further, that our policy logically should extend to strengthening of the Arab States so that their friendliness in war emergency may be useful.

The present refugee situation as pointed out in your letter will, unless rectified, serve to perpetuate and aggravate conditions of insecurity, unrest, and political instability, with attendant opportunity for Soviet penetration. In addition, constructive United States assistance with respect to refugees would be an asset with respect to maintenance and improvement of friendly relations with the Arab States, while the withholding of such assistance would add to the trend toward Arab embitterment.

In connection with this matter I should like to refer you to a recent intelligence estimate prepared by the Central Intelligence Agency (Intelligence Memorandum No. 180, a copy of which is attached1 ). In this memorandum, the CIA points out the serious risks inherent in the continuation of the present situations. These risks, insofar as they affect U.S. security, cause us serious concern.

The refugee problem, if unresolved, may not have specific, direct effect upon present U.S. military (as distinguished from strategic) interests in the Middle East area. The refugee problem can, however, have very serious repercussions on our strategic interests because those interests are bound to suffer unless the stability and friendship of the Middle East area are maintained and unless conditions there are sufficiently improved to permit Israeli and Arab reconciliation, at least to the extent that the area as a whole might reasonably be expected to resist Soviet penetration and to act in concert to oppose Soviet aggression.

We have offered no proposals for the solution of this very serious problem, but we stand ready to cooperate with you in taking appropriate steps to do so. We agree fully, however, with the tenor of your letter. We believe that a satisfactory long-term solution for security in that area and the earliest resolution of this and other major differences between Israel and the neighboring Arab States will pay important dividends in terms of our national security.2

Sincerely yours,

Louis Johnson

1 Not printed.

2 Secretary Acheson, in a memorandum of July 7, transmitted to President Truman a copy of Secretary Johnson’s memorandum and of the intelligence estimate (867N.48/7–749).

The Consul at Geneva (Troutman) to the Secretary of State 501.BB Palestine/6–1449: Telegram

[Document 761]

The Consul at Geneva (Troutman) to the Secretary of State

confidential
priority Geneva, June 14, 1949—4 p. m.

577. Palun 204. From Hare. On June 13 PCC held private meeting with Eytan re some of Israeli suggestions reported in Palun 197.1 Boisanger reiterated Arabs continued find it difficult meet directly with Israelis and pointed out Arabs and Israelis had both agreed as result Beirut meeting merely come to Lausanne for exchange views.

Hare summarized Israeli and Arab proposals to PCC and observed next move up to Israeli delegates.

Eytan replied that six months had passed since adoption GA resolution December 11, and it seemed logical believe Arabs should now be able to meet directly with Israelis. Although Israel still had Arab memo outlined in Palun 1662 under study, Eytan did not believe immediate affirmative action would be productive as Arabs had not thus far even commented on action already taken by Israelis as reported in Palun 145.3 Furthermore he seriously doubted efficacy of particularist approach to general settlement. Eytan then put hypothetical question whether, if Israel accepted principle of repatriation “without any strings attached,” Arabs would be persuaded to conclude peace. Eytan continued that under present circumstances in Israel and elsewhere in Near East it would be impossible for Israel actually to consider return refugees until Israel was informed of complete scientific, economic and financial plan for repatriation and resettlement of refugees. Until latter was known in detail, Israel would not even be in position to consider how many refugees could be repatriated to Israel. Meanwhile, Eytan contended that Israel’s proposal re separated families (Palun 145) and its willingness to take Gaza strip and refugees therein (Palun 1624 ) was liberal realistic approach to refugee question. Here again Eytan observed Arab delegates had not even commented on Israeli proposals.

Yalcin made moving statement re more affirmative approach by Israel pointing out Israel could accept principle of repatriation subject to such provisions as those who wished to return, those who wished to live at peace with their neighbors, special categories, international aid. Yalcin’s contention was that acceptance in principle contingent on numerous provisos would provide Arabs with point of departure and thereafter permit both Israelis and Arabs to tackle refugee question constructively.

Hare observed that all were convinced that Israel and Arab states sincerely desirous of establishment lasting peace in Palestine and Middle East. If refugee question remained unsolved, such peace would hopelessly be delayed. But to approach refugee question, it would be necessary to have preliminary agreement of both sides. Unless such agreement were obtained UN, international agencies, member governments and private organizations would have considerable difficulty in developing economic and financial plans for Palestine and Middle East which would assist in solving refugee question.

Eytan listened attentively although Ethridge discussion reported Palun 1745 must have been familiar to him. Eytan’s argument might be described as: “Tell me how much you will pay and I will tell you what, if anything, I will sell.”

Eytan agreed further discussion with PCC would be helpful at some future date. At moment it is difficult to determine Eytan’s motivation and intent in refugee question. Developments during next few days may make his meaning clear.

Sent Department 577, repeated Paris 73 (for Jessup). [Hare.]

Troutman

1 Identified also as telegram 920, June 12, from Bern, p. 1122 [Pg. 1122 is part of Doc. 751].

2 Dated May 23, from Lausanne, p. 1044 [Pg. 1044 includes portions of Doc. 682 and Doc. 683].

3 Identified also as telegram 410, May 10, from Geneva, p. 992 [Pg. 992 includes portions of Doc. 643 and Doc. 644].

4 Not printed, but see footnote 2, p. 1036 [Pg. 1036 is part of Doc. 675].

5 Identified also as telegram 821, May 28, from Bern, p. 1069 [Pg. 1069 includes portions of Doc. 702 and Doc. 703].

The Acting Secretary of State to the Embassy in Israel 501.BB Palestine/6–1449: Telegram

[Document 762]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Embassy in Israel 1

top secret
priority Washington, June 14, 1949—7 p. m.

367. Deputy Under Sec Rusk June 14 called in Israeli Chargé, said Dept had received reports cancellation all Israeli Army leave June 9 and 10 and of unusual Israeli mil activity Jerusalem vicinity and Syrian border region,2 and inquired whether Charge could tell Dept if these reports true and if so what they meant. Chargé said had received no info.

Rusk then stated view signature armistice agreements and admission Israel UN, US now considered mil phase Pal definitely at end. Resolution problem Syrian-Israeli armistice now being worked on by Bunche and also was matter which in no way justified recourse to mil action by either side. Same thing applied to situation in Jerusalem which had been prejudiced by recent Israeli move. Peace and stability NE extremely important to US and Dept perturbed by above reports from Israel. Rusk did not presume state what these reports meant but desired Chargé inform his Govt that US, as friend of Israel, would be deeply disappointed if Israel should undertake new mil action. No one cld foresee consequences of such action, which would be completely unjustified by circumstances.

Chargé said wld immediately convey info to his Govt.

Webb

1 This telegram was repeated to Arab capitals and Jerusalem and to Bern for the United States Delegation at Lausanne.

2 Tel Aviv advised, on June 17, that the resumption of Syrian-Israeli armistice talks had tended to relieve tensions in that area (telegram 467, 867N.00 (W)/6–1749).

Memorandum by Mr. Mark F. Ethridge to the Deputy Under Secretary of State (Rusk) 501.BB Palestine/6–1549

[Document 763]

Memorandum by Mr. Mark F. Ethridge to the Deputy Under Secretary of State (Rusk)1

secret [Washington,] June 15, 1949.

The U.S. Delegation at Lausanne wants instruction on the following points:

(1) Recess. In the attached telegram2 Hare points way in which a shorter recess can be achieved and still avoid danger that Arabs will not show up at New York.

In the light of his telegram and my own further thinking, what I would suggest is this:

That the American delegation be instructed, unless constructive proposals are forthcoming by the end of next week, to propose a recess in the talks to a date one month before the September Assembly, the Commission to meet then in New York (not at Lake Success).

The Jerusalem committee, technical committee on refugees, and the general political committee be instructed to continue their work.

The Commission to have temporary headquarters at League Palace in Geneva or in Jerusalem and members to be available to consider any new proposals or any other matter at the call of the Chairman.

Agreement to recess on the part of Israel and Arab states is not necessary. Neither side will agree because it will be an admission that they were in some way responsible. The Commission should assume the responsibility and regard it as a form of pressure on both sides.

Both sides should be warned by Commission and by the U.S. that any resort to force in any circumstance would be regarded most seriously.

Both sides should be told that the Commission, as always, welcomes any proposals that either side may make in the interim and that both parties are of course free to have any negotiations, direct or otherwise.

(2) Refugee Plan: You will remember that Eytan proposed to the Commission that the refugee problem be taken out of the context of the negotiations: that is, the United States is to pick up the check. Eytan appeared before the Commission again on Monday of this week and Hare summarizes his position in Palun 2043 as, “Tell me how much you will pay and I will tell you what, if anything, I will sell.”

Israel’s position on refugees has stiffened, rather than modified, since the Tel Aviv conferences. Whereas she said at first that she would be willing to consider the return of refugees within the context of a general peace settlement, she now says (quoting Hare), “Under the circumstances in Israel and elsewhere in the Near East it would be impossible for Israel actually to consider the return of refugees until Israel was informed of a complete scientific, economic and financial plan for the resettlement of refugees. Until the latter was known in detail, Israel would not even be in a position to consider how many refugees could be repatriated to Israel.” In other words, Israel is trying to force us to buy her into accepting her own obligation.

Her new position raises the question whether, having partially conditioned our promises of help on Israel’s fulfillment of her obligation under the resolution to our satisfaction, it would be prudent, helpful to a peace settlement, or possible either with the White House or with Congress, to abandon that position.

Israel’s great burden in accepting refugees is of course apparent, but in her Gaza proposal she admitted the possibility, with help, of absorbing the 230,000 refugees there, the 80,000 normal population and the broken families (estimated at between 35,000 and 140,000 people). In the Gaza proposal she made no such condition as she makes now. She could certainly with help absorb from 200,000 to 250,000 refugees even if she did not get the Gaza strip. If she would make a statement to that effect, hedging it with reservations as to what sort of refugees and under what conditions, we could then get a commitment from the Arab states.

I doubt very much, however, if in buying Israel into that agreement in principle we are satisfying the Arab demand for her to evidence her good faith under the resolution or that we are helping the position of the United States vis-à-vis either Israel or the Arab states. If we are going to buy peace let us make sure that it is to be peace and not disgruntlement which would arise in Arab states from further financial concessions to Israel without requiring her to fulfill the obligations of a UN member. I do not, therefore, think it is either prudent or contributory to peace to accept her conditions.

I leave to the Department the question whether the President or Congress would be willing to modify conditions under which help might be extended in resettlement and repatriation of refugees.

I would suggest, therefore, that you and George McGhee consider this course: (1) Instruct the American delegation that in view of the fact that the President’s conditions have not been met, the United States is not willing to introduce into the Commission the “McGhee plan”4 at this juncture, although it renews the commitment that it is willing to help in the refugee situation under the conditions already outlined to the Israeli and Arab delegations and to the members of the Commission. It should be said, also, that if and when those conditions are met the United States will be willing to introduce the plan.

(2) In the meantime work on a governmental, rather than Commission level, to get acceptance of the conditions.

(3) Recognizing that time is vital, in view of the expiration of UNRPR funds and the approach of the General Assembly, establish an organization that is ready to go quickly into action once it has been approved by the UN. I think it is necessary even to go so far as to have personnel on paper, though that would have to be quietly done.

(4) Make every effort to obtain funds for interim aid, not on a basis of relief, but on a basis of employment. The morale of the refugees is deteriorating daily and becoming more dangerous. If winter comes with no help, there will be an explosive situation in the Middle East. Money will obviously have to be obtained from sources other than Congress for that interim help.

M[ark F.] E[thridge]

1 Mr. Ethridge, on his return to the United States, informed President Truman that “the Arab-Israeli negotiations at Lausanne under the auspices of the Conciliation Commission are ‘deadlocked’ and that both Israeli and Arab representatives must adopt ‘entirely new approaches’ if a formal peace is to be reached.” (Department of State Bulletin, June 19, 1949, p. 780) The date of Mr. Ethridge’s interview with the President is not indicated in the Bulletin.

2 Not found attached.

3 Identified also as telegram 577, June 14, from Geneva, p. 1135 [Pg. 1135 includes portions of Doc. 760 and Doc. 761].

4 This refers, presumably, to Mr. McGhee’s memorandum of April 22 and its several annexes, p. 934 [Pg. 934 includes portions of Doc. 607 and Doc. 608].

The Ambassador in Israel (McDonald) to the Coordinator on Palestine Refugee Matters (McGhee) 867N.48/6–1549

[Document 764]

The Ambassador in Israel (McDonald) to the Coordinator on Palestine Refugee Matters (McGhee)

secret Tel Aviv, June 15, 1949.

Dear McGhee: Back of my telegram of today1 for your personal attention, copy of which is attached, lies the following reasoning.

Negatively, it is now indisputable that the PCC has shown such inherent organizational weaknesses that not even the super-energy and devotion of Mark Ethridge could galvanize it into life. Of course, its problems have been difficult and neither Arabs nor Jews have cooperated as they should; but the indictment that the PCC has shown itself “an inefficient postoffice” cannot be argued away.

Because the PCC is organically so weak, I think it a grave and unnecessary risk to contemplate using it as the base—no matter how indirectly—for the long term resettlement operations so wisely envisaged in your April 27 memorandum.2 To tie up those difficult and technical operations with an organization as political and as weak as the PCC would be to invite failure.

On the affirmative side, I urge in the strongest possible way that the basis for the resettlement operations should be a single individual with authority to give binding directions. At every stage in the development of these plans, there will arise prickly questions which unless grasped firmly by someone who has the power and the will to override nationalist and other obstructive tactics will cause the history of the refugees resettlement program to be a repetition of the old one—too little and too late.

Could not Griffis’s office have its mandate so broadened as to constitute a requisite base for the projected resettlement operations? The advantages of such a setup would be several: 1. Single-headed direction in the formulation and execution of basic policies, thus avoiding the acknowledged and unacknowledged cross purposes in the PCC which have tended to paralyze its actions.

2. The energy and devotion at the top which are essential and can be secured only through the driving leadership of an executive of the highest calibre.

3. Just recognition of the leading role which the United States through its generous contribution is making to a refugee solution. Such recognition will never be adequate through any tripartite base such as the PCC.

I recognize that it may be difficult or possibly embarrassing for the Department to reconsider its organizational plans. Nonetheless, I feel impelled to make the above suggestions in the conviction that such reconsideration is essential.3

Cordially yours,

James G. McDonald

1 No. 452 from Tel Aviv, not printed; it expressed the Ambassador’s doubts that a “triple-headed PCC can be effective as base essential resettlement and related operations.” (867N.48/6–1549)

2 This reference is presumably to the “Proposed Plan of Action,” p. 939 [Pg. 939 is part of Doc. 608].

3 Mr. McGhee, in reply on July 1, advised Ambassador McDonald, in part, as follows: “Let me hasten to assure you that we have never contemplated utilizing the PCC as an operating agency. We have viewed the PCC as a body which could initiate studies and pave the way for the development of a resettlement program rather than one which would implement such a program with any funds which might be made available for that purpose. We have had in mind for some time the establishment by the PCC of an Economic Survey Group to be composed of outstanding individuals whose personal authority would carry great weight. It has not yet been possible to activate this Group, the principal ‘reason being that we have not been able to get a specific commitment from the Israeli or Arab Governments with regard to the number of refugees which they would undertake to repatriate or resettle. Under these circumstances it may be necessary to approach the problem in a somewhat different manner, but we are convinced that the PCC should have a carefully formulated program as a basis for its recommendations to the General Assembly which will need to take the necessary action to initiate the future program. … We fully agree with you that, whatever the form of the organization, its success will in large part depend upon the selection of a director who can give strong leadership to the program.” (867N.48/6–1549)

The Chargé in Jordan (Stabler) to the Secretary of State 867N.01/6–1549: Telegram

[Document 765]

The Chargé in Jordan (Stabler) to the Secretary of State

secret Amman, June 15, 1949—8 a. m.

247. During talk with Prime Minister June 11, following discussed: 1. Referring to present situation in Jerusalem, Prime Minister said Transjordan Government determined not to make further concessions to Israelis and would not recede from its position by Israeli threat or use of force. It would be preferable for Israel, which appears to have no end to its expansionist ambitions, to make good its demands by force and conquest than for Transjordan to make any further concessions in hope of settling problem on reasonable basis. Every effort by Transjordan to meet with Israelis in spirit of reason and compromise had ended in failure. (In earlier talks same day King made similar comments stating that although he had endeavored to be reasonable, Israel always trying to get “stranglehold” on him). Prime Minister emphasized that his remarks did not mean that Transjordan had changed its attitude re desire settle Palestine problem and that Transjordan had no thought resuming hostilities. He only wished to make clear that Transjordan had gone about as far as it could in acceding to Israeli demands.

[Here follow paragraphs numbered 2 to 5, giving the Prime Minister’s views on the desire of Transjordan to establish good relations with Syria; the determination of Transjordan not to enter into separate negotiations with Israel; the need of Transjordan, Egypt, and Iraq for internal security arms “as every bit of strength gained by Arabs meant that much less feeling of superiority and aggressiveness on part Israel”; and the “fact” that continuation by Israel of its present policy would only result in increasing the determination of the Arab peoples “to prepare themselves for final destruction of Jewish state.”]

Sent Department 247, repeated Bern 25 for USDel PCC, pouched London, Tel Aviv, Arab capitals, Jerusalem.

Stabler

The Minister in Switzerland (Vincent) to the Secretary of State 501.BB Palestine/6–1549: Telegram

[Document 766]

The Minister in Switzerland (Vincent) to the Secretary of State

top secret Bern, June 15, 1949—noon.

940. Palun 207 from Hare. USDel doubts possibility obtaining agreement mentioned Unpal 1461 in near future for following reasons: 1. Israel is unwilling negotiate with Syria at Lausanne on any question including political and economic matters under GA resolution December 11 pending conclusion Israeli-Syrian armistice.

2. Arabs unwilling meet Israelis directly at Lausanne or even to reply indirectly through PCC pending affirmative Israeli action re refugee question.

3. Resulting stalemate as Israelis unwilling talk refugee question outside context general settlement including territorial question.

4. PCC including French, Turkish and US delegates as well as Arab delegates and perhaps Israeli Delegation are not technically prepared to discuss.

USDel believes water resources question should be studied by economic survey group before it is considered by PCC or meeting of states concerned. [Hare.]

Vincent

1 Dated June 12, to Lausanne, p. 1123 [Pg. 1123 includes portions of Doc. 751 and Doc. 752].

The Minister in Switzerland (Vincent) to the Secretary of State 501.BB Palestine/6–1549: Telegram

[Document 767]

The Minister in Switzerland (Vincent) to the Secretary of State

confidential Bern, June 15, 1949—noon.

939. Palun 208. From Hare. At PCC general committee meeting June 14 Sassoon and Hirsch dispelled any hope which Eytan’s statements (reference Palun 205[204? 1 ]) might have contained.

Agenda consisted points 1 and 2 in Palun 166 and point 3 in Palun 165.2

Re point 1 Sassoon stated Israelis were unable consider refugee return separately but only in context of whole peace settlement consequently immediate return was not possible. Israelis would, on other hand, take certain limited steps to preserve Arab property in orange groves. Sassoon indicated however, Israel had general economic plan for Israel which might provide for only certain acreage in orange groves. Some Arab groves including those lacking care or destroyed by war would probably be put to other use.

Re point 2, Sassoon indicated present Israeli currency regulations would prevent unblocking of Arab accounts. Sassoon suggested International Red Cross might make use of Arab accounts within Israel which would permit use of equivalent amount International Red Cross money outside Israel for refugees.

Israeli delegation stressed answers were preliminary as both points are still “under sympathetic consideration in Tel Aviv”.3

Re point 3, as result long involved discussion it became clear Israelis do not consider this Arab proposal on basis May 12 protocol as basis for negotiation of either refugee or territorial question (reference Palun 1694 ). Arabs consider Israeli territorial proposals in Palun’s 1625 and 1736 as violation of May 12 protocol. Result is deadlock.

Sent Department 939, repeated Paris 58 for Jessup. [Hare.]

Vincent

1 Identified also as telegram 577, June 14, from Geneva, p. 1135 [Pg. 1135 includes portions of Doc. 760 and Doc. 761].

2 Both dated May 23, from Lausanne, pp. 1044 [Pg. 1044 includes portions of Doc. 682 and Doc. 683] and 1043 [Pg. 1043 includes portions of Doc. 680 and Doc. 681] respectively.

3 The Department commented, on June 20, that the use of blocked Arab accounts in the manner suggested in point two of the Sassoon statement “appears clear violation spirit of GA Res Dec 11. Even if state claims right confiscate property own citizens, applicable portions GA Res based on equity as well as law and refugees fleeing from war seem to have position equivalent aliens whose property entitled protection. “[The question of] Blocked accounts presents more clearcut case but different only in degree from that of orange groves discussed under point 1. Shld be made clear no implication condoning any misuse Arab property contrary to principles law or equity.” (Telegram Unpal 157 to Bern, repeated to Tel Aviv, 501.BB Palestine/6–2049)

4 Identified also as telegram 819, May 28, from Bern, p. 1067 [Pg. 1067 includes portions of Doc. 700 and Doc. 701].

5 Dated May 23, from Lausanne, not printed, but see footnote 2, p. 1036 [Pg. 1036 is part of Doc. 675].

6 Identified also as telegram 820, May 28, from Bern, p. 1068 [Pg. 1068 includes portions of Doc. 701 and Doc. 702].

The Secretary of State to the Acting Secretary of State 501.BB Palestine/6–1549: Telegram

[Document 768]

The Secretary of State to the Acting Secretary of State

secret Paris, June 15, 1949—7 p. m.

Actel 74. During call on Secretary June 14 Bevin inquired as to our current thinking on Palestine situation, including Lausanne conference and problem of Transjordan. Secretary outlined to him views expressed by Ethridge during visit Paris, mentioning probable adjournment Lausanne talks and Ethridge view neither side wants to make peace. Bevin inquired whether we thought Jews would start to fight, stating this raised urgently question of supplying arms to Transjordan. Secretary discussed recent US note to Israelis and Israeli reply, reading substance paragraph two Telac 781 and pointing out Department wished Bevin consider carefully problem which might be created if UK becomes involved in conflict between Israel and Transjordan. Bevin said he had not had report from British chiefs of staff. He was much concerned about abandonment of Abdullah and said trend of UK thinking was now in direction of giving Abdullah arms and de jure recognition of incorporation of administered territories in Palestine. Bevin said Abdullah had strong support in House of Commons, including Churchill’s support. He promised to give us considered answer on this question in day or two.

Secretary then gave Bevin substance first paragraph Telac 792 reporting McDonald’s views on current Israeli claims, adding that Ethridge agreed with general view of Bevin about desirability of concluding agreement on water rights. Jessup mentioned view expressed by both Ethridge and Cordier, who had just come from Lausanne, to effect Arabs counting on weakening of Israel in next two years. Bevin said some of his people believed civil war in Israel quite possible, and they doubted whether Ben Gurion could maintain his hold. Secretary also commented on difficulties Jewish drive for funds in US now experiencing.

Acheson

1 Dated June 12, to Paris, p. 1126 [Pg. 1126 is part of Doc. 754].

2 Dated June 13, 5 p. m., to Paris, not printed; the first paragraph of this “top secret summary for the Secretary” digested Mr. Sharett’s views as set forth in telegram 443, June 10, from Tel Aviv, p. 1110 [Pg. 1110 includes portions of Doc. 741 and Doc. 742], and Ambassador McDonald’s views as given in his two telegrams of June 11; regarding these two latter messages; see editorial note, p. 1115 [Pg. 1115 includes portions of Doc. 745, Doc. 746, and Doc. 747].

Memorandum by the Acting Secretary of State 501.BB Palestine/6–1649

[Document 769]

Memorandum by the Acting Secretary of State

top secret [Washington,] June 16, 1949.

Meeting With President, Thursday, June 16, 1949

u.s. approach to transjordan

I delivered to the President the original of the attached memorandum with respect to the recent U.S. approach to Transjordan. The President read the pertinent sections and kept it. He indicated approval of the action taken in the Department.

J[ames E.] W[ebb]

[Annex]

Memorandum

Subject: Department’s Message to Transjordan concerning Separate Negotiations with Israel.

The following is the pertinent section of a message sent by the Department on June 1 to the American Legation at Amman, Transjordan:

[Here follows first paragraph of telegram 72 to Amman, except that the last sentence is omitted.]

The background of this matter is as follows:

In the latter part of May, at a time when the discussions being conducted by the Palestine Conciliation Commission at Lausanne were approaching a crucial point, Elias Sassoon, a representative of the Israeli Government, sent from Paris a message to King Abdullah of Transjordan asserting that the Lausanne talks were a complete failure and requesting Transjordan to enter into separate talks, parallel to the Lausanne discussions, in Jerusalem. King Abdullah, who had placed great hopes in the Lausanne talks and had instructed his representatives to make every effort to reach agreement with the Israelis there, reacted strongly against this proposal and confided his concern to the United States Chargé d’Affaires. He was not inclined to accede to the Israeli request, since the talks were progressing at Lausanne and in view of what had happened when separate talks last took place between Israel and Transjordan without the presence of a third party.

This occurred in March, while Dr. Bunche was conducting negotiations for an armistice between Transjordan and Israel with representatives of the two countries at Rhodes. Without Dr. Bundle’s knowledge Israel proposed a secret meeting with Transjordan, to take place in Jerusalem while the Rhodes talks were going on. Transjordan agreed, and during the meeting the Israeli representatives stated that Israel would not sign an armistice at Rhodes unless Transjordan agreed in Jerusalem to turn over to Israel certain areas in central Palestine then occupied by Iraqi forces. Upon the withdrawal of the Iraqi Army, Transjordan was scheduled to take over the areas occupied by Iraq, but in Jerusalem the representatives of Israel warned that if Transjordan attempted to do so without agreeing to turn over the areas in question, Israel, in addition to not signing the armistice, would not be responsible for the consequences. The Israeli representatives gave those of Transjordan 24 hours to agree. Abdullah appealed to the United States, but when no help came he signed the forced agreement on the theory that when this was done and the armistice signed at Rhodes, it might be more difficult for the Israelis to make more territorial demands. As a result, some of the richest land in Palestine passed to Israeli control and the number of Arab refugees was considerably increased.

Although no agreement had been reached at Lausanne, largely because of the rigidity of the Israeli position, the Department felt that Sassoon was totally incorrect in stating that the talks were a complete failure. The Department also believed that it was essential to give the strongest support to the Conciliation Commission, which was attempting to reach an equitable agreement between the parties and offered all the necessary facilities to the parties for reaching such an agreement. Under the circumstances, separate talks seemed totally unnecessary, and likely to lead to circumstances similar to those under which Transjordan was forced to give up considerable territory in order to achieve an armistice with Israel. Accordingly, the Department, in the interests of a just settlement, suggested to King Abdullah that he not enter the separate talks with Israel.

An additional motive for the Department’s approach to King Abdullah was the possibility that Israel and Transjordan, by negotiating together on the question of Jerusalem without the presence of the Conciliation Commission, might reach an agreement concerning the City which would disregard the international and Christian interests in Jerusalem and in the Holy Places.

Memorandum by the Acting Secretary of State 501.BB Palestine/6–1649

[Document 770]

Memorandum by the Acting Secretary of State

top secret [Washington,] June 16, 1949.

Meeting With President, Thursday, June 16, 1949

mark ethridge

The President expressed himself as being satisfied with the approach of Mr. Mark Ethridge to the Israeli problem and said he felt the proposal that the meeting be adjourned and then reconvened a month before the UN session was a good one.

The President desires to have for his information and files copies of the memoranda covering the talks between Ethridge1 and President Ben Gurion.

J[ames E.] W[ebb]

1 Mr. Ethridge submitted a letter dated June 17 to President Truman confirming his resignation as a member of the Palestine Conciliation Commission. The Department of State drafted a reply for the President, dated June 24, accepting the resignation at the close of business the following day (501.BB Palestine/43–2149).

The Consul at Jerusalem (Burdett) to the Secretary of State 501.BB Palestine/6–1649: Telegram

[Document 771]

The Consul at Jerusalem (Burdett) to the Secretary of State

secret Jerusalem, June 16, 1949—noon.

426. Dayan yesterday explained to Consulate General Israeli position on relation between Jordan armistice agreement and SC resolution on Palestine and present status UN personnel here. Armistice agreement which was signed to implement November 16 SC resolution represents one step beyond SC truce order of July 15 and previous SC resolution on Palestine. Israel and Jordan have progressed from truce stage to armistice stage on road to final peace. Armistice agreement supersedes various SC resolutions which no longer apply and powers conferred by them on UN personnel as well as restrictions imposed no longer in effect. To interpret situation otherwise would result in numerous contradictions. Terms of armistice conflict with SC resolution and interpretation of mediator. For example, SC truce resolution of July 15 and mediator’s instructions prohibit any change in lines while armistice provides for various shifts. Also under SC resolution UN observers empowered to issue orders to either party in case of violation of truce; under armistice Chief of Staff can only vote as one member of PAC [ MAC ]. Under SC resolution UN officers free move anywhere, observe and enforce truce; now can only move when requested by MAC and lack enforcement powers. Bunche at Rhodes much concerned with these contradictions but urged both parties proceed on basis realities rather than technicalities.

Because only armistice now binding UN no longer possesses rights at Govt House and personnel privilege of moving as wishes. PCC never possessed special right conferred by SC resolution. UN personnel in same position as any other civilians and have no more right remain in No Man’s Land than any other. Dayan denied any intention challenging entire position UN in Jerusalem.

I replied stating was expressing only personal views, that did not believe armistice supersedes and cancels out SC resolution. Latter could only be altered by SC and remains in force until SC takes specific action or peace established. Mediator and UN personnel hold same powers and rights as before but could logically refrain from exercising certain ones. Restrictions in SC resolution on both parties remain fully in force. If Israel feels situation incongruous and wishes change should as UN member apply to SC. Not proper question for consideration by MAC. However, I doubted SC willing rescind various resolutions until final peace treaties signed.

Sent Department 426, repeated Geneva 38, London 21, Baghdad 39, Beirut 86, Damascus 41, Tel Aviv 58. Pouched Amman, Cairo, Jidda.

Burdett

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Acting Secretary of State 501.BB Palestine/6–2249

[Document 772]

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Acting Secretary of State

top secret [Washington,] June 17, 1949.

Participants: The Acting Secretary—Mr. Webb

G—Mr. Rusk

Mr. Mark Ethridge

NE—Mr. Rockwell

Mr. Aubrey Eban—Israeli Representative in United Nations

Mr. Reuven Shiloah—Special Assistant to Prime Minister Ben Gurion

Mr. Uriel Heyd—Chargé d’Affaires a.i., Embassy of Israel

The meeting, which had been arranged at the request of Messrs. Heyd, Shiloah and Eban, began at 11:45 and lasted until 1:45.

Mr. Eban opened the conversation by stating that he and Mr. Shiloah had been instructed by the Israeli Government to offer certain verbal comment in connection with the Israeli reply1 to the note which the President directed be delivered in Tel Aviv on the basic aspects of a final settlement in Palestine.

Mr. Eban stated that he first wished to assure me of the deep feeling of friendship which Israel felt for the United States and of the profound Israeli gratitude for all that the United States had done for Israel. I said that this friendly feeling was reciprocated and that the United States desired its friendship for Israel to continue as strong in the future as in the past. It was because of friendly interest in the welfare of Israel that the President’s note had been despatched.

Mr. Eban then said that the President’s note dealt with two main subjects: territorial compensation and the refugees.

Territorial Compensation

With regard to the first, the Israeli Government had the following objections.

Moral Objection—

Israel felt that it was immoral that anyone should think of rewarding the Arabs for the aggression which they launched against Israel. There had been extremely heavy loss of life among the population of Israel as a result, and Israel believed that rather than receiving compensation, the Arabs owed reparations to Israel.

Territorial Compensation Rejected by the General Assembly—

Israel understood that the United States is attempting to implement the December 11 resolution of the General Assembly. However, this resolution made no mention of territorial compensation but rather called upon the parties to reach agreement among themselves without any predetermined territorial formula being involved. As a matter of fact, the General Assembly had specifically rejected such a territorial formula. In the debate in the General Assembly Mr. Dulles2 had stated that the boundary settlement should be left entirely to the parties. The Palestine Conciliation Commission, while invoking the principle contained in the December 11 resolution concerning refugees, should also approach the territorial question in the manner envisaged by the resolution.

Effect on Armistice Agreements—

The territorial compensation formula prejudges the issues decided in the various armistice agreements which have been concluded. While, of course, these agreements are dependent upon the final settlement, no one can say that the decisions arrived at in the agreements will not have a very important effect upon the form of the final settlement. It is thus undesirable to undermine what has already been accomplished by the agreements. Eban maintained that Israel holds no territory wrongfully, since her occupation of the areas now held has been sanctioned by the armistice agreements, as has the occupation of the territory in Palestine now held by the Arab states.

Psychological Effect on Arab World—

It is most undesirable, by means of the territorial compensation formula, to raise in the Arab world hopes which are impossible of fulfillment. The Israelis have noted a definite change in the Arab attitude. Arab representatives who formerly alleged they wanted no part of Palestine are now making demands for large slices of the Negev.

Refugees

Eban maintained that Israel had not adopted a negative attitude concerning the refugees. He said Israeli representatives had made the following concrete proposals.

1. The proposal to take over the Gaza strip with all its occupants.

2. An offer to repatriate members of broken families, after a census of such members had been taken. He thought that maybe 50,000 persons might come back to Israel if this were done.

3. Israel has accepted the responsibility for refugees who have managed to filter back into Israel. All in all, Eban thought these Israeli proposals would mean the eventual repatriation of some 300,000 refugees. Accordingly, it could not be said that Israel had adopted a negative attitude or rejected the principle of repatriation.

In this connection, Mr. Eban said that Mr. Acheson, during a conversation with Mr. Eban and Mr. Sharett in New York,3 had agreed that the security question was an important deterrent to the beginning of repatriation. Mr. Rusk interjected that this was not exactly so since what the Secretary had said was that Israel should begin the repatriation of refugees into areas where there was no security problem.

4. Mr. Eban maintained that Israel had agreed to unfreeze Arab bank accounts and to accept the responsibility for abandoned Arab lands in Israeli territory.

Mr. Eban then stated that the Israelis felt that their initiative at Lausanne had been unilateral and that although they were ready to make peace at Lausanne, there was no reciprocity. As further indications of the initiative taken by Israel, Mr. Eban cited the Israeli agreement to the internationalization of the Holy Places and the creation of a free-zone for Jordan at Haifa. There had been no response to any of these concessions by the Arab representatives.

Mr. Eban continued by stating that despite the provision in this sense contained in the December 11 resolution, there had been no direct meetings at Lausanne between Arabs and Israelis. This had not been the case with the negotiations conducted by Dr. Bunche. The Conciliation Commission should bring the two parties together and this was one reason why Israel had made its proposal for the creation of separate committees to discuss the various items upon which there were differences. Mr. Ethridge replied that the Conciliation Commission had always encouraged direct negotiation. Israel bore the main responsibility for the failure of such negotiations to materialize, because on the few occasions when Israeli and Arab representatives had met together the results of their meetings had immediately appeared in the Palestine Post. This procedure put the Arab representatives in an awkward position and discouraged further meetings.

Mr. Shiloah said that he felt the Beirut meeting between representatives of the Arab states was primarily responsible for the fact that the Arabs did not meet with the Israelis at Lausanne, because the Arabs were mutually suspicious of each other and having adopted a common attitude at Beirut they did not dare depart from this. Mr. Ethridge said that without the Beirut meeting the Arabs would never have agreed even to go to Lausanne.

Mr. Eban then stated that the duty of the United States Government and the Palestine Conciliation Commission was to call upon the Arabs to meet in separate negotiations with the Israelis according to the terms of the December 11 resolution.

Mr. Eban then took up the Israeli territorial proposals, stating that with Lebanon Israel had proposed the political frontier as the final boundary, the same with Egypt, and the present armistice line with Jordan.

At this point I said that so far I had seen no indication that the Israeli Government had any realization of the United States attitude in this matter. As far as I could see, Mr. Eban had had nothing new to add to what had been said so many times before. How, I asked, could we reconcile the reports of Israeli troop movements4 with the stated reasonable attitude of Israel toward a final settlement?

Mr. Eban said that Israel had no intention of undertaking military activity. If there were any troop movements, it was because of concern regarding the possible intentions of Colonel Zaim, who was known to be an ambitious militarist. All of Syria’s neighbors, including Israel, were fearful of a possible Syrian attack.

At this point the United States efforts to get Syria to agree to the Bunche proposal for an armistice with Israel were outlined to Mr. Eban.5

I then stated that with regard to the recent note to Israel, the Department had of course scrupulously observed Ambassador Elath’s special plea that the utmost secrecy be maintained. Under these circumstances, we thought it most unusual that so much of the contents of the note had been made known in various parts of the world.

I said that it seemed to me essential that both sides should subordinate their special desires to the overall necessity for a real peace, and that I had the feeling that the desire to accomplish such a peace was not yet strong enough in Israel.

Mr. Ethridge then reviewed the course of action taken by the Palestine Conciliation Commission. He explained how after considerable difficulty the Commission had succeeded in getting the Arabs to abandon their attitude that the refugee question was the only point which should be considered and to come to Lausanne for general peace talks. The United States delegation had told the Arabs that their position on the refugees was totally fantastic. The United States delegation had also taken the main responsibility in drafting the proposals on Jerusalem, which were very favorable to the Israeli point of view.

The Arabs regarded the United Nations and the United States as responsible for the refugee problem and maintained that the United States must obtain evidence of the good faith of Israel concerning the refugees. Some temporary concession by Israel on this point, which could have been surrounded by provisos, would have satisfied the Arabs and provided the key to the opening of final peace negotiations. Despite all the efforts of Mr. Ethridge and the State Department, Israel made no such concession and the Conciliation Commission went to Lausanne with nothing to offer the Arabs.

Mr. Ethridge said that he noted that the Israelis were attributing the Gaza proposal to him, but the record was clear that Prime Minister Ben Gurion first broached the Gaza plan at Tiberias on April 18 in a conversation with Mr. Ethridge. Mr. Eytan later took up the subject again at Lausanne.

Mr. Ethridge said that the Arab representatives had never stated that they were not willing to talk peace at Lausanne.

Mr. Eban admitted “within these four walls” that it was true that Israel had refused to make the commitment which Mr. Ethridge had urged concerning the refugees.

He asked whether in view of the steps concerning the refugees which Israel had subsequently taken and which he had previously outlined it would still not be possible to go to the Arabs and ask them to begin serious talks. Mr. Ethridge said that if Israel would make a concrete numerical commitment concerning the refugees the stalemate at Lausanne could be resolved.

Mr. Ethridge then stated that Mr. Shiloah had been wrong in previous statements in this country that Israel had demanded no territory in central Palestine. Although Israeli representatives had not made such demands to the Palestine Conciliation Commission they had stated them in the General Committee of the Commission, and had discussed the necessity for more land in central Palestine in connection with the Israeli development scheme.

Mr. Ethridge stated his opinion that if Israel would assume the burden of taking back a portion of the Arab refugees, the world would rally to Israel for having taken such a step based on ethics and humanity.

Mr. Eban inquired whether Mr. Ethridge could refute the observation that the Arabs want to get the refugees back into Israel but do not wish to make peace. In reply, Mr. Ethridge said that at Lausanne the Egyptian representative had told him that if Israel would take back more than a token number of refugees, Egypt would be willing to talk about a territorial settlement and to lift the economic blockade.

Mr. Shiloah said that the security question could not be disregarded. Israel had not seen the McGhee plan and was not sure that an overall scheme existed for resettlement of the refugees. All that was happening was that pressure was being put upon Israel to take back a definite number of refugees. Egypt, Syria and Jordan were rearming.6

1 Dated June 8, p. 1102 [Pg. 1102 includes portions of Doc. 735 and Doc. 736].

2 John Foster Dulles, member of the United States Delegation at the Second Part of the Third Regular Session of the General Assembly.

3 See Mr. Acheson’s memorandum of April 5, p. 890 [Pg. 890 is part of Doc. 577].

4 Tel Aviv, on June 13, reported the cancellation on June 9 and 10 of all leave from the Israeli Army, with the apparent intention of “preparing for action if as result of Zaim’s reported refusal discuss Bunche proposal Syrian armistice negotiations fail.” (telegram 448) The Department replied the following day, giving its assumption that “you are doing everything possible prevent new Israeli mil venture.” (telegram 365) Both telegrams are filed under 867N.20/6–1349. Tel Aviv advised, on June 17, that Miss “Herlitz categorically denied that army leaves had been cancelled” (telegram 465, 867N.20/6–1749).

5 Tel Aviv advised, in telegram 465 cited in footnote 4 above, of further information from Miss Herlitz that Israeli-Syrian negotiations resumed on June 16 “ ‘in spirit of friendly cordiality,’ that ‘some actual progress’ was made, and that next meeting called for June 21. Not expected any definite conclusion will be reached for ‘some weeks’ as it is anticipated Syrian elections will tend slow up proceedings, but Israeli officials appear optimistic of eventual outcome.”

6 The Department, the same day, summarized for the U.S. Delegation at Lausanne the meeting with the Israeli officials. The Department noted that the “Israelis reiterated at length familiar arguments why Israel unable take affirmative action re refugees and territorial settlement as set forth US note. US reps maintained firm line refuting number of allegations made by Israelis.” The summary concluded as follows: “US reps reiterated belief that if Israel wld make firm commitment to PCC repatriation specific and substantial number refugees, deadlock at Lausanne wld be resolved and way to negotiations with Arab states for overall settlements would be opened. Pointed out no possibility US assistance re refugees unless Israelis and Arabs definitely accept their responsibilities re repatriation and resettlement. “Israelis were told US believes fair final settlement cld not be achieved on basis Israel retaining all 1947 territory plus all territory under mil occupation.” (Unpal 154 to Bern, 501.BB Palestine/6–1749)

The Acting Secretary of State to the Embassy in Israel 867N.00/6–1149: Telegram

[Document 773]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Embassy in Israel

secret Washington, June 17, 1949—6 p. m.

375. Dept has decided to propose Israel and TJ accept the procedure for Jlem along lines suggested in Jlem Tel 409 Jun 11 rptd to you as 52. Bunche has indicated agreement and requesting Riley act this capacity. You are accordingly requested to make presentation and leave aide-mémoire with Israeli Govt along fol lines:

“The US Govt is increasingly concerned that the situation in Jlem constitutes a threat to peace in Pal. It therefore is presenting the fol proposals to the govts of Israel and TJ with a view to obtaining an agreed settlement as to the questions immed in issue between them.

It is proposed that the two states agree that for this purpose the Special Comite established by the Armistice agreement shld be superseded by the Mixed Armistice Comm which shld meet under the chairmanship of Gen Riley. The terms of reference shld include such questions relating to the demarcation of Jewish and Arab zones, the use of roads and other questions of access to places in the Jlem area, and the functioning of public utilities as require agreement between the parties. Chmn shld have power to make proposals when he deems desirable. Agreed settlement these questions will be without prejudice to final decisions to be taken in collaboration with the UN regarding internatl status of Jlem area, but parties will agree to recommend inclusion agreed settlement in these decisions to extent conformable such decisions.

The Govt of TJ [Israel] is urged to accept this proposal in a spirit of accommodation and with determination that an agreement must be reached with all possible speed in order eliminate threat Jlem now presents to cause of peace in Pal.”

We realize it may be difficult to achieve final agreement on terms reference thru separate negots Amman and Tel Aviv. However if you can achieve agreement in principle, parties cld meet in Jlem and finalize terms reference under chairmanship Riley.1

Webb

1 This telegram was repeated to Jerusalem. A virtually identical message was sent to Amman as telegram 82 the same day and time. The text of No. 375 was also sent as Unpal 153 to Bern, for the American Delegation at Lausanne, on June 17 (501.BB Palestine/6–4749). Ambassador McDonald discussed the subject matter of telegram 375 with Miss Herlitz at the Israeli Foreign Office on June 19 and left an appropriate aide-mémoire the following day. He also described “Burdett’s plan Jerusalem telegram to Department 409 June 11 as sound both in principles and details. It illustrates perfectly why immediate problem Jerusalem solvable only on spot.” (telegram 469, June 20, from Tel Aviv, 501.BB Palestine/6–2049)

The Consul at Geneva (Troutman) to the Secretary of State 501.BB Palestine/6–1749: Telegram

[Document 774]

The Consul at Geneva (Troutman) to the Secretary of State

confidential Geneva, June 17, 1949—7 p. m.

612. Palun 219. From Hare. On June 17 PCC met Arab delegates to discuss their memos of May 18, and 21 (Palun 166 and 1651 ) and to elicit their further views regarding territorial matters. It was obvious Sharett statement before Knesset reported in Paris Herald Tribune June 16 to which Arab delegate referred at commencement of meeting served as background for Arab remarks.

Egyptian delegate made it clear that until progress is made regarding Arab memos of May 18 and 21 which dealt with both refugees and territory and, in effect, until refugee problem is settled in this manner in accord with GA resolution December 11, he could not on basis of instructions from his government take up other matters such as territorial arrangements. Recent statements have been reported from Tel Aviv regarding frontiers but nothing regarding refugees. It would not serve any purpose, therefore, in placing other matters before Arab delegates (such as Israeli proposal regarding territory).

Yalcin pointed out seriousness of Egyptian statement and asked if three other delegates had similar instructions. Lebanon, Transjordan and Syria supported Egyptian delegate.

[Here follows a detailed summary of the views of the delegates of the three Arab States, stressing Arab lack of trust in the good will and intentions of the Israelis, their violations of the decisions of the United Nations, and their expansionist tendencies. The Arabs, on the other hand, had “taken progressive steps in signing May 12 protocol and submitting on May 18 and 21 memos. Arabs unlike Jews have signed protocol May 12 without reservation.”]

Lebanese concluded Arab delegates were legitimately preoccupied, that Jewish attitude was no help in common problem and that PCC should therefore act. [Hare.]

Troutman

1 Both telegrams dated May 23, from Lausanne, pp. 1044 [Pg. 1044 includes portions of Doc. 682 and Doc. 683] and 1043 [Pg. 1043 includes portions of Doc. 680 and Doc. 681], respectively.

The Acting Secretary of State to the Legation in Switzerland 501.BB Palestine/6–1849: Telegram

[Document 775]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Legation in Switzerland

secret
priority
niact Washington, June 18, 1949—11 a. m.

Unpal 155. For US Del Lausanne. For Hare. After fullest consultation Ethridge, Dept concludes useful purpose wld be served by proposing adjourn PCC for two or three week period, during which delegations wld have fresh opportunity consult their govts with view to advancing constructive proposals upon reconvening Lausanne.

During adjournment, Jlem comite, technical comite on refugees, and genl political comite wld continue their work. Members PCC wld be subject to recall upon request either side. Both parties wld of course be entirely free to conduct direct or indirect negots. Despite adjournment, PCC and USG wld under no circumstances tolerate resort to force by either side.

Pls telegraph your comments on this proposal. If you concur in it Dept will seek Pres’s agreement and thereafter approach Ankara and Paris requesting their support and suggesting they so instruct their reps Lausanne.1

Webb

1 Mr. Hare, in reply on June 20, raised the “question of exactly what we could hope to achieve by such a step. Eytan has just returned from consultation with his government and Sharett’s speech would hardly presage changed policy. Arab delegates here continue keep refugees doggedly to fore but they are split wide open on territorial issue and would be hard put to discuss territory even if refugee obstacle removed. In face these basic substantive differences it is difficult to see how short recess and reconvening here would further settlement as far as parties are concerned. Furthermore renewed contact French and Turkish PCC members with their governments could hardly be expected yield productive results. This leads to conclusion that, unless Department itself foresees possibility of using interim to advantage, probability is that negotiations would be renewed here on essentially same basis as present impasse except that by that time I hope, Ethridge successor would have been appointed. Should such be the case I find it difficult to see what would have been gained and would suggest that in that event further consideration be given to original idea of recess until August 15 in order make use of GA pressure where other expedients have failed. Basic fact of course is that neither side actually ready for peace at this time.” (telegram 974, identified also as Palun 220, from Bern, 501.BB Palestine/6–2049)

The Acting Secretary of State to the Legation in Syria 767N.90D/6–1649: Telegram

[Document 776]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Legation in Syria

confidential Washington, June 18, 1949—2 p. m.

252. Referring to conversation reported in your tel No. 327 of June 16,1 you may tell Arslan that US regards armistice agreements as very important stabilizing factors ME. The US will accordingly be prepared exercise its influence in SC to end that SC should take any necessary measures within scope Charter to deal with any threat to or violation intl peace and security arising from any threat to or breach these agreements. You may inform Arslan that Israeli Gov being informed this message with assurances impartial application.2

Reftel indicates possible misapprehension Arslan that Bunche proposal requires Syria withdraw several kilometers behind its own border. If necessary please make clear that proposal only requires withdrawal to intl boundary and that Syrians may station forces right up to the border, according Bunche’s own interpretation.

Webb

1 Not printed.

2 The Department repeated this paragraph in telegram 379 sent to Tel Aviv the same day. It concluded the message with an instruction to “inform Israeli Gov that our application foregoing policy will be impartial, depending entirely upon findings as to responsibility in event of threat or breach armistice agreement.” (501.BB Palestine/6–1849) Minister Keeley was received separately by Foreign Minister Arslan and Prime Minister Zaim on June 20 (telegrams 332, June 20, 501.BB Palestine/6–2049, and 335, June 21, 867N.01/6–2149, both from Damascus). The latter message expressed his optimism that “there is now good chance of early agreement on basis Bunche proposal of June 8 if Israeli show equal accommodating spirit. Department’s expressed willingness to put weight its influence in SC behind observance any agreement reached has had marked reassuring effect.”

The Acting Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom 501.MA Palestine/6–1849: Telegram

[Document 777]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom

confidential Washington, June 18, 1949—3 p. m.

2104. Congressional action US appropriation for UN Refugee Relief nearly completed. Of $16 million appropriated, $4 million is conditional upon finding by Pres that other nations have met their obligations to UN Relief Palestine Refugees. Congressional feeling strong that total contribution should be made only if effective support forthcoming from other UN Members. To date only $6,690,000 contributed by govs other than US. Under terms of appropriation bill Dept considers it may be necessary to limit US contribution from conditional $4 million to amount total contributions from other nations exceeding $12,000,000.

Griffis informed UK considering contribution one million pounds to British Red Cross for refugee program in Trans-Jordan and plans approach UK on possibility channelling that contribution through UNRPR. Additional UK contribution in this amt combined with anticipated French contribution of 500 million francs and listing of Arab contributions in services and supplies estimated at approximately $4 million would bring total contributions from govs other than US to about $16 million. If UK contribution Red Cross does not go thru UNRPR we see little prospect obtaining US conditional contribution $4 million without which UNRPR would be obliged close down Oct. 1.

Therefore most essential for success of both present and long range programs that proposed UK contribution for British Red Cross be channeled thru UNRPR. We see no reason why under terms UN resolution of Nov. 19 conditional gift could not be made to UNRPR so that UK could obtain credit at home for supporting British Red Cross and abroad for supporting UNRPR. Dept hopes Griffis can proceed London immediately explore matter with FonOff. UNRPR Lake Success informed Dept that parliamentary questions on proposed contribution scheduled June 21.

Please bring foregoing attention FonOff and express hope satisfactory formula can be found for purposes indicated.1

Webb

1 This telegram was repeated to Paris for Ambassador Griffis and to New York. A message of similar import was sent to Paris at the same date and time. It stated that it was “Most essential for success of both present and long range programs that French contribution be effected.” (telegram 2177, 501.MA Palestine/6–1849)

The Acting Secretary of State to the Legation in Jordan 867N.01/6–1849: Telegram

[Document 778]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Legation in Jordan 1

secret
priority Washington, June 19, 1949—2 p. m.

84. Ur niact 253, June 18.2 At time sending Deptel 823 Dept was under impression parties had reached satisfactory interim agreement Govt House. Dept also acted under impression urgency Jerusalem negotiations be brought under effective UN chairmanship.

Dept does not know at this time whether proposal has already been presented Tel Aviv. We therefore consider you shld proceed present proposal unless possible arrange directly with Tel Aviv more satisfactory timing.

Dept does not regard its proposal as effecting any great change in situation. Principal objective is place Riley in charge negotiations re territorial and other related matters Jerusalem area with object relieving tension. Agreement in principle both parties would permit Riley in consultation parties arrange priorities. If TJ insists prior settlement Govt House zone, this would also fall under Riley’s jurisdiction and he could proceed accordingly. We feel simple fact agreement of parties to international chairmanship of negotiations on comprehensive scale may itself tend relax tension and cause parties direct their thinking toward peaceful settlement rather than seeking gain advantage by unilateral acts.

In approving presentation proposals Bunche said that since one method had failed we shld try another. Did not seem feel this marked notable change in procedures already under way.

Tel Aviv please note that in last para quoted material Deptel 3754 “TJ” shld read “Israel”.

Webb

1 This telegram was repeated to Tel Aviv and Jerusalem.

2 Not printed; its first paragraph read: “Deptel 82, June 17 received this afternoon must have crossed mytel 250, June 15 [17]; As pointed out in my reftel am strongly of opinion that Government House question must be resolved before any action can be taken on Department’s proposal. Unless that matter can be settled, there would seem little chance that Transjordan Government would be prepared to agree, even in principle, to this proposal. I believe Jerusalem would concur in this opinion and also feel Riley would agree. Therefore recommend Department authorize me and Tel Aviv delay presentation of proposal until Government House dispute is satisfactorily settled.” (867N.01/6–1849) No. 250 is not printed.

3 Dated June 17, not printed, but see footnote 1 to telegram 375, p. 1154 [Pg. 1154 includes portions of Doc. 773 and Doc. 774].

4 Dated June 17, p. 1154 [Pg. 1154 includes portions of Doc. 773 and Doc. 774].

The Chargé in Jordan (Stabler) to the Secretary of State 867N.01/6–2049: Telegram

[Document 779]

The Chargé in Jordan (Stabler) to the Secretary of State

secret Amman, June 20, 1949—4 p. m.

255. In view Deptel 84, June 19, and since it not possible communicate with Tel Aviv expeditiously I presented proposal contained in Deptel 82 June 171 to Foreign Minister this morning and left him with aide-mémoire. Foreign Minister stated that Transjordan was anxious to settle questions at issue peacefully but felt Israeli demands excessive. If agreement could be reached on principle of returning life in Jerusalem to normal he believed there would be no difficulty in reaching understanding on present problems. Without agreement on this principle he was not hopeful. Foreign Minister promised take matter up with goverment urgently and give reply soonest. (It is understood Cabinet will consider proposal at Wednesday meeting, in meanwhile I will discuss matter with King and Prime Minister.)

Suggestion that presentation proposal be delayed (Legtel 253, June 182 ) was predicated on my belief that if Government House question finally settled to satisfaction both parties, MAC under Riley could start on other questions with clean slate and Transjordan Government would have more faith in Riley’s ability to bring about agreement and in Israel’s sincerity.3

Sent Department 255, repeated Jerusalem 124, Tel Aviv 21.

Stabler

1 See footnote 1 to telegram 375, p. 1154 [Pg. 1154 includes portions of Doc. 773 and Doc. 774].

2 Not printed, but see footnote 2, p. 1157 [Pg. 1157 includes portions of Doc. 777 and Doc. 778].

3 Chargé Stabler reported, on June 22, that earlier the same day he had been handed an aide-mémoire by the Jordanian Foreign Minister, which welcomed the U.S. proposal but noted that any agreement must be without prejudice to the ultimate status of Jerusalem (telegram 259 from Amman, 867N.01/6–2249).

The Acting Secretary of State to the Legation in Switzerland 501.BB Palestine/6–1349: Telegram

[Document 780]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Legation in Switzerland

secret Washington, June 20, 1949—8 p. m.

Unpal 159. For USDel, Lausanne. Re internationalization Jerusalem. (Palun 2011 ) In view insistent Israel refusal relinquish sovereignty New City, Dept felt this was point on which most important PCC submit proposals which cld be agreed to. Your proposal ingenious but Dept fears it wld give basis Israeli rejection entire plan. We also consider it preferable avoid reference sovereignty and merely specify respective powers exercised by authorities in area.

Dept considers that Secretariat working paper2 wld place important attributes sovereignty in adjacent states, especially actual governing power, except UN authority will exercise direct control over Holy Places and routes giving immed access to them.

As to points 2 and 3 in Art 6, adjacent states would actually govern subject to obligations enumerated Parts IV and VI. As to these points wld appear possible to specify that administrator shall exercise powers of supervision as enumerated in Parts IV and VI.

It appears encouraging that Israel has not objected to principle demilitarization. If they accept principle it wld seem difficult for them to reject element UN supervision of character specified since this calculated only to effect supervision by impartial internatl body. As to human rights, Dept does not envisage these obligations as resulting in disparate treatment Israeli citizens inside and outside Jlem. We contemplate Decl of Human Eights serving as standard of achievement for administrations haying general governing responsibility in Jlem, as we assume Decl would serve in all of Israel by virtue of Israeli membership in UN. We do not contemplate attempt to enforce specifically the provisions of Decl in Jlem as such treatment not appropriate to character of Decl. Primary reliance, for giving genuine effect to principles set forth in Decl as objectives, wld be on administering authorities in Jlem. Role of UN Administrator and Internatl Tribunal wld be to take cognizance of serious departures from standards proclaimed in Decl, and through judicial procedures to secure redress in such cases and bring about necessary changes by administering authorities. Tribunal wld take into acct all relevant circumstances in determining whether an administeririg authority was living up to its obligation to be guided by Decl as a standard of achievement in human rights field. Suggested redraft of Art 17 in Secretariat working paper is as follows:

Art 17. The authorities responsible for govt in the two zones of Jlem shall, in administering their respective zones, be guided by the principles and standards set forth in the Universal Decl of Human Eights approved by the GA on Dec 10, 1948 “as a common standard of achievement for all peoples and all nations”. If the UN Administrator believes that zonal authorities in Jlem are failing to comply with this obligation, he shall bring the matter to the attention of the Internatl Tribunal in an appropriate proceeding, or, if necessary, bring the matter before an appropriate organ of the UN.

We feel that if basic provisions re sovereignty cannot be rejected by parties, PCC will have more latitude in making other proposals even though parties may object. Israeli and Arab spokesman in GA may propose amendments and GA wld decide. Doubtful if parties wld reject entire plan if basic outline is reasonable. These considerations wld apply to jurisdiction given municipal council over common services mentioned reftel. Such provision does not appear important from UN point of view but shld be valuable to efficient functioning of city.

Dept generally concurs opinion ConGen Jlem last para Tel 412, Jun 13,3 rptd to you as No. 30.

Foregoing discussion is for your assistance and does not have nature instruction.

Dept expects to pouch shortly composite suggestions for changes in Secretariat draft for Jlem instrument.

Webb

1 Dated June 13, from Lausanne, p. 1130 [Pg. 1130 includes portions of Doc. 756 and Doc. 757].

2 Presumably Com. Jer/W.18, dated May 18, p. 1023 [Pg. 1023 includes portions of Doc. 666 and Doc. 667].

3 Not printed; it reported that the draft proposals for an internationalized Jerusalem had been discussed with French Consul General Neuville. The last paragraph dealt with certain of the latter’s suggestions (867N.01/6–1349).

The Acting Secretary of State to the Legation in Switzerland 501.BB Palestine/6–1449: Telegram

[Document 781]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Legation in Switzerland

secret
priority Washington, June 20, 1949—8 p. m.

Unpal 160. USDel Lausanne. For Hare. Palun 204, June 14.1 You shld inform Israeli rep US views along fol lines: USG greatly disturbed over present Israeli attitude refugee question, which represents marked departure assurances expressed by Eban May 52 before Ad Hoc comite GA when seeking UN membership. This attitude equally difficult reconcile with Gaza strip proposal, which represents firm admission on part Israel its ability assume responsibility 230,000 refugees plus 80,000 normal residents area. By refusal come forth with constructive proposal based on quantitative acceptance without territorial acquisition (penultimate para Palun 174, May 283 ), Israel has effectively blocked any possibility obtaining cooperation Arabs in resolving refugee question and any justification further US approaches to Arabs this purpose.

You shld express to Israeli rep USG’s disappointment re failure his Govt carry out purposes GA res Dec 11, despite Elath’s formal assurances contained his letter May 11 to SecState re Israel’s desire make utmost effort to bring its policy into conformity with resolutions of UN, and despite US offer technical financial assistance to Israel and Arabs in implementing program for solution of refugee problem under conditions specified and as part UN program (Unpal 114, May 234 ). You shld emphasize that onus of responsibility resolving refugee question lies squarely on Israelis and Arabs, and that USG is under no mandate from UN to lend its material resources to solve problem of Israeli-Arab making.5 Therefore USG greatly regrets Eytan’s implication that Israeli agreement repatriation is contingent upon assumption financial responsibility by US, and must reiterate that agreement repatriation is obligation placed upon Israel by international community under Dec 11 res.

USG further notes with disappointment that Israeli Govt has shown no inclination meet conditions on which US offer assistance (Unpal 114) was based. In event conditions met at future date, USG wld be prepared at that time consider question of assistance to Israel and Arab states. However, you shld emphasize implications such delay, since US support of refugee settlement program conditional upon UN action and sponsorship. Such program wld necessitate time-consuming and laborious preparation by PCC prior to presentation to GA this autumn. Under present circumstances, PCC not in position initiate preparation such program in absence necessary political cooperation. Therefore any additional delay will mean increasing difficulty if not impossibility obtaining UN action this year.

You shld also inform Arabs USG attitude.6

Webb

1 Identified also as telegram 577 from Geneva, not printed.

2 See footnote 2, p. 979 [Pg. 979 is part of Doc. 636].

3 Identified also as telegram 821 from Bern, p. 1069 [Pg. 1069 includes portions of Doc. 702 and Doc. 703].

4 Identified also as telegram 674 to Bern, p. 1047 [Pg. 1047 includes portions of Doc. 685 and Doc. 686].

5 Mr. Hare, on June 23, advised the Department that prior to and after Mr. Ethridge’s departure, the American Delegation had been reluctant to raise the question of general economic aid at PCC meetings, in the absence of general political agreement between the Arabs and Israelis. Its reluctance was based on the expectation of “almost certain leak” to the press and on the possibility that the PCC and the UN Secretariat might devote their entire attention to this subject. The American Delegation, however, had “privately discussed substance Unpal 114 and Palun 180 with French and Turkish members PCC but does not plan discuss question officially in PCC until commitments mentioned Palun 168 and 174 are forthcoming. We continue to attach importance to reservation in Palun 180 because of importance keeping PCC handling of refugee and territorial questions in step.” (telegram Palun 226 from Lausanne, 501.BB Palestine/6–2349) Palun 180 from Lausanne and Unpal 114 to Lausanne are printed on pp. 1086 [Pg. 1086 includes portions of Doc. 720 and Doc. 721] and 1047 [Pg. 1047 includes portions of Doc. 685 and Doc. 686], respectively. Palun 168 and 174 from Bern are printed on pp. 1065 [Pg. 1065 includes portions of Doc. 699 and Doc. 700] and 1069 [Pg. 1069 includes portions of Doc. 702 and Doc. 703], respectively.

6 Mr. Hare delivered the message contained in Unpal 160 to Mr. Eytan on January 22. The latter “made no comment on substance of message other than to say it would be duly considered and that he assumed reply in action rather than words would be preferred. I said that was exactly the case.” (telegram Palun 227, June 23, 11 a. m., from Lausanne, 501.BB Palestine/6–2349) The Department, on June 27, directed Tel Aviv to take the line set forth in Unpal 160 in discussing the refugee question with the Israeli Government (telegram 406, 501.BB Palestine/6–2749).

The Acting Secretary of State to the Consulate General at Jerusalem 501.BB Palestine/6–1649: Telegram

[Document 782]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Consulate General at Jerusalem 1

secret Washington, June 20, 1949—8 p. m.

275. Dept endorses your reply Day an conversation reported Contel 426 Jun 16. We consider SC Res May 29 and July 15 in force. Some changes brought about by armistice agreements which were negotiated by parties pursuant subsequent SC Res but these do not invalidate those provisions earlier resolutions left untouched. Bunche regards these resolutions as in force and plans proposed new res superseding them when Syrian armistice concluded. He wld retain only simple cease-fire and transfer mediator function this respect to PCC. Dept’s position on this proposal not yet formulated.

Dept not certain whether UN position Govt House area can be properly described as legal right or as privilege. Issue lies primarily between UN and states involved but we wld support UN contention right of free access. Neutral zone has been created by agreement parties and UN access recognized by them and confirmed by usage.

Dept wld consider it appropriate, subject your concurrence, inquire Dayan reasons for raising technical questions concerning UN rights this zone. As he says situation has progressed one step from truce to armistice. Assume all concerned hope hostilities phase concluded and moving toward final peace. Challenging existing neutral zones appears retrogressive step. UN has important work in this process. It has made financial investment in Govt House and our understanding will continue use of it so long as it has mission to perform in Jlem. If parties really desire peaceful settlement and coop with UN logical course wld be preserve existing neutral area and lend full facilities to UN. When opposite attitude is taken we can only speculate as to motives and naturally take into account strategic value of area.

Webb

1 This telegram was repeated to Tel Aviv and Amman and to Bern for the American Delegation at Lausanne.

The Ambassador in Israel (McDonald) to the Secretary of State 867N.48/6–2149: Telegram

[Document 783]

The Ambassador in Israel (McDonald) to the Secretary of State

top secret Tel Aviv, June 21, 1949—11 a. m.

471. Personal attention President and Acting Secretary of State. At my request Herlitz of Foreign Office called residence evening nineteenth remaining two hours to read portions, paraphrase others and discuss Eban’s cabled report of Israeli’s long meeting with Acting Secretary and other Department officials June 18 [17]. According to Herlitz President and Department are primarily disturbed by: 1. Israel’s failure make specific pledge repatriation refugees;

2. Fear lest Israeli be planning enlarge territory by force.

Although some extremists in army and Knesset advocate expansion by use or threat of force and despite general opinion of both Israelis and foreigners that Israel is strong enough to impose its will on Arabs, I believe fear of Israel aggression is not warranted. My belief based on: 1. Present task which government dare not shirk of absorbing a quarter of a million immigrants annually requires every available economic resource;

2. Battle to reduce fantastic cost of living must be won if Ben-Gurion cabinet is to survive;

3. Outbreak war would wreck Israel’s basic purpose “in gathering of exiles” and defeat government on vital economic front;

4. Israeli’s repeatedly expressed confidence in General Riley and readiness accept and even on occasion to request wider scope his mediation inconsistent with aggressive intentions”;

5. Aggression would alienate world opinion and risk economic or other sanctions.

Certainly Ben-Gurion, Sharett and General Staff are fully aware that further Israel expansion by force, even if war were won quickly, would be disastrously self-defeating. None of these men are reckless adventurers. On contrary their record during struggle against Britain and Arabs and now against enormous domestic problems shows Israeli leaders as highly intelligent and practical. They, knowing that aggression would lose American support and President Truman’s friendship have no intention invite self-destruction.1

McDonald

1 In a Summary of Daily Meeting with the Secretary, Mr. Rusk “reported receipt of a telegram from Ambassador McDonald in which McDonald said that the Israelis will not commit any acts of aggression. Mr. Rusk emphasized that this was only McDonald’s view and that we had not received any assurances from any official of Israel. It was agreed that in replying to McDonald we should ask him to attempt to get such assurances.” (Executive Secretariat files, lot 58–D609)

The Acting Secretary of State to the Legation in Switzerland 501.BB Palestine/6–2049: Telegram

[Document 784]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Legation in Switzerland

secret
priority
niact Washington, June 21, 1949—3 p. m.

Unpal 161. For USDel Lausanne. For Hare. We have carefully considered ur views Palun 220, June 20.1 However we still believe recess preferable to present stalemate, as means endeavoring obtain objective set forth para 1 Unpal 155.2

Shorter recess after which PCC wld reconvene Lausanne about July 15 wld be preferable to longer adjournment, since latter might result in producing psychological atmosphere militating against further negots through PCC and wld probably remove any possibility activating Econ Survey Group for purposes GA action autumn session.

USG will utilize recess to continue its efforts obtain more cooperative attitude both sides and to brief Ethridge’s successor as soon as appointed.

Pls discuss foregoing and Unpal 155 with Boisanger and Yalcin, informing them we are approaching Paris and Ankara with view requesting them issue similar instructions their delegates PCC. Dept informing SYG its views.

If agreement your colleagues obtainable, you shld seek to begin recess weekend June 25 or soonest thereafter and proceed Washington immed.3

Webb

1 Not printed, but see footnote 1, p. 1155 [Pg. 1155 includes portions of Doc. 774 and Doc. 775].

2 Dated June 18, to Bern, ibid [Pg. 1155 includes portions of Doc. 774 and Doc. 775].

3 The Department, on June 21, transmitted the substance of Unpal 155 and 161 to Paris, except that it altered the wording of the second paragraph of the former message to read: “Members PCC wld emphasize that resort to force by either side during or after recess wld under no circumstances be tolerated by PCC or UN.” (telegram 2203, which was repeated to Ankara for action (501.BB Palestine/6–2149)). No 2203 was also sent to New York the following day as the basis for urgent discussion with Secretary-General Lie (telegram 328, 501.BB Palestine/6–2249). Mr. Lie and the French and Turkish Foreign Offices concurred with the American proposal, except that the French Foreign Office, without withdrawing its agreement, felt that the present was not an opportune time for a recess (telegrams 761, June 22, from New York; 2595, June 22, from Paris; and 285, June 25, from Ankara, all of which are filed under 501.BB Palestine).

The Ambassador in Israel (McDonald) to the Secretary of State 501.BB Palestine/6–2249: Telegram

[Document 785]

The Ambassador in Israel (McDonald) to the Secretary of State

secret Tel Aviv, June 22, 1949—noon.

478. At my request Sharett received Ford and me Foreign Office June 21 for hour and quarter.

With marked show of resentment at what he termed “Rusk’s peremptory fifteen minute summons” to Israel Chargé June 141 Sharett outlined in great detail successive steps from May 25 to June 9 to secure personal conference with Zaim or Arslan and of Syrian “endless evasions and delays”. Sharett exclaimed that to be accused of imminent aggression in midst such Israeli “patient conciliatory procedure” was “shockingly unjust” and made Zaim’s “intransigence a model for other Arab governments.”

As to present Syrian-Israeli relations, Foreign Minister hopes MAC negotiations will succeed, but warned that Zaim could not expect indefinitely avoid withdrawal from Israel territory. “US should understand that Israel will exhaust every peaceful means through MAC, UN direct negotiations, etc., to secure mutual agreement but if Zaim persists in refusal accept Bunche proposal Israel does not intend remain quiescent.”

Comment: Foreign Minister evidently under heavy strain result of bitter criticism press and Knesset that government’s “pro-American policy” has resulted “national humiliation”. I believe his words meant to emphasize with us that justice and expediency “require pressure on Zaim to evacuate Israel territory” comparable to that exerted on Israel evacuate Lebanese territory. End comment.

Related subject: Regarding Department’s aide-mémoire, Deptel 375, June 17, Sharett took strong exception to opening sentence to effect that actual situation Jerusalem threat to peace. As to substance Department proposal Israel “quite prepared to consider this important suggestion.”

Foreign Minister took exception also to “undue importance” given in Acting Secretary’s conference with Eban, et al, June 18[17] to report that Dayan had arrived Government House “in armored car”. This was not fact: Dayan “never uses armored car”. By mistake an armored car did appear at Government House but Dayan “immediately ordered it away.”

New subject: Regarding reunion Arab refugees families, Sharett explained this principle being maintained and procedure “being worked out”. Decisions will be in individual cases with “security considerations paramount.”

Comment: I fear this foreshadows relatively few reunions near future. End comment.

New subject: Regarding Gaza proposal, Foreign Minister said Prime Minister “disclaims conception at Tiberias” but Israel “still willing accept strip including refugees.”

Conclusion: As we were leaving, I said: “I trust nothing will happen to give grounds for fear about Israel’s pacific purposes toward Syria”. Foreign Minister replied: “If all peaceful means fail, we can’t preclude possibility of ultimate use of force.”

Comment: I believe this remark to be move in Israel’s efforts to secure that US influence Zaim to accept Bunche formula. Certainly non-armistice with Syria weakens all peace efforts with other Arab states. Support therefore Bunche proposal is “key log” in present jam.

McDonald

1 For an account of the conversation between Mr. Rusk and the Israeli Charge, see telegram 367, June 14, to Tel Aviv, p. 1137 [Pg. 1137 includes portions of Doc. 762 and Doc. 763].

Memorandum by the Deputy Under Secretary of State (Rusk) to Mr. Matthew J. Connelly, Secretary to the President 501.BB Palestine/6–2349

[Document 786]

Memorandum by the Deputy Under Secretary of State (Rusk) to Mr. Matthew J. Connelly, Secretary to the President 1

top secret Washington, June 23, 1949.

The Secretary of State hopes to be able to speak to the President about Palestine immediately after the Cabinet meeting on Friday, June 24. The attached papers deal with the points which the Secretary will wish to discuss in the event the President has an opportunity to see them beforehand.

At Tab A is the text of a proposed aide-mémoire 2 to be handed to the Israeli Chargé d’Affaires in Washington as an informal reply to the Israeli note of June 8, 1949 (Tab B), which itself was a reply to a United States note of May 29, 1949 (Tab C)3 It is felt that it would be desirable to reply to the Israeli note in order to correct certain misunderstandings and points of fact in the event it becomes necessary to publish the exchange at some future date. The proposed aide-mémoire is moderate in tone and indicates the continuation of discussions between the United States and the Government of Israel on the work of the Palestine Conciliation Commission.

At Tab D is a telegram2 which it is proposed to send to Ambassador McDonald in reply to the latter’s telegrams (Tabs E and F)4 on the question of further military action by the Government of Israel. No new policy question is raised in the proposed telegram but it is believed that the President would be very much interested in the question of possible military action.5

1 At the “9:30 meeting” on the morning of June 23 in the State Department, Mr. Rusk submitted a proposed telegram and aide-mémoire regarding Palestine which he requested Secretary Acheson to bring to the attention of President Truman. The Secretary thereupon instructed Mr. Rusk to forward the two papers to the President (memorandum of June 23 by William J. McWilliams, of the Executive Secretariat, to the Secretary, 501.BB Palestine/6–2349).

2 Not found attached.

3 See telegram 322, May 28, to Tel Aviv, p. 1072 [Pg. 1072 includes portions of Doc. 704 and Doc. 705].

2 Not found attached.

4 See telegrams 471 and 478, dated June 21 and 22, respectively, pp. 1163 [Pg. 1163 includes portions of Doc. 782 and Doc. 783] and 1165 [Pg. 1165 includes portions of Doc. 784 and Doc. 785].

5 Secretary Acheson, on June 24, discussed the matter with the President, who approved both documents (memorandum of conversation by the Secretary, 501.BB Palestine/6–2449); for their texts, see telegrams 397 and 398 to Tel Aviv, June 24, pp. 1173 [Pg. 1173 includes portions of Doc. 788 and Doc. 789] and 1174 [Pg. 1174 includes portions of Doc. 789 and Doc. 790], respectively.

The Secretary of State to United States Mission at the United Nations 501.BB Palestine/6–2249: Telegram

[Document 787]

The Secretary of State to United States Mission at the United Nations

secret Washington, June 23, 1949—7 p. m.

331. Dept suggests reply to Eban ltr (urtel 759 Jun 221 ) along the fol lines:

“The US Govt has also been concerned by the lack of progress of the Special Comite. Since this Comite is strictly bilateral, composed of representatives of Israel and Hashemite Jordan Kingdom, the US has not participated in the negots directly or indirectly. For this reason my Govt does not have complete info as to the proceedings and has not been in a position where it cld appropriately undertake to advise the parties.

My Govt has nevertheless become convinced that the Special Comite wld not be productive of results and that a new approach to the problem is desirable. It is understood that a similar view was expressed by the Israeli representative on the MAC in Jlem on Jun 13, 1949 (FYI Jerusalem Tel 419, Jun 142 ).

Accordingly my Govt, considering this to be its best contribution to a solution, has ventured to suggest to the Govts of Israel and the Hashemite Jordan Kingdom that the problems under consideration by the Special Comite be transferred to the MAC which wld for this purpose meet under the chairmanship of Gen Riley. It was also suggested that the terms of reference shld include questions requiring agreement between the parties relating to the demarcation of Jewish and Arab zones, the use of roads and other questions of access to places in the Jlem area and the functioning of public utilities. It was also suggested that agreed solutions of these problems shld be without prejudice to the final decisions concerning the international status of Jlem which will be decided later in collaboration with the UN, but that these solutions shld be incorporated in such final decisions to the extent that they are comformable.

My Govt is now informed that this proposal has been accepted in principle by the Govt of the Hashemite Jordan Kingdom3 and that it is receiving the consideration of the Govt of Israel.

Accordingly, responding to your inquiry, I feel that my Govt has made the most appropriate intervention within its power in the circumstances. My Govt earnestly hopes that its suggestion will be accepted by both parties and that the resulting negots will lead to a satisfactory solution of these important questions.”

Acheson

1 Not printed; it gave the text of a “letter addressed to Austin by Eban, dated June 21, received today, requesting UN [US] good offices to urge Jordan to implement provisions of Article 8 of Israeli-Jordan armistice agreement, and containing assurances that the armistice agreements between Israel and Jordan ‘are working smoothly and show all signs of continuing to do so’.” (501.BB Palestine/6–2249)

2 Not printed; it advised that “At yesterday’s MAC meeting Israel delegate admitted creation special committee in armistice agreement mistake. Despite great hopes originally held for direct negotiations talks stalemated. Expressed desire refer all pending problems to MAC.” (501.BB Palestine/6–1449)

3 The Jordanian Government on June 22 issued a press release announcing acceptance of the United States proposal on handing over the question of Jerusalem to the Mixed Armistice Commission, (telegram 260, June 23) from Amman, 501.BB Palestine/6–2349) New York, on June 24, advised that General Riley had informed Mr. Bunche that the special committee, on June 21, had voted to transfer its functions to the Mixed Armistice Commission under the former’s chairmanship (telegram 769, 501.BB Palestine/6–2249).

President Chain Weizmann of Israel to President Truman 501.BB Palestine/7–949

[Document 788]

President Chain Weizmann of Israel to President Truman 1

Rehovoth, Israel, 24 June 1949.

Dear Mr. President: The Government of Israel have communicated to me the text of the Note transmitted to them on your behalf on the 29th May, as well as their reply of June 8th. The matters raised in the Note are of such gravity that I feel impelled to address you personally on the subject. You have throughout taken such a warm and helpful interest in the affairs of our young State that I am most anxiously concerned that you, our great and good friend, should be under no misapprehension regarding our position and intentions concerning the issues now at stake. I wish, indeed, it were possible for me to talk matters over personally with you. That is always the best way of removing misunderstanding.

We have all been distressed at the slow progress made at Lausanne. It may be that the device of a Conciliation Commission, consisting not of officers of the U.N., but of delegates of three different countries, with different backgrounds and policies, was not the best way of promoting a speedy settlement. It certainly appears to have been less effective than the mediation of one man pursued in the name of the United Nations as a whole. But be that as it may, we are trying our best to work with this Commission and have submitted to them a number of proposals, to none of which we have so far received any reply from the other side. Indeed up till now the Arab States have altogether refused to sit with our delegates under the auspices of the Commission

When our Delegation first arrived in Lausanne on April 30th, they immediately announced that they had come with full authorization to negotiate a comprehensive peace settlement with the delegates of the Arab States covering all the matters referred to in the U.N. Resolution of 11th December, 1948. They specifically stated that Israel was ready to contribute towards solving the Arab refugee problem in cooperation with the United Nations and the Arab States. A few days later they submitted to the Commission a draft preamble and two articles of a proposed peace treaty to serve as a basis for discussion. In this draft they proposed, among other things, the final liquidation of the war, the establishment of normal political and economic relations between Israel and the Arab States, mutual guarantees of the frontiers, abstention from the use of force for the settlement of disputes, and international arbitration in case such disputes could not be settled by agreement.

To this day we have not received any reply to these basic proposals.

Coming to the question of the Arab refugees, our delegation gave repeated assurances to the Commission that Israel was ready to cooperate with the U.N. and the Arab States for a solution of the refugee problem. We pledged ourselves to guarantee the civil rights of all minorities within our territory; we accepted the principle of compensation for land abandoned by the Arabs; we declared our readiness to unfreeze Arab accounts in our banks immediately on the conclusion of peace; we set up a Custodian of Absentee Property. Our delegation informed the Commission that the Government of Israel was ready to readmit members of Arab families separated by the war.

In conformity with the General Assembly’s Resolution of December 11th, relating to access to ports and means of communication our delegation has offered to create a free zone in the Haifa port for the benefit of Transjordan. Various proposals were made by our delegation for the delimitation of the frontiers of Israel with the Arab States. Our delegation also elaborated our attitude on the Jerusalem question.

All these constructive proposals have not elicited a single reply from the Arab delegations. It would, indeed, appear that these delegations did not come to Lausanne with authority to negotiate a peace settlement, but solely for the purpose of arranging for the repatriation of the Arab refugees to Israel.

Our delegations subsequently proposed the establishment of a number of sub-committees to deal with the general principles and conditions of peace, the territorial settlement, the refugee problem, the Jerusalem question, and the economic development of the Middle East, pursuant to Clause 10 of the U.N. Resolution of December 11th. We have not yet learnt the reaction of the Arab Delegations to these proposals. Finally, when members of the Commission suggested in a spirit of despondency that the Conference be suspended for a time, our delegation strongly opposed this course.

I feel sure you will agree, Mr. President, that in the light of these indisputable facts, we can hardly be charged with having failed to cooperate with the Commission. If so far nothing substantial has resulted from these talks, this is due essentially to the negative attitude of the Arab delegations and their persistent refusal to meet us under the auspices of the Commission. It is a great pity that the Commission failed to dislodge them from that negative attitude.

Permit me to add a few words on the two issues which are in the centre of the discussion: the territorial question and the refugee problem.

We have no aggressive designs against anyone and we are not looking for additional territory. But I think that no fair-minded man will deny us the right to retain that part of our ancient land which has become ours at a terrible cost of blood and treasure in the course of a war forced upon us by others. Most of the country which we hold beyond the boundaries set out on November 29th, 1947 was occupied by our forces during the second military campaign which was the result of the Arabs’ defiant refusal to accept the Mediator’s urgent plea for a continuation of the first truce. Bitter experience has shown that without that territory we are defenceless. Were we to give up the corridor to Jerusalem, that great city, whose people suffered so much and so heroically last year, would again be exposed to the danger of having its water supply cut off and of being starved into submission. In exactly the same way, Western Galilee holds the key to the defence of Haifa and the Valley of Jezreel, while the Ramleh area assures the safety of Tel Aviv from such menacing attacks as were launched upon it last year. None of these areas was ever allotted to any of the Arab States with which we are now negotiating. All of them are occupied by Israel legally under armistice agreements.

The Palestine Arab State contemplated in the U.N. Resolution of 29th November 1947 has not come into being—not through any fault of ours—and there is no reason whatever why the neighbouring Arab States who invaded Palestine in flagrant defiance of their obligations under the Charter, should be appeased by territorial “compensation” at our expense. Incidentally, all these demands for compensation in the end boil down to the same old question on which you took so firm a stand last year—the Negev. It is the Negev, particularly the southern Negev, which appears again to be demanded from us. The reasons against it are just as potent as they were last year when you so strongly opposed our being deprived of that area which contains the country’s sole mineral resources and which, in addition, is our only gateway to the East. What importance attaches to our having direct access to the Red Sea has been brought home to us strikingly by Egypt’s closing of the Suez Canal to all ships—even British ships—carrying, or suspected of carrying, goods to Israel. Because of such closure we are compelled to bring vital supplies (wheat, etc.) from Australia and the Far East all the way via the Cape and Gibraltar. With the coast of Eylat in our possession and the Negev opened up by transport roads, we shall have free access to the sea routes which are vital to our existence.

Now as to the refugee problem. It is a grave issue, but it was not created by us. It was not the birth of Israel which created the Arab refugee problem, as our enemies now proclaim, but the Arab attempt to prevent that birth by armed force. These people are not refugees in the sense in which that term has been sanctified by the martyrdom of millions in Europe—they are part of an aggressor group which failed and which makes no secret of its intention to resume aggression. They left the country last year at the bidding of their leaders and military commanders and as part of the Arab strategic plan. But in spite of all this we are, for humanitarian reasons ready to contribute as far as we can towards a solution of this problem. We have, in fact, done a good deal more under this head than could, for obvious reasons, be published. Your Ambassador has been given details under this head. We have been steadily re-admitting Arab refugees during the last few months. The number of those who have returned exceeds 25,000. We are ready to re-unite Arab families separated by the war, and we are now approaching the various Arab States through the Mixed Armistice Commissions for setting up special machinery to facilitate their return in organised form. We are prepared to re-admit more as part of a peace settlement. There are, however, two overriding considerations which limit what we can do in this sphere: we dare not again endanger our hard-won independence and security and with all the good will in the world, we cannot undertake tasks which are economically beyond our strength.

So many malicious charges have been levelled against us in connection with this Arab refugee question, that I cannot help drawing attention to the basic realities of the situation. We are a small State, nine hundred thousand Jews wedged in between forty million Arabs. We held our own last year by a terrific effort and at very heavy sacrifices, losing some of our finest youth and suffering heavy damage. The Arab States are making no secret of their intention of resuming war whenever they are ready for it. Only two days ago Faris el Khoury, the former Syrian member of the Security Council and Chairman of the Syrian Chamber, declared that the war against us “remains the corner-stone of Arab policy”. Not a week passes without our being warned by authoritative Arab spokesmen of the coming “second round”. The Arab States are rearming on a big scale, building up modern armament industries of their own and purchasing the most deadly modern weapons. A few weeks ago squadrons of British Vampire jet fighters were flown to the Suez Canal Zone—half an hour’s air flight from our frontier—ready for instant delivery when wanted, while Egyptian pilots are being trained in their use close by. Egypt has ordered British destroyers with 4” and 6” guns and submarines, while there is hardly any secret about the French rearming the Syrians. This rearmament, Mr. President, constitutes a direct threat to the peace of the Middle East and thereby also to the peace of the World. With this open threat of war hanging over us, can we ignore the security aspect of the admission of a large Arab population who, whatever their individual feelings might be, are likely to turn against us if war restarts?

Apart from the security question, which to my mind is paramount, there is the economic difficulty. When the United Nations in November 1947 voted in favour of a Jewish State, it was motivated preeminently by the purpose of solving once and for all the Jewish question in Europe, to get rid of the concentration camps and of the aftermath of Hitler’s holocaust. I know, Mr. President, that this purpose was uppermost in your mind when you gave us your staunch and steady support in those critical days. We are now doing exactly what we were expected to do. We are liquidating one camp after another and have already brought over many thousands of their former inmates. Can we be expected at the same time to build up, alongside this big effort of reconstruction, a new Arab economy to absorb hundreds of thousands of Arabs? For let there be no mistake about it: the Arab economic and social structure as it was prior to last year’s exodus has ceased to exist. The Arab refugee question can be solved in a big way only by a comprehensive effort of reconstruction. The crucial question is: is that effort to be undertaken in Israel, with all the political, security and economic stresses and strains arising therefrom, or in the neighbouring Arab countries where vast fertile areas are available for such resettlement and where these people can find a home in the congenial surroundings of an Arab society?

Our policy, as I stated before, is not one of absolute refusal to readmit Arabs and we may, if real peace is established, be able to do more in this respect than if the present atmosphere of latent war and hostility continues. But an all-round solution can only be found as part of a general development scheme for the benefit of the Middle East as a whole. Towards such a development scheme Israel is ready to make its contribution: I hope it will be a significant contribution. But to achieve all this there must be negotiation, agreement and peace. The most vital need at the present hour is for Arabs and Jews to enter into direct negotiations and hammer out an agreed settlement. I plead with you, Mr. President, that you may use your unique influence to induce the Arab States to face the realities of the situation and to take that decisive step.

With affectionate greetings,

Yours very sincerely,

Ch. Weizmann

1 Copy transmitted to Secretary Acheson by President Truman in a memorandum of July 9, with a request for a suggested reply.

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in Israel 501.BB Palestine/6–2249: Telegram

[Document 789]

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in Israel

top secret Washington, June 24, 1949—8 p. m.

397. Dept appreciates urtel 471, June 21, which has been read by the Pres with much interest. Dept considers points you enumerate make out conclusive case against further Israeli mil adventures from realistic point of view of Israeli self-interest. Same considerations apply to threat of force during course of negots for final settlement. US hopes such considerations appear as decisive to Israeli leadership as to outside world and that assurances we have had from Eban are solidly based upon Israeli Govt decision that Israel will resolve its differences with its neighbors through the procedures of peaceful settlement. Sharett’s statement reported penultimate para urtel 4781 indicates necessity following situation with closest attention.

FYI ref second para urtel 478 although urgency was emphasized by Dept officer making appt Israeli Chargé was given alternative times for Rusk appt and selected time himself.

Acheson

1 Dated June 22, p. 1165 [Pg. 1165 includes portions of Doc. 784 and Doc. 785].

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in Israel 501.BB Palestine/6–2449: Telegram

[Document 790]

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in Israel

top secret
priority Washington, June 24, 1949—8 p. m.

398. Following Aide-Mémoire delivered today to Israeli Chargé1 by Deputy Under Secretary Rusk:

“The Government of the United States has received the note delivered by the Government of Israel to the United States Ambassador in Tel Aviv on June 8, 1949, in response to the note of the United States Government dated May 29, 1949. The United States Government considers that there is an identity of interest between it, the Government of Israel and the Governments of the Arab States in the early accomplishment of an equitable settlement of the Palestine question, an interest which is in fact shared by all of the Members of the United Nations. It is therefore regrettable that the Government of Israel did not respond more affirmatively with respect to the questions of Palestinian refugees and of boundaries discussed in the United States note. The United States Government will wish at an early date to discuss these questions further with the Government of Israel and other interested Governments, but in the meantime desires to make the following observations with respect to the note of the Government of Israel dated June 8, 1949.

The United States Government does not consider that there has been any misunderstanding on its part of the position taken by the Government of Israel, as stated by Israeli Representatives at Lausanne, on the disposition of the refugee problem and on the final terrritorial settlement in Palestine.

With regard to refugees, Israeli Representatives stated that the Israeli Government will do nothing further at the present time, although it has under consideration certain urgent measures of a limited character. This position appears to be strongly reaffirmed in the Israeli note of June 8, 1949. The Government of Israel referred in that note to its readiness to pay compensation for land abandoned, to reunite families separated by the war, and generally to make its contribution to the solution of the problem by resettlement. It does not indicate that it is ready to contribute to the problem by accepting a substantial portion of the refugees on the basis of repatriation. On the contrary, the note states, “It is inconceivable that the Government of Israel should find itself able to undertake in one and the same breath the absorption of mass Jewish immigration and the reintegration of returning Arab refugees.” It is quite true that the Resolution of the General Assembly of December 11, 1948, indicated that repatriation should be permitted “at the earliest practicable date” but it can hardly be supposed that this reference to practicability was intended to subordinate repatriation to mass Jewish immigration into Israel.

With regard to the statement in the Israeli note of June 8, 1949, that the incorporation within Israel of the Gaza strip and the refugees located therein was suggested by the United States member of the Conciliation Commission, the Government of Israel will recall that Prime Minister Ben Gurion made this proposal to Mr. Mark Ethridge at Tiberias on April 18, 1949.2 The United States Government has studied with interest a proposal along similar lines made by Israeli Representatives at Lausanne on May 20, 1949,3 and sees no reason why the proposal might not become the basis for discussions between the Government of Israel and other interested Governments.

The United States Government regards the solution of the refugee problem as a common responsibility of Israel and the Arab States, which neither side should be permitted to shirk. It is for this reason that it has urged Israel to accept the principle of substantial repatriation and to begin immediate repatriation on a reasonable scale, and has urged the Arab States to accept the principle of substantial resettlement of refugees outside Palestine. The United States Government is convinced that unless both sides contribute fully to the solution of this problem, there is no basis for a settlement either of the refugee problem itself or of the other principal issues remaining unsettled. The United States Government is also convinced that the assumption of responsibility for the refugees by Israel and the Arab States constitutes a necessary condition to the provision of international assistance in the permanent disposition of the refugee problem.

The Government of the United States notes that the Government of Israel maintains that it cannot accept the principle of territorial compensation, related to the 1947 partition award, since that award was based on a series of assumptions which failed to materialize. It is observed, however, that the Government of Israel places considerable emphasis upon the continuing validity of the 1947 award where such emphasis supports its own position, for example, in connection with the military occupation by Israel of the southern part of the Negev during a period of truce and in connection with the presence of Syrian troops in a portion of Palestine allotted in 1947 to Israel. In any event, the partition of 1947 is the only authoritative expression of the views of the United Nations with respect to a just territorial division of Palestine between Arabs and Jews. The General Assembly has not indicated in which respects, if any, it believes the territorial basis of that award should be modified in the light of any changes in the assumptions on which that partition was based.

With regard to the statement that the United States position on the territorial question does not represent a policy of the United Nations, it must be recalled that, as a member of the United Nations Conciliation Commission, a body charged by the United Nations with promoting a final solution of the Palestine problem, the United States has the right and, indeed, the duty of advancing such positions as it believes may contribute to a just and lasting settlement. The United States Government could find no basis for such a settlement in the position taken by Israeli Representatives that Israel expects to retain all areas allocated to it by the 1947 Resolution of the General Assembly, to retain areas which it has occupied outside the 1947 partition lines, and to submit further demands as to territory in Arab Palestine in connection with the Israeli development program.

The United States Government can not accept the contention of the Government of Israel that the admission of Israel to membership in the United Nations indicated that the members of the world community considered as satisfactory the attitude of Israel with respect to the provisions of the General Assembly Resolution of December 11, 1948. Mr. Eban stated before the Ad Hoc Committee of the General Assembly on May 5, 1949,4 that it was his Government’s understanding that nothing but the provisions of Article IV of the Charter were relevant in the consideration of an application for membership in the United Nations. He added that, while proposing to give the official views of the Government of Israel on the problem of Jerusalem and on the Arab refugees, he reserved Israel’s opinion with regard to the relevance of extraneous issues to the question of admission to membership. The present effort of the Government of Israel to invoke support from the General Assembly for its position on such questions seems to be at variance with the basis on which it itself sought support for its admission to the United Nations. If there is any misunderstanding on this point which appears to impair the prospects of a settlement, the General Assembly can itself provide an authoritative interpretation of its action at its next regular session.

The United States Government has noted with appreciation the reference of the Government of Israel to the friendship for Israel of the Government and people of the United States. The suggestions which the United States Government has made in connection with a settlement of the Palestine problem have been motivated by deep and genuine concern for the peace and stability of the Near East, of which Israel is as much a part as are the Arab States, and by friendly interest in the future welfare of Israel. The United States Government continues in its resolve to do everything within its ability to assist the governments and peoples concerned to find a peaceful and lasting settlement of the Palestine question.

In conclusion, the United States Government wishes to emphasize its view that the military phases of the Palestine question must now be considered as terminated, and that any government which attempts to effect a particular settlement by the renewal of hostilities or the threat of hostilities would incur a grave responsibility before the community of nations. The United States Government welcomes the assurances it has received on this point from Representatives of the Governments directly concerned and looks forward to an early settlement which will relieve the peoples of all communities in and around Palestine of the misery and violence which has been their lot during recent years.”

Further comment will follow.5

Acheson

1 In a memorandum of June 24, Acting Secretary Webb described his meeting of June 20 with President Truman, as follows: “I reported to the President on my talk with the Israeli representatives [on June 17] and indicated that it would be necessary for us to answer the latest Israeli note.” (501.BB Palestine/6–2449)

2 See telegram 312, April 20, from Jerusalem, p. 925 [Pg. 925 includes portions of Doc. 601 and Doc. 602].

3 See telegram 769, May 20, from Bern, p. 1036 [Pg. 1036 is part of Doc. 675].

4 See footnote 2, p. 979 [Pg. 979 is part of Doc. 636].

5 This telegram was repeated to Bern for the American Delegation at Lausanne. Thomas E. Bromley, First Secretary of the British Embassy, called on Gordon H. Mattison, Chief of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs, on July 5 to inquire on behalf of the Foreign Office whether the United States had modified its recent approach to Israel regarding the refugee question and territorial compensation. Mr. Mattison informed Mr. Bromley that the second communication to the Israeli Government “did not represent any change in our approach to the subject. The reply had been designed to clear up certain Israeli misconceptions, as well as to reiterate our point of view.” (memorandum of conversation, by Mr. Mattison, 867N.48/7–549)

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Deputy Under Secretary of State (Rusk) 867N.01/6–2549

[Document 791]

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Deputy Under Secretary of State (Rusk)1

top secret [Washington,] June 25, 1949.

Participants: Mr. Rusk, Deputy Under Secretary of State

Mr. Uriel Heyd, Israeli Chargé d’Affairs a.i.

Mr. Mattison, NE

I handed the attached aide-mémoire to Mr. Heyd after orally summarizing its contents and reading verbatim the last two paragraphs for emphasis.2

I also mentioned that it looked to us as if the Lausanne Conference was going to recess for a few weeks. This Government was most anxious that the recess period he used to the utmost advantage towards developing a new approach towards the issues which are still outstanding.

In this connection we felt that the Gaza strip proposal was perhaps the key which would unlock the whole problem. For this reason we were most anxious that the Egyptians and Israelis get together and see what could be worked out. I inquired whether Mr. Eban would continue to remain in New York, in the event that it should prove advantageous for conversations to be held between the Israelis and Egyptians there. Mr. Heyd replied that Mr. Eban planned to remain in the United States until the return of Ambassador Elath. However, if it were a matter of urgency the Ambassador would return immediately.

I stated that this would not be necessary, and explained that we had no preconceived idea as to when the conversations might take place. It was possible that the Israelis might wish to use contacts that they already had with the Egyptians. On the other hand if these were not satisfactory we were willing to help in arranging an exchange of views.

Mr. Heyd said that he would communicate with his government and inform us of its reaction.

Mr. Heyd said that there was one other matter that Mr. Sharett had asked him to take up. This was with regard to my interview with him on June 24, 1949,3 in which I had discussed reports of impending Israeli military activity. Mr. Sharett was surprised and somewhat hurt that we had given credence to such irresponsible stories. I explained that we had received reports from a number of sources including Tel Aviv which when put together made a somewhat alarming picture. As a member of the UN and the PCC we had felt it our duty to bring these to the Israeli Government’s attention. We had been most gratified to hear that the reports were not true. If the resulting exchange of views had cleared the air they had served a useful purpose.

1 Drafted by Mr. Mattison.

2 Note that telegram 398, supra, states that Mr. Rusk handed the Aide-Mémoire to the Israeli Chargé on June 24.

3 It is not clear whether Mr. Rusk conversed with the Israeli Chargé on both June 24 and June 25. The editors have been unable to find a relevant memorandum of conversation, dated June 24, in the Department of State files.

The Consul at Jerusalem (Burdett) to the Secretary of State 501.BB Palestine/6–2549: Telegram

[Document 792]

The Consul at Jerusalem (Burdett) to the Secretary of State

secret
priority Jerusalem, June 25, 1949—noon.

444. Riley states Israel interpreting Bunche’s latest proposal re Syrian armistice to mean Israeli administration control of demilitarized area on border. All military forces to be excluded but since mixed administration not practical and area located on Israel side of border Israel authorities together with local Arab police will be responsible for administration.1

Riley feels above will be completely inacceptable to Zaim who accepted Bunche proposal on understanding demilitarized area would be completely separate from both Israel and Syria with ultimate responsibility for zone resting with UN. Riley asserts this was Bundle’s intention.

In view above Israeli stand, confirmed by conversation last night with Sharett, Riley sees little chance successful conclusion armistice. Believes question must be referred to SC. Pointed out Israel rejected plan for exchange territory and now in effect rejecting proposal for demilitarized neutral zone. Only other possible suggestion before reference to SC is accord to effect that since both sides not able agree on changes present truce lines should become armistice lines pending final peace treaty. He sees no chance Israel accepting this since Israel working on premise armistice lines will in practice be final peace lines.

Sent Department, repeated Geneva 41 for USDel PCC, Damascus 45.

Burdett

1 New York, the previous day, had advised that “Regarding Israeli efforts to secure from Bunche an interpretation that Israelis should have full civil authority and sovereignty over areas of demilitarized zone assigned to them, Bunche is taking stiff line that this type of legalistic argument and delay is unwarranted. He is sending Vigier a reaffirmation that his compromise proposal should be accepted by both parties as it stands. It provides for a gradual restoration of civilian life in the demilitarized zone under the general supervision of the chairman of MAC. Policing to be done by locally recruited personnel who shall be of the nationality of the settlements concerned. All questions of sovereignty or of the law which should prevail in the areas should be left for the peace settlement. In respect to law needed for police action, Israeli law should apply to their settlements and Arab law in the Arab villages.” (telegram 771, 501.BB Palestine/6–2449)

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom 501.MA Palestine/6–2549: Telegram

[Document 793]

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom

secret
priority Washington, June 25, 1949—2 p. m.

2198. USG convinced that only means breaking Israeli-Arab impasse re refugees in order meet common US–UK objectives that question and carry forward contemplated procedure for solution refugee problem is through exploitation Gaza strip proposal. During period PCC recess, we propose exercise strongest diplomatic pressure effort create more cooperative attitude both sides.

We have informed Israeli Government that we regard its proposal assume responsibility refugees and residents Gaza strip in return for cession thereof as significant admission its ability accept substantial number refugees, and that we believe this proposal shld serve as basis for discussion between states concerned.

You will recall that proposal flatly rejected by Arabs when transmitted them by PCC. On June 10 UnSecy during conversation with Egyptian Amb 1 asked latter his Govt’s position on Israeli proposal. Amb replied that Egyptian Govt regards offer as “cheap barter”, and stated first step is to permit those refugees so desiring return their homes. He had no suggestion, however, re disposition remainder. He further stated Egypt wld wish make proposals re frontier rectification designed secure strategically defensible frontier for purposes Egyptian and Israeli security. Amb said such proposals wld not involve large amount territory.

On June 11 AmEmb Cairo acting on instructions requested views Egyptian auths re Israeli offer,2 emphasizing concern USG re refugees that area, which has no econ potential for future settlement. Emb asked Egypt’s plans re disposition those not wishing return Israel, since latter might be considerable number, and requested Egyptian views re frontier in light Amb’s ref to strategic rectification, in order US might explore possibility exchange of Gaza strip for frontier rectification further south.

Khashaba Pasha informed Chargé he had requested military opinion from Brit Amb Cairo as to frontier line which Egypt cld most satisfactorily defend with own resources, and was advised that Gaza-Beersheba-Dead Sea line shld be adopted. In response specific query from Chargé, FonMin stated Egypt wld therefore not be willing cede Gaza strip to Israel even if Israel shld agree relieve Egypt of refugee burden that area.

While USG wld be prepared support frontier rectification favor Egypt, in accordance Pres’ formula re territorial compensation, present Egyptian proposal is of course not politically feasible and wld defeat purpose providing for disposition Gaza refugees.

We propose take strong line with Egyptians, based on overriding consideration of getting constructive action re refugees. USG urgently requests firmest UK support these representations and hopes UK will make utmost effort disabuse Egypt of its unrealistic attitude towards frontier rectification of character described foregoing. Deptel to Cairo this question being repeated you separately.

Pls discuss foregoing urgently with FonOff, rpt reply to Cairo and Bern for USDel.3

Acheson

1 See telegram 573, June 11, to Cairo, p. 1115 [Pg. 1115 includes portions of Doc. 745, Doc. 746, and Doc. 747].

2 See footnote 2, p. 1116 [Pg. 1116 is part of Doc. 747].

3 This telegram was repeated to Cairo and to Bern for the American Delegation at Lausanne. In reply, on June 28, London advised of information from Michael Wright that the “UK would instruct British Ambassador to mention to Egyptian Government US representations and to say that on territorial aspects these representations UK did not wish to give Egypt advice one way or other. However, refugees constitute problem utmost gravity and UK believes that if Egypt desires to keep Gaza strip it would be in very difficult position before world opinion if it refused keep refugees Gaza area. … Foreign Office inclined to think that it would be better for Egypt to keep Gaza strip and its refugees and for Israel to take another 150,000 refugees from elsewhere.” (telegram 2501, 501.MA Palestine/6–2849)

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in Egypt 887N.01/6–1449: Telegram

[Document 794]

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in Egypt 1

secret
priority Washington, June 25, 1949—2 p. m.

626. Pls seek immediate interview FonMin to resume subject discussed urtel 578, June 142 and convey to him orally Dept’s views along fol lines:

USG notes with profound disappointment negative attitude Egypt re cooperation refugee problem. Up to present, and despite urgency of refugees’ plight, no concrete or constructive proposals for solution refugee problem have been forthcoming from any of Arab states. On its part, Egypt has consistently demanded repatriation of refugees while admitting that substantial proportion will not desire return Israel, and only proposal of Egypt re disposition latter category has been that states other than Egypt assume responsibility therefor. Consistently negative approach of Egypt typified by attitude UnSecy Hassouna Pasha (Cairo A–690, June 163 ), who informed AmEmb Cairo that PCC subcommittees, designed to give simultaneous study to refugees and other outstanding issues, were unacceptable to Egyptian Govt. Arab states shld give most serious attention to consequences during recent years of their steadfast refusal accept realities situation re Pal.

Fol considerations shld be of direct concern to Egyptian Govt: (1) UNRPR program funds will run out within few months; (2) UN most unlikely take further action to extend assistance to refugees without evidence tangible progress towards solution refugee problem prior opening autumn session GA; (3) in absence such action, entire financial and admin burden relief and rehabilitation all refugees and resident population in areas under Arab military occupation will devolve upon respective occupying authorities as soon as UNRPR terminates, as well as full onus formulating and executing plans for their permanent disposition.

USG regards problem of refugees as joint responsibility of Israel and Arab states, and, as member PCC, cannot agree that either side should shirk responsibility. This fact of more than academic interest to Egypt, which as occupying power in southwest Pal, bears full responsibility for 230,000 refugees and 80,000 residents that area. USG, motivated by sincere desire find means resolving this problem, requested info re Egypt’s plans for permanent disposition these people. No such info has been forthcoming.

Israeli proposal re Gaza strip constitutes Israeli commitment to assume full responsibility for refugees and residents that area, and as such shld be given most serious and constructive consideration by Egyptian Govt. Proposal shld serve as basis urgent discussion between states concerned, through direct or indirect negots. USG prepared lend all possible assistance facilitate such negots. Repeat reply to Bern for USDel Lausanne.

Acheson

1 This telegram was repeated to London and to Bern for the American Delegation at Lausanne.

2 Not printed, but see footnote 4, p. 1117 [Pg. 1117 includes portions of Doc. 747 and Doc. 748].

3 Not printed.

The Consul at Jerusalem (Burdett) to the Secretary of State 501.BB Palestine/6–2549: Telegram

[Document 795]

The Consul at Jerusalem (Burdett) to the Secretary of State

secret
priority Jerusalem, June 25, 1949–—4 p. m.

445. Last night together with Riley met Sharett at reception and he outlined Israel reply to Department proposal re Jerusalem. After thorough discussion with Riley following comments submitted on different points: 1. Israel not willing accept proposition threat to peace exists in Jerusalem. Both Riley and Consulate General feel definite threat to peace existed but danger diminished for moment by action of Department. Believe preferable play down this aspect now and Department might reply glad draw conclusion from Israel note that Israel has no intention disturbing peace in Jerusalem. If necessary cite evidence threat to peace could mention movement of troops by both sides into Government House zone, failure both sides reduce forces Jerusalem in accordance with armistice, flat statement by Dayan to Consulate General that if not able obtain Scopus by negotiation would take it by force (would prefer Department not quote Dayan).

2. Israel feels special committee should not be superseded. No objection perceived to special committee remaining in being to handle minor matters by direct negotiation such as harvest in triangle. Riley also plans establish subcommittee of MAC to deal with armistice questions leaving MAC free consider Jerusalem problem.

3. Sharett stated willing instruct Israel delegation at next special committee meeting propose or support if proposed by Jordan reference to MAC of questions in article 8 of armistice agreement. I inquired whether would also include elimination of Arab and Israel zones which was essential part Department proposal. He stated Israel not prepared discuss territorial changes Jerusalem until questions in article 8 successfully settled. Felt ample room for agreement existed in article 8. Argued broadening terms of reference would only enable Arabs dodge fulfilling armistice and carrying out agreement already reached in principle at Rhodes. Said armistice lines now settled and should not move on to questions of permanent lines until all armistice problems solved.

Consulate General believes discussion of territorial changes as well as other Jerusalem problems in addition to those mentioned specifically in article 8 indispensable part Department proposal. Change proposed by Sharett strikes at foundation of plan. Problems mentioned article 8 are of prime importance to Israel but of relatively little interest to Arabs. Acquiescense in Sharett views would have effect of US supporting Israel demands without Arabs receiving adequate return. Arabs could only conclude US indirectly exerting pressure for further concessions to Israel.

Consulate General has considered proposal as opening way to real and permanent settlement of many practical problems affecting Jerusalem including principally limits of two zones and freedom of access. Such agreement would not conflict with international status plans and would be based on premise of demilitarized and neutral city. Riley agrees with this conception. However, he feels also MAC might be able make progress on article 8 questions alone although this not desirable.

Strongly recommend Department insist on consideration of territorial changes. Department might reply along following lines: Since agreement apparently not possible on narrow range of problems in article 8 hoped by broadening questions for consideration possible reach accord. Because certain matters apparently not soluble under armistice conditions suggested move forward towards permanent peace. Plan will permit overall discussion of Jerusalem problem in interest of establishing lasting arrangements and permitting return of normal life to maximum extent possible for both Jews and Arabs. Department feels that working on premise Jerusalem area will be permanently demilitarized zone two parties by direct negotiation under UN chairmanship can make progress toward solution in permanent manner of many practical problems affecting Jerusalem. Such agreement could be incorporated in plan of PCC for international status of city. Both parties have stated armistice agreements including demarcation lines only temporary and changes eventually necessary affecting daily life of people will cause much less dislocation now than in future.

As previously reported Israel has approached armistice agreements with intent that they shall constitute in practice permanent arrangements especially as to boundaries. This explains attitude on Syrian armistice. Riley shares this view. Once Israel obtains satisfaction on questions in article 8 of Jordan armistice will have all it wants and be content allow armistice agreement remain in effect indefinitely. Would just sit back and refuse any territorial changes as is doing at Lausanne despite efforts of US. Final position taken by Israel on territorial question Jerusalem will certainly indicate attitude towards territorial shifts as whole. In view Day an statements to Consulate General that willing discuss territorial changes Jerusalem, still believe possible induce Israel negotiate on whole Jerusalem question including specifically delimitation of zones. If Israel acceptance limited to article 8, feel Department should consider reply rejection proposal.

Sent Department 445, repeated Geneva 42 for USDel PCC, Amman 42, Tel Aviv 66.

Burdett

The Ambassador in Israel (McDonald) to the Secretary of State 501.BB Palestine/6–2549: Telegram

[Document 796]

The Ambassador in Israel (McDonald) to the Secretary of State

secret Tel Aviv, June 25, 1949—8 p. m.

489. ReDeptel 375 June 17 and Embtel 478 June 22. Formal reply to aide-mémoire handed Ford June 24 by Herlitz of Israel Foreign Office. Note reiterates Israeli Government’s inability subscribe view of USG that present situation Jerusalem constitutes threat peace Palestine “unless State Department is in possession reliable information indicating intention on part Government Transjordan to resort to offensive military action that area.” However, Government Israel “welcomes method proposed by USG for settlement certain points at issue between it and Government Transjordan” and while preferring that any items discussed under new proposal be limited to those specified in Article 8 of armistice agreement and no others, “has instructed its representatives on special committee to propose, or to support proposal that items as specified should be referred to MAC to meet under chairmanship General Riley”. Note finally expresses hope that implementation new proposal will not mean final abolishment special committee which government Israel believes “should continue to exist and meet for discussion and settlement such problems as both parties may agree upon in accordance former practice”.

In delivering note Herlitz stressed his [her] government’s hope that (1) Riley “and no one else” would act as chairman all meetings MAC under new proposal, (2) That only those items named Article 8 be handled and any such item or items already acted upon by special Committee not again be revived, and (3) that special committee not be terminated.

Copies of note being airmailed.

Sent Department 489, repeated Jerusalem 54, Amman 15.

McDonald

Memorandum by the Acting Secretary of State to the President 501.BB Palestine/6–2749

[Document 797]

Memorandum by the Acting Secretary of State to the President

top secret Washington, June 27, 1949.

There are attached herewith in accordance with your request of June 16, copies of cables covering talks held between Mr. Mark Ethridge, United States Representative on the Palestine Conciliation Commission, and Israeli Prime Minister David Ben Gurion.1

1 The copies enclosed were telegrams from Jerusalem, as follows: Nos. 274, 275, and 277, April 9; 291, April 13; 308, April 19; and 312, April 20. All of these messages are printed in this compilation, except for No. 308; regarding No. 308, see footnote 1, p. 923 [Pg. 923 is part of Doc. 600].

The Secretary of State to Certain Diplomatic and Consular Offices 501.MA Palestine/6–2749: Circular telegram

[Document 798]

The Secretary of State to Certain Diplomatic and Consular Offices 1

secret Washington, June 27, 1949—9 a. m.

In discussing Arab refugee problem with Govt to which accredited, you shld take fol genl line:

You shld bring to Govt’s attention substance Depcirtel May 27, 1 a. m.2 (Unpal 114) which USDel PCC has discussed informally with Israeli and Arab delegations Lausanne. Conditions under which such assistance wld be forthcoming shld be carefully emphasized.

You shld then state that USG deeply disappointed re failure Israelis and Arabs to adopt constructive approach to refugees. You shld emphasize that onus of responsibility resolving refugee question lies squarely on both Israelis and Arabs, and that USG is under no mandate from UN to lend its material resources to solve problem of Israeli-Arab making. USG notes with disappointment that neither Israelis nor Arabs have shown any inclination meet conditions on which US offer assistance was based. In event conditions met at future date, USG wld be prepared at that time consider question of assistance to Israel and Arab states. However, you shld emphasize implications such delay, since US support of refugee settlement program conditional upon UN action and sponsorship. Such program wld necessitate time-consuming and laborious preparation by PCC prior to presentation to GA this autumn. Under present circumstances, PCC not in position initiate preparation such program in absence necessary political cooperation. Therefore any additional delay will mean increasing difficulty if not impossibility obtaining UN action this year.

You shld stress problem of impending termination UNRPR program, and inquire what plans Arab states contemplate for continuation relief to refugees under their custodianship.

You may inform Govt that Israeli auths have received similar representations.3

Acheson

1 At Amman, Baghdad, Cairo, Jidda, Damascus, and Beirut.

2 Not printed; it repeated to Arab capitals the text of telegram 674, identified also as Unpal 114, May 23, to Bern, p. 1047 [Pg. 1047 includes portions of Doc. 685 and Doc. 686].

3 Chargé Stabler discussed the content of this circular telegram with King Abdullah on the morning of June 29. He pointed out that while Jordan had willingly accepted the principle of resettlement “in private conversations with US and other representatives, its attitude appeared quite different when acting in conjunction with other Arab States. Emphasized US Government is continuing exert pressure on Israel to give early indication how many refugees it will repatriate but suggested that immediate action by Arab States regarding resettlement those refugees unwilling or unable return would in no way diminish pressure on Israel or chances for repatriation. Also indicated that if some positive action not taken soon Arab States would find themselves with no outside relief assistance whatsoever and expressed belief Arab States totally unable handle problem on their own. “King said he agreed with this analysis and suggested that steps be taken now by US and other interested countries in making survey of resettlement possibilities in Jordan and Arab Palestine with view to drawing up plans for such resettlement. He indicated he entirely prepared move forward on this basis at once if financial assistance for carrying out projects assured and felt that ‘if you begin with me and others see what is being done, they will soon follow’.” (telegram 267, June 29, 7 p. m., from Amman, 501.BB Palestine/6–2949)

Mr. Raymond A. Hare to the Secretary of State 501.BB Palestine/6–3749: Telegram

[Document 799]

Mr. Raymond A. Hare to the Secretary of State

confidential Lausanne, June 27, 1949—3 p. m.

Palun 234. [Here follows the first paragraph dealing with answers to questions from Syria given by the Palestine Conciliation Commission at its meeting with Arab delegates on June 25.]

2. Essence Arab argument regarding territorial views ran as follows: Arab delegates would be willing further to discuss territorial matters if Israeli delegation returned to protocol of May 12 by basing its proposals upon it and if PCC undertook to pass judgment on Israeli and presumably Arab proposals in connection therewith.

Arabs argued Jews have done nothing to implement protocol. Paragraph 11 GA resolution December 11 reference refugees could not be subject of negotiation as it was GA imperative. Jewish territorial proposals under May 12 protocol were not “adjustments” but annexations. Arabs consider such proposals as inclusion western Galilee or Gaza as violation of protocol. Arabs also consider that Jewish agreement take Gaza refugees if Gaza strip is ceded to Israel as contrary GA resolution December 11. Arabs will not make such rash proposals but have complied with protocol as shown by their memos of May 18 and May 21. Arabs have already approached territorial question in their May 21 memo. PCC has duty deciding whether Arab proposal is within terms of protocol.

Arabs added regarding resettlement they were prepared to examine as soon as they knew how many refugees did not wish to return on basis completely free choice. Lebanese delegate specifically stated such refugees would find Arab countries ready to take them. Foregoing represents highlights of three-hour meeting. Summary record being pouched.

Hare

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in Israel 501.BB Palestine/6–2749: Telegram

[Document 800]

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in Israel

secret
priority Washington, June 27, 1949—7 p. m.

405. Dept concurs views expressed ConGen Jlem in Sharett interview reported Jlem Tel 445, Jun 25, rptd Tel Aviv as 66.

If official reply not yet received, or if unsatisfactory on points indicated reftel, pls reiterate views to appropriate officials. Our reference to Jlem constituting threat to peace was not an accusation but rather a statement of concern entertained by USG. Same statement concern made in presenting proposal TJ Govt. Concern seemed legitimate especially in view troop movements neutral zone. As result various consultations USG glad to have assurances such concern not warranted.

Restriction terms reference MAC to questions in Art 8 would frustrate one of main objectives in making US proposal. On basis our info previous negots re this art we feel they must be given broader base if agreement to be reached.’ Emphasize that Art 8 calls for negotiated agreement and this can only be done in negots between parties.

Re demarcation Arab-Jewish zones, this subject has special position in relation armistice on one hand and final peace on other. PCC given task formulating detailed proposals for Jlem at fall session GA. Most appropriate such proposals should include permanent demarcation lines and other arrangements now under discussion in Jlem. Opportunity to achieve final settlement Jlem is perhaps best prospect for progress this year and shld be seized by parties concerned. Furthermore agreement questions residence Arab-Jewish inhabitants respective zones will become more difficult the longer negots are delayed.

Pls use arguments above and those in reftel in manner to indicate strong view USG that proposal entirely fair and equitable and urgently desirable shld be accepted as means settling Jlem case and definite progress toward permanent peace in Palestine.1

Acheson

1 This telegram was repeated to Jerusalem and Amman and to Bern for the American Delegation at Lausanne. Ambassador McDonald read excerpts of telegram 405 to Mr. Shiloah on July 1, “stressing USG insistence on broader base formal Jerusalem settlement.” These views were reiterated to Miss Herlitz by Mr. Ford on July 5 (telegram 524, July 9, 2 p. m., from Tel Aviv, 501.BB Palestine/7–949).

The Chargé in Egypt (Patterson) to the Secretary of State 867N.48/6–2749: Telegram

[Document 801]

The Chargé in Egypt (Patterson) to the Secretary of State

secret Cairo, June 27, 1949—8 p. m.

628. Following receipt Deptel 626, June 25, 2 p. m. requested interview with Foreign Minister just returned from Alexandria. Khashaba Pasha received me noon 27th. I read over to him statements attributed to him mytel 578 June 141 all of which he confirmed. Thereafter I orally rendered to him in French US Government’s views on lack of constructive attitude by Egypt and other Arab states in cooperating towards solution refugee problem. On my mention of Egypt’s “negative attitude” Khashaba Pasha interrupted and inquired with asperity if Egypt’s steady insistence on positive implementation of numerous UN resolutions could be called negative. Egypt had, in accordance with UN resolutions, insisted on right of refugees desiring to return to their homes to do so. Those who did not desire to return to their homes in Palestine (and by homes he meant their houses and lands) should be compensated by Israel. Such persons should be admitted to the Arab states and the Arab states, Egypt included, would confer together as to distribution such refugees who had opted for resettlement. As for Egyptian refusal to accept proposed PCC’s subcommittees Foreign Minister stated that these subcommittees were Israeli devices designed to confuse humanitarian with territorial problems and perhaps indefinitely to delay former category which would not admit of delay. The human, that is, refugee problem, must be settled first since questions relating to demarkation of frontiers might drag on for years.

Foreign Minister, who frequently interrupted me in a rather agitated fashion (due perhaps to unaccustomed fast this first day of Ramadan), listened to my exposition regarding financial difficulties which would in all probability, arise in absence of immediate constructive thinking on the Arab part during current recess of PCC.

However, on my mention that in opinion US Government the refugee problem was a joint responsibility of Arab states and Israel, minister ister became annoyed and inquired if the Arabs did not have a right to defend themselves against aggression.

Israeli proposal of assuming responsibility for Gaza strip refugees and inhabitants in return for Gaza-Rafa coastal area amounted to their insistence on being paid for fulfilling a prior obligation imposed upon them by UN. Moreover, the Israelis had made no promise to permit the return of the refugees to their hearthstones, orchards and fields. For such refugees to be turned off in all probability into the desert of the Negev adjoining the Gaza strip to re-create such life as they could in that barren soil was not repatriation in the sense understood by Egypt. However, in conclusion Minister stated Egypt would not refuse to give serious consideration to any plan designed as humanitarian measure and susceptible of bringing stability to an area or situation. He desired, though, in order to enable his government to give thorough study to views presented by US Government, to receive written communication embodying such views.

Does Department authorize my summarizing its views in form of memorandum or other informal communication which I might send Minister under cover of personal letter?

Khashaba Pasha informed me of his prospective return this afternoon to Alexandria where Prime Minister has already preceded him. He will return Cairo Monday, July 4, to attend dinner which he will offer in honor Secretary Treasury Snyder.

It would be desirable to have for communication to him at that time any further views Department may desire to express.

It would seem that at least initial reaction of Foreign Minister to Department’s suggestion of utilization of Israeli proposal as basis for discussion is far from favorable.

Sent Department; repeated Bern, USDel Lausanne.

Patterson

1 Not printed, but see footnote 4, p. 1117 [Pg. 1117 includes portions of Doc. 747 and Doc. 748].

The Ambassador in Israel (McDonald) to the Secretary of State 501.BB Palestine/6–2849: Telegram

[Document 802]

The Ambassador in Israel (McDonald) to the Secretary of State

top secret Tel Aviv, June 28, 1949—noon.

495. ReDeptel June 25 [24] number 398. Following repeated readings of text I asked Herlitz of Foreign Office to residence. Ford also present. For more than hour June 27, we informally discussed main points text.

Then Herlitz read and paraphrased portions of Israeli Chargé’s report on conference with Rusk June 25.1 Chargé stressed friendliness of Department’s reply and Rusk’s verbal recommendation of bilateral negotiations between Israel and Egypt, possibly on basis Gaza plan and later with other Arab states individually. Chargé said Rusk suggested “probable necessity territorial compensation” to Egypt. Herlitz interpreted Rusk’s words as meaning “southern tip Negev”. (To this I made no comment.) Egypt considered by Rusk as key to deadlock. Chargé added Rusk also suggested “territorial compensation to other Arab states” (or as singular state) in subsequent negotiations.

My questions to Department are: “Is above summary Rusk accurate and does his suggestion cancel earlier Department’s discouragement of bilateral negotiations between single Arab state and Israel?” (Deptel 330, June 1).2

Belated subject: Taking advantage of friendliness of Department’s reply to Israel, Deptel 398, June 25 [24], I brought conversation to refugees and said to Herlitz substantially: “No amount friendship for Israel can hide fact that it has, re refugee repatriation, been poor in promise and poorer in performance. Recognizing all difficulties, there are no justifications Israel’s relative inaction. Impossible exaggerate human tragedy if Israel persists failure cooperate. If Israel in good faith proposed absorb the more than 200,000 refugees Gaza strip, it must have envisioned ways to do this. Hence, no logic in Israel’s argument it unable repatriate more than few tens of thousands (as also stressed to Foreign Office by Kopper3 on his recent visit). Unacceptable everywhere except in Jewish circles, will be argument that ingathering of exiles makes repatriation Arabs impossible. Israel self-interest requires refugee cooperation asked by Department.” (Close paraphrase my refugee remarks.)

I shall press these views with Weizmann at lunch today4 and later with Ben Gurion and Sharett.

Meantime, please wire details US and UN emergency refugee relief financial proposals reported Leopoldville radio night June 27.

New subject: Will continue to press on Israeli officials points Deptel 397, June 24.

Sent Department 495; repeated Bern 7 (for USDel PCC).

McDonald

1 See Mr. Rusk’s memorandum, p. 1177 [Pg. 1177 includes portions of Doc. 790 and Doc. 791].

2 Not printed, but see footnote 1 to telegram 72, June 1, p. 1082 [Pg. 1082 includes portions of Doc. 716 and Doc. 717].

3 Samuel K. C. Kopper, Special Assistant to the Director of the Office of Near Eastern and African Affairs.

4 Ambassador McDonald lunched with President Weizmann at Rehovoth on June 28 and urged the views of the United States on the refugee question. President Weizmann was said to have replied in substance that “your people don’t understand these refugees are our enemies and potential fifth column. Don’t your people read repeated threats from Arab capitals renewal war?” When asked how he reconciled his position with the Israeli offer to take the Gaza strip, he replied “That would be more than we ought to do but it certainly is utmost that is possible.” (telegram 498, June 29, 1 p. m., from Tel Aviv, 501.BB Palestine/6–2949)

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in Egypt 867N.01/0–2849: Telegram

[Document 803]

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in Egypt 1

secret Washington, June 28, 1949—7 p. m.

635. You are authorized present substance Deptel 626, June 25, to FonMin as aide-mémoire, adding fol additional considerations:

USG firmly convinced Gaza strip proposal forms basis important contribution to final settlement Palestine problem as well as constructive approach to solution grave humanitarian problem of refugees, and notes with appreciation FonMin’s assurances (urtel 628, June 27) that Egypt prepared give serious consideration to any plan designed as humanitarian measure and susceptible of bringing stability to area.

USG is not unmindful of considerations prompting FonMin’s concern re disposition and future well being of refugees in Gaza strip (urtel para 4) if Israel shld assume responsibility such refugees. If Egypt so desires, USG is prepared seek fullest info from Israeli Govt re specific plans underlying Israeli proposal, including future status refugees as Israeli cits. USG is also prepared advocate establishment appropriate international supervision to insure necessary guarantees welfare refugees are observed.

USG recalls with deep appreciation that Egypt, by its constructive action as first state to conclude armistice agreement, gave necessary impetus to conclusion of hostilities in NE. We are deeply hopeful that Egypt, recognizing earnest desire Near Eastern peoples and international community for restoration peace and stability Near East, is now prepared give similar stimulus to final settlement outstanding issues by entering into early discussions with Israel re Gaza proposal. USG reiterates that, if so requested, it stands ready to facilitate such discussions by all means at its disposal.

Rpt reply to London and to Bern for USDel Lausanne.

Acheson

1 This telegram was repeated to London as No. 2223 and to Bern for the American Delegation at Lausanne.

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in London 501.MA Palestine/6–2549: Telegram

[Document 804]

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in London

secret Washington, June 30, 1949—7 p. m.

2259. Pls seek early opportunity call upon Bevin and review questions outlined Deptel 2198, June 25 and 2223, June 28.1 You shld then make representations along fol lines:

USG disturbed by UK attitude concerning Gaza strip and refugees therein as set forth urtel 2501,2 June 28 and puzzled re basis FonOff belief that Egypt might be prepared assume responsibility for refugees in Gaza strip, view population pressure in Egypt and steadfast refusal Egyptian authorities, in response approaches by US reps both Washington and Cairo, to consider acceptance even token number. In this connection, UK will recall that Egyptian auths recently took steps remove into Gaza strip some 10,000 refugees who were being maintained in Egyptian territory.

Egypt thus appears excluded as settlement area. Moreover, UK will recall that US–UK refugee working papers give no indication Gaza strip has economic potential for settlement any significant portion of refugees now in area. In addition resident population of 80,000, who are for most part on relief at present time, Dept estimates number refugees in Gaza strip at minimum of 230,000, not 150,000 as UK appears to believe (last para urtel).

In view of foregoing, USG finds it difficult believe Egypt has any plans involving either total or partial Egyptian responsibility for disposition Gaza refugees or that Egypt capable formulating such plans in foreseeable future.

USG recognizes that strategic considerations involved in UK thinking this question. In opinion USG, however, any strategic advantages which might be obtained from permanent retention Gaza strip plus present occupants by Egypt wld appear to be outweighed by administrative burden and enormous financial requirements involved in maintenance refugees on permanent basis, particularly since nature of area precludes execution of self-sustaining settlement projects.

US is prepared support politically feasible modification Egyptian frontier in return for cession Gaza strip with all present occupants to Israel. In interests Egyptian-Israeli security, and equally in interests US–UK security, however, USG is convinced that speedy solution of refugee problem, establishment final Palestine settlement, and encouragement of modus vivendi between Israel and Arab states constitute firmer basis for strategic security of all states concerned than cld be achieved through exploitation minor military advantages of Gaza strip.

US has made and continues to make strongest representations to Israel urging quantitative acceptance substantial number refugees without territorial acquisition. No result has so far been obtained, and only hopeful development presaging repatriation of large numbers of refugees has been Israeli offer concerning Gaza strip. View facts that agreement between Israel and Egypt on Gaza strip and refugees would probably pave way for Israeli-Egyptian final settlement and thereby constitute decisive step towards overall Palestine settlement; that funds for UNRPR program are rapidly being exhausted; and that possibility getting UN action on constructive refugee program this autumn along lines contemplated by US–UK becoming increasingly remote, USG firmly convinced that Gaza proposal shld become basis for discussion between Egypt and Israel. USG hopes UK will agree that solution of grave and potentially explosive question of refugees is of overriding importance to US–UK strategic interests in NE area, and therefore reiterates its urgent request for firm UK support of US representations to Egypt.

Acheson

1 This was a repeat of 635 to Cairo, supra.

2 Not printed, but see footnote 3, p. 1180 [Pg. 1180 is part of Doc. 793].

The Consul at Jerusalem (Burdett) to the Secretary of State 501.BB Palestine/7–149: Telegram

[Document 805]

The Consul at Jerusalem (Burdett) to the Secretary of State

secret Jerusalem, July 1, 1949—2 p. m.

451. US proposals for negotiations in MAC on Jerusalem problems discussed yesterday with Dayan. From his comments believe Sharett rejected plan for following reasons: 1. Would constitute admittance by Israel that agreement not possible on questions in article 8 of armistice; that Jordan no longer bound to carry out article 8 if agreement not also reached on broader questions mentioned in US proposal. Would thus nullify section of armistice which Israel feels grants it important right.

2. Known position of US on territorial settlement. Discussion of delimitation of zones would only mean Israel giving territory and receiving very little in return.

3. Might indirectly involve acquiescence in international regime for Jerusalem to which Israel firmly opposed.

Dayan suggested Sharett might consider direct talks on permanent Jerusalem agreement between Israel and Jordan under chairmanship of third party outside of terms of reference and machinery of armistice. He added such talks might consider whole question of peace treaty with Jordan since very difficult reach settlement on Jerusalem when boundary line and other points regarding remainder of Palestine not determined. In these talks permanent arrangements regarding Latrun, Scopus, and other questions mentioned in article 8 could be reached but without affecting agreement already reached in principle for duration of armistice.

Above approach might accomplish most objectives US proposals but might well conflict with work of PCC, develop into direct peace talks between Israel and Jordan and even if acceptable to Jordan encounter opposition from other Arab states.

Sent Dept 451, repeated Geneva 44, Amman 43, Tel Aviv 69.

Burdett

The Chargé in the Soviet Union (Kohler) to the Secretary of State 867N.01/7–149: Telegram

[Document 806]

The Chargé in the Soviet Union (Kohler) to the Secretary of State

secret Moscow, July 1, 1949—3 p. m.

1661. 1. It seems to us in retrospect that Soviet support for internationalization Jerusalem under TC nothing more than formalistic gesture which had to be made in order not jeopardize adoption and implementation overall partition plan embodied GA resolution November 29, 1947 (Jerusalem’s numbers 437 and 440 to Department).1

2. Soviet supported this resolution because it believed creation weak independent state or states in Palestine would further its basic objective of eradicating Anglo-American influence in area and substitution therefor of Soviet Communist influence. Internationalization Jerusalem under TC not entirely compatible with this objective but certainly better from Soviet viewpoint than British control.

3. While western orientation present Israeli Government not pleasing to Soviet Government, such reports as Beirut’s 282 June 102 point toward concentration Communist Middle East effort in Israel and hence to conclusion that Soviets nevertheless consider Israel as “soft” for penetration purposes.

4. As probability establishment separate Arab state in Palestine begins recede, alternative dispositions Palestine area outside present Israel-held territory would appear to be either incorporation within Israel or within Jordan.

5. Incorporation within Israel would obviously better suit Soviet objectives: in view relative strength parties concerned it also appears more likely outcome.

6. Under these circumstances we may anticipate Soviet shift away from previous emphasis on carrying out November 29 GA resolution, including plan for internationalization Jerusalem. New line may be clothed in phraseology reminiscent of original Soviet preference for unified bi-national state in Palestine and thus have certain appeal to Palestine Arabs. (Communist propaganda line with Arab refugees reported Beirut’s 282 points this direction.)

7. Fact that Soviet press has been completely silent on Palestine issue for some time may also indicate stage being set for new Soviet approach Palestine.

Sent Department 1661, repeated London 160, Jerusalem 1, Tel Aviv 7, Arab capitals unnumbered.

Kohler

1 Both dated June 23; neither printed; the former cited an editorial in a Communist newspaper in Jerusalem, which denounced the internationalization of Jerusalem as a device “to enable US gain control over Israel” and asserted that even international control over the Holy Places “would result in complete control by American rulers over all Jerusalem.” Mr. Burdett concluded that “Strong opposition by Communist paper to any form internationalization Jerusalem may indicate change in USSR attitude this question.” (867N.01/6–2349)

2 Not printed.

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in Egypt 867N.01/7–149: Telegram

[Document 807]

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in Egypt

secret Washington, July 1, 1949—8 p. m.

659. Deptel 626 June 25 and Deptel 635 June 28. On June 24 Dept informally advised Israeli Emb USG anxious for Israelis and Egyptians to get together and discuss Gaza strip proposal. Dept also stated USG willing to facilitate such exchange of views either in New York or elsewhere.

Israeli Chargé July 1 informed Dept he had received message from Sharett stating Israeli Govt desirous begin proposed discussions with Egypt and anxious for assistance USG in bringing about conversation. Israeli Govt would prefer discussions take place Lake Success but willing consider any other arrangement agreeable to Egypt.

Dept realizes Emb has not yet received reply to Aide-Mémoire submitted per Deptel 635 June 18 [28]. If favorable reply received Dept desires Emb immediately approach FonOff and state discussions with Israelis have resulted in suggestion that informal discussions be held Lake Success between reps Egypt and Israel. You shld inquire whether Egypt Govt agreeable foregoing and repeat US offer to facilitate such discussions by all means at its disposal.

Dept instructing Emb London1 request Brit FonOff instruct Brit Emb Cairo concert with US Emb and strongly support US representations re Israeli-Egyptian discussions Lake Success if Egyptian Govt reply US Aide-Mémoire favorable.2

Acheson

1 In telegram 2300, July 1, 8 p. m., not printed.

2 This telegram was repeated to New York. Chargé Patterson’s Aide-Mémoire, dated June 30, was presented to the Egyptian Foreign Minister on July 2 (telegrams 642, July 5, and 713, July 26, both from Cairo, 867N.01/7–549, 501.MA Palestine/7–2649). The Chargé conversed on the matter early in July with Under Secretary Hassouna. The latter was said to have “reacted vigorously my allegation that Israeli proposal concerning Gaza has been sole constructive measure advocated in respect of long-term aspect of refugee problem, stating that Arabs had expressed constructive views Lausanne as he intimated Ethridge and Hare both knew. He added that it was really for PCC to advance solutions to refugee problem. Hassouna was also hotly antagonistic to Israeli desire take possession additional territory as represented by Gaza-Rafa strip and expressed surprise that USG could regard such measure as constructive proposal. He evidently regarded it as an indication of Israeli predatory intent and, indeed, stated that as long as Israelis felt they could obtain American support, they would never accept any proposition from any quarter.” (telegram 649, July 7, from Cairo, 867N.01/7–749)

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in Israel 501.BB Palestine/7–149: Telegram

[Document 808]

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in Israel

top secret Washington, July 1, 1949—8 p. m.

420. Ur 495 June 28. Rusk in talk with Israeli Chargé discussed territorial compensation to interested Arab states in accordance President’s formula which well known to you.

Suggestion re Israeli-Egyptian talks applied specifically to Gaza strip proposal. Rusk foresaw such talks might lead to broader discussions with Egypt and possibly conversations with other Arab states.

Dept would not discourage bilateral negotiations freely entered into by Israel and Arab states according terms GA res Dec 11 and unaccompanied by attempts coercion. Dept’s suggestion Abdullah subject Deptel 330 June 11 made view circumstances surrounding previous bilateral Israeli-Jordan talks resulting Israeli occupation additional area triangle, necessity give maximum support PCC at crucial moment, and possibility Israel and Jordan might reach agreement re Jerusalem which would exclude international and Christian interest that city.

Dept hopes you will not allow Israeli officials evaluation of tenor of US reply to give them impression that US Govt does not attach most grave importance to points made in US notes. What was Herlitz reply to your remarks re refugees?

Dept has no info re “US and UN emergency refugee relief financial proposals”. Broadcast may have been based upon SYG Lie’s urgent appeal to UN members for more contributions UNRPR.2

Acheson

1 Not printed, but see footnote 1 to telegram 72, June 1, p. 1082 [Pg. 1082 includes portions of Doc. 716 and Doc. 717].

2 Ambassador McDonald replied on July 5 that he was grateful for the clarification of the Department’s position regarding bilateral negotiations. He advised further that “Government here has repeatedly insisted it has never used threats in Israel-Transjordan negotiations. Israel officials do not misinterpret Deptel 379, June 18 as weakening of USG position President’s note May 28. I stress every opportunity that USG attaches ‘most grave importance to points made in US note’ and leave no room for doubt. Re Dept’s question Deptel 420 Herlitz’s reply my refugee remarks (Embtel 495, June 28), she remained silent” (telegram 513 from Tel Aviv, 501.BB Palestine/7–549) Telegram 379 is not printed, but see footnote 2, p. 1156 [Pg. 1156 includes portions of Doc. 776 and Doc. 777].

The Ambassador in Israel (McDonald) to the Secretary of State 867N.01/7–349: Telegram

[Document 809]

The Ambassador in Israel (McDonald) to the Secretary of State

top secret Tel Aviv, July 3, 1949—3 p. m.

511. Shiloah of Foreign Office, who returned Tel Aviv June 30, was at residence my request two hours July 1. Ford also present. Re Washington impressions Shiloah said:

Was gravely troubled and perplexed by “widespread and deep suspicion in USG of Israel’s purposes”. US and Israel have same basic purposes in Middle East—(1) stability, (2) peace, (3) prosperous and secure Israel and Arab states. Third objective impossible without achievement of first and second. USG and Israel differ only about means, yet their relations poisoned by USG’s suspicion of Israel. Arab states are openly rearming, pledging renewal of war and refusing discuss terms of peace, but Israel alone is charged by USG as potential aggressor. Cause of this discrimination must be found and eradicated. Obviously prevailing suspicion not primarily matter of USG personalities. What can Israel do to end USG suspicions? (Close Shiloah’s main statement)

In reply I admitted frankly fact and gave list reasons USG fears of Israel’s purposes. I stressed that Israel’s failure yield on issues refugees or frontiers and its evident superior military strength were basic causes. Ford pleaded eloquently that Israel make large and definite refugee offer.

Replying Shiloah said pressure on Israel for refugee offer was “easy way” for us and if granted would solve nothing, but only prepare way for another similar demand on Israel later. He then repeated his personal suggestion made “towards end” of conference in office Assistant Secretary June 18 that a small committee immediately draft general but comprehensive plan refugee settlement.1

Re Department Gaza suggestion (Deptel 399 June 24 [25]) Shiloah expressed warm appreciation and said Israel will press bilateral negotiations. He fears failure however “unless Cairo ceases feel that USG on theory territorial compensation, supports transfer southern tip Negev to Egypt”.

Comment: Shiloah’s anxiety reflects grave concern of government here and its resentment at “injustice of USG’s suspicions”. Department’s willingness sponsor Israel-Egyptian negotiations is, I think, most helpful move in long time. Its success would loosen key log in both refugee and territorial jam. End comment.

McDonald

1 Mr. Shiloah at this point was referring, presumably, to the meeting with Acting Secretary Webb on June 17. Mr. Webb’s memorandum of that conversation did not include Mr. Shiloah’s suggestion as set forth in this paragraph.

Memorandum by the Acting Director of the Office of United Nations Affairs (Sandifer) to Mr. James W. Barco 501.BB Palestine/7–549

[Document 810]

Memorandum by the Acting Director of the Office of United Nations Affairs (Sandifer) to Mr. James W. Barco 1

restricted [Washington,] July 5, 1949.

The working paper of May 18, 1949 entitled “Preliminary Draft, International Regime for the Jerusalem Area” has been examined by officers of UNA, L, and NEA, who have collaborated in the following comments and suggestions which are transmitted for your assistance. Please give us your reaction to these suggestions and keep us informed as to the views of your French and Turkish colleagues on such of the points as you may take up with them.

It is suggested that the working paper might be given a title such as “Instrument Establishing an International Regime for the Jerusalem Area”. This would make it possible to refer to the document as an “Instrument” rather than a “Plan” as is now done.

Article 3. Powers of government in the two zones shall be exercised by the competent local authorities in their respective zones except as otherwise provided in the present Instrument.

Comment: It is believed preferable to eliminate the phrase “exclusive competence” found in the working paper in favor of the expression “except as otherwise provided”, which is a more accurate description of the division of powers set forth in the Instrument.

Article 4. It is suggested that the proposed United Nations representative be given the title of “Commissioner” instead of “Administrator”.

After the first paragraph of Article 4, the following might be inserted: “The Commissioner shall report annually to the General Assembly. He shall also make special reports to the appropriate United Nations organ whenever he deems it necessary.”

Article 5. Delete the last sentence and substitute the following phrase as the last clause of the preceding sentence: “and three by the responsible authorities of the two zones acting jointly or, in event of their failure to agree, by the Commissioner.”

Comment: This suggestion is in line with the suggestion in Jerusalem telegram 412, June 13, the reasons for which are regarded as completely valid.

Articled 6. On behalf of the United Nations, the Commissioner shall ensure the protection of and free access to the Holy Places, in accordance with the terms of Articles 12 to 14 of the present Instrument.

Article 6 bis. Similarly on behalf of the United Nations, the Commissioner shall supervise: (a) the permanent demilitarization and neutralization of the area, in accordance with the terms of Article 15 of the present Instrument; and

(b) the protection of human rights and of the rights of distinctive groups, in accordance with the terms of Article 17 of the present Instrument.

Comment: We consider that the word “supervise” is a more accurate expression of the function of the Commissioner under paragraphs 2 and 3 of Article 6 of the working paper.

Article 7. The Commissioner, assisted by the Administrative Council, shall promote, facilitate, and participate in: (a) coordination of measures for the maintenance of public order;

(b) operation of the main services of common interest to the Jerusalem area;

(c) equitable allocation of the contributions of each zone toward expenditures in the common interest; and

(d) planning and execution, on an area-wide basis, of such matters of municipal concern as regional planning, the development of transport and communications, and the construction and operation of public utilities.

Comment: It is believed that the expression “promote, facilitate, and participate in” more accurately describes the role of the Commissioner than the term “ensure”—an obligation which might also be beyond his power to carry out.

Article 8. Delete.

Comment: The part of Article 8 which is desirable to retain is here moved to Article 7, resulting in the deletion of Article 8.

Article 9. There shall be established an International Tribunal for Jerusalem composed of three judges to be appointed by the President of the International Court of Justice. Each judge shall hold office for a term of _______________ years from the date of his appointment and until a successor shall have been appointed, unless his post on the Tribunal shall earlier have become vacant. The President of the International Court of Justice shall determine when a vacancy has been created through resignation, disability, or death. A judge may be removed for cause by the General Assembly of the United Nations, thereby creating a vacancy. A judge may be appointed for successive terms. In the initial appointments, one judge shall be appointed for ___________ years, the second for ________ years, and the third for __________ years. The judges of the International Tribunal shall not be residents of Jerusalem or nationals of the State of Israel or an Arab State. The Tribunal shall sit in Jerusalem. It shall prescribe its own rules of procedure. The Tribunal shall designate one of its number to serve as president for such period as the Tribunal may determine. The judges shall receive uniform salary, and allowances, in amounts to be determined by the General Assembly.

The International Tribunal for Jerusalem shall have jurisdiction to hear and determine cases between the responsible authorities of the Jewish and Arab zones and between the United Nations Commissioner and the responsible authorities of either zone involving claims that laws, ordinances, regulations, administrative acts or court decisions applying to the area of Jerusalem are incompatible with the present Instrument.

Alternative text for preceding paragraph:

[The International Tribunal for Jerusalem shall have jurisdiction to hear and determine cases between the responsible authorities of the Jewish and Arab zones and between the United Nations Commissioner and the responsible authorities of either zone concerning the interpretation or application of the present Instrument.]2

The Tribunal shall also have jurisdiction to review, in its discretion, final decisions of the Mixed Tribunal for Jerusalem provided for in Article 10 of the present Instrument.

Decisions of the Tribunal shall be binding on the parties.

The International Tribunal may issue such orders within its competence as it deems necessary to the effective exercise of its jurisdiction.

Comment: As indicated in Unpal 88, May 2, we favor making the decisions of the Tribunal legally binding in all cases. On this basis the distinctions made in paragraph 3 of Article 9 of the working paper become unnecessary. Also it seems that paragraph 2 of this Article would include paragraph 1, which may therefore be eliminated.

An alternate text is submitted above for paragraph 2 embodying the usual language used in treaties for conferring compulsory jurisdiction over the subject matter. Such language would be desirable on general principles, but there is doubt whether in this case it might give an appearance of rigidity which would be objectionable to the parties.

The paragraph concerning the review of decisions of mixed courts is suggested because it is felt that such cases, even though the parties are individuals or corporations, might involve the interpretation of the basic Instrument for Jerusalem.

Article 10. The following introductory paragraph for this article is suggested: “There shall be established a Mixed Tribunal for Jerusalem composed of three judges. Each Judge shall hold office for a term of ________ years from the date of his appointment and until a successor shall have been appointed, unless his post on the Tribunal shall earlier have become vacant through resignation, disability, or death. A judge may be appointed for successive terms. One judge shall be appointed by the responsible authorities of the Jewish and Arab zones respectively. The third judge, who shall serve as president of the Tribunal, shall be appointed by the President of the International Tribunal for Jerusalem; this third judge shall not be a resident of Jerusalem or a national of the State of Israel or an Arab State. The Mixed Tribunal shall sit in Jerusalem. It shall prescribe its own rules of procedure. The judges shall receive uniform salary, and allowances, in amounts to be determined by the General Assembly.”

This would be followed by the present second paragraph of the working paper, with the insertion of the word “all” before “the parties” in the second line.

The following additional paragraph for Article 10 is also suggested: “The Mixed Tribunal may issue such orders in Jerusalem as it deems necessary for the effective exercise of its jurisdiction. The decisions and orders of the Mixed Tribunal shall be executed by the appropriate authorities of the zone in which such decision or order applies.”

Article 11 bis. The salaries, allowances, and administrative expenses of the United Nations Commissioner, the Deputy Commissioner, the International Tribunal for Jerusalem, the Mixed Tribunal for Jerusalem, and the staff of the Administrator, including guards and administrative personnel, shall be included in the annual budget adopted by the General Assembly and shall be paid by the United Nations.

Comment: This text would replace the last paragraph of present Article 11.

Article 12. As to the first paragraph, it might be desirable to specify that guards may also be stationed on the routes specified by the Administrator to give immediate access to the Holy Places.

With regard to paragraphs on taxation, we would consider that the corresponding clause, (Article 36, paragraph 6) of the Trusteeship Council draft Statute, would be preferable. This clause was based almost textually on the General Assembly Resolution of November 29, 1917 and had wide acceptance among United Nations members, including France.

Article 13. The Commissioner shall undertake to secure for ministers of religion and pilgrims free circulation throughout Jerusalem. He shall have power to negotiate and conclude with the States concerned arrangements to facilitate the travel of ministers of religion and pilgrims to and from Jerusalem.

Article 15. It is suggested that the second paragraph begin as follows: “The reponsible authorities of the two zones shall make declarations to the General Assembly guaranteeing the demilitarized character of their respective zones …”3

The third paragraph might read: “Any violation of the provisions contained in these assurances or any attempt to alter the international regime by force shall, unless settled by negotiations or pursuant to a decision of the Tribunal, be reported by the Commissioner to the Secretary General, who shall bring the matter to the attention of the Security Council.”

In the fourth paragraph we suggest that “two parties” be replaced by “responsible authorities” and that the following be added to the end of the paragraph: “unless temporarily authorized by the United Nations Commissioner.”

Article 16. We suggest the deletion of the phrase “be called upon to.”

Article 17. Our comments on this article have already been telegraphed to you.

Article 18. We suggest that this should be deleted.

Article 19. A possible alternative to this article would be a provision that Jerusalem shall not be the capital of either of the adjacent states.

We also have in mind the possibility of using the International Tribunal in certain matters outside the Jerusalem area. In particular we have in mind the possibility that the parties might be called upon to give undertakings that they will not impose undue restrictions on the entry and free movement of persons desiring to visit the Holy Places in Palestine. It appears possible to give the International Tribunal jurisdiction to determine whether visa regulations and other measures are unduly restrictive of such free access.

1 Mr. Barco was formally attached to the Division of United Nations Political Affairs; at this time, he was on detail to the American Delegation at Lausanne. The memorandum of July 5 was sent to him, in care of the Consulate at Geneva, with a letter of July 14 by Mr. Sandifer, who by that time had become Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for United Nations Affairs (501.BB Palestine/7–1449).

2 Brackets appear in the source text.

3 Omission in the source text.

The Ambassador in Israel (McDonald) to the Secretary of State 867N.01/7–549: Telegram

[Document 811]

The Ambassador in Israel (McDonald) to the Secretary of State

top secret
priority Tel Aviv, July 5, 1949—noon.

512. From reliable private American, whom I trust completely but am pledged not name, I am told that President Weizmann is calling conference with Ben Gurion and Sharett July 6 to urge that Israel offer unqualified1 non-aggression pacts to Arabs States.

I would appreciate Department’s reaction this idea and its advice.2

McDonald

1 As originally received in the Department, telegram 512, at this point, read “qualified”. The correction was made on July 8.

2 The Department replied on July 5, stating that it would be “pleased see non-aggression pacts freely entered into between Arab States and Israel. However, Dept unable give to proposal ur 512 July 5 the full consideration necessary without further details. For instance, what is meant by ‘qualified’? Does Weizmann envisage non-aggression pacts as forming part of overall peace settlement, or wld he plan make proposal before and separately? Difficult see how Israel cld hope Arab States wld take favorable action on proposal unless it connected with final settlement” (telegram 423, 867N.01/7–549)

The Secretary of State to the Secretary of Defense (Johnson) 867N.48/7–149

[Document 812]

The Secretary of State to the Secretary of Defense (Johnson)

secret Washington, July 6, 1949.

My Dear Mr. Secretary: The receipt is acknowledged of your letter dated June 14, 1949, in which you analyze the probable effects of the Arab refugee problem upon United States military and strategic interests in the Near East, in response to the Department’s request for such an appreciation. This appreciation, as well as the intelligence estimate prepared by the Central Intelligence Agency which you transmitted as an enclosure, are of considerable value to the Department. The Department is transmitting your letter together with its enclosure to the President1 for his information.

You are doubtless aware that the President recently made a decision to recommend to the Congress that this Government, within the framework of the United Nations, support a program for the repatriation and resettlement of the Palestinian refugees with United States financial and technical assistance. Such assistance would be conditional upon (1) formulation by the Palestine Conciliation Commission or the United Nations of a plan which has a reasonable chance of implementation at a reasonable cost; (2) full acceptance by Israel and the Arab states of the responsibilities involved and their active cooperation in the execution of an agreed plan; and (3) appropriate assistance from international and other sources.

If these conditions are fulfilled, the execution of such a program of repatriation and resettlement would have important effects in meeting the objectives of the National Military Establishment in the Near East.

You are assured that the position of the National Military Establishment will be given the fullest consideration in the further development of this Government’s policy toward the Arab refugee problem.

Sincerely yours,

Dean Acheson

1 With Secretary Acheson’s memorandum of July 7, not printed.

The Consul at Jerusalem (Burdett) to the Secretary of State 501.BB Palestine/7–649: Airgram

[Document 813]

The Consul at Jerusalem (Burdett) to the Secretary of State

secret Jerusalem, July 6, 1949.

A–94. The following general observations, admittedly of a speculative nature, are respectfully submitted regarding the current situation in Palestine: 1 —The favorable opportunity for settlement of the present phase of the Palestine problem existing at the time of the signature of the first armistice agreement has now passed. Willingness on the part of the Arabs to end, at least for the time being, the fight over Palestine has been replaced by a general hardening of attitude and reaffirmation of their early conviction that it is impossible to do business with the Jews. The turning point and one of the principal causes of this change was the harsh terms exacted by Israel in the “Triangle.” Thus Israel has missed an opportunity to start on the long and difficult road towards achieving at least a working relationship with the Arabs upon which her future depends.

2 —Arab efforts are now turning to relatively long range plans for the time when it will be possible to resume the war against Israel. Recognition of their past weaknesses and readiness to actually work for that future date rather than rely on talk is growing. The Arab Legion program for training Palestinians has met with good response and recruits are now drilling at numerous villages. The Arabs have no immediate intention of resuming hostilities, but the movement is towards a day in the future when a successful war will be possible instead of a day in the future when real cooperation with Israel will be possible. Although Arab disunity is still great, each state is apparently working separately towards the same objective.

3 —The immediate desire of the Arab refugees is to return to their original homes regardless of the government in control. Morale is low, they see little hope in the future, and the meagre personal possessions which were salvaged have been expended. The Palestinians consider themselves the victims not only of the UN and Israel but of the failure of the other Arab States to live up to their boasts.

4 —Despondency, misery, lack of hope and faith, and destruction of former standards of values, make the refugees an ideal field for the growth of communism. Having lost everything, the rosy, although vacuous, pictures of a Communist society are a strong temptation.

5 —Recent reports of US pressure on Israel have raised to a high pitch Arab expectations that Israel will be forced to conform to the often stated US policy both with respect to territories and refugees. Non-fulfillment of these hopes will bring a correspondingly bitter reaction.

6 —The State of Israel has no intention of allowing the return of any appreciable number of refugees except, perhaps, in return for additional territory. By this date there is much truth in the Israel contention that their return is physically impossible. Arab houses and villages, including those in areas not given Israel by the partition decision, have been occupied to a large extent by new immigrants. Others have been deliberately destroyed. There is practically no room left. Arab quarters in Jerusalem, until recently a military zone, are now almost full and new immigrants are pouring in steadily.

7 —Despite Israel’s declarations, the state is financially unable to pay compensation for Arab property taken over. Great difficulty is experienced even in financing current Jewish immigration and settlement. Barring outside loans or gifts, the funds are not on hand.

8 —The UN and particularly the US thus find themselves in the position of indirectly supporting and financing Jewish immigration and settlement. By feeding and settling Arab refugees deprived of property and means of livelihood, the UN and US are enabling Israel to use the same property and means of livelihood for new immigrants.

9 —Failure of the UN in the past to protect the rights and interests of the Palestinian Arabs by forcing Israel to comply with the various UN Resolutions is largely responsible for the present situation. The policies which Israel has been permitted to follow have placed her in a position where a reversal is almost impossible.

10 —The State of Israel has no intention of consenting to any reduction in territory now held except for minor rectifications with full compensation. Israel conducted the armistice negotiations with the intent that the boundaries fixed should be minimum frontiers of the new state and not temporary armistice lines.

11 —Israel has three additional immediate demands. If it proves impossible to satisfy them by negotiation, the employment of force is not unlikely. These are: withdrawal of Syrian forces to the former Palestine boundary; elimination of the Latrun salient; free access to, and additional territory on, Mount Scopus.

12 —Israel eventually intends to obtain all of Palestine, but barring unexpected opportunities or internal crises will accomplish this objective gradually and without the use of force in the immediate future.

13 —Israel is convinced of its ability to “induce” the United States to abandon its present insistence on repatriation of refugees and territorial changes. From experience in the past, officials state confidently “you will change your mind,” and the press cites instances of the effectiveness of organized Jewish propaganda in the US.

14 —Under the present circumstances the UN and US are confronted with two broad choices: a —Employ the necessary punitive measures against Israel to force her to consent to a reduction in territory and repatriation of refugees. At this late stage strong measures are required which will have a severe effect on the State of Israel economically and politically.

b —Admit that the US and UN are unable or unwilling to take the required measures, and therefore that US policy on boundaries and refugees cannot be carried out. This will require plans to liquidate the Palestine problem, formed on the premise that the refugees will not return and that no territorial changes will occur.

15 —Delay in making the necessary determination will only make it more difficult either to force the necessary reversal on Israel or to develop resettlement plans for the refugees and to conclude at least de facto peace treaties.

Burdett

The Ambassador in Israel (McDonald) to the Secretary of State 501.BB Palestine/7–649: Telegram

[Document 814]

The Ambassador in Israel (McDonald) to the Secretary of State

secret Tel Aviv, July 6, 1949—3:46 p. m.

516. In hour talk yesterday and Foreign Office, Herlitz told Ford Israeli Government had sent July 1 request via PCC 1 to representatives of Egypt, Lebanon and Transjordan for names Arab dependents (wives, children) now those three countries of “breadwinners” now in Israel in order immediate steps may be taken reunite these divided families in Israel. She not prepared hazard number possible repatriates under this plan but felt would be “less than 25,000 persons.”

Re Jerusalem proposal (Deptel 375, June 17) Herlitz said Dayan was told by Burdett July 2 that proposal transfer certain functions SP Commission to MAC “had been withdrawn by USG” and asked confirmation this report in view Israeli agreement support proposal. Please advise present status this development.2

Sent Department 526; repeated Jerusalem 57; Amman 17.

McDonald

1 The request was actually made through the Mixed Armistice Commission. The correction was requested by Tel Aviv in its despatch 178, July 8 (501.BB Palestine/7–849).

2 The Department’s reply on July 7 stated that “USG has not withdrawn proposal re MAC. Dept has assumed Riley investigating possibility setting up new arrangement view acceptance proposal by Jordan and willingness Israel go along despite reservations. Dept desires Emb press points made Deptel 405 June 27.” (telegram 433, 501.BB Palestine/7–649)

The Secretary of State to the Legation in Jordan 867N.48/7–649: Telegram

[Document 815]

The Secretary of State to the Legation in Jordan

restricted Washington, July 6, 1949—6 p. m.

93. In meeting with Haikal July 6 McGhee expressed appreciation for cooperative attitude shown by Jordan re refugees but pointed out any int. assistance in solving refugee problem depended upon agreement Israelis and Arabs accept their responsibilities re repatriation and resettlement. Said he thought public announcement by Jordan of readiness accept some refugees might be helpful in leading other Arab states agree accept own responsibilities. Inquired whether Haikal thought his Govt willing make such statement.

Haikal said wld consult Amman but believed Govt wld be agreeable make public statement accepting for resettlement a number of refugees “who did not desire return to homes in Israeli-occupied areas”, with proviso re int. assistance.

In conversations this matter with auths you shld stress necessity that all parties accept responsibilities re refugees in order provide basis for any possible int. aid within framework UN. Wld be difficult, for example, establish int. refugee program on basis cooperation only one country such as Jordan. You shld inform auths that US believes public statement by Jordan wld be helpful in inducing other Arab states cooperate, but leave no doubt in their minds that while statement wld be deeply appreciated by US, it wld only be first steps and that int. refugee program can not be established without cooperation Israel and Arab states and without prior survey resettlement and repatriation possibilities in Arab states and Israel. State US continues press Israel re repatriation.

In conversations with auths you shld emphasize points made Depcirctel June 27.1

Acheson

1 The formal reply to the Chargé’s representations were embodied in a Jordanian Foreign Office note of July 19. The note stated that Jordan supported the right of the refugees to return to their country in accordance with United Nations decisions and that the Government would cooperate concerning those refugees who did not wish to return, providing financial assistance were forthcoming (telegram 285, July 20, 9 a. m., from Amman, 501.BB Palestine/7–2049). Mr. Stabler concluded his telegram with the observation that “No mention is made in note of public statement. It is clear from various talks with Foreign Minister and others that Jordan Government does not feel it can make such statement at this stage.”

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in Israel 867N.01/7–349: Telegram

[Document 816]

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in Israel

top secret Washington, July 6, 1949—8 p. m.

430. Fol Dept’s comments ur 411 [511] July 3 for your use with Shiloah and other Israeli officials who may take similar line:

US as anxious as is Israel for peace, prosperity and stability NE, but can not agree that this can be achieved on Israeli premises regarding territory and refugees.

On basis investigations its reps abroad US Govt does not believe Arab states preparing resume conflict. Any public statement to contrary designed for internal consumption within Arab states can be matched by corresponding Israeli public statements.

US Govt has pointed out to Israeli Govt on numerous occasions steps latter might take to facilitate arrival peace NE and continued full US support of Israel.

US Govt can not agree that repatriation substantial number refugees wld “solve nothing.” In opinion US Govt such move wld be major step on road to peace.

US Govt also rejects apparent implication Shiloah that solution refugees problem is responsibility of US. Clear that primary responsibility lies with Israel and Arab states, which shld discharge this responsibility through repatriation and resettlement, respectively.

Acheson

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern and African Affairs (Hare) 501.BB Palestine/7–749

[Document 817]

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern and African Affairs (Hare)1

secret [Washington,] July 7, 1949.

Participants: Mr. Aubrey Eban, Israeli Representative to the U.N.

Mr. Uriel Heyd, Israeli Chargé D’Affaires a.i.

Mr. George C. McGhee, Assistant Secretary, NEA 1

Mr. Raymond Hare, Deputy Assistant Secretary, NEA

In the course of a luncheon conversation on July 7 Mr. Eban inquired whether the Department had heard anything from the Egyptians regarding the possibility of conversations in New York on the Gaza strip question. He said that he had intended leaving this weekend for a short trip to Tel Aviv but that he would naturally defer his departure in case there was a prospect of the holding of conversations at an early date. Mr. McGhee said that we had not heard from the Egyptians as yet but that we expected to do so any time now and that we would, of course, inform the Israeli Embassy as soon as we received word.

Discussing the substantive side of the Gaza strip proposal, Mr. Eban said that from the economic standpoint this area was of little interest to Israel; its acquisition would merely result in Israel obtaining several miles of additional coastline. The situation was quite different, however, when viewed from the standpoint of security. Gaza was only a short distance from Tel Aviv itself and as long as it remained in the hands of a country with the military potential of Egypt it could not but constitute a perpetual threat to Israel. It was true that the return of any sizeable number of Arab refugees would also constitute a threat to Israeli security but in the case of the Gaza strip it seemed abundantly clear that the risk of accepting responsibility for the refugees there was far overshadowed by the danger of that area remaining in Egyptian possession.

Mr. McGhee observed that, as Mr. Eban doubtless knew, we had seen promising possibilities in the Gaza strip idea as a step toward Palestine settlement2 but that unfortunately the proposal had been made in such a way as to produce the effect of being a straight barter of refugees against territory. Mr. Eban said that he too felt that the presentation of this matter may have left something to be desired. In further discussion on this subject Mr. McGhee observed that although direct discussion on the Gaza proposal was favored as a practical measure he assumed that such negotiations would have to be integrated in due course into other negotiations, particularly with reference to Transjordan. Mr. Eban indicated that such would doubtless be the case.

Turning to the general question of refugees Mr. Eban said that he was concerned lest Israel should make a gesture in that direction only to have it refused by the Arabs on the basis of inadequacy and thus leave Israel “out on a limb”. He expressed doubt in the circumstances whether it was advisable for Israel to make such a move. Mr. McGhee said that he viewed the matter from an entirely different point of view. Presuming that the gesture made by Israel was indeed serious, it would constitute a positive and much needed step in the direction of peace. It could, for example, be made contingent on acceptance of the remainder by the Arab States. It was, of course, obvious that Israel would not be able to take back all of the refugees but a move which would indicate that it was willing to make a real effort to contribute to a solution would create an entirely different and more promising atmosphere. Mr. McGhee went on to emphasize the gravity of the situation which would arise as a result of failure to take constructive action on the refugee question in the very near future. He said that as a result of consultations with officials of the United Nations and of his own personal knowledge of Congressional attitude he was certain that little could be done by way of obtaining further funds on a straight relief basis. Relief could only be obtained if promise were given of some constructive program for the liquidation of the problem. It would be an extremely serious matter for both Israel and the Arab States if it should become apparent that failure to take action on this important question was the direct result of a lack of their willingness to assume responsibilities which they jointly shared. Mr. Eban appeared to be particularly impressed by this argument and said that he would make a point of stressing it on his return to Tel Aviv.

1 Messrs. McGhee and Hare become Assistant Secretary of State and Deputy Assistant Secretary on June 24 and July 6, respectively.

1 Messrs. McGhee and Hare become Assistant Secretary of State and Deputy Assistant Secretary on June 24 and July 6, respectively.

2 The Department, on July 8, instructed the American Delegation at Lausanne to inform the French and Turkish Delegations of the Gaza strip proposals made by the United States (telegram Unpal 181, 501.BB Palestine/7–849).

The Secretary of State to the Chairman of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee (Connolly) 501.BB Palestine/5–3149

[Document 818]

The Secretary of State to the Chairman of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee (Connolly)

Washington, July 8, 1949.

Dear Senator Connally: In accordance with the request of your Committee, dated May 31,1 for the Department’s comments on S.J. Res. 98 proposing to establish the Near East Survey Commission, the Department has made a careful study of the proposal and does not recommend enactment of this measure.

The Department is in full agreement with the objectives of this resolution, which are directed towards promoting the economic development and the general welfare of the Near East, and appreciates the recognition accorded by the resolution to the special importance of this area of the world.

The Department is convinced that the objectives of the resolution should be sought through a United Nations framework, and that the United States should avoid the implication of assumption of direct responsibility for development needs of the Near East. Such an implication would unquestionably be drawn out of the creation of the proposed Commission, even though the resolution directs that the work of the Commission be coordinated with UN activities. The United Nations, through the Palestine Conciliation Commission and the United Nations Relief for Palestine Refugees, has already assumed responsibility for and is actively seeking solution to many of the problems of the Near East which are included in the objectives of the resolution.

The Department attributes great significance to the activities of the Palestine Conciliation Commission, in which the United States is one of the three participating governments. Pursuant to its task of promoting final settlement of all problems outstanding between Israel and the Arab states, the Conciliation Commission has been charged by the United Nations with the repatriation, resettlement, and economic and social rehabilitation of the refugees from the Palestine hostilities, and has been instructed to seek arrangements which will facilitate the economic development of the area.

The Conciliation Commission is undertaking, in close cooperation with the United States Government and its other participating members, to formulate plans for the accomplishment of the above purposes. Such plans, which are parallel in their objectives with those outlined in Section 6 of the Joint Resolution, are well under way, on the basis of previously prepared, comprehensive surveys of the Near East. It is understood, moreover, that the Conciliation Commission plans to establish an economic survey group, composed of high ranking administrators and highly competent technical specialists, who will coordinate on a regional basis the existing surveys of the Near East, with a view to accomplishing the repatriation and resettlement of refugees and contributing to the economic development of the entire area. Under its terms of reference, the economic survey group will be required to examine the economic situation in countries affected by the recent hostilities, and to make recommendations which will enable the governments concerned to further such measures and development programs as are required to overcome economic dislocations created by the hostilities; it will be required to reintegrate refugees into the economic life of the area on a self-sustaining basis within a minimum period of time, and to promote economic conditions conducive to the maintenance of peace and stability in the area.

Furthermore, the technical assistance and investment guarantee program which has been submitted to the Congress by the President would enable this Government to participate in the economic development of this area. In developing a preliminary budget for the technical assistance program particular attention was given to the Near East as an area in special need of this type of assistance as an essential element in its economic development.

Under these circumstances, the Department welcomes the interest which has inspired the Joint Resolution under reference. It believes, however, that the purposes of the resolution will be better served by cooperative action such as that contemplated through the Conciliation Commission. Such coordinated effort would insure against duplication and would bring to the problem the facilities and support of other interested governments and international organizations which is essential to solution of the economic and related problems of the area.

In view of the great interest of the United States in the establishment of a firm and lasting peace in the Near East through the efforts of the United Nations, the Department of State hopes that the Congress will give maximum support to measures recommended by the United Nations and its organs to this end.

In view of the request from your Committee for a report at this time, we have not awaited Bureau of the Budget clearance.

Sincerely yours,

For the Secretary of State:
Ernest A. Gross
Assistant Secretary

1 Not printed.

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern and African Affairs (McGhee) 890B.00/7–849

[Document 819]

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern and African Affairs (McGhee)1

confidential [Washington,] July 8, 1949.

Participants: Mr. McGhee, Assistant Secretary of State

Dr. Charles Malik, Lebanese Minister

NE—Mr. Mattison

[Here follows discussion of various matters, particularly the refugee question.]

Dr. Malik then developed the main theme of his call, namely that there should be an immediate “two weeks” conference between the United States, Britain and France, on a very high level. Such a conference could settle matters in a way which would insure peace in the Near East for the next twenty-five years. It could be held in secrecy, and decisions taken which were vital to the whole area. With agreement reached, the United States could then embark on a program which would mean the salvation of the area. At this point he was careful to elaborate that he felt that economic development projects should be given a relatively low priority. Of first importance was the question of firm political guidance. Citing General Sir Edward Spears2 as an example of what a firm guiding hand could achieve, he said that the Arab states were in a stage of uncertainty where such treatment was necessary.

I interrupted to explain that there might be difficulty in American participation in such a program. We were not politically adept at this kind of action and, furthermore, we did not like the kind of responsibility which such advice necessarily entailed. As a second point, I mentioned the fact that the American public was not accustomed to seeing the country occupy such a role, and there would undoubtedly be public criticism on the grounds that we were interfering with the internal political affairs of other countries.

[Here follows further discussion of the type of program that Minister Malik advocated.]

1 Drafted by Mr. Mattison.

2 British Minister to Syria and Lebanon from 1942 to 1944.

Editorial Note [Document 820]

Editorial Note

New York, beginning July 8, sent several reports to the Department concerning the armistice negotiations between Israel and Syria. The report of July 8 stated that there had been general agreement on the draft of an armistice and that some demarcation of armistice lines had been achieved (telegram 811, 501.BB Palestine/7—849).

Disagreements were encountered subsequently, particularly on the location and possible modification of the “certified truce line,” which had been established on July 18, 1948, after the second truce (telegrams 815, 818, and 819 from New York, all dated July 11, 501.BB Palestine/7–1149).

The Secretary of State to the United States Representative at the United Nations (Austin) 501.BB Palestine/7–649: Telegram

[Document 821]

The Secretary of State to the United States Representative at the United Nations (Austin)

confidential Washington, July 8, 1949—6 p. m.

351. Fol Dept’s comments ur 804 July 6.1 Dept agrees visit Eban Tel Aviv wld be advantageous but desires point out no indication yet received Egypt will agree to proposed conversations. In conversation with McGhee July 7 Eban stated planned to leave for Israel this weekend but prepared delay departure if any signs received Egyptians desirous” undertaking discussions.

View shortage of time before fall GA session Dept considers it desirable that PCC reconvene if possible on schedule and that it and delegations proceed take decisive action re major issues.

Role of USG re Gaza strip discussions that of friend suggesting parties talk over proposal together. US will not participate as third party in discussions or act as mediator. If third party assistance desired PCC shld provide. Other members PCC have been informed that USG considers Gaza proposal shld serve as basis discussion between Israel and Egypt and that USG willing facilitate such discussion shld parties desire undertake.

Agree that if discussions take place at UN headquarters it shld be understood they taking place within UN framework. UN further tied in by fact that Israeli Gaza proposal made during discussions held under auspices UNPCC. PCC cld consider any agreement reached between Israel and Egypt as having been accomplished accordance its terms of reference. Dept sees no need for formula proposed by Eban re role USG.

Acheson

1 Not printed; it reported that Mr. Eban had called on Mr. Boss that morning to discuss the proposal regarding the Gaza strip. The Israeli representative had stated that he would represent his Government in conversations with Egypt and that he planned to leave for Tel Aviv on July 10 for brief consultations. Telegram 804 stated also that Mr. Eban “raised question whether USG acting with regard to Gaza strip discussions in its capacity as member of PCC, that is with knowledge and consent of other, members.… [He] considered it very important that UN be tied in. He thought best formula, if occasion should arise, would be that USG had been assigned by agreement among members of PCC to assist parties for this particular purpose.”

Mr. Eban spoke finally concerning the arms embargo. “As he saw it, there were two alternatives: First, conclusion of Syrian armistice would be final step in creation of whole new situation in which all bets would be off; in this case something very like an arms race would be very likely to start.

“As second alternative, SC might conclude that armistice phase had been completed, but that peace had not yet been achieved; therefore, arms embargo as contained in SC resolution should be continued until achivement peace Settlement. Eban expressed clear preference for second alternative as more prudent and giving less occasion to temptation of risking resumption of hostilities.” (501.BB Palestine/7–649)

The Secretary of State to Certain Diplomatic and Consular Offices 501.MA Palestine/7–949: Circular telegram

[Document 822]

The Secretary of State to Certain Diplomatic and Consular Offices 1

restricted Washington, July 9, 1949—1 a. m.

You are requested to seek an appropriate occasion to bring orally to the attention of Govt to which you are accredited details of recent Congressional action re US contribution to UNRPR program and implications thereof as fol: US has already contributed $8 million to UNRPR and a further sum of $4 million will be paid shortly under appropriation recently passed by Congress. An additional $4 million may be contributed upon a finding by Pres that other nations have met their obligations to UNRPR. Such finding cannot now be assured in view failure many nations make substantial contributions.

You shld inform Govt that, even if full $16 million forthcoming from US, UNRPR funds wld be exhausted within few months. In event that finding of Pres unfavorable, UNRPR operation will cease in August. USG can not request present Congress authorize further contributions to UNRPR beyond sum which it has already allotted, and it is doubtful whether either UN or US would be responsive to request for additional funds for continued relief program in absence constructive steps by Israel and Arab states upon which cld be based long range repatriation and resettlement program.

You shld make abundantly clear to Govt implications these factors. Upon termination UNRPR, there is no assurance that full burden both administration and financing of relief all refugees will not revert to states in which refugees now being maintained or which constitute occupying authority in respective zones of Arab Pal. Even if tragic humanitarian implications termination international relief fail to move NE states to constructive action, neither Israel nor Arab states can remain aloof to or avoid consequences of attendant security problem.

USG therefore urges that most serious and urgent consideration be given to consequences of failure to take earliest action to contribute to political agreement through PCC making possible for PCC to take steps looking towards long range solution of refugee problem. In light possible early termination relief program, USG convinced that it is no longer possible for states concerned to maintain present preoccupation with doctrinaire approach to refugee problem or to pursue course dictated solely by narrow self-interest If they persist in doing so, world community, which has borne cost of custodianship refugees during past year, will hold NE states responsible for deterioration already tragic plight of refugees.

USG therefore considers it essential that Arab states and Israel openly assume their respective responsibilities resettlement and repatriation before termination this period of grace.

Acheson

1 At Arab capitals and Tel Aviv and at Bern for the American Delegation at Lausanne.

The Ambassador in Israel (McDonald) to the Secretary of State 501.BB Palestine/7–1149: Telegram

[Document 823]

The Ambassador in Israel (McDonald) to the Secretary of State

top secret Tel Aviv, July 11, 1949—3 p. m.

niact

528. Acting immediately on Department’s instructions its circtel unnumbered July 9 and Deptel 433, July 7,1 Ford and I talked with Sharett at Foreign Office 35 minutes early morning July 11.

I presented with utmost earnestness USG’s strong views that Israel should accept broader base MAC jurisdiction Jerusalem in order advance settlement of additional issues including permanent demarcation lines and possible agreement to be incorporated by PCC in its general Jerusalem plan for UN GA.

Replying Sharett gave “conditional” answer promising “fuller and more definitive” later after consultation. He put forcibly these objections: 1. Transjordan armistice is binding but not yet implemented. Israel insists on implementation before broadening base discussions with Transjordan. USG “instead of putting pressure on Transjordan to carry out armistice is putting pressure on Israel to agree new terms negotiations without and before implementation existing armistice”.

2. USG position if accepted would be “unhealthy precedent” because any agreement “could be made null by one party insisting on new terms before carrying out original terms”. Moreover, acceptance USG proposal would involve “much larger issues than Jerusalem”; e.g. Abdullah’s authority over whole Arab Palestine which Sharett said would “remain Arab but not necessarily under Abdullah”.

3. “Practically USG terms difficult acceptance because in negotiating final demarcation lines Jerusalem, Transjordan is expected make far-reaching claims including return of former Arab portions new city, which Israel will resist.” Acceptance USG’s present suggestion would mean that “Washington influences would he used against Israel on issue permanent lines.”

4. At end, Sharett reiterated that above answer was conditional. Not final.

Comment: I anticipate that Israel’s final reply will in essence be as above. Unless Department can offer to Israel more convincing reasons for acceptance than those in Deptel 405,2 Israel will continue, I fear, to resist USG proposal and will insist on carrying out Transjordan armistice.

Personally, I cannot avoid conviction that some Burdett’s arguments Jerusalem’s telegram 66, June 25, repeated Department 405 [445] are ingenuous. For example, his contention that “problems mentioned in Article 8 are of prime importance to Israel but of relatively [little] interest to Arabs” and that if US supported Israel’s demand for carrying out this armistice article “without Arabs receiving adequate return” they “could only conclude US indirectly exerting further pressure for further concessions to Israel;” this argument seems to me to demand that Israel make new concessions in order that USG consent to urge Transjordan Garry out armistice terms. Tough-minded realistic Foreign Office here not likely accede unless offer tangible Quid pro quo. End comment.

Re my suggestion (Embtel 524, July 93 ) I still feel Jerusalem conference with Riley and Burdett highly desirable.

New subject re refugees; I put most strongly considerations Depcirtel July 9.

Sharett’s reply in summary follows: 1. “Israel is not responsible for refugee problem.”

2. “We are vitally interested in problem and that something be done soonest and are anxious help. We may not have said last word re our proposals but situation extremely difficult”. Then Sharett added grimly that “repeated and publicly obvious representations by USG to Israel on this subject make government’s concessions more difficult. We need to be allowed to act without visible American pressure”. Further reply awaits conference Foreign Office with Eban who expected July 12.

Comment: I hope but I am not sure that Sharett’s words foreshadow more constructive refugee proposal by Israel than any heretofore. End comment.

Sent Department, repeated Jerusalem 58, Amman 18, Bern 12.

McDonald

1 Not printed.

2 Dated June 27, p. 1185 [Pg. 1185 includes portions of Doc. 797 and Doc. 798].

3 Not printed.

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in Israel 501.BB Palestine/7–649: Telegram

[Document 824]

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in Israel 1

secret Washington, July 11, 1949—6 p. m.

437. Fol for your background info in conversations with Israeli officials. With reference Israeli intention reunite divided families (ur 526 [516] July 6) USG welcomes this first tangible step toward commencement the immed repatriation long requested by USG but hopes Israeli auths will make every effort enlarge scope this process particularly view fact plan as originally presented to PCC by Israeli reps envisaged return members divided families, not merely those which have “breadwinners” in Israel. USG believes that despite current status Syrian-Israeli relations Israel shld make similar approach to Syria as evidence good intentions.

US press reported FonMin to have declared in announcement program for reunion of families that Israeli policy toward majority refugees remains unchanged. If this true you shld make clear to Israeli auths that USG considers that limited operation described urtel, which would merely implement Israeli commitment of longstanding, in no way fulfills Israel’s obligation assume its responsibility to undertake substantial repatriation.

Acheson

1 This telegram was repeated to Arab capitals and London and to Bern for the American Delegation at Lausanne.

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in France 501.BB Palestine/7–1249: Telegram

[Document 825]

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in France

restricted
priority Washington, July 12, 1949—7 p. m.

2528. Pls inform FonOff that USG giving urgent consideration to means strengthening PCC and improving chances fulfillment its tasks. Pursuant these objectives, USG suggests immediate approach, in which it requests Turkish and French support, to Arab states along fol lines: “Govts of France, Turkey, and US, motivated by sincere conviction that every effort must be made to facilitate progress towards successful conclusion PCC’s tasks, and to accord PCC full cooperation therein, hopes Govts concerned will instruct their delegations to enter into forthcoming discussions at Lausanne with new and constructive approach towards all issues outstanding. Up to present time, progress of PCC has been impeded by fact that certain delegations to Commission were authorised by their Govts to discuss or negotiate only with respect to limited aspects of Pal settlement, or to insist upon establishment of priorities in approaching the several questions. PCC was established by GA res of Dec 11 have application to govts and authorities concerned, as well as to members PCC. It is earnest conviction of PCC member states that all delegations to Lausanne on reconvening July 18 should be given full authority by their respective govts to enter into discussion and negotiation of all issues which fall within purview of PCC—particularly status of Jerusalem, territorial settlement, and disposition of refugees. Indeed, a primary purpose of Protocol of May 12, 1949 was to enable Arab and Israeli delegations to extend their exchanges of views to all questions covered by GA res. After talks resume, therefore, refugees and territorial questions shld be subject concurrent discussion.”

Substantially similar approach wld be made Israel, taking account of fact that Israeli del has full authority discuss all outstanding questions.

At time of foregoing representations, we propose inform both sides that this bilateral approach.

If FonOff agrees re foregoing approach, USG wishes send immed tel to Arab states and hopes Turk and French Govts prepared take similar action.1

Acheson

1 This telegram was repeated to Ankara for action and to New York for information. Ankara advised, on July 15, that the Turkish Foreign Office agreed to approach the “Arab states along lines Department’s draft although not in identical language. Will also approach Israeli Government through Turk Consulate General Jerusalem.” (telegram 322, 501.BB Palestine/7–1549)

Memorandum by the Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern and African Affairs (McGhee) to the Secretary of State 501.BB Palestine/7–1349

[Document 826]

Memorandum by the Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern and African Affairs (McGhee) to the Secretary of State 1

secret [Washington,] July 13, 1949.

Subject: United States Support of the Palestine Conciliation Commission and Establishment of an Economic Survey Mission.

Discussion:

It is considered essential in the national interest that the United States Government take the initiative in an effort to overcome the present impasse in the negotiations for a settlement of the Palestine question. This is necessary in order to assure formulation of an interim program under United Nations auspices for solution of the refugee problem which would create a favorable atmosphere for a final political settlement; to replace the temporary United Nations refugee relief program which is rapidly drawing to a close, and to take steps to overcome economic dislocations arising out of the hostilities which are seriously handicapping economic progress in the area.

Failure to take such action would result in increased suffering and possible widespread starvation among the refugees, attended by further deterioration of present conditions of unrest which would be exploited by communist and opportunist elements and would gravely endanger the security of the Near East. Moreover, unless some progress towards solution of the Palestine problem is achieved before the opening of the General Assembly in September, the entire question will be subjected to further acrimonious and unproductive debate.

The discussions at Lausanne under the auspices of the Palestine Conciliation Commission have reached an impasse largely over the disposition of the refugees. If substantial progress can be made towards solution of this problem, a decisive step will have been taken towards a general settlement. It would have been preferable if the initiative with respect to outside assistance could, in accordance with previous plans, have awaited satisfactory agreement by Israel and the Arab States as to disposition of the refugees, and full assumption of their responsibilities toward repatriation and resettlement respectively.

It is, however, believed that outside initiative can be taken now to survey the refugee and other economic problems remaining from the hostilities, without committing the United Nations, the United States or any other government to any specific line of action, or to any action at all unless specified conditions are met. Such a survey will, it is believed, facilitate agreement on disposition of the refugees by offering hope to the countries concerned for the assistance known to be required for any successful repatriation or resettlement program, and serve to divert their preoccupation from their present short-range objectives to longer-range economic solutions to broader problems.

Recommendations:

It is recommended that the following course of action be pursued by the United States Government:

1. Palestine Conciliation Commission. a. The United States Government take immediate steps to strengthen the Conciliation Commission by the nomination of a strong representative, who must be present at the next meeting of the Commission in Lausanne, scheduled for July 18.

b. The United States representative urge the Commission to request the Secretary-General of the United Nations to strengthen the staff of the Commission by the appointment of a highly qualified American administrator as Chief of Staff, and supporting personnel, to carry out its coordinating and operating functions. (Whoever is appointed could, as a collateral duty responsible directly to the Secretary-General, be appointed to succeed Mr. Stanton Griffis who is resigning effective August 1 as head of the UNRPR.)

c. The Conciliation Commission, after it reconvenes, be urged by the United States representative to devote its attention chiefly to the questions of territorial settlement, the status of Jerusalem and the political aspects of the refugee question. Any final specific allocation of the refugees on a geographical basis would take into consideration the technical analyses of this question as submitted in the report of the Economic Survey Mission.

2. Economic Survey Mission. a. The Conciliation Commission be urged by the United States representative to establish an Economic Survey Mission at the earliest Practicable moment, pursuant to its authority under paragraph 12 of the General Assembly resolution of December 11, 1948. The terms of reference of this Mission should be based upon the foregoing resolution with special reference to paragraph 11 thereof, which establishes the principles of repatriation and compensation for refugee property, and instructs the Conciliation Commission to facilitate the specific tasks of repatriation, resettlement, economic and social rehabilitation of the refugees, and payment of compensation. Within this context, the Economic Survey Mission should be charged with the objectives of examining the economic situation in countries affected by the recent hostilities and making recommendations which will enable the governments concerned to further such measures and development programs as are required to: (1) overcome economic dislocations created by the hostilities; (2) reintegrate the refugees from the hostilities into the economic life of the area on a self-sustaining basis within a minimum period of time; and (3): promote economic conditions conducive to the maintenance of peace and stability in the area. Recommendations by the Survey Mission relative to political problems with which the Commission is concerned should be at the request of the Commission and confined to the economic aspects thereof. The report of the Mission would serve as a basis for further action in the General Assembly and by appropriate international organizations and interested governments, including such action as the President may wish to recommend to the Congress with respect to United States participation in the program. It will be recalled in this connection that on May 26, 1949, the President approved the principle of United States participation in such a program under certain specified conditions which can still obtain.

b. The Conciliation Commission be urged by the United States representative to request the appointment of an outstanding American still to be designated as Chief of the Economic Survey Mission, and that the Chief appoint, in agreement with the Commission and the Secretary-General, a British and a French deputy and such expert personnel, selected on a multinational basis, as may be required to carry out the economic survey. Such personnel should be chosen on the basis of their special qualifications and in consultation with interested governments and appropriate international organizations.

c. The Department seek at the September meeting of the General Assembly an effective integration of all United Nations responsibilities remaining in connection with the Palestine hostilities, including refugee relief, rehabilitation and resettlement, and economic programs.

3. Diplomatic Representations.

The Department utilize the present recess in the Lausanne discussions to attempt through diplomatic representations to obtain a more realistic and constructive approach to outstanding problems on the part of both Israel and the Arab States, and, in the light of the continued refusal of Israel to agree to the principles set forth in the President’s recent representations to Israel, to take concrete steps to convince the Israeli Government of the grave importance which the United States attached to these representations. (This will be made the subject of separate recommendations.)

4. Public Statement by the President.

Simultaneous with the announcement by the Secretary-General of the appointment of the chief of the Economic Survey, Mission, the President issue a public statement, now in preparation, pledging United States support of the Palestine Conciliation Commission and the Economic Survey Mission. This statement would also include a definition of long-range United States policy towards the Near Eastern area as a whole, minimizing present issues between Israel and the Arab States.

[Here follow concurrences.]

1 Transmitted, through Messrs. Webb and Rusk, together with a summarizing memorandum of July 13, in Mr. McGhee’s memorandum of the same date to Secretary Acheson. The transmitting memorandum bears the Secretary’s “OK” in a marginal notation.

The Ambassador in Israel (McDonald) to the Secretary of State 501.BB Palestine/7–1349

[Document 827]

The Ambassador in Israel (McDonald) to the Secretary of State

secret Tel Aviv, July 13, 1949.

No. 180

Subject: Comment on the Jerusalem Consulate General A–94, July 6, of Mr. Burdett, re “Current Situation in Palestine”.

Sir: I have the honor to submit the following comments on Mr. Burdett’s “general observations” which I have read and reread with closest attention.

Regretfully, I must record that I can agree unqualifiedly with only four (paragraphs 3, 4, 5 and 10) of Mr. Burdett’s fifteen theses. From all the other eleven theses, I find myself forced by my understanding of the facts to dissent.

Here are some examples of my dissent: 1. Mr. Burdett’s categoric statement that “the turning point and one of the principle [principal] causes” of the “hardening of the attitude” of the Arabs was the “harsh terms exacted by Israel in the Triangle” (paragraph 1) is not supported by any evidence. In fact, the attitude of the Arab states other than Trans-Jordan on the issue of peace with Israel was intransigent before as well as after the Israel armistice with Trans-Jordan.

2. Admittedly “the movement (among the Arabs) is towards a day in the future when a successful war will be possible.” (Paragraph 2.) But Mr. Burdett’s implication that these Arab plans for resumption of war are solely the fault of Israel is manifestly unjust unless the very existence of Israel be deemed justification for Arab plans to destroy the new State by war.

3. I cannot share Mr. Burdett’s certainty that “Israel has no intention of allowing the return of any appreciable number of refugees except, perhaps, in return for additional territory.” (Paragraph 6.) On the contrary, at the time his despatch was filed, intensive consideration was being, and continues to be, given by Israeli authorities in Tel-Aviv to the repatriation of a large number of Arab refugees without involving additional territory for Israel.

4. Mr. Burdett’s charge that the UN failure “to protect the rights and interests of the Palestinian Arabs by forcing Israel to comply with the various UN resolutions” has been “largely responsible for the present situation” (paragraph 9) would be more persuasive if anywhere in his despatch he took account of the Arab states’ violation of vital UN decisions, notably the basic partition decision of November 29th.

5. Mr. Burdett’s related charge that Israel “eventually hopes to obtain all of Palestine” (paragraph 12) is consistent with his central thesis that this State alone is the devil of the piece, but he cites no proof of Israel’s alleged expansionist program.

6. Similarly, it would be interesting to have the evidence on which Mr. Burdett bases his statement that “Israel is convinced of its ability to ‘induce’ the United States to abandon its present insistence on refugees and territorial changes.” He gives no proof of this flat declaration. (Paragraph 13.)

7. Unsound and defeatist is Mr. Burdett’s statement that “the UN and the US are confronted with only two broad choices: (1) Employ the necessary punitive measure against Israel. … or, (2) Admit that the US or the UN are unable or unwilling to take the required measures.”

The United States is not limited to two such absolute and mutually exclusive choices.

The task of statesmanship is precisely to avoid the easy way of adopting either of two such extreme measures as Mr. Burdett contends are the only alternatives. I have no fear that the State Department or the President will be tempted to impale themselves on either horn of this destructive dilemma.

On the contrary, the United States has consistently—except when special circumstances have seemed to dictate otherwise—sought to use its influence in equal measure with both Israel and the Arab states. Why should not our Government continue to influence both sides equally in the direction of moderation and conciliation, merely varying the nature and amount of its persuasion according to its judgment on the particular issue involved?

Success in the achievement of President Truman’s high ideals for the Near East require policies not based on prejudgments either pro-Arab or pro-Israel, but on a combination of extraordinary discernment, flexibility and realism.

Respectfully yours,

James G. McDonald

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom 501.BB Palestine/7–1349: Telegram

[Document 828]

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom 1

secret Washington, July 13, 1949—7 p. m.

2432. Reps Brit Emb July 13 furnished Dept list points suggested by FonOff as basis PCC approach solution Palestine problem. Fol substance points and informal comments reps Dept.

1) Acceptance of refugees by Arabs and Israelis for resettlement and repatriation. Dept agreed and there was further accord that view circumstances Israel latter could probably not be expected accept more than quarter million refugees for repatriation.

2) Israeli Gaza strip proposal should be accepted on condition safeguards devised re future treatment Gaza refugees Israel and territorial compensation made by Israel for strip. Dept agreed some kind international supervision treatment of refugees in Israel essential. Re second condition Dept in agreement provided Egypt desired compensation.

3) Israel should make territorial compensation for areas outside 1947 boundaries retained by her. Dept agreed but pointed out danger creating impression that US would not agree to any settlement which did not provide for territorial compensation. US did not wish attempt force Arab states accept compensation if they did not desire, and if agreement reached between parties without duress which did not include territorial compensation US would not oppose.

4) If territorial compensation should take form of award to Jordan or to Jordan and Egypt of part or whole of Southern Negev, thus providing-land bridge between Egypt and Jordan, Israel should have “guaranteed” freedom of access and communication to Bed Sea. Equally Arab states should have “guaranteed” freedom of communication and access to Mediterranean through ports of Gaza and Haifa. If another solution were adopted for Southern Negev there should nonetheless be guaranteed freedom of communication and access across it between Egypt and Jordan and between Israel and Red Sea. Alternative method of providing for freedom of communication and access might be neutral zone or zones. Dept stated opinion that continuity of land communication between Arab states was most important territorial item in Palestine settlement as far as Arabs were concerned. Felt it might be possible for PCC informally make specific territorial proposal to parties and that this might well take form suggested arrangement involving transfer part of Southern Negev to Egypt and Jordan with agreement for Israeli access Red Sea. Dept inquired how much of Southern Negev UK thought would be necessary transfer to Arabs in order assure effective land communications between Jordan and Egypt. Brit reps said they would query FonOff. Dept pointed out such proposal as Gaza-Dead Sea line obviously unfeasible. Dept saw no reason for arranging access to Mediterranean for Arab states at Gaza if similar arrangement made at Haifa.

5) Free port at Haifa with arrangement by which Iraqi crude could be freely exported in return for provision by Iraq of normal supplies for Haifa refinery. Dept stated general agreement desirability establishment free zone facilities Haifa Arab states but doubted possibility or desirability establishment free port completely free of Israeli control.

6) Partition of Jerusalem for administrative purposes with international supervision, particularly of Holy Places. Dept stated its position on Jerusalem in general agreement with this.

7) Incorporation of Arab Palestine in Jordan. Dept agreed desirable this should be done at appropriate time.

8) Israel and Arab states concerned should agree to share for their mutual benefit waters of Jordan and Yarmuk. Dept agreed.

Acheson

1 This telegram was repeated to Arab capitals.

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in Israel 501.BB Palestine/7–1349: Telegram

[Document 829]

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in Israel

confidential Washington, July 13, 1949—7 p. m.

niact

446. Follows message from Bunche to Sharett, Jul 13, concerning final phase Syrian-Israeli armistice negotiations:

[Here follows the text of Mr. Bunche’s message to Israeli Foreign Minister Sharett. It noted that the Syrians had accepted the fundamental Israeli condition that they withdraw from their occupied positions in Palestine, subject to three conditions. Mr. Bunche requested that Mr. Sharett go as far as he reasonably could toward accepting the Syrian reservations, in order to conclude speedily the prolonged negotiations.1 ]

Dept desires you see Sharett soonest and give full support to position set out in Bunche message, emphasizing earnest hope US Govt that remaining obstacles conclusion armistice can be surmounted. You may wish first consult with Riley and Vigier in order obtain additional background remaining points at issue.

Acheson

1 The text of Mr. Bunche’s message was sent to the Department by New York in telegram 827, July 13, 10:51 p. m., 501.BB Palestine/7–4349. Ambassador Austin, the same day, reported Mr. Bunche’s observation that “he would be ‘greatly obliged if Department of ‘State could get across to Tel Aviv’ support for his representations to Sharett” (telegram 824 from New York, 501.BB Palestine/7–1349).

The Consul at Jerusalem (Burdett) to the Secretary of State 501.BB Palestine/7–1449: Telegram

[Document 830]

The Consul at Jerusalem (Burdett) to the Secretary of State

secret Jerusalem, July 14, 1949—11 a. m.

463. Comments on Tel Aviv’s 528, eleventh follow: 1. Although Jordan bound abide by terms armistice, article 8 provides only for “formulation of agreed plans and arrangements”. Not bound reach agreement in practice despite previous agreement in principle.

2. Since past history special committee shows not possible formulate agreed plans, logical adopt different approach, broaden terms reference and attempt progress from armistice conditions to peace conditions.

4. [3?] Proposal as understood by Consulate General has always possessed twofold purpose lessening tension Jerusalem by solving article 8 problem and progress towards peace through agreement on delimitation Arab Israel areas and related questions.

5. [4?] Relinquishment by Israel portion Arab quarters seized by force in Jerusalem necessary as part final peace and consistent with US policy on territorial settlement. Opposition by Sharett to Department’s proposal on grounds would involve return Arab portions Jerusalem directly contrary to US policy.

5. Demarcation of zones essential part plan for international status Jerusalem PCC required present September GA. Line can be drawn either by agreement between Israel and Jordan or arbitrarily by PCC. If Israel persists in rejection US proposals suggest PCC immediately consider demarcation line and other related questions.

6. Consulate General believes US should intensify efforts secure Israel acceptance US policy on both refugees and territory since Sharett’s remarks afford grounds for hope representations making themselves felt.

8. [7?] Israel acceptance broad terms reference still considered prerequisite start actual negotiations in MAC.

Sent Department; repeated Tel Aviv 75, Amman 47.

Burdett

The Minister in Syria (Keeley) to the Secretary of State 867N.48/7–1449: Telegram

[Document 831]

The Minister in Syria (Keeley) to the Secretary of State

secret Damascus, July 14, 1949—5 p. m.

384. President Zaim summoned me today and in hour-long review various matters separately reported, expressed his anxiety over refugee problem, stressing his conviction that unless refugees can speedily be resettled their deteriorating situation and morale will make them increasingly amenable to Communist propaganda. Unlike most Syrians, he lost no time in recriminations or fulminations against Israel for failure to implement repatriation provisions of December 11 UN resolution but made earnest plea for US aid in resettling refugees, implying resettlement is only realistic solution distressing problem.

Recalling that as long ago as April 28 (mytel 2561 ) he had expressed his willingness resettle quarter million or more in Syria if refugees fairly compensated for their losses and Syria given adequate aid. He begged me urge my government come forward with financial and technical assistance to help him fulfill his offer before Communists succeed in their increasing appeal to these victims of Palestine conflict. Explaining that he could not openly take initiative because powerful opposition would attack him for selling out to Jews and their backers, he pledged his wholehearted cooperation if US would take lead. “Give us needed help, show us way and we will prove our good will.” Here as example latter, he alluded to cooperative response Syria has made to US plea for compromise in armistice talks with Israel saying he personally had directed Syrian delegation to make extreme concessions as earnest his appreciation USG’s constructive promise support observance agreement and as gesture his desire speedily liquidate Palestine problems. Armistice would be reached and refugee problem must be solved.

Referring to numerous economic development projects which Syria is anxious to implement and concerning which detailed studies already made (despatch 165, July 14)2 he pled for necessary funds and technical assistance promptly to alleviate them as means of absorbing refugee labor.

Reminding President that USG has consistently shown its concern for refugees both in making substantial contribution their relief and in urging necessity for realistic approach to resettlement, I said we have long foreseen and pointed out distressing and dangerous situation that will exist when current relief funds are exhausted as they soon will be without other provision in sight (pages two and three Legations A–134, May 11).2 He interrupted to express his pleasure that his and our thinking should be so similar and repeated earnestly “we want to resettle them as speedily as possible, but you must help us do it”. I then presented Department’s views as outlined Depcirtel May 27, 1 a. m.3 and said US felt that greater initiative should come from Arab states. Reiterating probable dire political consequences if Syria openly took initiative, Zaim said “if everyone concerned waits for someone else to move, problem will not be solved in thousand years. Recognize difficulty of our position and help us to prove our good will. It is in your interest as much as ours that this problem be speedily solved.”

Believing that no useful purpose would be served by prolonging discussion pending receipt of Department’s reply to Legtel 380, July 132 and authority to make specific suggestions for Syrian consideration, I said I would not fail report his views to my government which I knew would be happy to learn of his awareness of serious implications of problem and of his continued willingness to approach its solution realistically.

Sincerity of Zaim’s will to action is unquestionable if for no other reason than his awareness that Palestine problems stand in way realization many of his dreams. While Legation shares belief that he cannot safely go too far in advance of Syrian public opinion in what would here be considered unreasonable surrender to Israeli intransigence, it is evident that he is susceptible of being led by friendly US initiative not only in resettling refugees but in compromising other differences with Israel. In Legation’s opinion it is in interest of peace in Middle East to capitalize on Zaim’s cooperativeness by recognizing delicacy his position and by encouraging him with our support wherever possible.

If, as recommended Legtel 380, we eschew scolding tactics and take initiative in building constructively on cooperation offered us, resettlement in Syria can begin as promptly as projects can be activated with needed funds and technical assistance.

While appreciating considerations that influenced Department to condition its help of elements set forth in Depcirtel May 27, Legation believes urgency of matter calls for more direct leadership in assembling and concentrating desirable international assistance. Legation fears that unless US takes and keeps initiative in UN to evolve workable plan, cooperation on international plane will be forthcoming too slowly to solve problem before it worsens dangerously and perhaps irreparably.

Our acceptance of leadership entails danger of being blamed for shortcomings of any suggested plan of action but our successful solution this distressing problem would be great humanitarian gesture worthy our best traditions and would pay dividends in helping restore our once high prestige in Arab lands.

Sent Department 384, repeated London 98, Paris 83; pouched Amman, Baghdad, Beirut, Bern, Cairo, Jerusalem, Jidda, Tel Aviv, Ankara, Moscow.

Keeley

1 Not printed, but see footnote 3, p. 962 [Pg. 962 includes portions of Doc. 621 and Doc. 622].

2 Not printed.

2 Not printed.

3 Not printed; it repeated to Arab capitals and Tel Aviv the text of telegram 674, May 23, to Bern, p. 1047 [Pg. 1047 includes portions of Doc. 685 and Doc. 686].

2 Not printed.

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in Egypt 501.MA Palestine/7–1349: Telegram

[Document 832]

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in Egypt

secret Washington, July 14, 1949—11 p. m.

701. Reurtel 669 July 131 and others on same subject. Dept concerned lest Egyptians be given impression that US is insisting they agree to Gaza strip proposal. You shld make every effort to impress Egyptian officials that US position is that this is proposal which has merit, and shld not be summarily dismissed. For this reason USG believes it essential that it be discussed between parties at interest. Egyptian agreement to discuss question wld not involve commitment to accept proposal. It wld be concrete statesmanlike gesture. However, outright refusal to discuss wld leave Egypt open to accusation from other side that it had refused to even discuss a matter of mutual interest and wld undoubtedly be used as opportunity for propaganda campaign against Egypt.

If Egyptians shld attempt to argue that question already discussed at PCC you shld point out that immediate negative reaction of Egyptian delegate at Lausanne did not constitute in the view of this Govt “discussion” of question.

Dept cannot understand your reference in first [last] para reftel 2 to “USG’s complaisant partiality to Israel”. In interests of peace USG has on number of occasions made firm representations both sides, and has sought impartially to give advice whenever cause of peace in area cld be advanced thereby. Further comment on this and points raised in your A–746 July 13 will follow.4

Acheson

1 Not printed.

2 This paragraph gave the comment of Chargé Patterson after his conversation with Abdul Moniem Mustafa, head of the Egyptian Delegation at Lausanne, as follows: “I found Mustafa Bey’s position possibly foreshadowing that of Egyptian Government not in accord with realistic appraisal of situation. If Egypt is weak in military sense Egyptian lack of confidence in Israeli good faith in UN ability to enforce its resolutions and in USG’s complaisant partiality to Israeli should induce willingness to compromise and make best of bad bargain however unjust.” (867N.01/7–1349)

3 Not printed.

4 The Department, on July 14, sent to London a telegram broadly parallel to No. 701. The telegram queried whether the British Foreign Office “now contemplates extending dipl support US representations to Egypt” concerning the Gaza strip proposal (No. 2450, 501.BB Palestine/7–1449). Its content was discussed on July 15 with Michael Wright, who in referring to the British program set forth in telegram 2432, July 13, to London, p. 1223 [Pg. 1223 includes portions of Doc. 827 and Doc. 828], stated that “it was Bevin’s belief that coordinated approach for whole program as embodied in British suggestions held most hope for success. Wright felt personally that to press Egyptians further on Gaza proposal, in isolation from other points, might well prejudice Egyptian acceptance proposals as whole.” (telegram 2790, July 15, 6 p. m., from London, 501.BB Palestine/7–1549)

Statement Released by the Department of State [Document 833]

Statement Released by the Department of State 1

undated

The appointment of Paul A. Porter as United States Representative of the United Nations Palestine Conciliation Commission was announced by the White House on July 16, 1949.2 Mr. Porter recently served as Chief of the American Economic Mission to Greece with the personal rank of Ambassador.

The Palestine Conciliation Commission is charged with the task of facilitating settlement of all issues outstanding between Israel and the Arab States under the General Assembly resolution of December 11, 1948. This government attaches great importance to a speedy solution of these issues and offers its unqualified support in the fulfillment of the Commission’s task.

This government welcomes the resumption of the Lausanne meetings, which represent a further advance in the direction of peace between Israel and the Arab States. The recent discussions at Lausanne were of material benefit in clarifying the respective positions of the two parties. In the opinion of the United States as a participating member of the Commission, the groundwork has now been laid for constructive negotiations in which both parties must cooperate to the full if the area of disagreement is to be progressively narrowed and a final settlement obtained.

1 Reprinted from Department of State Bulletin, July 25, 1949, p. 98. This source Joes not indicate the date of release.

2 The American Delegation at Lausanne was notified of Mr. Porter’s appointment in Unpal 186, July 16, which also informed that Mr. Porter planned to leave the United States immediately for Lausanne (501.BB Palestine/7–1649).

The Secretary of State to Certain Diplomatic Offices 501.BB Palestine/7–1649: Circular telegram

[Document 834]

The Secretary of State to Certain Diplomatic Offices 1

restricted
priority Washington, July 16, 1949—1 a. m.

In order to strengthen PCC and to improve chances fulfillment its task, you are instructed immediately to approach govt to which you tire accredited along fol lines: “Govt of US, motivated by sincere conviction that every effort must be made to facilitate progress towards successful conclusion PCC’s task, and to accord PCC fullest cooperation therein, hopes govts concerned will instruct their delegations to enter into forthcoming discussions at Lausanne with new and constructive approach towards all issues outstanding. Up to present time, progress of PCC has been impeded by fact that certain delegations to Commission were authorized by their govts to discuss or negotiate only with respect to limited aspects of Pal settlement, or to insist upon establishment of priorities in approaching the several questions. US Govt must emphasize that terms of ref under which PCC was established by GA res of Dec 11 have special application to govts and authorities concerned as well as to members PCC. It is earnest conviction of US Govt that all delegations to Lausanne on reconvening July 18 should be given full authority by their respective govts to enter into discussion and negotiation of all issues which fall within purview of PCC, particularly status of Jerusalem, territorial settlement and disposition of refugees. Indeed, a primary purpose of Protocol of May 12, 1949 was to enable Arab and Israeli delegations to extend their exchanges of view to all questions covered by GA res. After talks resume, therefore, refugees and territorial questions should be subject to concurrent discussion.”

Govts of Israel and Arab States should also be informed that similar approach has been made to both sides.

Re other members of PCC, Turkish Govt has already agreed to approach Govts of Israel and Arab States as has US Govt. Dept hopes to be informed shortly that French Govt has also agreed.2

Acheson

1 At Cairo, Tel Aviv, Beirut, Damascus, and Amman.

2 Chargé Stabler discussed the content of this circular telegram with the Acting Prime Minister and King Abdullah on July 20. The King gave his views as follows: “Regarding Jerusalem said his ideas and those of Israel were close and felt there should be no difficulty reaching agreement. Regarding territorial settlement believed it should be based on partition with adjustments provided latter did not harm Jordan. Regarding refugees indicated his belief that as general principle all refugees should be resettled in Arab areas. If large numbers should return [to Israel] they would be source of constant friction between Arab States and Israel and dangerous situation would be created. However Israel should permit return those desiring become Israel citizens (which he thought would be few) and those who desire enter Israel to settle their properties.… Again made plea for US financial assistance in form loan and machinery.” (telegram 286, July 20, 8 p. m., from Amman, 501.BB Palestine/7–2049) On July 21, the Jordanian Foreign Minister informed the Chargé that he had instructed his delegation at Lausanne “to discuss all outstanding issues without regard to priorities on basis of UN decision Jerusalem, frontiers and refugees.” (telegram 289, July 23, 10 p. m., from Amman (501.BB Palestine/7–2349))

Cairo, on July 22, advised that after discussions with high Egyptian officials, there was “no reason to believe instructions Egyptian delegation Lausanne have been amplified in sense recommended by Department.” (telegram 702. 501.BB Palestine/7–2249)

The Secretary of State to the Legation in Syria 301.BB Palestine/7–1649: Telegram

[Document 835]

The Secretary of State to the Legation in Syria

confidential Washington, July 16, 1949—2 p. m.

283. Dept informed Riley and Vigier feel responsible Israel Govt1 in armistice negotiations goes long way toward meeting Syrian reservations re Samakh area and the Syrian Govt should now accept Israeli compromise offer.2 Next meeting armistice delegations Monday, July 18, when armistice agreement might possibly be initialed or subsequent signature later in week. Dept understands Riley and Vigier have seen you and Syrian PM and request your support their dews with Syrian Govt. Dept endorses their request.

Acheson

1 The text of the Israeli response was transmitted by New York in telegram 833, July 15, 6:59 p. m. (501.BB Palestine/7–1549), not printed.

2 This information was reported by New York in telegram 832, July 15, 57 p. m. (501.BB Palestine/7–1549), not printed.

The Secretary of State to the Legation in Syria 501.MA Palestine/7–1349: Telegram

[Document 836]

The Secretary of State to the Legation in Syria

secret Washington, July 16, 1949—6 p. m.

284. Urtel 380 July 131 indicates different interpretation than that intended by Dept of word responsibility in Depcirctel June 27. Dept’s position that Israelis and Arabs bear primary responsibility for solution refugee problem contains no implication of blame for sequence of events leading to creation of refugees but is based squarely upon physical fact that problem intrinsic to the area by virtue of physical presence of refugees in Arab states, separated from their property, asssets and homes in Israeli or Israeli-controlled territory. Since US does not accept primary responsibility nor would support UN in acceptance, such responsibility must reside in Israel and Arab states. Concept of responsibility was dicussed openly and frankly by US rep with all Arab dels Lausanne, all of whom appeared fully to understand US position. For these reasons, Arab dialectics can do no more than perpetuate deadlock, without in any way removing refugee problem from geographical sphere of Arab states. Both sides have inescapable responsibility to take action re refugee question or suffer consequences to their own security which will inevitably result from continued inaction.

Dept fully aware of pros and cons of past history with respect to creation refugee problem. We are firmly convinced, however, of necessity both parties abandoning their preoccupation these arguments if any solution is to be achieved before major disaster is precipitated by refugee problem.

Depcirctel June 27 and Depcirctel July 9 1 a. m. in essence offer Arabs and Israelis two alternative choices: Depcirctel June 27, together with Depcirctel May 27 1 a. m.2 on which it is based, clearly indicate basis on which USG prepared offer material assistance in solution refugee problem. Depcirctel July 9 1 a. m. cites alternative of complete inaction by Israelis and Arabs, with resultant inability of international community initiate further action and attendant repercussions upon best interests Israel and Arab states.

You shld therefore proceed make representations along lines Depcirctel June 27 and July 9, emphasizing considerations set forth above.3

Acheson

1 Not printed.

2 Not printed; it repeated to Arab capitals the text of telegram 674, May 23, to Bern, p. 1047 [Pg. 1047 includes portions of Doc. 685 and Doc. 686].

3 This telegram was repeated to Tel Aviv and was pouched to Arab capitals, London, Paris, Jerusalem, and Ankara and to Bern for the American Delegation at Lausanne. Minister Keeley discussed the content of telegram 284 with the Syrian Prime Minister on July 17 and reported that the latter “was visibly and volubly disappointed that no distinction was made between Syria and Israel or between Syria and certain other Arab states in assessing blame for alleged inaction.… In addition to making maximum contribution to refugee relief it long ago offered to accept for resettlement double or more number already parked on its territory. Acceptance responsibility for creation of refugees as implied by Department in referring to problem as one of ‘Israeli-Arab’ making was another matter and simple justice aside no Syrian Government could stand which accepted any part of blame for creation of Arab refugees or which thus or in any other way admitted or connived in alienating right of refugees to return to their ancestral homes in Palestine and their right to compensation for losses if in actual circumstances they are precluded by Israel from returning or do not wish to return to live under Israeli tyranny.” (telegram 390, July 18, 9 a. m., from Damascus, 501.MA Palestine/7–1849)

The Minister in Syria (Keeley) to the Secretary of State 501.BB Palestine/7–1749: Telegram

[Document 837]

The Minister in Syria (Keeley) to the Secretary of State

confidential
priority Damascus, July 17, 1949—7 p. m.

387. When I discussed Israeli reply with PriMin Barazi July 15 he concluded that, irrespective qualms re details, Syrian Government would, as “of its appreciation of friendly advice of its friends” (meaning US), accept Israeli compromise offer. Following receipt today Deptel 283 July 16 I broached subject again when PriMin came to my house to review various matters separately reported and learned that true to his promise he had yesterday instructed Syrian Delegation to accept terms without further discussion.

Unless Israeli raise new issues or renig, armistice agreement will be initialled tomorrow, July 18, and signed during week he said. “I have given you my word; it is final.” Have informed Riley.

Sent Department; repeated Baghdad 76, Beirut 87, London 100, Paris 85, Tel Aviv 48, Jerusalem 58, Amman 49, Cairo 52, Jidda 33, Ankara 56, Bern 24 (for USPCC).

Keeley

The Minister in Syria (Keeley) to the Secretary of State 501.BB Palestine/7–1849: Telegram

[Document 838]

The Minister in Syria (Keeley) to the Secretary of State

confidential Damascus, July 18, 1949—7 a. m.

389. Prime Minister told me yesterday that because of heavy cost (30,000 Syrian pounds monthly) and belief of Syrian delegation that nothing likely to be accomplished at Lausanne because of Israeli intransigence he proposed cut delegation to one officer and one clerk. I replied that while composition Syrian delegation matter for his decision its reduction at this time might be interpreted as weakening Syrian interest in work of PCC which would be unfortunate on eve arrival Paul Porter whose appointment I extolled.

Also took advantage of occasion to convey sense Depcirtel July 16, 1 a. m. and to urge that Syria take leadership in constructive approach at Lausanne (Bern for USPCC). In reply to Prime Minister query “tell me what you want me to do” I suggested strength Syrian delegation be maintained at least temporarily and be given full authority and instructions to discuss all outstanding problems which fall within purview of PCC, particularly status Jerusalem, territorial settlement and disposition refugees.

After some discussion he agreed and added that he would strengthen Syrian delegation by replacing Farid Zaynaldin “who is too rigid dialectician” and by adding one or more realists, perhaps bringing Edmond Homsi, Syrian Minister London to Lausanne. In addition Prime Minister said he would use his influence with other Arab states to get them to adopt more positive attitude. He would do so out of his conviction that it is in interest Syria and other Arab states to follow advice and leadership of US in solving Palestine problems. As Syria has already followed US advice in armistice [negotiations?] with Israel (mytel 387, July 17) so it is prepared to do in peace talks in belief said Prime Minister that US influence would henceforth be increasingly exerted toward ends of justice.

Pointing out again how difficult it is for Arab states to take initiative in compromising with Israel Prime Minister indicated willingness go along on any reasonable arrangements that would serve cause some peace in Middle East. He recalled statement he had made to Ambassador Griffis and me months ago in this connection (mytel 651, October 18, 19481 ) and reiterated hope that UN under US inspiration and leadership would speedily impose Palestine settlement based on partition plan of November 29, 1947 which Arab states would in present circumstances have to accept as force majeure.

If present friendly Syrian Government remains in office and if [garble] request initiative and leadership (mytel 384, July 14 and 388, July 172 ) in refugee resettlement and in working out reasonable compromise in other matters before PCC Legation believes and Riley concurs that Syria now offers best Arab leadership in reaching overall peace settlement.

If we want peace and stability in Middle East we must boldly accept leadership in achieving it.3

Sent Department 389; repeated London 102, Paris 87, Bern 25, pouched Amman, Baghdad, Beirut, Cairo, Jidda, Jerusalem, Tel Aviv, Ankara.

Keeley

1 Not printed.

2 Latter not printed.

3 In reply on July 20, the Department instructed Damascus to convey to the Prime Minister “US appreciation Syria’s cooperative attitude reflected in his forthright action in reinforcing Syrian participation in PCC meetings and for endeavoring influence other Arab states act similarly. US confident continuation this policy will be most beneficial in speeding settlement outstanding problems.” (telegram 287, 501.BB Palestine/7–1849) Minister Keeley transmitted these sentiments to the Prime Minister on July 21. The latter urged the United States Government “keep secret his offer endeavor influence other Arab states realistically to adopt more positive policy at Lausanne and to follow US lead. Prime Minister reemphasized success his efforts this respect likely to be in proportion to how well secret kept.” (telegram 400, July 22, 10 a. m., from Damascus, 501.BB Palestine/7–2249)

Memorandum by the Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern and African Affairs (McGhee) to the Secretary of State 501.BB Palestine/7–1949

[Document 839]

Memorandum by the Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern and African Affairs (McGhee) to the Secretary of State 1

top secret [Washington,] July 19, 1949.

Subject: Appointment with Paul A. Porter

Discussion:

On July 16 the President appointed Paul A. Porter to succeed Mark Ethridge as the United States representative on the Palestine Conciliation Commission.

Mr. Porter plans to leave Washington July 21 by plane for Lausanne. Mr. Porter has an appointment with you at 11:45 a. m. and with the President at 3:15 p. m. on July 20.

Since Mr. Porter’s appointment on July 16, officials of the Department have had an opportunity to brief Mr. Porter in detail on all aspects of the Palestine question including the instructions which Mr. Lovett, with the President’s approval, issued to Mr. Keenan and Mr. Ethridge2 (Tab A).

It is anticipated that Mr. Porter will inquire to what extent and in what manner the United States Government will support him in his negotiations as the United States representative on the Palestine Conciliation Commission. It is accordingly suggested that you may wish, prior to your appointment with Mr. Porter, to discuss the present stage in developments regarding Palestine with the President.

It is recalled that the President directed the Department on May 29 to approach the Government of Israel in a friendly and firm manner with regard to its attitude on the subjects of Arab refugees and a territorial settlement in Palestine. It was stated at that time that “if the Government of Israel continues to reject the basic principles set forth by the resolution of the General Assembly of December 11, 1948, and the friendly advice offered by the United States Government for the sole purpose of facilitating a genuine peace in Palestine, the United States Government will regretfully be forced to the conclusion that a revision of its attitude toward Israel has become unavoidable.”

The Government of Israel has continued to refuse to heed the advice of the United States Government concerning the principle of territorial compensation for areas held by Israel outside the 1947 Palestine partition lines and the repatriation of a substantial number of Palestine refugees without reference to territorial acquisition. It is hoped, however, that during future talks at Lausanne, the representatives of Israel will adopt a more conciliatory attitude.

Meanwhile, in order to strengthen Mr. Porter’s authority and to increase the prospect of success at Lausanne at this critical stage, it is recommended that Mr. Porter be authorized to emphasize privately to the representatives of Israel at Lausanne two important points: 1. that the United States Government continues to stand firmly behind the principles enunciated in its note of May 29; and

2. that, pending the adoption of a more conciliatory attitude by Israel, the United States Government is finding it extremely difficult to give favorable consideration to the two following matters: a) Further allocation of funds under the $100,000,000 loan requested by Israel in 1948. One of the principal reasons leading to favorable action by the ExImBank on this request was the belief that there were hopes of an early and final peace in Palestine and the consequent establishment of normal economic conditions in Israel which would facilitate the ultimate repayment of the loan. Israel’s failure thus far to heed the friendly advice of the United States may be said to have delayed peace and normal economic relations. Pending positive action by Israel to attain these objectives a suspension of further allocation of funds is accordingly warranted on banking grounds.

b) Ways and means by which the United States, through the United Nations, might be able to participate in an overall program for the repatriation and resettlement of Palestinian refugees. In order to plan a program which would be acceptable to the United States Congress, banking institutions and United Nations member states, some measure of agreement between the Arabs and the Jews and a definite prospect of peace in Palestine are essential; otherwise there would be no firm base on which the United States or other members of the United Nations would be able to formulate and participate in a workable program.

It is also recommended that Mr. Porter continue to emphasize to the representatives of the Arab states at Lausanne:

that the United States continues to support the principle of repatriation of those refugees who wish to return to Israel; but at the same time, hopes that the representatives of the Arab states will be able to make constructive suggestions with regard to the resettlement of those refugees who do not wish to return. Failure to do so would have the consequences indicated under 2(b) above.

Recommendation:

It is recommended that

1) Mr. Porter be authorized to approach the Arabs and the Israelis privately as indicated above;

2) The representative of the Department recommend to the ExlmBank that it temporarily postpone further allocations under the loan pending positive action by Israel at Lausanne.3

[Here follow concurrences by officers of the Office of Near Eastern and African Affairs and of the Office of United Nations Affairs.]

1 This memorandum was transmitted to the Secretary through Mr. Rusk who initialed it.

2 See Mr. Lovett’s letter of January 19 to Mr. Ethridge and footnote 1 thereto, p. 681 [Pg. 681 includes portions of Doc. 407 and Doc. 408].

3 In an attached undated memorandum, Mr. McGhee wrote: “Mr. Porter discussed this with the President yesterday and the President approved the course of action recommended in this memorandum.”

The Ambassador in Israel (McDonald) to the Secretary of State 501.BB Palestine/7–1949: Telegram

[Document 840]

The Ambassador in Israel (McDonald) to the Secretary of State

secret Tel Aviv, July 19, 1949—noon.

549. Re Depcirtel July 16 received July 18. Department will have noted in Embtel July 18, 5451 niact, that following my repeated representations to Foreign Office Israeli Government through Shiloah July 15 and Eytan July 16 declared that Israel delegation was returning Lausanne instructed along lines similar Department’s suggestions. July 18 after dinner for Justice Douglas at residence, Ben-Gurion by implication confirmed Israeli plans for more conciliatory and broader approach at Lausanne. Despite this prior substantial Israeli assent views Depcirtel July 16 were formally urged upon Foreign Office by Ford in conference with Herlitz July 19 who is reporting immediately to Sharett.

Sent Department 549, repeated Baghdad 15, Beirut 27, Damascus 24, Amman 21, Cairo 18, Jidda 1, Lausanne.

McDonald

1 Not printed; it reported that Ambassador McDonald conversed with Mr. Shiloah on the evening of July 15. The latter made known that he would replace Mr. Eytan as head of the Israeli Delegation at Lausanne, that he would be “taking with him more ‘elastic program’” and that he hoped “for progress before UNGA if PCC will bring two groups together.” The Ambassador commented to the Department that “What Shiloah said and way he said it encourages me to hope, that Israel’s policy especially on refugees is developing favorably.” The following day, the Ambassador saw Mr. Eytan, who emphasized that Israel “intends to be ‘more forthcoming’ at Lausanne and hopes that ‘Arabs and US delegates will also be more conciliatory’.” Mr. Eytan was said to have said that it was “essential” that the “UN have success” in the negotiations. (501.BB Palestine/7–1849)

The Minister in Lebanon (Pinkerton) to the Secretary of State 501.BB Palestine/7–1949: Telegram

[Document 841]

The Minister in Lebanon (Pinkerton) to the Secretary of State

restricted Beirut, July 19, 1949—3 p. m.

369. Re Depcirtel, July 16. Lebanese Delegation to Lausanne has been impressed with need to reach agreement on outstanding issues being discussed and it has received instructions from President and Prime Minister to cooperate fully with PCC. Principal delegate has been given full authority in negotiations. In two conversations I had with him during his stay Lebanon, he indicated complete willingness to cooperate and so far as Lebanon is concerned realization of urgency for finding solution on all points. Foreign Office says Turk Chargé has made similar approach and has received similar assurances.1

Pinkerton

1 The Department, on July 20, directed Beirut to “Convey to Pres and PriMin US appreciation Leb cooperative attitude re PCC negots and instru[ction]s this regard to principal Leb delegate Lausanne” (telegram 353, 501.BB Palestine/7–1949).

Mr. Stuart W. Rockwell to the Secretary of State 501.BB Palestine/7–2049: Telegram

[Document 842]

Mr. Stuart W. Rockwell to the Secretary of State

confidential Lausanne, July 20, 1949—11 a. m.

Palun 246. In conversation this afternoon Abdul Monem stoutly denied US charge regarding negative Egyptian attitude, stated Egypt anxious for just peace based on return large number refugees and partition plus compensation. Egypt in no hurry sign unjust peace which would not be lasting and rather than do this preferred await developments. Would take long time for bitterness Near East to subside enough to permit Arab states sign peace and meantime, who knew what might happen in Israel? Israel is carrying crushing economic burden and possibility civil war should not be disregarded.

Said Egypt had decided could not discuss Gaza proposal. Showed complete indifference fate Gaza refugees who were international and Jewish responsibility and maintained if international aid stopped Egypt had means support.

Negev must remain Arab and Egypt needed Gaza-Beersheba-Dead Sea line for defense.

Only sign progress Egyptian position here was information he had been authorized discuss matters other than refugees. Said he willing consider any proposal put forward by PCC but refused commit self in replies to questions regarding possibility Egyptian-Israel condominium Southern Negev or guarantee Israeli access Akaba if Southern Negev in Arab hands.

Hirsch has made it very clear that Israeli Government does not desire that Palestine question be discussed in GA this fall. Put forth “personal” suggestion that if PCC saw any hope for progress at time opening GA, it should recommend Palestine be excluded or placed at very end of GA agenda.

Have asked Arab delegates what their position will be if Shiloah brings substantial concessions from Tel Aviv. All have said would discuss concessions with great interest but obvious that during recess they have reached no common position regarding territorial issue.

Rockwell

The Secretary of State to the Legation in Syria 767N.90D/7–2049: Telegram

[Document 843]

The Secretary of State to the Legation in Syria

Washington, July 20, 1949—7 p. m.

288. Express to Syrian Govt gratification USG with regard signature Israeli-Syrian armistice agreement on July 201 and express hope this further step toward peace in Palestine will increase possibilities successful conclusion to meetings now taking place with PCC at Lausanne.2

Acheson

1 For text, see SC, 4th yr., Special Supplement No. 2.

2 This telegram was sent simultaneously, mutatis mutandis, to Tel Aviv as No. 461. Nos. 288 and 461 were repeated to New York. For the statement made by Secretary Acheson on July 20 on the signing of the Israeli-Syrian armistice, see Department of State Bulletin, August 8, 1949, p. 180.

Editorial Note [Document 844]

Editorial Note

Acting Mediator Bunche, on July 21, transmitted a report to the Security Council on the status of the armistice negotiations and the truce in Palestine. He observed that Israel had concluded armistice agreements with Egypt, Lebanon, Jordan, and Syria; that the agreement with Jordan covered the front held by Iraqi forces, making unnecessary negotiations between Iraq and Israel; that the Saudi Arabian forces in the Palestine conflict had served under Egyptian command and were therefore covered by the terms of the Egyptian-Israeli armistice; and that no agreement involving Yemen was necessary since Yemen had no forces in the conflict.

As a result of these agreements, the report indicated, “an armistice now applies to all of the fighting fronts in Palestine and by the terms of the agreements the military phase of the Palestine conflict is ended.”

The report contained Mr. Bundle’s conclusions and his proposed draft resolution, as follows: 1. The practical application of the Security Council’s truce in Palestine has now been superseded by effective armistice agreements voluntarily negotiated by the parties in the transition from truce to permanent peace. Since all of these agreements are self-enforcing and establish the necessary machinery for their supervision, with the assistance of the United Nations Chief of Staff of the Truce Supervision Organization and United Nations observers at his command, it would seem unnecessary longer to impose upon the States concerned the restrictive conditions of the Security Council truce. The Security Council resolution of 15 July 1948 imposed not only a truce and the conditions relating thereto, but ordered the Governments and authorities concerned, pursuant to Article 40 of the Charter of the United Nations, to desist from further military action.

2. In view of the existing state of affairs in Palestine, the Security Council might consider it advisable to review the situation in the light of the new conditions and to take appropriate action. Such action might declare it unnecessary to prolong the truce provided for in the Security Council resolution of 15 July 1948. It might, at the same time, reaffirm the order in that resolution to the Governments and authorities concerned, pursuant to Article 40 of the Charter of the United Nations, to desist from further military action, and might also call upon the parties to the dispute to continue to observe an unconditional cease-fire. Action along some such lines would be consistent with the realities of the present situation and would at the same time fully safeguard the basic objective of the Security Council that fighting in Palestine shall not be resumed.

3. In conclusion, I would respectfully call to the attention of the Security Council my communication to the Council of 17 January 1949. In my view, the action which the Council might now properly take should also provide, in accordance with General Assembly resolution 194 (III) of 11 December 1948, for the termination or the transfer to the United Nations Palestine Conciliation Commission of such functions as now remain to the position of Mediator under Security Council resolutions. With the armistice agreements concluded, there is no longer any useful function to be performed by the Mediator. Any further activity by me would inevitably impinge upon the work of the Palestine Conciliation Commission. This could create only confusion and duplication of effort and would serve no useful purpose whatsoever. Under the terms of the several armistice agreements, I have no responsibility for their implementation or supervision, since this responsibility, by mutual agreement, is assumed by the parties themselves. With the truce obsolete, the armistice agreements concluded, and the Palestine Conciliation Commission conducting peace negotiations, the mission of the Mediator has been fulfilled. I am happy to have had this great opportunity to serve the United Nations and the cause of peace in Palestine and in this, my final report, wish to thank the Security Council for the indispensable support which it has given to me in my efforts to discharge the responsibilities entrusted to me.

4. Finally, it is clear to me that the success or failure of any mediation or conciliation effort in a situation such as that presented by Palestine must depend very largely upon the measure of support afforded by the United Nations. If the voice of the United Nations is strong and clear, it can be the decisive factor in the mediatory effort to resolve the conflict. The most effective instrument at the disposal of a mediator or conciliator is the assurance of prompt and vigorous support and action by the United Nations.

5. I have taken the liberty of attaching to this report, as an annex, a memorandum suggesting the general lines of the action which the Security Council might now consider it appropriate to take.

Ralph J. Bunche
Acting Mediator

Editorial Note [Document 845]

Editorial Note

The Department of State, on July 21, released a statement by Secretary of State Acheson on the Palestine problem. The key paragraph read as follows: “Now that the position of both parties have been fully defined in previous sessions of the [Palestine Conciliation] Commission, it will materially advance the task of the Commission if both the Israeli and the Arab delegations return to Lausanne with full authority to enter into constructive and effective negotiations. It will also greatly facilitate the Commission’s task if both sides will now extend their exchange of views to all problems covered by the General Assembly resolution of December 11, in order to make possible a simultaneous and balanced approach to the closely related problems of territoral settlement and disposition of the refugees from the hostilities.” The full text of the Secretary’s statement is published in Department of State Bulletin, August 1, 1949, page 148.

Annex [Document 846]

Annex

undated

The Security Council,

Having noted with satisfaction the several armistice agreements concluded by means of negotiations between the parties involved in the conflict in Palestine in pursuance of its resolution of 16 November 1948,

Expresses the hope that the Governments and authorities concerned, having undertaken by means of the negotiations now being conducted by the Palestine Conciliation Commission, to fulfil the request of the General Assembly in its resolution of 11 December 1948 to extend the scope of the armistice negotiations and to seek agreement by negotiations concluded either with the Conciliation Commission or directly, will at an early date achieve agreement on the final settlement of all questions outstanding between them;

Declares that the armistice agreements, as an important step in the transition from truce to permanent peace in Palestine, render unnecessary the prolongation of the truce as provided in the resolution of the Security Council of 15 July 1948;

Reaffirms the order set forth in its resolution of 15 July 1948 to the Governments and authorities concerned, pursuant to Article 40 of the Charter of the United Nations, to desist from further military action, and calls upon them to continue to observe an unconditional cease-fire;

Requests the Conciliation Commission, with the assistance of the United Nations Chief of Staff of the Truce Supervision Organization, to undertake the observance of the cease-fire in Palestine, and terminates all remaining functions of the United Nations Mediator on Palestine under Security Council resolutions;

Requests the Secretary-General to continue in existence such of the present Truce Supervision Organization as the Conciliation Commission, in consultation with the Chief of Staff, may require in maintaining the cease-fire, and as may be necessary in assisting the parties to the armistice agreements iii the supervision of the application and observance of the terms of those agreements.

The full text of Mr. Bunche’s report is printed in SC, 4th yr., Supplement for August 1949, page 1 [Pg. 1 is part of Doc. 1].

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in Israel 501.BB Palestine/7–2249: Telegram

[Document 847]

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in Israel 1

secret Washington, July 22, 1949—7 p. m.

472. Re our proposal Jlem negots under Riley, Dept has fol main points: Art 8 Armistice Agreement, does not rigidly limit subject matter negots re Jlem but includes any questions which parties may submit. In any case Art calls for formulation agreed principles these subjects and implementation obviously requires agreement in free negots between parties. Unsuccesful effort to reach such subsequent agreement shld not be regarded as violation Armistice Agreement.

Foregoing considerations admittedly technical but support our controlling motivation achieve agreement these questions which are vital to settlement Jlem question. It appears possible that sufficient bargaining points exist both sides among these related problems to furnish basis compromise agreement. Dept hopes that parties can disregard technical aspects and undertake broadly based talks which might make possible settlement Jlem question.

Sharett’s statement that Israel will resist return former Arab quarters is first official statement we have had to this effect. It appears directly contrary to provision GA res Dec 11 concerning return refugees to homes and contrary gen US policy and principles justice and equity. Question shld at least be subject negots.

Dept considers possible PCC will feel compelled include recommendations territorial and related questions in its detailed proposals for internatl regime which it must present this fall. Highly desirable such proposals have prior agreement parties but if this not possible PCC may have to make own recommendations.

Acheson

1 This telegram was repeated to Jerusalem, Amman, Bern (for the American Delegation at Lausanne), and New York.

The Secretary of State to the Legation in Switzerland 501.MA Palestine/7–1949: Telegram

[Document 848]

The Secretary of State to the Legation in Switzerland

secret Washington, July 22, 1949—7 p. m.

[Unpal] 198. For USDel Lausanne. Pls inform your colleagues PCC re fol and if they agree proceed as follows:

On basis Cairo tel 689, July 19,1 rpted to Bern, Abdul Moneim Mustafa Bey expressed willingness discuss Gaza proposal in presence PCC. While obvious intent is summary rejection proposal, you and your colleagues shld take initiative privately to raise question with him on basis reftel, expressing appreciation his willingness undertake discussions and pointing out that USG, in making proposal for such discussions, held no brief for any specific locale for discussions but merely suggested Lake Success as convenient meeting place during recess. Now that PCC has reconvened, his suggestion conduct talks Lausanne quite proper. If he shld raise objection that Gaza proposal not in accord with May 12 protocol, you shld emphasize that protocol’s primary intent was to create technique under which negots cld be extended to cover all issues outstanding under Dec 11 res, and that therefore any reasonable proposals put forward shld be given serious attention. Regardless of whether he intends enter into pro forma or substantive discussions Gaza, you shld inform him you and your colleagues prepared immediately approach Israeli del privately with view ascertaining whether it prepared make territorial compensation for Gaza strip of character which PCC cld consider equitable for presentation to Egyptians, and what guarantees it has in mind for refugees and residents along lines set forth para 1 Unpal 133, June 4.

If progress made in private discussions, it is anticipated Israeli del shld then add proposal for such equitable territorial compensation and foregoing guarantees to its May 20 Gaza strip proposal (Document AR/12, May 232 ) in PCC meeting and that Arabs shld then formally discuss proposal in PCC meeting.

Palun 246 July 20 just received. We assume Abdul Moneim meant Egypt cld not discuss Gaza publicly at this stage. In view his assurances to US Chargé Cairo, however, pls proceed along lines foregoing.3

Acheson

1 Not printed; it reported at length on conversations held at Alexandria by Chargé Patterson with British Ambassador Campbell, Acting Chief of the Royal Cabinet Hassan Youssef, Foreign Minister Kashaba, Secretary General of the Arab League Azzam, Mustafa Bey, and the Egyptian Finance Minister on July 15, 16, and 17. The conversations dealt with the Gaza strip proposal. The Chargé advised that all those consulted found little to approve in the proposal; while Egyptian officials “denounced it as forerunner Israel aggression against Gaza, expressing great surprise and I may add contemptuous surprise that the government of a great nation such as US should lend itself to such disreputable scheme.” After describing his various conversations, the Chargé commented: “From foregoing lengthy and perhaps repetitious recital Department may find cumulative evidence not only of total lack of Egyptian faith in any proposal emanating from Israel but also a growing suspicion of inability or unwillingness of USG to view Palestine controversy impartially. This may serve to amplify and clarify reference to USG’s complaisant partiality to Israel mentioned in concluding paragraph Embtel 669, July 13, which was designed to emphasize a certain lack of realism on Egypt’s part. I fear that continued harping on merits of Gaza plan which are completely invisible to Arab eyes, may cause Egyptians to view USG as an accomplice of an expansionist and aggressive Israel and impair, if not destroy nascent cordiality which Egyptian officials and others have been showing toward US and its citizens and interests in interval since conclusion February 24 armistice. It is not pleasant to see practices of one’s government treated with the very real intellectual and moral disdain evident in minds and indeed on lips of ranking officials of a foreign government.” The Chargé concluded that “should Department be able guarantee Egypt territorial compensation sufficient provide land bridge between Egypt Jordan, Egypt I believe might adopt more conciliatory attitude toward proposed settlement.” (501.MA Palestine/7–1949) Regarding 669, see footnote 2 to telegram 701, July 14, p. 1229 [Pg. 1229 includes portions of Doc. 832 and Doc. 833].

2 AR/12 was a memorandum of the Palestine Conciliation Commission, which transmitted to the Delegations of the Arab States at Lausanne a summary of the proposals and suggestions made by the Israeli Delegation oh May 20 (IO files). The Israeli proposals and suggestions are set forth in telegram 769, May 20, from Bern, p. 1036 [Pg. 1036 is part of Doc. 675].

3 This telegram was repeated to Cairo. The formal rejection by the Egyptian Government of the United States proposals was made in the form of an undated aide-mémoire handed to Chargé Patterson on July 25 (telegram 713, July 26. 9 a. m.). The Department replied on August 4, stating that “Although Dept cannot agree with contentions in Egyptian reply it is believed undesirable to continue to press Egyptian Govt re Gaza strip proposal. Proper focus of discussion this subject now appears to be Lausanne.” (telegram 778, repeated to Bern for the American Delegation at Lausanne) Both telegrams are filed under 501.MA Palestine/7–2649.

The Secretary of State to the Legation in Switzerland 501.BB Palestine/7–2249: Telegram

[Document 849]

The Secretary of State to the Legation in Switzerland 1

secret Washington, July 22, 1949—7 p. m.

Unpal 199. For USDel, Lausanne. Re Deptel 472 Jul 22 to Tel Aviv Dept wld appreciate comments appropriate procedure in event failure parties agree demarkation lines and related subjects Jlem area. Dept considering fol alternatives:

PCC might recommend as part of proposals that agreement shld be reached by parties and that failing agreement within specified time UN authority shld delimit zones on basis status quo Nov 29, 1947.

Second alternative. If parties fail agree within next few weeks PCC shld make own recommendations as part of proposals after consulting expert opinion in Jlem.2

Acheson

1 This telegram was repeated to Tel Aviv as No. 471, to Jerusalem as No. 304, to Amman as No. 101, and to New York as 382.

2 In reply to this telegram and the one supra, Ambassador McDonald observed that the problems of Jerusalem, refugees, and boundaries were “little if any nearer solution than when PCC was created, more than seven months ago.” The Ambassador concluded that “Lack of progress not attributable personalities nor wholly to inherent difficulties of issues nor to stubborness governments concerned. Department should face fact that PCC has been inherently self-stultifying. Despite Porter’s best efforts PCC will, I fear, remain incapable that series of strong affirmative united actions essential bring Arab states and Israel to move beyond present armistices. “In light of PCC record, gravity of unsettled problems and urgent need for speedy action, I urge Department begin now campaign to have UNGA replace PCC by single man authority. This change vital even if Bunche be not available to do job.” (telegram 566, July 26, 7 p. m., from Tel Aviv, 501.BB Palestine/7–2649)

The Secretary of State to the Legation in Syria 501.MA Palestine/7–1849: Telegram

[Document 850]

The Secretary of State to the Legation in Syria

secret Washington, July 22, 1949—7 p. m.

293. Urtel 390 July 18.1 In reply your query as to what Dept specifically desires from Syria to advance refugee solution, it wld be of considerable value if Zaim wld authorize Syrian del inform PCC officially of its willingness cooperate in facilitating solution of refugee problem by accepting substantial number refugees for permanent settlement Syria. Such undertaking by Syria wld in no way relieve Israel of its repatriation responsibilities and other Arab states of necessity cooperating in resettlement. We also hope Syrian cld be instructed use its influence induce other dels to adopt similar position simultaneously at Lausanne.

In making foregoing suggestions, we recall, of course, that Arab dels to PCC at June 25 meeting Lausanne expressed willingness examine resettlement question as soon as they knew how many refugees did not wish return to homes on basis completely free choice, and stated that such, refugees wld find Arab countries ready to take them. However we now hope it would be possible to make more practical and forthright statement along lines suggested, which wld more accurately reflect Zaim’s demonstrated interest in settlement of refugees in Syria and wld materially advance progress of negots towards permanent solution of problem.

Since some progress has been made in private discussion with Arabs and since certain indications exist that Israel may now be prepared make concessions re refugees, we are concerned lest forthcoming Arab League Political Comite meeting result in hardening of Arab attitude, and thereby produce setback to PCC negots.

On suitable occasion, you shld make ref to Arab League meeting and state that Dept understands refugee question will be taken up. You shld then make fol observations:

Dept has received indications that PCC now has reasonable hopes achieving early progress towards practicable solution refugee problem. We are aware that Arab states, who bear burden of refugees, wld welcome such solution. Dept believes that all parties now appreciate fact that solution can only be achieved through effective cooperation Israelis, Arab states, UN and its member govts. For this reason Dept hopes that at forthcoming meetings Arab League, Arab reps will find it possible to adopt position in Beirut which will make it possible for Arab reps at Lausanne constructively to approach resettlement of refugees in connection with overall solution for Pal problem.

Sent Damascus, repeated to Beirut and Amman for similar action vis-à-vis Lebanese and Transjordan govts.2

Acheson

1 Not printed.

2 This telegram was also repeated for information to Bern for the American Delegation at Lausanne. Its content was summarized and sent to Baghdad, Jidda, and Cairo as a circular telegram of July 22, 11 a. m. (501.MA Palestine/7–2249). Minister Keeley conveyed the substance of No. 293 to Prime Minister Barazi on July 25. The latter “said he would immediately send cable instructions to Syrian representatives at Lausanne to confirm to PCC formally oft-repeated offer to accept for resettlement substantial number of those refugees who not desiring return to Palestine to live under Israeli administration are compensated for their losses as foreseen in UNGA resolution December 11 and who elect to settle in Syria. Barazi implied number would depend upon Syria’s absorptive capacity in light of amount of resettlement aid furnished (in past tentative figure has been 250,000 to 300,000).

“As for forthcoming meeting Palestine Political Committee Barazi said it likely to be held in Egypt (Alexandria) and he is optimistic it will support realistic and constructive attitude at Lausanne. For his part he will exert his whole influence to that end.” (telegram 408, July 25, 11 a. m., from Damascus, 501.MA Palestine/7–2549)

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom 501.BB. Palestine/7–1549: Telegram

[Document 851]

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom

secret
priority Washington, July 23, 1949—2 p. m.

2582. Brit Emb Rep (Embtel 2790 July 15)1 recently discussed Brit suggestions outlined Deptel 2432 July 13 with Dept. Brit stated they were prepared to approach Arab States, France and Turkey re these various points. Dept suggested, however, that it might be wise temporarily to postpone such approach (except for Gaza strip proposal which was currently being discussed by Brit Emb Cairo with Egyptian officials) until Brit and ourselves had agreed more precisely on form and substance of approach. Brit Emb seeking further views FonOff on certain points.

It may not therefore be necessary for Wright to raise proposal with Bevin for time being. Pls inform Dept re current Brit views on Gaza strip proposal.

Acheson

1 Not printed.

The Chargé in Jordan (Stabler) to the Secretary of State 867N.01/7–2349: Telegram

[Document 852]

The Chargé in Jordan (Stabler) to the Secretary of State

secret Amman, July 23, 1949—midnight.

291. During talk with King this morning, he made following comments: 1. He had received no information from Fawzi Pasha re agreement Transjordan and Arab delegates that Transjordan should annex Arab Palestine (Depintel July 21, 1 a. m.1 ). However, believed annexation inevitable and desirable. During feast next week, delegation from Nablus would present to him formal request for annexation, having first held meeting in Nablus to accept partition principle. Delegation would include former followers of Mufti and he thought this action significant. HM felt such areas as might be returned to Arabs should also be annexed to Transjordan.

2. Regardless what other Arab states wished Transjordan still desired settle with Israel on permanent basis. “This is my will.”

3. He had sent memo to government suggesting new ministry for resettlement (refugees) be formed, under Ragheb Bey Nasha Shibir (former mayor Jerusalem and elder statesman) if latter would accept. Ministry would be charged with formulation plan to resettle refugees in Transjordan and Arab Palestine along lines Legtel 286, July 20.2 In addition each Transjordan village would be requested take 10 percent refugees living in Hebron and Samaria districts where resettlement possibilities difficult. He again expressed hope Transjordan would receive US and international aid soonest. Promised would send me copy his memo to government.

4. He doubted whether league political committee would hold meeting as planned since no agreement on site could be reached. If not held it would make no difference.

5. King has received official invitation visit Spain and would do so following visit to England. (Re visits please see Legtel 274, July 5.3 )

Pouched Madrid, Tel Aviv, Jerusalem, Arab capitals, London.

Department summarize USDel PCC.

Stabler

1 Not printed.

2 Not printed; it reported information from King Abdullah that “He had given orders to his government begin resettlement in Jordan and Arab Palestine and had in mind scheme to be directed by Musa Alami for use his private and state domain lands on both sides Jordan valley.” (501.BB Palestine/7–2040)

3 Not printed, but see footnote 1 to telegram 117, p. 1284 [Pg. 1284 includes portions of Doc. 886 and Doc. 887].

Editorial Note [Document 853]

Editorial Note

In a note of July 25, 1949 to the Secretary of State, the Egyptian Ambassador, Mohamed Kamil Bey Abdul Rahim, reiterated an earlier Egyptian request of June 10 for United States support towards bringing to an end the arms embargo imposed by the Security Council (see telegram 573, June 11, to Cairo, page 1115 [Pg. 1115 includes portions of Doc. 745, Doc. 746, and Doc. 747]). The Ambassador cited the damaging effects of the embargo on trade and stated that the embargo was a hindrance to Egypt’s industrial and economic development, as well as to her program of defense. He noted that United States goods needed for Egypt’s development were among the articles covered by the embargo. The Ambassador requested the United States to take into account the cessation of hostilities in Palestine and the conclusion of all armistice agreements, including the Syrian Armistice signed the preceding week, (501.BB Palestine/7–2549)

Editorial Note [Document 854]

Editorial Note

Following his return from Tel Aviv, Ambassador Elath called on Mr. McGhee to discuss his recent trip. Mr. McGhee’s memorandum of conversation, dated July 25, cited the Ambassador as expressing “the opinion that our recent note to Israel regarding refugees and territory had been emotionally phrased. The Government had been somewhat hurt, possibly because it is a new state and unused to diplomatic exchange. I replied that we did not consider that our note had been emotionally phrased but had reflected the facts regarding the situation relating to Palestine under UN resolutions and established US policy.” Regarding the note, see telegram 398, June 24, to Tel Aviv, page 1174 [Pg. 1174 includes portions of Doc. 789 and Doc. 790].

The Ambassador was also reported to have stated that Egyptian refusal to discuss the Gaza strip proposal “showed that Egypt, and probably the other Arab states, did not sincerely desire peace. If they did they would be endeavoring to seek a way out of the present situation in the Near East.

“I pointed out that we had hoped the Egyptians would be willing during the recent recess of the PCC to adopt this proposal as a basis for discussion. Although this had not proved possible, I hoped that future developments at Lausanne might lead to this result through a simultaneous discussion of such interlinked subjects as territory and refugees. I added that I felt that the inability of the Egyptians recently to discuss the Gaza strip proposal was not indicative of a lack of desire for peace but was merely based on Arab emphasis on other matters such as repatriation under the GA Resolution of December 11. I emphasized the importance we attach to a conciliatory attitude on the part of the Israeli delegation at Lausanne in order to break the vicious circle which had thus far existed in Israeli and Arab talks with the PCC.” (867N.50/7–2549)

Major General John H. Hilldring to the Secretary of State 501.BB Palestine/7–2549

[Document 855]

Major General John H. Hilldring 1 to the Secretary of State

Phoenix, Arizona, July 25, 1949.

Dear Mr. Secretary: Before I left Washington last April the President asked me to take a message from him to the appropriate officials of Israel. The message related to his deep concern about the attitude of the Israeli government as to: 1. Arab refugees, and

2. Acceptance by the Israeli government of the UN decision of November 29, 1947, for the future control of Jerusalem.

At noon last Monday I reported to the President on this mission, and on other matters regarding Palestine, and at four o’clock on Monday—a few minutes before I was to depart for Chicago and Arizona—I was informed that the President wanted me to repeat to you the report I had made to him earlier in the day.

As Mr. Battle has probably told you, I immediately called your office. In view of the fact that I do not expect to be back in Washington for some weeks, I suggested, and Mr. Battle concurred, that I send you a brief résumé of my report to the President which I can expand, if you desire more detail, when I return to Washington.

On my second day in Israel I called on the foreign minister and delivered the President’s message to him. I later discussed it with the Prime Minister and several other Israeli officials. I made it clear, as the President wanted, that he was personally concerned and disturbed about these matters.

Mr. Sharett stated that he was distressed to hear that the President felt as he did, and took some time to explain to me the domestic threat which any Israeli government would face if it agreed to the return of any Arab refugees. He asked me to examine the refugee and Jerusalem problems on the ground while I was in Israel, and to discuss these matters with him again before I left.

During my seventeen days in Israel I gave considerable time and thought to this project. At the end of my visit Mr. Sharett was at Lake Success. Therefore, I related my impressions and views to one of his assistants. Here in brief is what I said: 1. The President is right. The refugee problem should be separated from the other issues, and a settlement of the refugee problem effected promptly. As a beginning Israel should make a generous and bold proposal as to what it was willing to contribute to the settlement.

2. The Jerusalem problem was complicated. I wanted to give more thought to it. Anyway it could wait, in my judgment, until the refugee problem was well under way toward settlement.

The officials expressed regret that I did not agree with their proposals and attitudes about Arab refugees, but promised to communicate my views to the foreign minister.

Subsequently, two Israeli officials came to Paris to discuss this issue with me, and on a later visit to Paris Ambassador Elath conferred with me again about it. Finally, in London during my last week in Europe I had several talks with two officials from Tel Aviv. At the conclusion of each of these European discussions the Israeli officials expressed the conviction or the hope that their government would accept in some considerable part the President’s proposal as to refugees.

Last Saturday the Israeli Consul General in New York came to Washington to see me. He informed me that his government was willing: 1. To discuss the Arab refugee problem separately, and

2. To agree to admit 100,000 Arab refugees, including the 20,000 who have already entered Israel illegally, but not including any that might be admitted under any future negotiation or settlement in regard to the Gaza strip.

Mr. Lurie made it quite clear: 1. That this proposal would be offered, however, only if it were satisfactory to the President and to the United States government, and

2. That this was their final figure, not a starting point from which to bargain. He based this conclusion on the judgment that the quarter of a million Arabs who would then be in Israel would be as many Arabs as his country could absorb without creating either a threat to the security of the country or an inordinately great economic problem.

I informed Mr. Lurie that I would give his message to the President. I have not, of course, given Mr. Lurie any indication of the President’s reaction to this proposal.

As to Jerusalem, I informed the President that it was my judgment that the UN decision of November 29th would never be applied because: 1. Neither Israel nor Transjordan wants it.

2. After the experience of the 100,000 Jews in Jerusalem during the siege of 1948, no government in Israel which agreed to it would last five minutes, and

3. There is much difference of opinion among the so-called Christian countries as to the wisdom of insisting of the 1947 UN decision instead of some other, and perhaps better, scheme of UN control of Holy places not only in Jerusalem but also in Bethlehem, Nazareth and elsewhere.

I also gave the President several personal observations at random: 1. The Israeli government and most Israelis are disturbed and worried about recruitment and rearmament in Arab league countries, which in my opinion accounts in large measure for their super-sensitiveness in regard to security.

2. Neither the UN nor the US is ever going to bring about peace in the Near East. This will be accomplished, if it is ever accomplished, only by the Jews and the Arabs themselves with the help and guidance of the UN and the US, or both. I am certain that the indifferent results which have come out of the Lausanne Conference are traceable to the fact that the UN commissioners have been keeping the principals to the settlement apart—deliberately, instead of encouraging them to discuss the issues together.

3. One reason why America hasn’t been more effective in the Palestine affair is because of the kind of Americans who are involved in it. They belong in too many cases to one of two groups: a. Those who feel that the Jews of Palestine are always wrong, and

b. Those who feel that they are always right.

Both groups are wrong, of course, and it seems quite clear to me that a peaceful settlement of the Palestine problem cannot be expected to be brought about, or to be influenced, by people from either group. Dr. Bunche is a notable exception to the rule.

4. Another observation that worried me considerably was the difference in attitude toward Israel between British officials and our own. The British officials I talked to were without exception completely realistic and unemotional about Palestine. Their attitude can be summed up in a few words. If there is going to be a Jewish State in the Near East, then we must find a way to get along with it. Invariably I was then asked, “Do you believe we, British, will have much trouble making friends with Israel?” I never encountered in any Britisher the attitude of one U.S. official observer who said to me, “I am hot anti-Jewish; I am simply pro-British. I am going along with the British.”

5. I am convinced that Israel wishes to be oriented to the west. Its officials and its people want the friendship of the United States, want to pattern Israel largely after the American way.

6. The President has great prestige and influence with Israeli officials. Once they are convinced that expressions of U.S. policy represent the views of the President, they carry great weight.

I believe that this is a complete outline of my report to the President. Of course, it is not as full a statement as I was able to give the President in nearly forty minutes. As I said in the beginning of my letter, I shall be very happy to fill in the details, if you feel that they would be useful to you, when I get back to Washington.

I am very much impressed with the splendid job you are doing, which doesn’t surprise me in the least. Congratulations, and my very best wishes for your continued success and health.2

Sincerely,

John Hilldring

1 Formerly a member of the United States Delegation at the United Nations and Assistant Secretary of State for Occupied Areas.

2 Messrs. Wilkins, Rusk, and Aaron S. Brown, Assistant to Mr. Humelsine, prepared a draft reply on August 11, which contained substantive informal comments. Secretary Acheson discarded the draft and prepared his own reply, which withheld “questions and comments until we have a chance to talk together.” Neither the draft nor the actual reply, dated August 16, is printed. They are filed with the letter of July 25. Ambassador McDonald has given a brief account of Major General Hilldring’s visit to Israel in My Mission to Israel, p. 170 [Pg. 170 is part of Doc. 73].

Preliminary Draft Declaration by the Committee on Jerusalem of the United Nations Conciliation Commission for Palestine IO Files, A/AC.25

[Document 856]

Preliminary Draft Declaration by the Committee on Jerusalem of the United Nations Conciliation Commission for Palestine

restricted [Lausanne ?,] 26 July 1949.

Com.Jer./W.29

Declaration Concerning the Holt Places, Religious Buildings and Sites in Palestine Outside the Jerusalem Area

In implementation of paragraph 7 of the resolution of the General Assembly of the United Nations of 11 December 1948, the Government of _____________ formally undertakes by the following provisions to guarantee the protection of and free access to the Holy Places, religious buildings and sites in Palestine situated in its territory: 1. Freedom of conscience and the free exercise of all forms of worship shall be guaranteed, subject to the maintenance of public order.

2. The Holy Places, religious buildings and sites _________ shall be preserved and their sacred character protected. No act of a nature to profane that sacred character, such as the construction of buildings in an unsuitable proximity shall be permitted.

3. Rights existing on 15 May 1948 concerning the Holy Places, religious buildings and sites shall not be impaired.

4. The Government of _______ undertakes to guarantee freedom of access, of visa and of transit to ministers and pilgrims of the Christian, Jewish and Moslem religions, without distinction as to nationality, subject only to considerations of national security and to the maintenance of public order.

5. No form of taxation shall be levied in respect of any Holy Place, religious building or site which was exempt from such taxation on 15 May 1948.

No change in the incidence of any form of taxation shall be made which would either discriminate between the owners and occupiers of Holy Places, religious buildings and sites or would place such owners and occupiers in a position less favourable in relation to the general incidence of that form of taxation than existed on 15 May 1948.

6. The provisions of Articles 1 to 5 shall be under the effective supervision of the administrative and judicial authorities of the United Nations in Jerusalem, in conformity with the relevant provisions of the Instrument establishing a permanent international regime for the Jerusalem area. The Government of _______ undertakes to cooperate actively with the United Nations Commissioner in this task and to take special account, in regard to the granting of entry and exit visas and residence permits in its territory to ministers and pilgrims of the Christian, Jewish and Moslem religions, of the recommendations addressed to it by the United Nations Commissioner. The Government of _________ furthermore undertakes to grant the latter the privileges and facilities necessary for the performance of his functions.

The United States Representative at the United Nations (Austin) to the Secretary of State 501.BB Palestine/7–2649: Telegram

[Document 857]

The United States Representative at the United Nations (Austin) to the Secretary of State

secret
priority New York, July 26, 1949—1:21 p. m.

859. Eban at his request called on Ross late yesterday afternoon and discussed the following matters of which he said he understood the only one Elath was instructed to take up with the Secretary on Wednesday is the question of continuing the arms embargo.

[Here follow sections on the discussions at Lausanne, relations with Syria, and the arms embargo.]

4. Egyptian blockade.

Eban referred to the Egyptian practice of stopping shipping through Suez destined for Haifa. This practice he said was a severe economic handicap to Israel with regard, for example, to importation of meat from Australia and was also a severe handicap to the UK with particular reference to the passage of tankers from the Persian Gulf through Suez destined for the Haifa refineries. This forced the UK to use dollars to buy oil from dollar areas. The Israeli Government could not understand the Egyptian position in this matter. They considered the blockade an act of war rather than an armistice. On the other hand, the Egyptians who all along have denied the existence of war, say the armistice terms do not in any way comprehend the blockade and that the blockade is a sovereign act of the Egyptian Government, that other governments have nothing to do with.

Because of the concern which the Israeli Government feels the UK Government shares with them in regard to this matter, Israeli representatives in London have been instructed to take this matter up with the UK authorities at London this week. They will seek to determine in the first instance whether there is any truth in the rumors that the Egyptian Government has given assurances that there will be no more searches of shipping going through Suez and destined for Haifa. If there is no truth in these rumors, the Israeli representatives will seek to determine the UK view of what might be done to get the blockade lifted.1

Austin

1 These last two paragraphs were quoted in airgram 839, August 1, to London, with a request that the Embassy “keep Dept fully informed as possible results Israeli-UK discussions referred to.” The airgram was sent also to Cairo and Tel Aviv (501.BB Palestine/8–149). Messrs. Boss and Eban discussed the questions of the arms embargo and of the Egyptian blockade on August 1. Concerning the latter, Mr. “Eban said Israeli Minister in London had also discussed this with Bevin, pointing out the inconsistency of Egypt receiving arms from the UK on the basis that peace exists in Palestine while maintaining the blockade on the basis of war existing. Bevin was reported as having told Israeli Minister that UKG had made representations to Egyptian Government but had not yet received response. Eban expressed hope that UK representative would refer to Egyptian blockade and desirability of lifting it in SC.” (telegram 875, August 1, 1:59 p. m., from New York, 501.BB Palestine/8–149)

Mr. Paul A. Porter to the Secretary of State 501.BB Palestine/7–2649: Telegram

[Document 858]

Mr. Paul A. Porter to the Secretary of State

secret Lausanne, July 26, 1949—4 p. m.

Palun 249. Preliminary impressions leave me dubious as to prospect of important changes of attitude as result recess. Regret that holidays ending Ramadan, failure Shiloah arrive (due July 27), and unavailability Egyptian delegation make it impossible at present obtain more definitive views. Talks with colleagues on PCC and delegation members available give no grounds for optimism as to settlement by agreement here. Apparently parties willing to continue endless and aimless discussions.

At Executive session PCC morning July 25, I suggested we spend next two weeks in exploring prospects of agreement. If it should appear, as seems likely, that no agreement can be developed by mutual consent, PCC should then initiate proposals that in its view are equitable. I obtained provisional approval for this procedure.

Therefore request Department’s views and instructions on (1) equitable territorial settlement; (2) provisional allocation refugees by area in light Nr. 1; (3) information re status survey group project; (4) preliminary position US re desirability placing overall Palestine question on GA agenda. Letter detailing these first reactions being prepared and subsequent telegram will convey suggestions US delegation re possible territorial settlement.

This request covers waterfront and I recognize its general character. Feel it important however that Department begin formulating a specific position on outstanding issues in view of probable contingency that impasse will continue and PCC may have obligation to initiate proposals. Failure to follow such course could make UN role in bringing about Palestine settlement meaningless and cast UN efforts into category of futile debating society. We may be forced to take initiative and I want instructions as specific as possible.

Porter

The Secretary of State to the United States Mission at the United Nations 501.BB Palestine/6–949: Telegram

[Document 859]

The Secretary of State to the United States Mission at the United Nations

confidential Washington, July 26, 1949—5 p. m.

390. Urtel 693, June 9.1 Dept assumes in light Israeli-Syrian armistice that Bunche will raise again at early date introduction into SC of res terminating functions of mediator and revoking clause of SC res of May 28 preventing import or export of war material into area.

Dept believes before deciding its position on lifting arms embargo it would be useful to confer with Bunche so that Dept may explore with him (1) considerations underlying introduction of his proposed res at this time rather than after current phase of work of PCC concluded; (2) whether he anticipates from his conversations with other SC members that lifting arms embargo will be in issue in SC and subject of sharp debate.

Accordingly, request you arrange early meeting at mutually acceptable time for Bunche, Ross and Wilkins in NY and that you request Bunche defer presentation res until we have had opportunity to discuss with him.

Acheson

1 Not printed, but see footnote 2, telegram Unpal 134, p. 1091 [Pg. 1091 includes portions of Doc. 724 and Doc. 725].

Mr. Paul A. Porter to the Secretary of State 501.BB Palestine/7–2649: Telegram

[Document 860]

Mr. Paul A. Porter to the Secretary of State

secret Lausanne, July 26, 1949—5 p. m.

Palun 250. Present thinking USDel re Unpal 199, July 24 [22] as follows: If failing agreement at Lausanne PCC decides to make recommendations to fourth GA re over-all Palestine territorial settlement, would be appropriate include recommendation re demarcation Jerusalem as part Jerusalem proposals if parties have by then; failed agree in PCC.

If above decision not taken PCC could recommend as part of jerusalem proposals that parties reach agreement re demarcation: through mediation UN authority on basis status quo November 29.

USDel believes would be undesirable, so soon after establishment UN representative Jerusalem, to submit authority of latter to severe and perhaps fatal test involved in attempt to delimit zones without agreement parties. If parties failed reach agreement under mediation UN representative latter could still exercise authority on basis status quo and attempt strength position. In course time might bring parties to agree with him or recommend that UN call upon parties accept a specific demarcation.

Porter

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in Israel 767N.90D/7–2149: Telegram

[Document 861]

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in Israel

secret Washington, July 26, 1949—7 p. m.

476. During past two years USG has consistently supported UN in its handling of Palestine. USG has also sought ways of bringing Israelis and Arabs together directly or indirectly in UN or outside UN. Para 4 of GA Res Dec 11 provides that parties seek agreement by negots conducted either with PCC or directly Dept recently supported direct talks between Israel and Egypt for this reason, and because PCC was in recess. Thus far Arabs have been unwilling, however, undertake direct talks.

Dept considers it preferable at this critical stage to place major emphasis on new phase PCC activities and strongly to support new US rep. If emphasis were shifted at this time to series of personal conferences between high Israeli and Arab officials, we wld appear to be undercutting PCC and thereby prejudice its present prospects for success and its future usefulness. Meanwhile, possible personal conferences might be protracted and lead to no result.

Dept believes Ben Gurion’s desire for action, as reflected by willingness meet Zaim, might equally well be implemented by Israeli del at Lausanne. Such Israeli efforts at Lausanne to reach agreement with Syria might also have effect of promoting agreement between Israel and other Arab states at Lausanne.

It may be desirable at later date to encourage direct talks between high Israeli and Arab officials if under conditions then existing such talks should appear advisable to supplement discussions at Lausanne or otherwise to accelerate developments. Meanwhile, you are instructed informally to emphasize to Israeli officials importance we attach to current phase PCC discussions.1

Acheson

1 This telegram was repeated to Amman as No. 105 and to other Arab capitals, London, Bern (for the American Delegation at Lausanne), Jerusalem, and New York. Tel Aviv replied on August 8 that Foreign Minister Sharett the previous day had expressed his dismay at the admonition contained in telegram 476 and had stated that “Israel determined seek peace in Middle East and ‘means business’ in its resolve cooperate every way with PCC to this end. Nevertheless, as ‘sovereign independent state here to stay’ he felt Israel should be given ‘free hand’ in its efforts contribute toward attainment peace whether via PCC or through direct contact with Arab neighbors, and said his Government convinced such bilateral approach US would be helpful in reaching PCC’s own objectives. Foreign Minister said he voiced Prime Minister’s sentiments this respect and that Shiloah had conveyed same to Porter.” The Foreign Minister had also expressed the hope that the “‘Arab states would be counseled and influenced’ accept proposal” concerning the Arab refugees “promptly since longer Arabs delayed action, more increasingly might Israel, forced by public opinion, ‘disengage itself from commitments’.” (telegram 602, 501.BB Palestine/8–849)

The Secretary of State to the Legation in Switzerland 501.BB Palestine/7–2649: Telegram

[Document 862]

The Secretary of State to the Legation in Switzerland

confidential Washington, July 26, 1949—7 p. m.

Unpal 208. For USDel Lausanne. As soon as you consider desirable in order support current negotiations, you are authorized take steps to establish Econ Survey Mission. When decision made, pls notify Dept and inform your colleagues of Dept’s view that PCC shld activate economic survey mission near future pursuant para 12 of Dec 11 res in order meet urgent need for carefully formulated program prior GA action autumn session. Dept believes terms of ref this Mission shld be based on foregoing res with special ref para 11 thereof, which establishes principles of repatriation and compensation for refugee property, and instructs PCC facilitate specific tasks of repatriation, resettlement, econ and social rehabilitation, and payment of compensation. Within foregoing context, Mission shld be charged with objectives set forth Unpal 119, May 27, numbered para 1.

In Dept opinion, designation as mission, in which all members would be clearly responsible to chairman, wld greatly expedite completion survey and insure coordinated action. We also believe members of mission shld not serve as reps their respective govts1 but as members international organ under auspices PCC.

Re composition, Dept believes Unpal 113, May 23 shld be modified in order include French deputy as well as UK deputy, in light France’s traditional interests NE and stated desire participate actively in refugee program. In addition to chairman and deputies, mission wld include such technical personnel as required to carry out survey, selected by chairman on multinational basis and on basis their special qualifications, in consultation with interested govts and appropriate international organizations, and subject to final approval of PCC. Dept hopes Turk Govt wld be prepared make qualified personnel available on request chairman.

Dept hopes US national to serve as chairman can be chosen within few days. As soon as you consider appropriate, pls ask Boisanger obtain views FonOff re proposed French deputy and express hope French Govt will look into question availability outstanding French candidate this post.

As soon as Dept informs you re nomination of American rep, PCC cld then proceed make formal request that SYG announce establishment of survey mission and purpose thereof. White House announcement wld be made concurrently. At same time PCC members shld make formal approach to all NE govts, requesting their cooperation with mission.

Repeated to Amembassies Paris and Ankara for discussion with FonOffs upon authorization from you.2

Acheson

1 In an explanatory note to London, the Department, on July 26, stated that “While individual members of mission wld of course advise their respective govts of proceedings of mission, Dept does not consider it feasible for members of mission to serve as reps of their respective govts. Latter wld not only raise difficult administrative and financial problems, but might make acceptability of mission to govts of NE even more difficult to overcome.” (telegram 2617, 501.BB Palestine/7–2649)

2 This telegram was repeated to Paris and Ankara with an additional note that Unpal 113 and 119 were being repeated to them separately. It was also repeated to London without the additional note. The Department, on August 4, informed London that in conversations with British Embassy officials, it had “emphasized necessity maintaining international status of econ survey mission in order to place matter in UN context and to avoid impression that direct responsibility is being assumed by US or GB or any other state. We have pointed out that USG, which wld probably make major financial contribution to any program established, must insist upon keeping UN between itself and refugee problems (telegram 2770, 501.BB Palestine/8–449)

The Consul at Jerusalem (Burdett) to the Secretary of State 501.BB Palestine/7–2749: Telegram

[Document 863]

The Consul at Jerusalem (Burdett) to the Secretary of State

secret Jerusalem, July 27, 1949—4 p. m.

495. Consul General strongly favours second alternative Deptel 304, July 22.1 Believe impossible present realistic plan providing for “effective UN control” without consideration matters listed Article 8 and in addition questions such as demarcation zones, means of access to holy places, status such sites as Jewish cemetery on Mount of Olives and permission Jews reside in Jewish quarters Old City. These points are of immediate practical concern to parties directly involved and recommendations with respect to them will vitally affect acceptability PCC proposals. Demarcation lines will also play major part in determining stability UN regime and certain Christian nations have great interest in exclusion their institutions from Jew zone. Feel decision on such fundamental and far reaching issues should be made by PCC and GA and not postponed by reference to Jerusalem authorities appointed by UN. Fear any failure at September GA reach definite decision re Jerusalem both as to nature international regime and on “practical” questions would seriously jeopardize hope for any form internationalization.

With refusal Israel to negotiate on basis Department proposal and expressed determination Sharett resist return Arab quarters, prospects agreement between parties or even start negotiations on major questions now remote. Only relatively short time remains before September GA and delay while waiting for agreement could prevent preparation PCC plan. Positions of Transjordan and Israel particularly on question delimitation zones now appear so diametrically opposed that imposed solution apparently inevitable. Also Department suggestion that zones be delimited on basis status quo November 29, 1947 will require imposition on Israel. Under circumstances decision by GA would have much more weight and chance of acceptance than one by UN Jerusalem authorities.

In view above Consul General suggests following procedure: 1. Continuation efforts to induce Israel negotiate with Transjordan on basis Department proposals. Agreement to maximum extent possible eminently desirable and negotiations could narrow zone within which PCC must make decision.

2. Elaboration on proposals by PCC Jerusalem subcommittee at same time and without waiting results Israel–Transjordan discussions.

This would assure readiness plan by September and any points agreed to by Transjordan and Israel could be incorporated. Jerusalem committee might wish return to Jerusalem or request representatives of member governments on spot to advance suggestions.

Sent Department 495, repeated Tel Aviv 81, Geneva 46, Amman 53.

Burdett

1 This was a repeat of Unpal 199 to Bern, p. 1245 [Pg. 1245 includes portions of Doc. 849 and Doc. 850].

The Secretary of State to the United States Delegation at Lausanne 501.BB Palestine/7–2049: Telegram

[Document 864]

The Secretary of State to the United States Delegation at Lausanne

confidential Washington, July 27, 1949—7 p. m.

Unpal 211. [For Porter.] Dept notes with interest urtel Palun 246, July 20, Hirsch advised Rockwell Israeli Govt not desirous Palestine question be discussed next GA. In view Shiloah’s expressed greater cooperative attitude to McDonald re refugees (Bern Tel 15, July 18, from Tel Aviv1 ) Dept believes Israeli motives warrant further exploration.2 Dept believes discussion Palestine question in GA almost inevitable. One, continued need relief refugees makes question almost certain agenda item since UNRPR funds exhausted by October. Only quick decisive solution problem in PCC could lessen chance lengthy careful GA consideration. Two, Dept believes GA entitled consider results its Dec 11 res. Three, implementation any solution refugee problem satisfactory Israelis Arabs undoubtedly will require aid other UN Members hence should have GA authorization and assistance. FYI, you shld bear in mind USG plans for refugee resettlement, repatriation, rehabilitation contemplate continuing direct relief by UN through voluntary contributions and coordinated aid from US, UK, France and other sources under UN auspices for economic development refugee settlement areas. Estimate at your briefing July 20 re likelihood getting Congressional appropriation was request shld be made only after GA consideration entire problem.

Acheson

1 This was a repeat of No. 545 from Tel Aviv, not printed, but see footnote 1, p. 1237 [Pg. 1237 includes portions of Doc. 839 and Doc. 840].

2 Lausanne reported, on July 29, that “According to Hirsch, main motive for Israeli Government’s desire that general Palestine question not be discussed fall GA is deleterious effect inevitable acrimonious debate would have on discussions Lausanne and on general Israeli-Arab relationships. Hirsch has suggested that if at some later date prior opening GA PCC feels there is hope of progress at Lausanne, PCC should recommend that general Palestine question not be discussed at all or be placed at end of agenda.” (telegram Palun 255, 501.BB Palestine/7–2949)

Memorandum of Telephone Conversation, by the Deputy Under Secretary of State (Rusk) 501.BB Palestine/7–2849

[Document 865]

Memorandum of Telephone Conversation, by the Deputy Under Secretary of State (Rusk)

secret [Washington July 28, 1949.

I told Mr. Connelly1 that Ambassador Elath would probably bring up today the question of retaining the arms embargo on Israel and the Arab States. I said that Ralph Bunche had recommended to the Security Council that the various truce resolutions be rescinded and that the Security Council proceed on the basis of the armistice agreements. I told Mr. Connelly that the Secretary of State would wish to discuss this matter very carefully with the President and that the Secretary hopes that the President will make no commitment to Ambassador Elath prior to the Secretary’s talk with the President.

Mr. Connelly said that he would take care of the matter and see to it that the President “just listens”. He stated that he would need nothing in writing, that my telephone call was sufficient.

1 Matthew J. Connelly, Secretary to President Truman.

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Deputy Under Secretary of State (Rusk) 501.BB Palestine/7–2849

[Document 866]

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Deputy Under Secretary of State (Rusk)1

confidential [Washington ], July 28, 1949.

Participants: Eliahu Elath, Israeli Ambassador

Uriel Heyd, Israeli First Secretary

G—Mr. Rusk

NEA—Mr. McGhee

NE—Mr. Wilkins

Problem

The extent to which Israel will be able to contribute to the Arab refugee problem in the Near East by permitting repatriation.

Action Required

To determine what reply the US Government will make to the Israeli Ambassador with regard to his remarks relating to the present attitude of Israel re repatriation.

Action Assigned to

NE

On July 28 the Israeli Ambassador Eliahu Elath, accompanied by his aide, Uriel Heyd, called on me at his request for the purpose of discussing Israel’s present attitude regarding the question of Arab refugees in the Near East.

The Ambassador said that his government had decided to permit the return of 100,000 Arab refugees for two reasons: (1) to demonstrate Israel’s cooperation with the US; and (2) to contribute what it could to a solution of the general Arab refugee question in the Near East. Ambassador Elath added that the Israeli proposal was based on the assumption that the Arab states would be willing to conclude peace at Lausanne, and that the present Security Council arms embargo under the Security Council resolutions of May 29 and July 15 would be maintained.

Ambassador Elath stated that his government had reached its decision for these two impelling reasons in spite of the fact that Israeli security and economic experts had considered the proposed decision as disastrous.

The Ambassador explained, in reply to questions, that the 100,000 Arab refugees would include returning members of separated families and Arab infiltrees into Israel.

The Ambassador said that Israeli Foreign Minister Sharett had been scheduled to present the foregoing information to American Ambassador McDonald in Tel Aviv on July 27th, and that Israeli Delegate Shiloah planned to inform the PCC at Lausanne similarly shortly. Ambassador Elath said the Israeli delegation hoped the PCC would establish a refugee committee to which the Israeli proposal would be submitted. Reference would not be made, however, to the necessity for a formal conclusion of peace or the question of the arms embargo.

I thanked Ambassador Elath for his statement regarding the admission of 100,000 refugees into Israel and said we would study it.

Mr. McGhee inquired whether the 100,000 refugees was a rigid maximum figure, pointing out that if the Israelis and the Arabs at Lausanne attempted to tackle the question of approximately 750,000 refugees in its entirety, it would be necessary to approach the question flexibly. It was our thinking that each of the parties should accept its responsibility and absorb its share of this common problem. For example, if Israel absorbed only approximately 250,000 refugees, i.e., the 100,000 to be admitted and the Israeli estimate of 150,000 already in Israel, and if the living spaces for refugees in the Arab states totaled only 300,000, there would be a gap of 200,000 refugees. What would happen to these refugees? Israel and the Arab states should solve the whole problem and not only a part of it. It could not be assumed that Israel and the Arab states could leave the balance to UN or some other undetermined authority.

Ambassador Elath replied that the 100,000 figure was the maximum. He appeared to be confining himself to the exact phraseology of his instructions because he was unable to reply with regard to responsibility for refugees that might not be absorbed by Israel and the Arab states.2

Ambassador Elath expressed his government’s view that the present arms embargo should be maintained in order to avoid an arms race in the Near East. I observed that the recent conclusion of armistice agreements between Israel and Lebanon, Syria, Transjordan, and Egypt separately would seem to remove the necessity for the maintenance of an arms embargo. I inquired whether Israel would be willing to give its assurance that it would not import arms, which would thus have the effect of removing one of the chief elements in Arab fears regarding Israel. Ambassador Elath replied that the armistice agreements were a step on the road to final peace and that he could assure me of Israel’s nonaggressive intentions. His government felt, however, that the arms embargo should be maintained at the present time.

Ambassador Elath remarked, during his discussion of military matters, that such groups as Palmach and Irgun, which had previously been highly autonomous, were now integrated into the Israeli Army. The Ambassador again referred to his government’s hope that the US Government would soon be in a position to provide a high-ranking US Army Officer for the purpose of assisting Israel in reorganizing its military establishment. I told the Ambassador that this matter was still under consideration within the Department.

The Ambassador added that he hoped to have a further discussion with me and Mr. McGhee regarding the foregoing matters and that he also hoped to call upon the Secretary in the near future. I told him that the Department would immediately take these matters under consideration and would communicate with him further concerning them. I also told him that an appointment would be arranged with the Secretary.

Ambassador Elath subsequently discussed details regarding the Gaza strip proposal with Mr. Wilkins. The Ambassador explained, in reply to a question, that if this proposal proved acceptable to the Arabs it would not be possible for Israel to absorb the 230,000 Arab refugees within the area of the Gaza strip. On the other hand, if the Gaza strip proposal should now prove acceptable Israel would not be able to maintain its proposal regarding the 100,000 refugees. The Ambassador said he had not been informed by his government whether the proposal regarding 100,000 refugees and possibly 130,000 refugees from the Gaza strip would simultaneously be acceptable to his government.

Mr. Wilkins inquired whether the Israeli Government had considered the possibility of enlarging this proposal to include territorial compensation along the Egyptian frontier within the area allocated to the Arab state in Palestine and now occupied by Israel. Mr. Wilkins observed that such addition would lift the Gaza strip proposal out of the context of a bargain of “refugees for real estate” and might therefore make it acceptable to Egypt. Ambassador Elath said he did not know and that he himself had never thought of this possibility. He remarked, in this connection, that Israel would never permit the blocking of access to the Gulf of Aqaba for Israel through the relinquishment of territory in the tip of southern Palestine, for the purpose of giving Transjordan direct access to Egypt.

Ambassador Elath subsequently informed Mr. Wilkins that his government had not indicated what form peace should take at Lausanne but conceded it need not necessarily be along the lines of a peace treaty but might assume the form of unilateral declarations by the states concerned, bound together under the title of “Act of Lausanne.”

1 Drafted by Mr. Wilkins.

2 The Department summarized Mr. Rusk’s memorandum of conversation up to this point in Unpal 214, July 29, 8 p. m., to Lausanne, which was repeated to London, Arab capitals, and Tel Aviv (501.BB Palestine/7–2949). Unpal 214 stated, additionally, that “Elath was informed we do not consider it appropriate for Dept to advise as to adequacy or inadequacy of number of refugees permitted to return as Arab reaction and influence of Israeli proposals on Lausanne negots would determine this point. Arabs might not consider present Israeli figure as complying with GA Res Dec 11 and might not be able to resettle balance of refugees even if they so desire. It wld be difficult for US and other states to come forward with assistance plan in event all refugees not provided for under resettlement and repatriation plan.”

Mr. Paul A. Porter to the Secretary of State 501.BB Palestine/7–2849: Telegram

[Document 867]

Mr. Paul A. Porter to the Secretary of State

restricted Lausanne, July 28, 1949—11 a. m.

Palun 252. As result urging by general committee, chiefs all Arab delegations have agreed cable their governments recommending that favorable reply be given to Israeli démarche through MACs re reuniting separated families and that steps be taken to begin reunion.

Also as result urging by general committee Israeli delegation has agreed request Israeli Government give favorable consideration Arab desires re conditions for reunion families based on oriental concept of family unit.

Porter

The Ambassador in Israel (McDonald) to the Secretary of State 501.BB Palestine/7–2849: Telegram

[Document 868]

The Ambassador in Israel (McDonald) to the Secretary of State

secret Tel Aviv, July 28, 1949—noon.

571. In 40-minute talk with Foreign Minister [at] his office [at] his request late yesterday, Ford and I were informed that Israeli Government, reviewing exchange of words both oral and written which had taken place recent weeks re Arab refugee problem, had been “deeply impressed” by one argument in particular, namely that until countries involved including Israel specified actual number refugees they prepared take, no overall planning of refugee program including all important financing could be undertaken. Accordingly, while still adhering to general policy outlined by Eban at Lake Success May 5 that resettlement best solution refugee problem, Israeli Government had now decided make concrete contribution toward “overall solution” that problem and “in interest of general peace settlement” by offering take back total of 100,000 refugees. Immediate procedure in implementation this offer will be for Israeli delegation in Lausanne to inform PCC that “if Arab delegations prepared enter peace negotiations, Israel will then announce willingness go ahead with repatriation program.” Foreign Minister stressed no territorial expansion strings attached to above offer. He also underlined that 100,000 was limit as this number would bring total Arab population in Israel “well over quarter million, far beyond margin of safety by all known security standards.” Finally he urged fullest secrecy above proposition until Israeli Delegation Lausanne had acted.

Related subject: Foreign Minister said with some asperity that after nearly four weeks no written reply had been received regarding Israel’s offer reunite Arab families. In case of Lebanon “oral acceptance” had been expressed by one official, later to be denied in Beirut, but nothing had come from Egypt or Transjordan. Foreign Minister added that immediately Syrian armistice was signed that country had also been invited participate in divided family program (reDeptel 437, July 11).

Sent Department 571; repeated Baghdad 19, Beirut 31, Damascus 28, Jerusalem 62, Amman 25, Cairo 23, Jidda 5, London 73.

McDonald

Mr. Paul A. Porter to the Secretary of State 501.BB Palestine/7–2849: Telegram

[Document 869]

Mr. Paul A. Porter to the Secretary of State

secret Lausanne, July 28, 1949—2 p. m.

Palun 253. Shiloah arrived today July 27 and in private conversation stated following position of Israeli Government which he said adopted because US pressure.

1. Israel now prepared discuss refugees outside context of final Palestine settlement.

2. In discussions of refugee question Israel prepared if PCC so desires, officially commit self to accept specific number refugees for repatriation. Shiloah showed no inclination to mention number and I did not press him in this first meeting.

3. Actual repatriation of above number of refugees could not begin until: a. Overall plan for repatriation and resettlement drawn up and means to put in operation assured. Israel could not be expected accept refugees under US pressure only to find that remainder continue in relief camps and are not resettled.

b. There must be evidence, convincing to all parties, that real progress being made toward final settlement. Israel did not insist upon formal peace treaties but could not be expected to admit large number of refugees if Arab states had no intention of making sincere efforts to reach peaceful settlement.

Shiloah emphasized necessity for international refugee repatriation and resettlement plan and urged that US hasten formulation such plan.

When question territory mentioned Shiloah said PCC would have “bitter wrangle” with Israeli delegation over any plan involving reduction Israeli occupied territory. Strongly outlined familiar position re necessity Israeli retention Negev. Maintained that “alleged” psychological desire of Arabs for continuous land connections between Arab states merely hastily erected screen to cover 19th Century ideas of military strategy. Said Israeli Government “might” consider suggestions for territorial “adjustments” which did not involve loss of Negev.

I am not encouraged by this position but shall of course attempt to make most of it and plan press for continuous sessions PCC with Arabs and Israelis in attempt discover soonest whether possibility of agreement exists.

Porter

The Secretary of State to the United States Delegation at Lausanne 501.BB Palestine/7–2649: Telegram

[Document 870]

The Secretary of State to the United States Delegation at Lausanne

secret Washington, July 28, 1949—9 p. m.

Unpal 213. Ref Palun 249.1 Although Dept not yet precisely informed what attitude Israeli and Arab Dels will take Lausanne, Dept hopeful its recent diplomatic approaches to NE capitals and growing realization there of necessity for some early action re refugees will produce results Lausanne. Parties should be made to understand that if their intransigence continues next report of PCC to UN will necessarily reflect their respective positions.

Dept concurs your suggestions two weeks exploratory period and PCC initiation proposals if direct agreement not in sight. We believe anything in the nature of a PCC plan shld be avoided at least until fol stage is tried: Proposals shld be advanced by PCC on individual problems in manner which seems most effective and PCC shld be continuously prepared to withdraw, substitute or modify proposals in light reaction parties. This procedure wld keep discussions on negotiating basis with parties continually talking in terms of solutions for various problems and shld afford maximum opportunity reaching solution between now and time report must be made to GA.

Dept is presently preparing supplementary views and instructions on four points mentioned para 3 Palun 249. Meanwhile, fol comments may be helpful: (1) This subject is under current consideration concerning which you will be informed shortly.

(2) Dept considers Israel shld absorb approx 400,000 Arab refugees and residents, of which Israel estimates 150,000 are already there. However, you should avoid US responsibility for any specific figures. Balance of refugees outside Israel will be absorbed almost entirely by Syria and Jordan including central Palestine. Allocation will necessarily depend upon disposition Gaza refugees and whether Lebanon, Egypt, and Iraq will be able retain token number. Further advice will fol this general subject;

(3) Survey group project progressing and can be ready at PCC call. Meanwhile, Dept awaits your reaction re timing of PCC action under Unpal 208.2 Further advice will fol shortly on this matter;

(4) Dept’s preliminary views re placement on GA agenda sent separately (Unpal 2113 ).

Fol receipt your proposed letter and further tel. Dept will frame specific instructions on which US initiative in PCC, if required, may be based. Meanwhile, USDel’s reaction to tactics and views herein mentioned will be appreciated.

Acheson

1 Dated July 26, p. 1254 [Pg. 1254 includes portions of Doc. 857 and Doc. 858].

2 Dated July 26, to Bern, p. 1257 [Pg. 1257 includes portions of Doc. 861 and Doc. 862].

3 Dated July 27, to Lausanne, p. 1260 [Pg. 1260 includes portions of Doc. 863 and Doc. 864].

The Chargé in Jordan (Stabler) to the Secretary of State 501.BB Palestine/7—2849: Telegram

[Document 871]

The Chargé in Jordan (Stabler) to the Secretary of State

secret Amman, July 28, 1949—10 p. m.

294. Tel Aviv telegram [566] July 26 to Department1 repeated Amman 24. I agree with Ambassador McDonald it would be futile attempt settle Jerusalem problem on basis first suggestion Deptel 101 July 22.2 If proposal meant demarcation of zones without internationalization, Transjordan would probably accept. However if it meant internationalization of Jerusalem called for in GA resolution of November 29, 1947, it is believed King would oppose it notwithstanding official attitude of Transjordan as expressed at Lausanne. On Israeli side there seems little doubt proposal, with or without international, would be resisted in every possible way. Consequently if UN should proceed along this line, it is believed another opportunity would present itself for flaunting [flouting] of such decisions.

Unless it shortly becomes clear that Israel accepts Department’s proposal re MAC (Deptel 82, June 17)3 without reservation it would appear problem will have to be dealt with by PCC along lines second alternative Deptel 101 and as originally proposed by Legation. Would suggest definite time limit now be set re Israel’s final reply Department’s proposal.

While agreeing with Ambassador McDonald that it would be most unfortunate if members of PCC prove unable agree amongst selves on single proposal, feel time has now come for PCC to take matters into own hands and put forward soonest definite joint proposals for settlement all outstanding issues. Further discussions with Arab and Israel delegates along lines first part Lausanne conference will, I believe, prove to no avail and will only lead to failure present session. With anticipated change Israel attitude and with continuing pressure on both Arabs and Israel it may be that sufficient leeway will exist between positions both parties to permit PCC to put forward compromise proposals.

I fear single man authority suggested by Tel Aviv would have no more chance success than PCC in settling Palestine question as he would still be obliged deal with Arab states as group and Israel. It seems certain Arab states would not agree at this stage enter into separate negotiations with Israel under UN auspices. Moreover it would not be possible for Arab states in their present frame of mind to undertake direct negotiations with Israel. This due fact that for first time since beginning Palestine conflict Arab states represented at Lausanne have reached some degree cooperation and understanding and deviation by any state from this line would be regarded as “treachery”. Transjordan for one which is so sensitive to criticism at this time could not consider such direct negotiations. In addition to above it is felt any plan put forth by “single man authority” would suffer the same fate as Bernadotte plan in GA.

I concur views expressed Deptel 105 July 264 that at this critical stage fullest support should be given US representatives PCC and to PCC in general. PCC should be encouraged present joint proposal, acceptable to member states and UK, to Arab and Israel delegates Lausanne. Moreover US should be prepared to give its fullest support to such proposal with assurance that its position will not change.

Department summarize USDel PCC.

Sent Department 294, repeated Tel Aviv 37, London 54, Jerusalem 138, Baghdad 73, Beirut 54, Cairo 36, Damascus 57. Pouched Jidda.

Stabler

1 Not printed, but see footnote 2, p. 1245 [Pg. 1245 includes portions of Doc. 849 and Doc. 850].

2 This was a repeat of Unpal 199, ibid [Pg. 1245 includes portions of Doc. 849 and Doc. 850].

3 Not printed, but see footnote 1 to telegram 375, June 17, p. 1154 [Pg. 1154 includes portions of Doc. 773 and Doc. 774].

4 This was a repeat of 476 to Tel Aviv, p. 1256 [Pg. 1256 includes portions of Doc. 860 and Doc. 861].

Memorandum by Mr. John C. Ross to the Deputy Under Secretary of State (Rusk) 501.BB Palestine/7–2949

[Document 872]

Memorandum by Mr. John C. Ross to the Deputy Under Secretary of State (Rusk)1

secret [Washington ?,] July 29, 1949.

As I see it there are three alternative courses concerning the arms embargo for Palestine, which was discussed at a meeting with Department officers this morning.

1. To lay the draft resolution proposed by Bunche on the Security Council table until say September, possibly later, in any event until after the PCC makes its report.

2. To propose adoption of the Bunche resolution amended to provide for retention of the arms embargo.

3. To propose adoption of the Bunche resolution (subject to minor amendments).

The first alternative has the possible advantage of avoiding discussion in the Council at this time of the controversial embargo question. I doubt however if this advantage is real in view of the fact that the Israelis have made public their position in favor of retaining the embargo and in view of the risk that the Russians may bring up the question This course would have the effect legally of retaining the embargo until we know a little better how the PCC discussions at Lausanne are going to come out.

On the other hand I think this course confuses two phases of the Palestine question which we have in the past weeks and months tried to keep quite separate, namely the armistice phase and the definitive peace making phase. Also, I feel that this course would create a negative reaction psychologically [and] might thereby impair public confidence and impair the work at Lausanne. Bunche would probably oppose this course and we could probably expect fairly strong opposition from the British and the Egyptians, at least.

The second alternative would have the advantage of protecting us against the risk of an arms race in the Near East. To propose this alternative in the Council however would, I feel quite sure, be, controversial and although strongly supported by the Israelis and probably also by the Russians and the Ukrainians, would be strongly opposed by the British and the Egyptians. I think we would have a chance of getting the Council to support us in such proposal but only as a result of very considerable effort.

The disadvantage of this course is that it would be widely interpreted as indicating a lack of confidence on the part of the United States in the relatively early achievement of peace in Palestine. As corollaries I think Arab confidence in our impartiality would be shaken and the peace effort at Lausanne impaired.

Although I orginally strongly favored retention of the embargo for the time being, I have now come to the view and so recommend personally that we should adopt the third alternative, namely to propose adoption of the Bunche proposed resolution subject to such minor amendments as we may think desirable.

In proposing that this course be followed I have in mind two corollaries. First, that we make a statement in the Council (and endeavor to get the British and if possible the Egyptians and the Israelis to make similar statements) of a reassuring character. In such a statement we would call attention to our own control of arms and munitions exports and make clear that we have no intention of permitting so far as we are concerned an arms race to get started.

The second corollary is that through diplomatic channels we endeavor to assure that an arms race will not get started. The diplomatic channels I have in mind are with the British, the French, the Arab States and Israel and possibly also such other states as Sweden.

I should make clear that the foregoing recommendations are personal. I discussed this matter with Ambassador Austin before leaving New York and he at that time was inclined, as was I, to favor retention of the embargo. I will of course take up my present view of the matter with the Ambassador on my return to New York on Monday and I should like if possible to take up with him at the same time the Department’s view if it has by then been determined. In view of the fact that the Council will probably meet on this subject on Wednesday next, I think it is important that a decision be reached as promptly as possible so that there will be time enough before the meeting for consultations both in Washington and in New York.

John C. Ross

1 Addressed also to Mr. McGhee.

Editorial Note [Document 873]

Editorial Note

President Zaim of Syria informed Minister Keeley on July 30 that a formal request would be addressed to the United States Government for certain military equipment and uniforms, to be used by internal security forces. The Legation suggested that the Department would “wish examine request in light political consideration Syrian goodwill toward and cooperation in UN–US plans refugee resettlement.” (telegram 420, August 1, 5 p. m., from Damascus, 890D.24/8–149)

The formal request was made on July 30 in a letter from the Chief of the Military Cabinet of the President of the Syrian Government to Minister Keeley. Damascus transmitted a copy to the Department on August 1 in despatch 187 (890D.24/8–149).

Marginal notations on telegram 420 state that a reply to Damascus and a circular telegram were drafted on August 5. They were not sent and copies have not been found in the files of the Department. A further marginal notation states that “Reply not necessary because of Aug 14 coup d’état”. For documentation on the several coups in Syria in 1949, see pages 1630 [Pg. 1630 is part of Doc. 1132] ff.

Mr. Paul A. Porter to the Secretary of State 501.BB Palestine/7–3049: Telegram

[Document 874]

Mr. Paul A. Porter to the Secretary of State

Lausanne, July 30, 1949—1 p. m.

restricted

Palun 256. Shiloah July 28 notified PCC Israel is prepared discuss refugees and to specify number willing repatriate subject two conditions set forth Palun 253 July 28.

July 29 Shiloah by letter submitted third condition—that discussions re refugees must be held directly between Israeli and Arab delegates in presence PCC.

PCC decided would not present third position to Arabs as condition. July 28 notified Arab delegates of Israeli position and first two conditions. Reference to third position was limited to informally expressed hope that Arab delegates would at opportune moment find it possible engage in joint discussions with Israelis.

Arabs all said only had powers talk with PCC. Joint discussions out of question. Would consider Israeli position and attendant two conditions.

I called upon Arabs accept, stating PCC felt Israeli conditions reasonable and that Israelis not attempting gain parliamentary advantages or entrap Arab delegates. Stressed humanitarian aspects Refugee situation and fact UNRPR funds running out with little likelihood more to become available unless political agreement reached re repatriation and resettlement. Egyptian delegate gave impression his delegation would accept. Arabs will give answer August 2.

Porter

Memorandum by the Secretary of State 501.BB Palestine/8–549

[Document 875]

Memorandum by the Secretary of State 1

secret [Washington,] August 1, 1949.

Conference With the President—July 29

The President informed me that the Israeli Ambassador, who has recently returned from a visit to Israel, called on him and said that he would shortly call on me. The President thought that his attitude was more conciliatory than it had been prior to his departure. He made the following points: (1) The Israeli Government was anxious to make progress on the refugee question and would repatriate up to 100,000 refugees.

(2) They wished the United States to oppose in the General Assembly any raising of the embargo on arms.

(3) The Israeli Government wished to retain the Negeb.

(4) The Israeli Government wished to retain the continued friendship and support of the United States Government.2

D[ean] A[cheson]

1 Addressed to Messrs. Rusk, Sandifer, and McGhee and to Ernest A. Gross, Assistant Secretary of State for Congressional Relations, and Adrian S. Fisher, the Legal Adviser.

2 A summary of this memorandum was sent to the American Delegation at Lausanne in Unpal 219, August 5, 8 p. m. (501.BB Palestine/8–549), repeated to New York, Arab capitals, Jerusalem, Tel Aviv, London, Paris, and Ankara.

Mr. Paul A. Porter to the Secretary of State 501.BB Palestine/8–149: Telegram

[Document 876]

Mr. Paul A. Porter to the Secretary of State

secret Lausanne, August 1, 1949—10 a. m.

Palun 257. Following comments Unpal 2131

(1) Agree procedure second paragraph but desire stress necessity avoiding further delays insofar as possible.

(2) Agree Israel should be expected end up with approximately 400,000 Arab refugees and residents. Basis estimates Riley, believe 120,000 more accurate figure for Arabs now in Israel. Responsibility suggesting any specific figure if such action taken would rest with PCC not US.

(3) See Palun 2582 for action taken re survey group.

(4) On basis present situation Lausanne believe discussion general Palestine situation in GA desirable.

Porter

1 Dated July 28, from Lausanne, p. 1267 [Pg. 1267 is part of Doc. 870].

2 Dated August 1, from Lausanne, not printed; it advised that the Delegation had discussed the question of the economic survey group with the other members of the Conciliation Commission, who were in general agreement that the group be constituted as envisaged by the Department in Unpal 208, July 26, p. 1257 [Pg. 1257 includes portions of Doc. 861 and Doc. 862]. (501.BB Palestine/8–149)

The Consul at Jerusalem (Burdett) to the Secretary of State 867N.48/8–149: Telegram

[Document 877]

The Consul at Jerusalem (Burdett) to the Secretary of State

confidential Jerusalem, August 1, 1949—4 p. m.

499. ConGen concurs fully with opinion expressed last paragraph Palun 255.1 Israel currently concentrating every effort consolidate holdover entire area now in its possession with particular emphasis on sections not allotted Israel by GA Resolution November 29. Ben-Gurion and Sharett personally encouraging settlement present border areas (ConGen airgram A–97, July 6)2 while movement new Jewish immigrants into former Arab sections Jerusalem progressing steadily. Israel press indicating desire avoid general discussion Palestine at September GA.

Postponement beyond September GA of decision on repatriation of refugees, boundaries and international regime for Jerusalem will further jeopardize small chance now remaining for obtaining settlement in accord with UN Resolution, US policy and principles of justice and equity. Delay will provide Israel with additional opportunity consolidate her position and reinforce her argument that “turning back clock” impossible.

Contel 495, July 27 recommended presentation definite plan covering all aspects Jerusalem problem to September GA. Suggest report by PCC on overall situation with specific recommendations re refugees and boundaries might constitute best approach entire problem. Must reiterate view often expressed that Israel will not comply in substantial manner with either GA Resolution, US policy or principles of justice and equity unless US or UN willing employ forceful measures.

Sent Department repeated Geneva 47 for USDel PCC, London 33, Baghdad 46, Tel Aviv 83, Beirut 95, Damascus 52, Cairo 23, pouched Amman, Jidda.

Burdett

1 Dated July 29, from Lausanne, not printed; the last paragraph stated that the “Israelis here have stated their belief it unwise for PCC to deal with important problems involved in Palestine settlement in hurried atmosphere of working against GA deadline. I think, however, that PCC should use this deadline as pressure to induce parties take concrete steps forward and I also have growing impression that despite their assurances regarding desire for quick peace, Israelis are not sure GA might not adopt settlement plan they considered unfavorable and would not mind having further time to consolidate their situation in Palestine.” (501.BB Palestine/7–2949)

2 Not printed.

Mr. John C. Ross to the Secretary of State 501.BB Palestine/8–149: Telegram

[Document 878]

Mr. John C. Ross to the Secretary of State

secret New York, August 1, 1949—8:08 p. m.

878. Bunche, with whom I discussed question this afternoon, continues to favor lifting arms embargo and said he planned to make this position clear to Eban whom he was seeing later this afternoon. He stressed that any attempt to maintain embargo was unrealistic since it would require to be effective rebuilding truce supervision organization in order to establish observers at all airfields and ports in area and getting permission of states concerned, including Israel, to do so, which permission he was sure would not be forthcoming. He also stressed that if this subject were debated, facts of Israeli imports from eastern Europe would inevitably be brought out. In addition he anticipated whole question of immigration of fighting personnel and men of military age into Israel, contrary to truce provisions, would also be brought out.

I told Bunche Department had not yet reached decision and would want to take his views into account. As alternative to lifting embargo I asked what he thought of idea of Council deferring action on his report leaving aside his own personal inclinations. He thought it would be very bad to follow this course, SC, he said, called on the parties for prompt action in effecting armistice as transition between truce and permanent peace. Parties have in good faith and despite serious obstacles complied with SC request for action. It would be therefore an act of bad faith of part of SC to defer action on his report at this time. Such deferment would be interpreted as expression of lack of confidence in parties, particularly in view of fact armistice agreements (see for example article 3 of Syrian agreement) contain very strong nonaggression pledges. Furthermore, leaving his personal inclinations aside, he as mediator would be supposed, if the Council deferred action, to do a lot of things which are now obsolete and impractical.

Bunche hopes very much it will be possible for Council to complete action on his report at Thursday’s meeting. He hoped US would sponsor his draft resolution but agreed it would be better for Canada to do so if they are willing.

On terms of Bunche’s draft resolution he agreed it would be better to eliminate language referring to Conciliation Commission in last two paragraphs and said if it were suggested in the Council to eliminate this language, he would support this suggestion and say that from the standpoint of the work of the PCC it would be better for it not to become involved in observance of the cease fire.

Ross

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom 501.BB Palestine/8–149: Telegram

[Document 879]

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom

secret Washington, August 1, 1949—8 p. m.

2710. Brit Emb reps and Dept officials have recently had further discussions re points in Deptels 2432, July 13 and 2582, July 23. Brit and ourselves now appear in substantial agreement in principle. It is of course understood that this is not a rigid position as developments at Lausanne might necessitate modification as discussions progress at Lausanne. Proposed Brit approach to Arab States, Israel, France and Turkey in support our similar views relating such matters as Palestine refugees, territorial settlement and Jerusalem area wld be most timely at this stage in view second phase of discussions at Lausanne.

For ur information, on July 25 Brit Emb rep conveyed to Dept further FonOff observations re certain details relating to points discussed in Deptel 2432, July 13. Dept plans transmit following comments to Brit Emb rep Aug 1 and suggests you also inform FonOff prior to general approach it proposes to make: 1. Re territorial settlement Dept does not believe only alternative is restoration of Western Galilee to Arabs by Israelis. Other alternatives might conceivably lie in area north of Beersheba and along Egyptian frontier south of El Auja; or,1 in some form of UN guarantee of access across southern Palestine and to ports in Palestine;

2. Although it proved impossible to bring Israel and Egypt together with Gaza strip proposal as basis of discussion during recent PCC recess Dept hopeful proposal might be integrated with other refugee and territorial proposals for discussion during present phase Lausanne talks;

3. Dept agrees Arab govts might prefer conclude something less formal than peace treaty in first instance but does not believe absence of formal declaration of war would be valid argument as armistice agreements have been concluded between Israel and contiguous states.

Acheson

1 As originally drafted, there appeared at this point the words “if territorial compensation proves impossible.” They were deleted by the drafter prior to the encoding of the message.

Mr. Paul A. Porter to the Secretary of State 501.BB Palestine/8–249: Telegram

[Document 880]

Mr. Paul A. Porter to the Secretary of State

secret Lausanne, August 2, 1949—3 p. m.

Palun 260. Reference Palun 253.1 In meeting with PCC August 2 Arab delegates accepted conditions set by Israelis as basis for discussion refugee problem. Delegates demonstrated cooperative attitude.

PCC immediately proceeding meet Shiloah obtain for transmission Arab delegations terms Israeli proposal re refugees.

Porter

1 Dated July 28, from Lausanne, p. 1266 [Pg. 1266 is part of Doc. 869].

The Consul at Jerusalem (Burdett) to the Secretary of State 501.MA Palestine/8–249: Telegram

[Document 881]

The Consul at Jerusalem (Burdett) to the Secretary of State

secret Jerusalem, August 2, 1949—3 p. m.

500. In talk last night Kunde, US representative technical committee on refugees, made following points:

[Here follow 13 numbered points.]

Comment: Open admission by Comay1 of Israel plans for returning Arabs confirms previously deductions that Israel has no intention whatsoever conform with December 11 GA resolution in either letter or spirit. Section 11 resolves that refugees wishing return to their homes and live in peace with their neighbors should be permitted to do so at earliest practicable date, In case highly individualistic Arab, attempts to fit him as cog in Israel collective society and disregard his right return home is equivalent to exclusion Arabs from Israel. Difficult escape belief Jews loudly touted Israel projects for reunion families and return 100,000 refugees possess many earmarks of sham to evade efforts US and UN motivated by principles of humanitarianism, justice and equity to protect rights of original inhabitants Palestine in accordance UN resolutions.

Plans mentioned above and other evidence present conditions and future status Arabs may expect in Israel point up great and continuing difficulties UN will face in assuring Arabs in Israel equitable treatment and guaranteeing them basic human rights. Consulate General suggests emphasis might be shifted to rectification of temporary armistice lines to restore to Arabs area given them by GA resolution November 29 or equivalent fertile lands for use in intensive resettlement Arab refugees outside Israel. In absence willingness or feasible means for UN or US force Israel actually permit refugees return to their homes and live under acceptable conditions, this alternative might provide closest equivalent to repatriation called for by December 11 GA resolution. Would be in accord with US policy on boundaries. To forestall further consolidation by Israel of her position in all areas now held, action at September GA would be necessary.

Department summarize last five paragraphs for USDel, PCC.

Sent Department 500, repeated London 34, Amman 55, Baghdad 47, Beirut 96, Damascus 53; pouched Jidda, Cairo.

Burdett

1 Mr. Herbert Kunde’s points 11 and 12 noted Mr. Comay’s frank admission to the Committee that returning Arabs would be treated in the same way as new Jewish immigrants, would be integrated into the collective economy, and would be placed where their services were most needed. There was no possibility that the Arabs would return to their original homes. Mr. Comay was also cited as saying that the program for reunion of families “would in practice amount to selection by Israel of certain desirable categories of Arabs for return. Would be selected on basis security consideration and skill.”

Memorandum by the Deputy Under Secretary of State (Rusk) to the Secretary of State 501.BB Palestine/8–349

[Document 882]

Memorandum by the Deputy Under Secretary of State (Rusk) to the Secretary of State

confidential [Washington,] August 3, 1949.

Subject: Consideration of Dr. Bundle’s last report to Security Council, including lifting of SC Arms Embargo NE.

During the past six months, separate armistice agreements have been concluded between Israel on the one hand, and Egypt, Lebanon, Transjordan and Syria on the other, under the guidance of Dr. Bunche as Acting UN Mediator. These agreements are of indefinite duration, incorporate “what amounts to a non-aggressive pact”, provide for the withdrawal and reduction of forces and establish machinery under General W. E. Riley, UN Chief of Staff, USMC, for the settlement of differences which may arise under the agreements.

On July 21 Dr. Bunche submitted a report (Tab A1 ) to the SC relating to the present status of the armistice negotiations and the truce in Palestine. This report concludes that Dr. Bunche’s responsibilities under various SC resolutions including that of November 16, 1948 have now been discharged and suggests that such functions as remain might be terminated or transferred to the Palestine Conciliation Commission which was established under the GA resolution of December 11, paragraph 2c (Tab B). Dr. Bunche attached a suggested resolution as an annex2 to his report. In neither the report nor in the resolution does Dr. Bunche make any specific references to the raising or the retention of the arms embargo imposed by the SC on May 29, 1948. Officers of the Department, however, have been advised of Dr. Bunche’s personal view that approval of his suggested resolution by the SC would in effect lift the arms embargo.

The principal question at issue is whether the United States representative in the SC should support the Bunche proposal for transferring his functions to the PCC and rescinding the earlier truce resolutions of the SC, despite the fact that by so doing the existing SC arms embargo would be lifted. The State Department considers that there is no difficulty about transferring Bunche’s functions to the Conciliation Commission and agrees that we should now proceed on the basis of armistice agreements rather than SC truce resolutions. A specific question is whether the existing UN arms embargo should be retained.

There appear to be three courses, discussed in detail in Tab E, which might be followed: (1) The US might support postponement of consideration of Dr. Bunche’s report and annex.

(2) The US might support the adoption of Dr. Bunche’s report and annex, but call for the retention of the arms embargo.

(3) The US might support the adoption of Dr. Bunche’s report and annex including the cancellation of the arms embargo subject to such minor amendments as may be desirable.

The following are the principal points for consideration in connection with the arms embargo question: 1. While postponement of the issue would appear to be desirable, it might be difficult to obtain because the Bunche report has been submitted and it can be assumed that one of the parties or one of the members of the Security Council would raise the question in the Council. In fact, the Security Council is scheduled to meet on Thursday morning to consider the report.

2. The theory of the armistice agreements which have now been concluded between Israel and all of its Arab neighbors is that the military phase of the problem is over and that in the progression from truce to armistice to final settlement the completion of the task of the Palestine Conciliation Commission is all that remains.

3. In practice the effect of the arms embargo has been favorable to Israel in as much as Israel has been able to obtain substantial quantities of arms despite the embargo.

4. If the lifting of the arms embargo would in practice precipitate an arms race in the area it would seriously jeopardize a settlement and would add to the already heavy economic problems of the area.

5. Great Britain and France have already begun certain deliveries to the Arab countries, with the knowledge of Bunche, on the ground that these arms were needed for internal security. It is doubtful that the Arabs would continue to comply with an arms embargo, particularly if Israel continued to buy arms abroad. The retention of the arms embargo would probably mean that both Israel and the Arab States would seek arms from iron curtain countries.

6. Israel has asked that the arms embargo be continued until a final peace settlement has been reached at Lausanne. In talks with USUN in New York, Mr. Eban indicated, however, that they were principally interested in assurances against an arms race.

7. The retention of an arms embargo, if it is to be enforced, would require revisions and additions to truce enforcement machinery which has been used up to this point. Such additional machinery would probably involve commitments both of personnel and budget from the United States.

8. Some increase in arms appears to be required for legitimate internal security purposes in the Arab States, resulting from unrest arising from the Palestine question as well as from the presence of large numbers of refugees. Mr. Bevin has strongly emphasized this point in discussing U.S.–U.K. common security interests in the Middle East.

Conclusion

From consideration of the above items it is concluded that, on balance, the United States should support the Bunche proposal to eliminate the truce resolutions despite the arms embargo feature, but should use its influence in the Security Council and diplomatically to ensure that arms going to the Middle East are within the scope of legitimate internal security requirements.

Recommendations

1. That USUN be instructed informally to ascertain the attitude of other SC members in order to determine what position they are likely to take in the SC.

2. That, unless these informal soundings indicate a strong disposition toward postponement of SC action until a later stage in the PCC talks, the US support the lifting of the arms embargo and the adoption of Dr. Bundle’s resolution, and in so doing: (a) Make a statement in the Council (and endeavor to get the British and if possible the Egyptians and Israelis to make similar statements) of a reassuring character to the effect that we have no intention of permitting, in so far as we are concerned, an arms race to get started;

(b) Through diplomatic channels, endeavor to assure that an arms race will not get started.3

1 Tabbed materials cited in this memorandum are not found attached. Regarding Mr. Bunche’s report of July 21, see editorial note, p. 1240 [Pg. 1240 includes portions of Doc. 845 and Doc. 846].

2 See ibid [Pg. 1240 includes portions of Doc. 845 and Doc. 846].

3 In the “Summary of Daily Meeting with the Secretary” on August 3, Mr. Rusk is recorded as having “presented a paper on Palestine to the Secretary. The main issue in the paper was whether or not we should agree to lift the arms embargo in the Middle East. Mr. Rusk pointed out that the Israelis had changed their attitude on this question. He made a point, however, that he thought there should be complete understanding on this issue with the President. The Secretary said that he would meet with the President today and get a firm decision. The urgency of this matter was brought about because the Security Council of the United Nations is meeting with Dr. Bunche on this matter starting today.” (Secretary’s Daily Meetings, Lot 58 D 609)

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Secretary of State 501.BB Palestine/8–349

[Document 883]

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Secretary of State

confidential [Washington,] August 3, 1949.

Authorization of Action on Bunche Resolution

I discussed the attached memorandum of August 31 and the two telegrams from Ross of August 12 with the President. I also told him that a telephone message from Ross this morning stated that Eban did not intend to propose amendments to the Bunche Resolution. Finally, I said that the latest information indicated that the debate on the resolution might be very short indeed and that, unless we raised objection, it would probably be passed tomorrow.

The President was clear that we should support the Bunche resolution. He has great confidence in Dr. Bundle’s recommendations and is convinced that his standing in the country is such that his recommendations would not be misinterpreted. The President thought that if any action later on is necessary in regard to arms it can be dealt with as a separate matter. I suggested that, if Eban raised the matter of reassurance that there should not be an arms race, I thought that we might join with others in expressing the same desire and thereafter take such diplomatic steps as were available to prevent this from occurring. The President thought that this was a sound view.

You3 may, therefore, proceed along the above lines.

1  Supra.

2 Presumably Nos. 875 and 878; the former is not printed, but see footnote 1, p. 1254 [Pg. 1254 includes portions of Doc. 857 and Doc. 858].

3 Copies of this memorandum were sent to Messrs. Rusk (for action), McGhee, and Sandifer.

Mr. Paul A. Porter to the Secretary of State 501.BB Palestine/8–349: Telegram

[Document 884]

Mr. Paul A. Porter to the Secretary of State

confidential Lausanne, August 3, 1949—4 p. m.

Palun 261. PCC (US chairman) met with Israeli Delegation August 3. Informed Israelis re Arab acceptance Israeli conditions for discussion refugee problem and requested delegation set forth its proposal.

1. Shiloah asked if Arabs could now be considered to have committed themselves to opening discussions on all issues outstanding between parties. If so, Israeli Delegation would like PCC give publicity. Chairman stated PCC did not believe that in accepting Israeli conditions Arabs had formally obligated themselves to discussion all issues, but said Arabs in informal discussions with PCC had indicated willingness do so. Shiloah could not agree that Arabs could withdraw from talks whenever did not like turn they were taking and insisted discussion on refugees must be regarded as commencement discussions on all points. Chairman stated PCC in private meeting would consider what kind of publicity might be given to present developments and exactly what form it might take. Was agreed Israeli Delegation would not discuss August 3 meeting with press representatives.

2. Shiloah after stating usual disclaimer of Israel irresponsibility for refugees and stressing security consideration, said Israel now willing see increase of Arabs in Israel above number there at end hostilities by what Israel considered large number. Could mention approximate number Israel had in mind if PCC so desired, but desired point out could be no lasting solution unless Arab states willing share responsibility.

3. Shiloah then proposed that UN immediately set up body to study economic possibilities in Arab states and propose specific projects for resettlement refugees there. Subject formulation overall plan and if international assistance furnished, Israel would make contribution mentioned paragraph two.

4. Responding to question from chairman, Shiloah said approximate figure Israeli Government had in mind was 100,000. Declared present Arab population in Israel between 165,000 and 170,000 and said Israeli Government envisaged eventual total Arab population of around 250,000. This figure based on Israel’s retaining all present territory. Wished make clear would retain full authority direct returning refugees to specific localities and to specific economic activities.

5. Referring to international assistance mentioned by Shiloah, Boisanger asked whether Israel envisaged such assistance being directed at economic improvements in Israel which would enable latter absorb refugees or to specific repatriation projects. Shiloah said would reply later.

6. Chairman asked what Israeli attitude would be if proposed UN Investigating Commission should study repatriation possibilities Israel and find latter could absorb more refugees than figure mentioned. Shiloah replied could not give definite reply at that time but desires once more stress security factor of which Israel better judge than anyone else. As result prodding by chairman Shiloah stated would give great weight to findings of such UN group.

7. Chairman then asked whether PCC could take it that approximate figure mentioned was not absolute or impossible of change. Shiloah said would agree to such interpretation but desired make statement that 100,000 represented heavy tax on Israel. Israeli Delegation had no intention of bargaining and had presented figure as honest estimate Israeli capacity absorb refugees. Refused agree that proposal represented Israeli acceptance degree responsibility for solution refugee problem. Preferred proposal be considered as indicating Israeli recognition of problem.1

Porter

1 The substance of Palun 261 was conveyed by a circular telegram of August 10, 4 a. m., to London, Paris, Arab capitals, Ankara, Tel Aviv, and Jerusalem (501.BB Palestine/8–1049).

Memorandum by the Secretary of State to the President 501.BB Palestine/8–449

[Document 885]

Memorandum by the Secretary of State to the President

Washington, August 4, 1949.

Subject: Payment of United States Contribution to United Nations Relief for Palestine Refugees

1. Public Law 25, 81st Congress, a Joint Resolution of March 24, 1949 authorized the appropriation of funds not to exceed $16,000,000 for the relief of Palestine refugees, in response to the message submitted by you to the Congress on January 27,1949.1

2. Public Law 119, 81st Congress, appropriated to the President $12,000,000 for the relief of Palestine refugees, and an additional $4,000,000 for the same purpose, “to such extent as the President from time to time finds that other nations party to such United Nations agreement have met their obligations to the United Nations Relief for Palestine Refugees …”.2

3. The amount of $12,000,000 has already been paid to the United Nations. The United Nations has presented to the Department (a) an official statement to the effect that contributions in the total amount of $13,377,930, in cash, kind and services have been received or are in process of delivery from other governments as of July 31, 1949, and that there have been additional contributions, concerning which definitive information is not yet known, and (b) a request that the United States make a further contribution at this time. The Acting Secretary General of the United Nations states that the need for additional funds is so critical that the relief work cannot continue into September without the assurance of matching funds from the United States.

4. The Department of State believes that the request of the United Nations is reasonable and that the situation is urgent. The Department therefore recommends that the President make a finding that other nations party to the United Nations agreement have met their obligations to the United Nations Relief for Palestine Refugees in the form and to the extent of the contributions, totaling $13,377,930, shown in the attached schedule as having been received by the United Nations Relief for Palestine Refugees or in process of delivery from governments other than the United States as of July 31, 1949; and that the President authorize the payment of a contribution of $1,377,930 as an addition to the contribution of $12,000,000 previously made. Further implementations of Public Law 119 will be required later as additional statements are received from the United Nations.3

1 Not printed.

2 Omission indicated in the source text.

3 President Truman, on August 10, made a finding “that other nations party to the agreement on United Nations Relief to Palestine Refugees have met their obligations under said agreement to the extent that an additional contribution to the United Nations in the amount of $1,377,930 is justified.” (501.MA Palestine/8–1049)

Editorial Note [Document 886]

Editorial Note

Ambassador Austin, on August 4, addressed the Security Council on the Palestine question. Near the end of his statement, he noted that the conclusion of the armistice agreements “justifies confidence in the early establishment of permanent peace in Palestine. As the Security Council foresaw in its resolution of 16 November 1948, progress toward peace in Palestine would involve a transition from a truce to an armistice, to be followed by a final settlement. Such a final settlement is the task of the Palestine Conciliation Commission, and, with the conclusion of these Armistice Agreements before us today, only the completion of the task of the Palestine Conciliation Commission remains.

“Therefore, the Security Council, as contemplated in its resolution of 16 November, may appropriately bring to an end the stringent measures which were instituted to ensure more effective observance of the truce, including certain of the prohibitions of the parties included in the Security Council resolutions of 29 May 1948 and 15 July 1948. Among these was an embargo placed on the parties to the dispute and all other Governments and authorities concerned to refrain from importing or exporting war material and personnel into the affected area. These restraints, which characterized the truce period, are no longer appropriate or necessary now that we have firm commitments from the Parties in the Armistice Agreements to ref rain from all hostile activity and to adjust their differences, if any, peaceably.”

Ambassador Austin then stated that “An arms race would jeopardize the armistice and the settlement.” He asserted that the United States “does not intend to allow the export of arms which would permit a competitive arms race in the area. Export of arms to that area of the world should be strictly limited to such arms as are within the scope of legitimate security requirements, again as recommended by Dr. Bunche. We hope that prudence will prevail not only among the parties but among all nations of the world which are in a position to supply arms and that they will pursue a policy similar to that which we intend to pursue.” (SC, 4th yr., No. 36, pages 26 [Pg. 26 is part of Doc. 3], 27 [Pg. 27 is part of Doc. 3])

New York reported that during the Council’s deliberations on August 4, Mr. Bunche’s draft resolution was sponsored by Canada and supported by the United States, the United Kingdom, Canada, Egypt, China, and Cuba. It advised also that the references to the Palestine Conciliation Commission in the Bunche draft had been replaced by references to the United Nations Chief of Staff, a change agreed to by Mr. Bunche (telegram 891, August 4, 10:55 p. m., 501.A Summaries/8–449).

The Secretary of State to the Legation in Jordan 8901.001/7–549: Telegram

[Document 887]

The Secretary of State to the Legation in Jordan

secret Washington, August 4, 1949—6 p. m.

117. Dept has given careful consideration suggestion contained urtel 274, July 51 re visit Abdullah US but feels present uncertainties Lausanne negots and necessity US impartiality in exertion of pressure on both sides to reach agreement renders planning such visit difficult this stage.

Furthermore Presidential sched so crowded that visit most difficult arrange. If and when invitation extended might be desirable shld King proceed from Amman direct to US rather than via England. Therefore fact of King’s visit to England not necessarily controlling as to time of visit.

Acheson

1 Not printed; it stated that the British Government had invited King Abdullah to visit in August and queried whether the Department would consider inviting him to visit the United States following completion of that trip (890i.00/7–549). Mr. Stabler, in a letter of February 19 to Mr. Rockwell, had raised the question of a royal visit to the United States. Mr. Rockwell’s response of March 16, initialed by Mr. Satterthwaite, stated “we believe the idea merits sympathetic consideration but feel that nothing whatsoever could be done about it before a settlement is reached in Palestine.” Both letters are filed under 890i.001/2–1949.

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State 501.BB Palestine/8–449: Telegram

[Document 888]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State

secret London, August 4, 1949—7 p. m.

3071. 1. Points contained Deptel 2710 August 1 communicated Burrows and Beith, August 2.

2. At FonOffs suggestion, Beith and Embassy officer today went over various points and comments contained Deptel 2432 July 13 and subsequent telegrams, as well as relevant FonOff telegrams with British Embassy, Washington. Beith preparing new draft using original British document as basis and endeavoring meet points raised since then. On approval by FonOff, revised document will be telegraphed Department.

3. FonOff anxious know where it stands vis-à-vis Department in regard this matter. Earlier Department comments and reactions were characterized as “informal” and “tentative thinking.” Deptel 2710 states “British and ourselves now appear in substantial agreement in principle.” Can we assure FonOff of Department’s “formal” agreement in principle?

4. FonOff would be glad have Department’s views on timing. As Department knows British thought is to indicate to Egypt and Jordan and possibly other Arab Governments as well as French and Turks that such program would have UK support. (Beith said today they would also probably include Israel. Does Department consider it would; be preferable approach French and Turks before approaching Arab Governments and Israel or approach all simultaneously? Would Department have any objection UK mentioning to French and Turks that US and UK are in substantial agreement in principle?

5. It appears to Embassy that British program holds promise as basis for negotiations in PCC. This being case, Embassy feels there would be considerable advantage if US took initiative in discussing this program with French and Turks, telling them at same time we are discussing it with British. British could then make approach in support. As second phase, PCC could present program to Arabs and Israelis, backed up by strong diplomatic support from UK, US, and, if desirable, French and Turks. Foregoing procedure would obviate any embarrassment which might be caused by French and Turks learning we have been discussing this question with British outside PCC, and presumably unbeknownst to them. Procedure would, moreover, have advantage keeping negotiations in UN organs which in final analysis will have responsibility for seeing settlement lived up to.

Douglas

Mr. Paul A. Porter to the Secretary of State 501.BB Palestine/8–549: Telegram

[Document 889]

Mr. Paul A. Porter to the Secretary of State

top secret
priority Lausanne, August 5, 1949—5 p. m.

Palun 265. PCC has asked principal advisers, meeting in private and not as general committee, to draw up informal proposals concerning territory allocation of refugees and Jerusalem which PCC might consider submitting to parties as basis discussion. Jerusalem proposal will be plan drawn up by Jerusalem Committee.

First meeting revealed following re territory: (1) French representative stated French Delegation and French Government had specific ideas concerning territorial settlement. French Government desired not to offend either Jewish minority in Trance or Moslem population French empire. French representative, accordingly, most reluctant participate in any discussions re territory. Was only persuaded to do so when it was pointed out that any plan drawn up would be informal personal suggestion of advisers and that it would not necessarily be accepted by PCC or by Governments of members of PCC.

Despite above statement of French representative, there have been indications here that French Delegation PCC has been encouraging Lebanese Delegation to advocate trusteeship over western Galilee.

(2) Under instructions his government, Turkish principal adviser “has drawn up plan involving transfer of Negev to Egypt and Transjordan below line Deir el Balah–Asluj–31st parallel–Transjordan frontier. Turkish plan would also transfer to Lebanon and Syria eastern Galilee above horizontal line between Lebanon and Syrian borders just north Lake Hula and would return to Transjordan areas in triangle given up during Israeli–Transjordan armistice negotiations, as well as some territory in LyddA–Ramle area but not towns of Ramie and Lydda.

Turkish principal adviser and apparently Turkish Foreign Office convinced would be easier for Jews to give up Negev than all eastern or western Galilee. Yenisey states Turkish plan would maintain desired Arab territorial continuity, give Transjordan corridors to sea at Deir el Balah and create buffer between Egypt and Israel.

(3) I have authorized US principal adviser to advocate territorial distribution based upon judgment of prospects of acceptances and defensibility. This proposal is not intended to represent any appraisal of objective factors of geographic, economic, ethnic or other considerations. It is simply put forward as possible basis of expedient settlement. Would appreciate soonest comments and instructions. Proposal follows: (a) Area enclosed by line from Mediterranean coast at Deir el Balah to juncture thirtieth parallel and Egyptian Palestine border to be transferred to Egypt. Remainder Gaza strip to go to Israel.

(b) Area enclosed by line running from northern-most tip present Transjordan controlled area central Palestine to juncture Jordan River–Palestine–Transjordan frontier to be transferred to Transjordan.

(c) Triangle areas taken over by Israel during Israeli-Transjordan armistice negotiations to be returned to Transjordan up to point just south of juncture HaderA–Afula road and 1947 partition frontier between Israel and Arab Palestine.

(d) Area now held by Transjordan in south central Palestine to be extended westward to include towns of Beitjibrin and Qubeiba, and westwards outward and eastward to line running from Dead Sea to eastern boundary between Israel and Arab Palestine under 1947 partition, half-way between southern partition boundary Israel and central Arab Palestine and present southern-most penetration Transjordan forces in central Palestine.

(e) Israel to retain western Galilee.

Above general position does not include such points as Latrun salient, Mt. Scopus and demarcation lines Jerusalem, agreement on which might be reached separately by Transjordan and Israel.

Porter

Mr. Paul A. Porter to the Secretary of State 501.BB Palestine/8–549: Telegram

[Document 890]

Mr. Paul A. Porter to the Secretary of State

top secret
priority Lausanne, August 5, 1949—7 p. m.

Palun 266. PCC August 4 decided not transmit formally to ArabDels Israeli proposal re refugees since if did so instant rejection would result and impasse be created. Substance proposal discussed privately by PCC members with chief ArabReps. Reaction emphatic. Atassi1 told me, for example, proposal mere propaganda scheme and “Jews either at your feet or throat”. Urged US make economic arrangements with Syria and other Arab states for resettlement refugees and general development and Israel be left to condemnation world opinion. Other reactions not so violent but equally adamant in considering refugee program less than token.

PCC August 5 held private meeting with Shiloah in which he urged reconsider position. He expressed regret discussions could not proceed on imaginative scope regional development. Stressed historic opportunity ME countries for internal development, emphasizing with exception Egypt others have area, water resources, etc. but lack population. Defended proposal as consonant with Israel’s economic capacity and internal security.

Sassoon then directed attention to July 27 congress refugees in Lebanon after which spokesmen congress allegedly requested (1) no cession parts Arab Palestine to surrounding states and (2) that refugees be armed to retake Arab Palestine. Sassoon stated this known in Israel and urged as proof security conditions paramount.

PCC pressed Shiloah review proposals and ascertain if more flexible attitude could not be adopted. PCC meeting with Arab Dels August 6 to solicit informal proposals re their possible contribution solution refugee problem.

These events plus private talks convince me that although atmosphere may appear more conciliatory on surface basic positions remain unchanged. Feel obliged point out Department meeting July 282 with Elath apparently promptly reported Shiloah who advised me that US policy linked to no specific refugee figure and that Israel proposal did not necessarily produce adverse reaction in Washington. Urge Department make position clear to Elath and clarify any possible misunderstanding. We cannot take firm position here if there is slightest doubt as to Department’s position (reference Unpal 214).3

Now becoming more convinced no progress will be achieved here re refugees if problem approached in terms mathematical absolutes.

Therefore ask Department’s approval following procedure: (1) Spend ensuing week attempting ascertain dimensions difference on refugees.

(2) Press PCC privately consider suggesting own solution re major outstanding points (reference Palun 265).4

(3) Submit privately to each del conclusions PCC as basis working draft.

Would hope reach (3) in 10 days but would not guarantee achievement any timetable here.

(1) Declaration by Arabs and Jews of responsibility solution problem.

(2) Recognition of variables in statistics.

(3) Agreement each party accept refugees in accordance capacity and availability internal economic assistance.

(4) Pledge by all parties give due weight findings survey group connection specific development projects.

(5) Statement by parties and/or PCC of targets re refugees as based on known facts and foregoing assumptions but with understanding that target number not absolutely binding on any party.

Would like Department’s immediate suggestions re foregoing. Believe this or similar approach only realistic hope accord. While privately ArabDels make specific commitments all reluctant take positive public position.

Consider desirable survey group be set up soonest and am awaiting name US member in order PCC may request SYG establish.

Porter

1 Adnan el-Atassi, Head of the Syrian Delegation at Lausanne; regularly, Syrian Minister in France.

2 See Mr. Rusk’s memorandum of conversation of that date, p. 1261 [Pg. 1261 includes portions of Doc. 865 and Doc. 866].

3 Dated July 29, to Lausanne, not printed; but see footnote 2, p. 1263 [Pg. 1263 is part of Doc. 866].

4 Dated August 5, from Lausanne, supra.

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom 501.BB Palestine/8–749: Telegram

[Document 891]

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom

secret
niact
priority Washington, August 7, 1949—5 p. m.

2798. Dept has following comments on Embtel 3071 Aug 4 and Embtels 3099 and 3104 Aug 6:1

1. Ref Para 3 Embtel 3071 and after studying Embtel 3099 Dept reiterates position stated in Deptel 2710 Aug 1, which stated “Brit and ourselves now appear in substantial agreement in principle. It is of course understood that this is not a rigid position as developments at Lausanne might necessitate modification as discussions progress at Lausanne. Proposed Brit approach to Arab states, Israel, France and Turkey in support our similar views relating such matters as Palestine refugees, territorial settlement and Jerusalem area would be most timely at this state in view second phase of discussions at Lausanne.”

Dept considers Brit might approach NE govts as have French Turkish and US govts during recent months on these and other matters. Dept does not consider that supporting approaches necessitate quote formal unquote agreement. In our view Brit approach would represent voluntary indication to interested govts of general Brit thinking and of basic conformity with our general thinking. Dept considers it preferable to maintain flexibility at this stage rather than to adopt rigid position.

2. Ref Para 4 Embtel 3071. Dept considers that Brit might approach French, Turkish and NE govts simultaneously although it has no objection if Brit prefer to approach French and Turkish govts in advance. Dept has no objection if Brit inform French, Turkish and NE govts that US–UK are in substantial agreement in principle providing it is pointed out that our position is not rigid and will take into consideration developments as discussions progress at Lausanne where USDel is following same line in private discussions with French and Turks.2

3. Ref Para 5 Embtel 3071. Dept considers that our substantial agreement in principle holds promise as basis for approach to interested govts and might serve as basis for informal discussions at Lausanne, but that it does not represent quote basis for negotiations in PCC unquote. US, French and Turkish Dels are already taking initiative at Lausanne as indicated in Palun 265.3 British supporting approach to French, Turk and NE govts should therefore be helpful at this time.

4. Ref Embtel 3099. Dept is in substantial agreement in principle but suggests regarding section “g” that sentence should read quote US–UK favor incorporation central Arab Palestine in Jordan, when feasible unquote.

5. Ref Para 3 Embtel 3071 and Embtel 3104. Dept would appreciate your informing Brit FonOff foregoing views before Brit approach French, Turkish and NE govts.4

Acheson

1 Telegram 3104 not printed.

2 London reported, on August 9, that the Foreign Office had instructed the British Embassies at Paris and Ankara to approach the French and Turkish Foreign Offices regarding the proposals and that it had decided to await the reactions of the French and Turkish Governments before approaching the Arab Governments and Israel (telegram 3129, 501.BB Palestine/8–949).

3 Dated August 5, from Lausanne, p. 1286 [Pg. 1286 includes portions of Doc. 888 and Doc. 889].

4 This telegram was repeated to Bern for Mr. Porter.

The United States Representative at the United Nations (Austin) to the Secretary of State 501.A Summaries/8–849: Telegram

[Extract]

[Document 892]

The United States Representative at the United Nations (Austin) to the Secretary of State

New York, August 8, 1949—7:54 p. m.

898.

. . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Canada and France withdrew their own texts in favor of a new joint resolution and the USSR presented a series of amendments to the original Canadian draft, as the SC resumed consideration Aug. 8 of Bunche’s report on Palestine. Tsarapkin (USSR) argued that remaining negotiations should be left to the parties themselves. Lunde (Norway) supported the joint proposition.

One USSR amendment—to disband the UN Truce Supervision Organization—occasioned discussion, with Bunche warning it would nullify important provisions of the armistice agreements and representatives of the parties favoring the continued presence of the UN personnel required by the agreement. Eban (Israel), however, saw no point in requesting the SYG to arrange for the continued service of personnel “required in observing and maintaining the cease-fire.”1

. . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Austin

1 For the further discussion of Mr. Bundle’s report by the Security Council on August 8, see SC, 4th yr., No. 37. The texts of the new joint resolution by the Canadian and French Representatives and of the Soviet amendments are printed ibid., pp. 2 [Pg. 2 is part of Doc. 1] and 6 [Pg. 6 is part of Doc. 1], respectively.

The Secretary of State to the United States Delegation at Lausanne 501.BB Palestine/8–949: Telegram

[Document 893]

The Secretary of State to the United States Delegation at Lausanne

secret Washington, August 9, 1949—7 p. m.

Unpal 223. Reference is made to Palun 2631 which reports info from Shiloah that Eban had been informed by reliable source close to White House that Pres recently stated to source he wld oppose any attempt to deprive Israel of Negeb and believed figure of 100,000 refugees to be repatriated by Israel very reasonable.

Policy of Pres regarding territories and refugees has been stated repeatedly by Pres, State Dept and USDel PCC. Shiloah and Eban shld be left under no illusion that such policy has been changed or that there is any difference of view between Pres, Dept, and USDel on these matters.

You are authorized to show copy this tel to Shiloah in Lausanne. USUN authorized to take similar action with Eban, and AmEmb Tel Aviv with Israeli FO. For your info this tel cleared with White House.2

Acheson

1 Dated August 3, from Lausanne, not printed.

2 This telegram was cleared by telephone with Mr. Clifford. It was repeated to New York for action and to Arab capitals, Jerusalem, Tel Aviv, London, Paris, and Ankara for information. Mr. Ross, presumably on August 11, conversed with Mr. Eban about the content of Unpal 223. The latter, after checking with the Israeli Embassy, gave a “very careful statement” of his understanding of the conversation between President Truman and Ambassador Elath, as follows: “In reply to Elath’s exposition regarding the Israeli position on the Negev and certain, reports that Israel should give up the Negev, the President said he did not know of any such proposals.

“Elath indicated the willingness of his government to repatriate, 100,000 refugees. The President said he appreciated that step and the attitude that prompted it.” (telegram 915, August 11, 9:09 p. m., from New York, 501.BB Palestine/8–1149)

The Chargé in Israel (Ford) to the Secretary of State 501.MA Palestine/8–949: Telegram

[Document 894]

The Chargé in Israel (Ford) to the Secretary of State

secret Tel Aviv, August 9, 1949—9 p. m.

607. Prior his departure yesterday for US, Ambassador read Jerusalem’s telegram 505, August 3,1 to Department and was of opinion there no grounds Burdett’s belief Knesset debate and attendant press campaign “conducted in large part for foreign consumption in effort create impression Israeli offer repatriate number refugees of tremendous importance and made by government in spite fierce internal opposition”.

New subject: Ambassador also read Jerusalem’s telegram 500, August 2, to Department and felt whole tone telegram was highly tendentious and that concluding suggestion to shift emphasis “to rectification of temporary armistice lines to restore to Arabs area given them by GA Resolution November 29 or equivalent fertile lands to use in intensive resettlement Arab refugees outside Israel” would gravely endanger all hope progress toward peaceful agreement, and that Israel would certinly resist, if necessary by arms, any change armistice lines.

Comment: I agree both above opinions. There is no doubt about genuineness both internal opposition and resentment Israeli Government’s recent offer repatriate Arab refugees, and while offer undoubtedly made as result foreign and especially US representations, its impact on local public opinion was nonetheless far-reaching and its jolt to government was softened only by ruse, whether intentional or not, of Prime Minister himself (Embassy’s A–211, August 5).2 As regards any contemplated change in present armistice lines, realities of situation are that Jews even now have so far consolidated their position in majority areas presently held, either through actual or fully planned settlements, that any action initiated now which would result dislodging them could easily prove disastrous. End comment.

Sent Department, repeated Baghdad 24, Beirut 36, Damascus 32, London 84, Amman 29, Cairo 30, Jidda 9, Lausanne; Tehran pass Jerusalem 67.

Ford

1 Not printed.

2 Not printed; it reported that the Prime Minister, in reviewing his Government’s position on the return of Arab refugees before the Knesset on August 2, created an uproar on raising a question as to when the opposition had warned the people of the danger of war with the Arabs and of the need to prepare their defense. Mr. Ben-Gurion claimed for his Government “the sole responsibility” for Israeli defense preparations. There was an outcry by the opposition in the Knesset and for 2 days the opposition press devoted all of its energy to refuting the Prime Minister’s allegations, deflecting them from the issue of the repatriation of the Arabs (867N.48/8–549).

The Secretary of State to Francis Cardinal Spellman, Roman Catholic Archbishop of New York 867N.01/7–1349

[Document 895]

The Secretary of State to Francis Cardinal Spellman, Roman Catholic Archbishop of New York

Washington, August 11, 1949.

My Dear Cardinal Spellman: The President has asked me to reply to your letter of July 13.1 I appreciate the further evidence of your interest in the Jerusalem question and your understanding of the delicacy of the problem with which the Conciliation Commission is dealing.

It is recalled that the President’s letter of June 222 stated that the United States Government firmly supports the principle of the internationalization of Jerusalem. It occurs to me that the subsequent remarks regarding the economic difficulties which would arise in implementing this principle may have given you the impression that only economic factors were involved.

Political factors are also of great importance. For example, it is necessary to consider such matters as the relationship between the peoples and institutions in the Jerusalem area and the adjacent states in order effectively to integrate the Jerusalem area into the political as well as the economic life of Palestine.

With regard to some of your economic points, it is recalled that the General Assembly resolution of November 29, 1947, provided for the partition of Palestine with economic union. This resolution also provided that a certain proportion of the surplus revenue from the Customs and other common services should be utilized to supply income for the administration of the Jerusalem area. As you know, the General Assembly resolution of November 29 was implemented only to a very limited extent. As a result, neither the original plan for the internationalization of Jerusalem nor the provision regarding revenue for Jerusalem has become effective; consequently it is necessary for the Conciliation Commission, in devising a practical plan for the internationalization of the Jerusalem area, under the General Assembly resolution of December 11, to take these factors into consideration.

It may be recalled that the General Assembly resolution of December 11, 1948, provided that the Jerusalem area should be accorded special and separate treatment from the rest of Palestine and should be placed under effective United Nations control, and that the Conciliation Commission was instructed to present detailed proposals for a permanent international regime to the Fourth session of the General Assembly in September 1949.

It may be remembered in this connection that the American representative expressed the view in Committee I of the General Assembly on November 26, 1948, that “During the course of the coming year full consideration can be given to the difficult problems of the maintenance of law and order in Jerusalem and the cost of administration …3 It is our belief that the Jerusalem area should be integrated, in so far as is consistent with its special international character, with the people and institutions of the remainder of Palestine.”

There seems little doubt that the General Assembly, in framing its resolution of December 11, had in mind the various economic considerations to which you refer, and that it hoped that a practical plan could be worked out during the year subsequent to December 11, 1948.

With regard to the consequences of a recognition that the adjacent states have sovereignty over the respective Arab and Jewish portions of Jerusalem, you raise the question whether, such sovereignty being recognized, the adjacent states might not be able to invoke paragraph 2 of Article 7 of the United Nations Charter in order to deny the rights of the United Nations in the area.

I believe that your apprehensions on this point will be dispelled by the assurance that we have no intention of recognizing the sovereignty of any state in the Jerusalem area. The type of international regime which we have in mind would involve the distribution of governmental powers among the three authorities concerned, namely, the two adjacent states and the United Nations authority. It will not be an application of the concept of sovereignty in the usual sense, but will rather be a matter of a precise definition of the location of respective governmental powers. In the present case, where the only rights of the adjacent states in the area will be those defined in an agreement to which they are parties, they will clearly be in no position to deny the rights of the United Nations, which will be defined in the same agreement.

It is my understanding that the Palestine Conciliation Commission is still in the process of working out a practical plan for the internationalization of the Jerusalem area which will take into account the varied and complex problems which are involved. I regret that I am not in a position to supply you with a copy of this plan at this time as the Conciliation Commission has not yet submitted its report to the Secretary General of the United Nations. Meanwhile, a copy of your letter of July 13 and related correspondence are being forwarded to the United States representative on the Palestine Conciliation Commission for his consideration in relation to the plan on which the Commission is working.

Sincerely yours,

Dean Acheson

1 Not printed.

2 The President’s letter was in reply to Cardinal Spellman’s letter of June 10; neither printed. They are filed under 501.BB Palestine/7–549.

3 Omission indicated in the source text.

Memorandum by the Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for United Nations Affairs (Sandifer) to Mr. James W. Barco, at Lausanne 501.BB Palestine/8–1149

[Document 896]

Memorandum by the Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for United Nations Affairs (Sandifer) to Mr. James W. Barco, at Lausanne

restricted Washington, August 11, 1949.

Subject: Comments on Preliminary Draft of Declaration Concerning the Holy Places, Religious Buildings, and Sites in Palestine Outside the Jerusalem Area (Com.Jer./W.29, 26 July 1949).

The preliminary draft of a declaration to be made by Israel and the Arab state concerning the Holy Places, religious buildings and sites in Palestine outside the Jerusalem area (Com.Jer./W.29, 26 July 1949) has been examined by officers of UNA, L/P and NEA. The following comments and suggestions are the result of this joint examination and are transmitted to you for your assistance in further discussions on this subject.

Your letter of July 27, 19491 notes that the Jerusalem Committee intends to submit a preliminary draft of the Declaration to the Israeli Delegation for its comments. It is assumed that the views of the Arab Delegation will likewise be sought.

There follows a paragraph by paragraph comment on the draft Declaration:

Paragraph 1.

It is suggested that the reference to “freedom of conscience” be omitted from this paragraph. A guarantee of freedom of conscience is a matter which does not relate particularly to the question of the Holy Places and access to them. Accordingly it is not believed necessary for the purposes of this Declaration. It will be observed that freedom of conscience is not referred to in Paragraph 7 of the Assembly Resolution of December 11, 1948. Moreover, freedom of conscience is not susceptible of limitation and could not therefore be made “subject to the maintenance of public order”, as it is in the present draft.

Paragraph 2.

It is suggested that the second sentence of this paragraph be deleted. The basic obligation is contained in the first sentence. The second sentence indicates only one of many possible forms that a derogation from this obligation might take. It is not believed desirable to emphasize in the Declaration the matter of “the construction of buildings in unsuitable proximity” and so possibly to detract from the broad character of the obligation stated in the first sentence of the paragraph.

Paragraph 3.

The text of this paragraph seems satisfactory. As a matter of clarification, it is the understanding of the Department that the use of the date May 15, 1948 in this paragraph and in paragraph 5 has the effect of preserving the status quo under the Mandate with regard to the subjects indicated, and does not have the effect of including any new provisions which may have been instituted on 15 May 1948 immediately following the termination of the Mandate.

Paragraph 4.

The following rewording is suggested for this paragraph: “The Government of _______ undertakes to guarantee freedom of access to the Holy Places, religious buildings and sites within its territory and, pursuant to this undertaking, will guarantee rights of entry and of transit to ministers and pilgrims of the Christian, Jewish and Moslem religions, without distinction as to nationality, subject only to considerations of national security and to the maintenance of public order.”

Paragraph 5.

No comment except for the observation made in connection with paragraph 3.

Paragraph 6.

The following revision of paragraph 6 is suggested: “6. The Government of ____________ undertakes to accept and to give effect to such recommendations as may be made by the United Nations Commissioner, provided for in the Instrument establishing a permanent international regime for the Jerusalem area, with respect to the application and observance of this Declaration. The Government of _________ further undertakes to grant the United Nations Commissioner the privileges and facilities necessary for the performance of his functions.”

Comment:

It was felt that the preliminary draft of paragraph 6 contained in Com.Jer./W.29 did not state with sufficient clarity the authority of United Nations Commissioner with respect to Holy Places outside Jerusalem and his relationship to the two states concerned in the implementation of the Declaration. It was felt that an undertaking by the Governments to “cooperate actively” was not sufficient and that, as regards the protection of Holy Places which is the subject of the Declaration, the two Governments should be prepared to agree to give effect to recommendations of the United Nations Commissioner.

For your information, the Department contemplates the possibility that, in the resolution approving the Declaration, the General Assembly would instruct the United Nations Commissioner to report periodically on the implementation of the Declaration. This would insure that violations of the obligations assumed in the Declaration could be brought to the attention of the General Assembly by the United Nations Commissioner. It is believed that existence of such a provision would in itself promote the observance of the Declaration and that Assembly discussion of reports of the United Nations Commissioner would be an additional sanction.

1 Not found in Department of State files.

The Secretary of State to the United States Delegation at Lausanne 501.BB Palestine/8–1149: Telegram

[Document 897]

The Secretary of State to the United States Delegation at Lausanne 1

top secret Washington, August 11, 1949, 12 noon.

Unpal 224. Reference para four Palun 2662 Elath was clearly informed of Dept position on July 28 as stated Unpal 214.3 Meanwhile, to remove any doubt which might exist in Elath’s mind or in his reports to his Govt, Asst Secy McGhee on Aug 9 took advantage of Elath’s presence in Dept for purpose presenting new Israeli Economic Counselor to emphasize 1) reports from USRep Lausanne indicated Arab reaction to Israeli refugee proposal was unfavorable; 2) press releases from Tel Aviv indicating that “Israel’s offer…4 has been reed favorably by President Truman” were not indicative of US thinking; 3) whatever merits of Israeli offer may be, it does not meet provisions of para 11 GA res Dec 11; 4) Israeli offer does not provide suitable basis for contributing to solution of Arab refugee question in view of limited extent to which Arab states are now able to absorb refugees on econ and financial grounds; 5) if Israel cld accept 230,000 Arab refugees from Gaza area, it shld be able to make more substantial offer now; and 6) on balance, US does not consider present Israeli offer to repatriate 100,000 Arab refugees satisfactory from standpoint of basis for ultimate solution of refugee problem. Although we remain unwilling to assume responsibility for naming figure, McGhee suggested to Elath that only Gaza figure or higher wld appear to offer satisfactory basis.

Elath expressed disappointment re reported Arab reaction. Present Israeli proposal to repatriate 100,000 Arab refugees was maximum for econ and security reasons, particularly latter. Elath added, how ever that his Govt wld be informed re six points which McGhee emphasized.

Israeli reaction remains to be seen. Meanwhile, Unpal 2235 shld further reinforce any discussions you may have re second point.

Dept approves three-point procedure in Palun 266. Re second point, separate tel is being sent re Palun 265.6 Re third point, Dept suggests differing views within PCC be included in conclusions as alternatives rather than as individual US, French or Turkish “plans”. Procedure in Unpal 2137 is considered preferable at this stage.

Dept approves five-point formula for solution re refugees.

Re name US member of survey group, most promising candidate was unable to accept because of other commitments. Dept is actively working on this matter and hopes to inform you further shortly.

Acheson

1 This telegram was repeated to London.

2 Dated August 5, from Lausanne, p. 1287 [Pg. 1287 includes portions of Doc. 889 and Doc. 890].

3 Dated July 29, to Lausanne, not printed; but see footnote 2, p. 1263 [Pg. 1263 is part of Doc. 866].

4 Omission indicated in the source text.

5 Dated August 9, to Lausanne, p. 1291 [Pg. 1291 includes portions of Doc. 892 and Doc. 893].

6 Dated August 5, from Lausanne, p. 1286 [Pg. 1286 includes portions of Doc. 888 and Doc. 889].

7 Dated July 28, to Lausanne, p. 1267 [Pg. 1267 is part of Doc. 870].

Mr. Stuart W. Rockwell to the Secretary of State 501.BB Palestine/8–1149: Telegram

[Document 898]

Mr. Stuart W. Rockwell to the Secretary of State

restricted Lausanne, August 11, 1949—3 p. m.

Palun 272. PCC has accepted general committee recommendation for establishment Lausanne mixed Arab-Israeli technical committee to study means putting into effect accord on frozen funds subject Palun 270.1 Committee would consist 1 Arab 1 Israeli with neutral chairman to be provided by UN probably from Geneva office.

Israelis and Arabs have agreed establishment committee and Arabs have decided name Labbane2 as their representative, pointing out this first instance they have agreed meet directly with Israelis. Azcarate now seeking chairman.

Rockwell

1 Dated August 9, from Lausanne; it reported that Arab and Israeli delegates in the General Committee had “agreed to mutual unblocking, on pound for pound basis, of funds blocked in Arab states belonging to Palestine Arabs now resident in Israel and of funds blocked in Israel belonging to Palestine Arabs now resident in Arab states.” (Palun 270, 501.BB Palestine/8–949)

2 Abdel Chafi el-Labbane, member of the Egyptian Delegation at Lausanne; regularly Chief of the Political Section of the Arab Affairs department in the Egyptian Ministry for Foreign Affairs.

Mr. Stuart W. Rockwell to the Secretary of State 501.BB Palestine/8–1149: Telegram

[Document 899]

Mr. Stuart W. Rockwell to the Secretary of State

secret Lausanne, August 11, 1949—3 p. m.

Palun 273. Following is résumé important positions developments since recess.

1. General—since July 18 PCC through formal and informal contacts informing self on position parties since recess. Principal advisers now preparing questions on specific points at issue which PCC could put to parties in effort get them clarify and make more specific their positions. After receiving replies intention USDel and Turk delegation that PCC draw up compromise proposal which it could present to parties. If parties reject proposal USDel and Turk delegation favor placing general Palestine question on GA agenda, with possibility PCC might present suggested compromise solution for consideration GA.

One difficulty in this is attitude Boisanger who states belief it premature to present compromise proposal to parties and that PCC must continue discussions in effort conciliate parties. Alleges PCC has made progress and that on number important questions cannot be decided so fast. Moreover opposed to PCC going to GA with proposed solution stating PCC has mandate conciliate not arbitrate and that long as either party ready continue conciliation discussions PCC has no choice but do so.

Boisanger position coincides with that of Israelis who strongly opposed going to GA and state ready continue discussions here until settlement reached. Type of settlement they have in mind indicated by Sasson in private conversation when he said Israelis thought main task PCC was persuade Arabs adopt Israeli position and that PCC was wrong if it considered that conciliation involved proposals which would deprive Israel of any territory or envisage return of much more than 100,000.

Arabs generally favor going to GA. Some desire do so in order use GA as sounding board for restatement their position. Others such as Jordan delegation in order be “forced” to acquiesce in possible decision of GA resolution problem. USDel believes no Arab chief delegate here would dare break front by reaching agreement on important points which could be considered unfavorable to Arab position, and that view this and adamant Israeli attitude, position of Boisanger re possibility reaching agreement not sound. There has been progress on minor points but basic positions remain unchanged. USDel also believes that if GA passed plan which gave something to Arabs on territory there is good chance Arab states would accept.

USDel thinks attitude Boisanger personal and not based on instructions his government. May be necessary for US and Turk governments discuss matter with French Government since there is extremely undesirable possibility parties may learn of serious divergence within PCC and also PCC can take no decisive steps unless agreement unanimous.

Territory—Israelis insist they need all territory they now hold especially Negev. Sasson has however twice indicated Israel might be able give up territory along Egyptian frontier in vicinity Auja.

Arabs are standing on 1947 partition, May 12 protocol and US territorial position. Syria and Lebanon interested in western Galilee, Jordan wants back triangle areas and Ramie Lydda and desires corridor to Mediterranean, and Egypt wants Negev up to line known to Department. Department familiar with tentative territorial suggestions USDel and Turk delegation. Work on established common territorial position in informal meetings of principal advisers has been stopped because Boisanger in line with his general position has instructed De la Tour Du Pin1 take no effective part in discussions and no responsibility for France in any proposal which might be drawn up. USDel knows however that French delegation possesses map probably prepared by Benzihta’s personal initiative, indicating suggested territorial distribution.

Refugees—Department familiar with Israeli proposition. In addition, Sasson states if several thousands of refugees are left over after Arab states have indicated how many they will accept, Israeli will accept for sake agreement.

Arabs publicly stand on December 11 resolution and state they will consider resettling those refugees who do not wish to return Israel.

Privately Syrian and Jordan representatives agree to inevitability resettlement large numbers in their countries but state view necessity maintain Arab unity and public opinion at home they cannot reach political agreement envisaging this.

Arabs about to present to PCC utterly unrealistic counterproposal on refugees in reply to Israeli proposition.

4. Jerusalem—Jerusalem committee has run into unexpected snag due attitude French representation. Benoist2 now arguing that it premature for committee to agree on Jerusalem as long as other issues unsettled, that Vatican pressure makes it difficult for French government to agree to anything less than complete internationalization, that UN authority in Jerusalem must control real property transfers and immigration to city etc. Sudden tactics Benoist certainly reflect overall attitude Boisanger toward PCC initiative and probably desire French Government accommodate Vatican. Members French delegation state important French Catholics sending them personal letters urging complete internationalization.

Rockwell

1 M. le Vicomte de La Tour du Pin Verclause, attached to the French Delegation at Lausanne.

2 Philippe Benoist, attached to the French Delegation at Lausanne.

The Secretary of State to the United States Delegation at Lausanne 501.BB Palestine/8–1149: Telegram

[Document 900]

The Secretary of State to the United States Delegation at Lausanne 1

top secret Washington, August 11, 1949—9 p. m.

Unpal 225. Ref Palun 265.2 Dept believes discussion territorial question within PCC shld be helpful at this stage. As indicated Unpal 213,3 Dept believes that procedure of having PCC agree on various alternative plans as basis for possible discussion between parties is preferable to having PCC itself agree on a single plan for territorial adjustment which might be unacceptable to both sides and share the fate of the Bernadotte plan.

Dept has fol comments on your numbered paras: (1) Dept suggests procedure outlined Unpal 213 shld be emphasized to French and Turkish dels in order to stress concept of flexible proposals rather than rigid plan at this stage.

If French del has radically different proposals it is suggested they be put forward as alternatives to general PCC proposals rather than as separate and distinct French proposals. Dept believes foregoing procedure wld avoid confusion and misunderstanding which might arise from such discussions as those reported between French and Lebanese.

(2) Turkish proposal appears substantially identical with that contained Keenan instructions Jan 19494 except for northern Galilee and rectifications in central Palestine.

(3) Dept is not clear re areas mentioned in (b) (c) and (d). Pls describe further.

Suggested US proposal appears, in general, to add territory to Israeli Gaza strip proposal, to make certain territorial rectifications in northern central Palestine and to add certain territorial changes in southern central Palestine as exchange for western Galilee.

US proposal also appears, in general, to be at considerable variance with position US has previously taken. We therefore do not believe your proposal shld be put forward within PCC as final US views or official US territorial position at this time. On other hand, it must be remembered that any territorial settlement which is acceptable to parties wld undoubtedly be acceptable to US.

Dept is presently working on alternative territorial position as suggestion which might be put forward in General Committee of PCC. Following consultation with Porter concerning it, you will be further informed.

Acheson

1 This telegram was repeated to London.

2 Dated August 5, from Lausanne, p. 1286 [Pg. 1286 includes portions of Doc. 888 and Doc. 889].

3 Dated July 28, to Lausanne, p. 1267 [Pg. 1267 is part of Doc. 870].

4 Not printed, but see footnote 1, p. 681 [Pg. 681 includes portions of Doc. 407 and Doc. 408].

The United States Representative at the United Nations (Austin) to the Secretary of State 501.A Summaries/8–1149: Telegram

[Extract]

[Document 901]

The United States Representative at the United Nations (Austin) to the Secretary of State

New York, August 11, 1949—9:15 p. m.

911.

. . . . . . . . . . . . . .

By a vote of 9–0, USSR and Ukraine abstaining, the SC Aug. 11 adopted a joint French-Canadian resolution (S/1367) in connection with the report of Acting Mediator Bunche on Palestine. Soviet amendments, reintroduced in a slightly revised version, were all rejected.

The SC also adopted, without opposition, a Canadian-Norwegian draft (S/1362) paying tribute to the work of the late Mediator, the Acting Mediator and members of their staff1

. . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Austin

1 For the concluding discussion of Mr. Bundle’s report by the Security Council of August 11, see SC, 4th yr., No.38, pp. 1–14 [Pgs. 1–14 include portions of Doc. 1, Doc. 2, and Doc. 3]. The text of the Canadian-French resolution is printed infra; that of the Canadian-Norwegian draft is printed as Resolution 72 (1949) in United Nations, Official Records of the Security Council, Fourth Year, Resolutions and Decisions of the Security Council, 1949, hereinafter identified as SC, 4th yr., Resolutions, 1949, p. 7 [Pg. 7 is part of Doc. 1]. Senator Austin’s statement supporting the Canadian-French draft resolution and opposing the Soviet amendments is printed in SC, 4th yr., No. 38, p. 5 [Pg. 5 is part of Doc. 1].

Resolution 73 (1949) Adopted by the Security Council on August 11, 1949 [Document 902]

Resolution 73 (1949) Adopted by the Security Council on August 11, 1949 1

August 11, 1949

The Security Council,

Having noted with satisfaction the several Armistice Agreements concluded by means of negotiations between the parties involved in the conflict in Palestine in pursuance of its resolution 62 (1948) of 16 November 1948,

1. Expresses the hope that the Governments and authorities concerned, having undertaken, by means of the negotiations now being conducted by the Conciliation Commission for Palestine, to fulfil the request of the General Assembly in its resolution 194 (III) of 11 December 1948 to extend the scope of the armistice negotiations and to seek agreement by negotiations conducted either with the Conciliation Commission or directly, will at an early date achieve agreement on the final settlement of all questions outstanding between them;

2. Finds that the Armistice Agreements constitute an important step toward the establishment of permanent peace in Palestine and considers that these agreements supersede the truce provided for in Security Council resolutions 50 (1948) of 29 May and 54 (1948) of 15 July 1948;

3. Reaffirms, pending the final peace settlement, the order contained in its resolution 54 (1948) to the Governments and authorities concerned, pursuant to Article 40 of the Charter of the United Nations, to observe an unconditional cease-fire and, bearing in mind that the several Armistice Agreements include firm pledges against any further acts of hostility between the parties and also provide for their supervision by the parties themselves, relies upon the parties to ensure the continued application and observance of these Agreements;

4. Decides that all functions assigned to the United Nations Mediator in Palestine having been discharged, the Acting Mediator is relieved of any further responsibility under Security Council resolutions;

5. Notes that the Armistice Agreements provide that the execution of those Agreements shall be supervised by mixed armistice commissions whose chairman in each case shall be the Chief of Staff of the United Nations Truce Supervision Organization in Palestine or a senior officer from the observer personnel of that organization designated by him following consultation with the parties to the Agreements;

6. Requests the Secretary-General to arrange for the continued service of such of the personnel of the present Truce Supervision Organization as may be required in observing and maintaining the cease-fire, and as may be necessary in assisting the parties to the Armistice Agreements in the supervision of the application and observance of the terms of those Agreements, with particular regard to the desires of the parties as expressed in the relevant articles of the Agreements;

7. Requests the Chief of Staff mentioned above to report to the Security Council on the observance of the cease-fire in Palestine in accordance with the terms of this resolution, and to keep the Conciliation Commission for Palestine informed of matters affecting the Commission’s work under General Assembly resolution 194 (III) of 11 December 1948.

1 Reprinted from SC, 4th yr., Resolutions, 1949, p. 8 [Pg. 8 includes portions of Doc. 1, Doc. 2, and Doc. 3].

The Secretary of State to the Egyptian Chargé (Chiati) 501.BB Palestine/7–2549

[Document 903]

The Secretary of State to the Egyptian Chargé (Chiati)

The Secretary of State presents his compliments to the Chargé d’Affaires ad interim of Egypt and refers to the Embassy’s notes of June 10, 19491 and July 25, 1949, in which the question of the removal of the Security Council’s Arms Embargo was raised. In these notes the Egyptian Government took the position that its restrictions on the movement of air and sea transport to Israel “had been imposed for no other reason than to insure that the ships and planes enroute to Israel via Egypt did not carry armaments or war material to the Zionists as contraband in defiance of the Security Council’s decisions.”

As the Egyptian Government is aware, following the conclusion of the Syrian Israeli armistice the Acting Mediator submitted his final report to the Security Council2 and that body has relieved him of his functions. At the same time the Security Council took action which in effect removed the arms embargo imposed by its resolutions of May 29 and July 15, 1948.

It is therefore evident that the obstacles which the Egyptian Government found to the removal of its restrictions no longer exist, and it is assumed that immediate steps will be taken to remove the various restrictions which have been imposed since the outbreak of hostilities in Palestine. It is felt that such action will be a constructive step towards the restoration of normal conditions in the area.3

Washington, August 12, 1949.

1 Not printed; but see telegram 573, June 11, to Cairo, p. 1115 [Pg. 1115 includes portions of Doc. 745, Doc. 746, and Doc. 747]. In an attached memorandum of August 12 to Mr. McGhee, Gordon H. Mattison, Chief of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs, noted that “The drafting of a reply to the notes of June 10 and July 25, 1949 from the Egyptian Embassy was delayed in order to take full advantage of Dr. Bunche’s proposal to the Security Council that the ‘truce resolutions involving the arms embargo be removed.”

2 Dated July 21; see editorial note, p. 1240 [Pg. 1240 includes portions of Doc. 845 and Doc. 846].

3 Mr. McGhee handed this note to Dr. Chiati on August 12 and stated that “the Department felt that Egypt would act in accordance with the Embassy’s note of June 10, 1949 and lift the shipping restrictions which allegedly had been continued in effect because of the arms embargo. Mr. McGhee emphasized the fact that the United States had supported the removal of the Security Council’s resolutions which had included the arms embargo. He pointed out that the removal of shipping restrictions by Egypt would be a constructive step toward normal relations in the Near East area.” (memorandum of conversation by Stuart D. Nelson of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs, 501.BB Palestine/8–1249) The substance of the note of August 12 was conveyed to Arab capitals, Tel Aviv, and Jerusalem in a circular telegram of August 16, 4 a. m., and to Bern for Mr. Porter in telegram 1144, August 18, 8 p. m. (501.BB Palestine/8–1649, 8–1849).

President Truman to President Weizmann, at Rehovoth, Israel 501.BB Palestine/8–1549

[Document 904]

President Truman to President Weizmann, at Rehovoth, Israel 1

personal Washington, August 13, 1949.

My Dear President Weizmann: Thank you for writing me personally with regard to our note of May 29, 1949, and your Government’s reply of June 8. I appreciate your desire to remove any misapprehension regarding the position and intentions of your Government. I am certain a personal talk would be helpful. As this is not possible at the present time I shall endeavor to answer certain of your points.

It is true that many long months have passed since the Palestine question was first referred to the United Nations. On the other hand, it is our belief that the United Nations has made remarkable progress in view of the complexity of the problem. It may also be true that, in theory, a single individual such as Count Folke Bernadotte or Dr. Ralph Bunche would have been able to proceed more rapidly than a commission consisting of three or more members. In practice, however, experience has demonstrated that a single individual can only succeed with active assistance on the part of interested governments. We believe that the present Palestine Conciliation Commission has been able to function effectively, when one considers that it is responsible for negotiating a longer range political settlement whereas the Acting Mediator’s functions were confined to the achievement of shorter range military agreements.

The proposals which the Israeli delegation at Lausanne has advanced have undoubtedly been helpful to the Palestine Conciliation Commission. Although some of these proposals have not been adopted, it may be recalled that the representatives of Israel, Lebanon, Syria, Transjordan and Egypt on May 12, 1949 were signatories to a protocol of the Commission which should have the effect of facilitating further discussion of all questions, including the refugee problem, and thereby of achieving a final peace settlement. It seems reasonable to consider the Arab agreement to the protocol of May 12 as a general reply to the Israeli proposals.

With regard to the general question of the Arab refugees, you may recall that the General Assembly resolution of December 11 provided that the refugees wishing to return to their homes and live at peace with their neighbors should be permitted to do so at the earliest practicable date, and that compensation should be paid for the property of those choosing not to return. I am, therefore, glad to be reassured by your letter that Israel is ready to cooperate with the United Nations and the Arab states for a solution of the refugee problem; that Israel pledges itself to guarantee the civil rights of all minorities; that Israel accepts the principles of compensation for land abandoned by Arabs; that Israel declares its readiness to unfreeze Arab accounts under certain conditions; that Israel has set up a custodian of absentee property; and that Israel is ready to readmit members of Arab families.

It may be noted, however, that in making these proposals the Israeli delegation made them conditional, in general, on the conclusion of peace and other limiting factors, and that the representatives of the Arab states, on the other hand, considered the General Assembly resolution as imperative and mandatory.

With regard to (1) access to ports and means of communications, and (2) the delimitation of frontiers, it again seems reasonable to believe that the protocol of May 12 might be considered as a constructive basis on which these matters could be discussed. With regard to the Jerusalem question, it is my understanding that the Palestine Conciliation Commission has made excellent progress during which it consulted all interested parties and that it is presently in the process of preparing its report on this subject for the General Assembly in accordance with paragraph (8) of the General Assembly resolution of December 11.

In view of these developments at Lausanne, I believe one may conclude that the Arab representatives are prepared to enter into negotiations with the objective of achieving a peace settlement. This conclusion would appear to be reinforced by the Commission’s communique of July 28, which reports that “the Arab delegations and the delegation of Israel have given express assurances regarding their intentions to collaborate with the Commission with a view to the definitive settlement of the Palestine problem and to the establishment of a just and permanent peace in Palestine.”

The Commission has already activated a number of subsidiary groups, such as the General Committee, the Jerusalem Committee, and the Technical Committee on refugees. It is my understanding that the Commission now has your project regarding additional subcommittees under consideration and that the commission might take advantage of your project to facilitate further discussions.

With regard to direct negotiations, it may be recalled that the General Assembly resolution of December 11 provides for negotiations conducted either with the Palestine Conciliation Commission or directly. Thus far the representatives of the Arab states have been unwilling to enter into direct talks. It may be hoped, however, that further progress at Lausanne might make it possible to conduct negotiations both with the Palestine Conciliation Commission and directly.

With regard to the refugee problem, we are of the opinion that primary responsibility for a solution to this problem rests with Israel and the Arab states and that, assuming all concerned are willing to approach it realistically and constructively, the United Nations, including its individual members, might be willing to assist the states concerned in reaching such solution. It is reassuring that Israel, for humanitarian reasons, is ready to contribute as far as it can toward a solution of this problem and has been readmitting Arab refugees and is ready to reunite Arab families.

During your recent visit to the United States I talked to you about my feelings regarding the refugees and the question of a final territorial settlement. These views were repeated in the recent exchange of notes between your Government and mine. I would be less than frank if I did not tell you that I was disappointed when I read the reply of your Government to our note of May 29. Even after talking with Ambassador Elath, following his recent return from Tel Aviv, I am not certain that the present proposals of your Government will affect the current conversations at Lausanne in such a way as to achieve a lasting peace between Israel and the Arab states.

Whether or not one can say that Israel has cooperated with the Commission, it seems to us that the views of the Israeli Government are in many respects at variance with the General Assembly resolution of December 11. The views of the Israeli Government may also be considered as failing to take into account the principles regarding territorial compensation advanced by the United States as indicated in our Aide-Mémoire of June 24.

With regard to territory, your reassurances that Israel has no aggressive designs against anyone and that it is not looking for additional territory are appreciated. We can understand that you might be somewhat apprehensive on security grounds; nevertheless, it seems reasonable to believe that the conclusion of armistice agreements with the neighboring Arab states should prove reassuring and that both Israel and the Arab states on the basis of the General Assembly resolutions of November 29, 1947, and December 11, 1948, should be able to discuss the territorial question.

I sincerely hope that both Israel and the Arab states will continue the discussions at Lausanne in a conciliatory spirit and with a greater understanding of the problems which exist between them. If both sides undertake an approach of this kind a settlement in Palestine would be greatly facilitated. Such a settlement would be an extremely important contribution to the stability of the Near East and the well-being of its peoples. It would, in addition, provide a basis on which it would be possible more constructively to plan for the future.

Very sincerely yours,

Harry S. Truman

1 This letter was drafted by Mr. Wilkins on August 8 and transmitted to President Truman for approval by Secretary Acheson with his memorandum of August 10. The memorandum noted that “Sending a reply [to President Weizmann’s letter of June 24] at this time should be helpful in view of the discussions now taking place at Lausanne.” The White House returned the proposed reply to the Department on August 15, with the President’s approval. Mr. McGhee handed the President’s reply to Ambassador Elath on August 18 (see Mr. McGhee’s memorandum of that date, p. 1323 [Pg. 1323 includes portions of Doc. 916, Doc. 917, and Doc. 918]) for transmission to the Israeli President. The Department, on August 19, sent a summary of the reply to Tel Aviv (telegram 535, 501.BB Palestine/8–1949) and on August 31 transmitted copies of the Truman–Weizmann correspondence to Tel Aviv, Arab capitals, Paris, London, Ankara, New York, and Jerusalem for background information only and not for discussion outside these various missions (501.BB Palestine/8–1549). Copies were also sent to Geneva for the American Delegation at Lausanne on September 6 (501.BB Palestine/9–649).

The Acting Representative at Vatican City (Gowen) to the Secretary of State 867N.01/8–1349

[Document 905]

The Acting Representative at Vatican City (Gowen) to the Secretary of State

restricted Vatican City, August 13, 1949.

No. 24

Sir: I have the honor to enclose a copy of an undated statement entitled “The Present Situation in Jerusalem”1 which was handed to me on August 12, 1949 by the Acting Secretary of State of the Holy See, Monsignor Domenico Tardini. The statement which, he said, has just been prepared by the Secretariat of State of His Holiness sets forth the latest views of the Holy See on the problem of Jerusalem and is now being forwarded by the Vatican to all Apostolic Nuncios and other high ranking members of the Catholic hierarchy for their information.

Monsignor Tardini remarked that this statement is an “unofficial compendium of certain de facto and de jure considerations which according to the Holy See should be borne in mind for a proper appraisal of the position of the Holy See on the problem of Jerusalem and for a just, proper and permanent settlement of that vital issue”. An informal English translation2 is attached for immediate reference.

The gist of the statement is that in the opinion of the Holy See only complete internationalization of Jerusalem, its environs and all the Holy Places in Palestine can bring a true, fair, and lasting peace to the Holy Land, and that all other proposed solutions are inadequate.

After a description of the “now very critical situation in Jerusalem” the statement goes on to point out what the Vatican believes would be a satisfactory solution of the problem, viz:

[Here follow nine points said to offer a satisfactory solution of the problem of Jerusalem and a reference to the Pope’s Encyclical Letters of October 24, 1948, and April 15, 1949, “in which he recommended international control for Jerusalem, its environs and all the Holy Places in Palestine.”]3

Respectfully yours,

Franklin C. Gowen

1 Not printed.

2 Not printed.

3 Mr. Gowen, on August 4, had raised the question whether the Department would object to his arranging an appointment for Brigadier General Riley with the Vatican Acting Secretary of State, in order to deliver a message to the Vatican from Israeli Foreign Minister Sharett (telegram 30 from Vatican City, 501.BB Pales tine/8–449). The message as summarized in the telegram stated that Mr. Sharett “was anxious to know just what Vatican wanted done with Jerusalem problem. Was Vatican interested only internationalization Jerusalem under international regime? If so, then Israel saw no solution to problem as Israel does not consider possible to place some 100,000 Jews now residing in New City under such control. It would mean these Jews would be outside Israel and subject only to protection of such administrative body against attack by Arabs. Sharett suggested (a) international control and/or supervision of holy places in Jerusalem area with same body supervising to lesser degree holy places in other parts Palestine. Free access to all holy places would be guaranteed; (b) internationalization of Old City with Israel rendering such assistance as necessary to ease economic and living conditions there. Even if Old City was returned to Arabs similar arrangements could be made; (c) under (b) free access to holy places in new Jerusalem and other parts of Israel could be arranged. Sharett was interested in knowing whether or not Vatican if interested in (a), (b) and (c) would be willing to arrange for meeting with Israeli representatives for purpose of explaining [exploring?] possibilities looking forward to possible solution.” The Department, in reply on August 9, stated that “General Riley shld not act as intermediary between Israeli FonMin and Vatican. Such action might give rise to unwarranted polit implications in view Riley’s USMC rank and position as Chief of Staff of Acting Mediator. Furthermore, presentation of Israeli views to Vatican by Riley, a function which wld ordinarily be responsibility of Israeli Min Rome, might create impression US concurred in Israeli views. Position of ITS rep on PCC might thereby be prejudiced and work of PCC re Jerusalem might be seriously affected.” (telegram 13 to Rome, 501.BB Palestine/8–949)

Memorandum of Conversation, by Mr. Harlan B. Clark of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs 501.BB Palestine/8–949

[Document 906]

Memorandum of Conversation, by Mr. Harlan B. Clark of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs

secret [Washington,] August 15, 1949.

Participants: NEA—Mr. Hare

Mr. Paul A. Porter

Mr. Mark Ethridge

Mr. Fraser Wilkins, NE

Mr. Clark (in part), NE

[Mr. Faiz el-Khouri Syrian Minister]

(a) Problem: The Syrian Minister expressed the opinion that an injustice had been done in Palestine and said that he would like to have a further opportunity to make his views known to Mr. Porter and Mr. Ethridge in this regard. It is believed he may be motivated by personal reasons of prestige in asking to consult with Mr. Porter and Mr. Ethridge.

(b) Action Required: In the present circumstances, it is recommended that any further request by the Syrian Minister for conferences with Mr. Porter be discreetly declined.

(c) Action Assigned to: NE

Discussion:

After calling on Mr. McGhee (see memorandum of today’s date entitled “Views of the Syrian Minister on the Syrian Coup d’état of August 14”)1 the Syrian Minister asked to speak with Mr. Porter and Mr. Ethridge, who were consulting with Mr. Hare and Mr. Wilkins in an adjoining office. Upon being introduced to them, Faiz Bey began to criticize United States policy in regard to Palestine. He declared that this Government was powerless to act fairly in the matter since, like nearly every other country, the United States was completely controlled by Jews. He said that Jewish groups in England had extracted all the benefit that they could out of the British Government during the mandate period but that now Israel was an independent state they relied mainly on the United States to assist them in achieving their objectives. Mr. Ethridge and Mr. Porter asked specific questions as to how Faiz Bey believed that progress might be made in settling outstanding questions, but he turned them aside, with the remark that only by removing American support from Israel could a satisfactory settlement be made. He added that even Soviet Russia appeared to have been subject to Jewish influence and that in these circumstances when all the countries of the world were under the control of the Jews, “why could I be blamed for acquiescing in their control?” This mystifying query appeared to be rhetorical and before discussion was resumed, Mr. McGhee came in to say that Mr. Porter and Mr. Ethridge were due in another conference in 2 or 3 minutes and asked that they be excused. Faiz Bey took his leave with the remark “You see, there is never any time for me to make my views known”.

Mr. Clark who accompanied Faiz Bey to the elevator said he was sure that Mr. Porter and Mr. Ethridge had been pleased to have this opportunity to talk with him and would have been glad to have discussed the question with him further were it not for the fact that their presence was urgently required at an important meeting already scheduled. Faiz Bey replied that he understood that perfectly and that what he was ref erring to was that he had tried to see Mr. Porter before his departure for Lausanne and had been told that he was so busy making necessary preparations for his work on the Palestine Conciliation Commission that it was not possible to arrange a meeting. Mr. Clark said that he knew that Mr. Porter had indeed been very busy prior to his departure but that at Lausanne he had had full opportunity to discuss all aspects of the Palestine question with the Arab delegates to the Conciliation Commission meetings including the Syrian delegation which was in possession of pertinent instructions from its government. Faiz Bey replied, “Yes, but Lausanne is not enough. The Palestine question must be discussed everywhere”. The Minister said he appreciated having the opportunity to meet Mr. Porter and Mr. Ethridge and seemed pleased at the reception he had received.

[Here follows the final paragraph giving an analysis of the personal motivations of the Syrian Minister in desiring a meeting with Messrs. Ethridge and Porter.]

1 Not printed, but see editorial note, p. 1632 [Pg. 1632 includes portions of Doc. 1133 and Doc. 1134].

Memorandum by the Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern and African Affairs (McGhee) to the Assistant Secretary of State for Economic Affairs(Thorp) 811.516 Export-Import Bank/8–1549

[Document 907]

Memorandum by the Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern and African Affairs (McGhee) to the Assistant Secretary of State for Economic Affairs(Thorp)

confidential [Washington,] August 15, 1949.

On August 15 the recent decision of the President temporarily to postpone further allocations under the $100,000,000 Exim Bank loan to Israel1 was discussed with Messrs. Rusk, Porter (US Rep. PCC), Ethridge (Former US Rep. PCC), Satterthwaite, Hare, Dort,2 and Whitman.3 This is not a question of cancellation of the unallocated balance of $49,000,000 on the original $100,000,000 Exim Bank loan to Israel. It is merely a question of temporary delay of further allocations against the $49,000,000 balance.

It was agreed that early peace in Palestine, which was anticipated when the Exim Bank loan to Israel was first made in the spring of 1949, has not been achieved. Even though the Palestine Conciliation Commission has been working in the Near East and in Switzerland during the past seven months, a peace settlement does not seem any closer today. In spite of limited proposals put forward by both parties regarding minor aspects of the Palestine question, no real basis for agreement under the auspices of the PCC seems to exist at the present time. In view of these factors it was agreed that the Exim Bank should suspend further allocations under the loan for the time being.

It was agreed that the Secretary of State, as a member of the Board of the Exim Bank, should inform the Board that before further allocations are made the Department of State would like to review the Situation regarding any specific request for funds for the purpose of determining whether the allocation would be appropriate in the light of present circumstances. It is understood, for example, that a $5,000,000 request is pending for the Port of Haifa. It would need to be determined whether the availability of these funds for the Port of Haifa would be justified in the absence of progress towards peace in Palestine.

It was also agreed that the Secretary of State should inform the Board that the PCC plans to set up an economic survey mission for the purpose of studying the economic situation in the Near East, particularity the situation with regard to the repatriation of refugees in Israel and their resettlement in the neighboring Arab states, and for the purpose of making recommendations regarding overall economic projects for the Near Eastern area. In the absence of peace in Palestine and pending the recommendations of the Economic Survey Mission it would be wise temporarily to suspend further allocations, as such allocations might subsequently be integrated with the recommendations of the Mission itself.

It is hoped that these arguments will convince the Exim Bank of the economic grounds on which the Department’s views are based and that the Bank will take a similar line in such conversations as it might have when Israeli representatives approach the Bank regarding new requests.

Recommendation:

It is recommended that you discuss this matter along the foregoing lines with appropriate officials of the Exim Bank.

1 The Department, on August 5, advised the American Delegation at Lausanne that “Current conversations between reps Eximbank and Israeli reps Washington will shortly make it clear that further allocations under Eximbank loan have temporarily been postponed.” (telegram Unpal 218, 811.516 Export-Import Bank/8–549) In reply, on August 8, Mr. Porter stated that he had “not injected ExImBank loan into discussions here. Because of Shiloah’s firm position re refugees and territories do not believe any discussions in this regard would result in more than minor changes in basic position. Believe maximum effect will be obtained when Israeli Government learns from Bank officials that full economic cooperation with US not feasible under existing situation.” (Palun 267, 501.BB Palestine/8–849)

2 Dallas W. Dort, Special Assistant to Mr. Thorp.

3 Roswell H. Whitman, Associate Chief of the Division of Investment and Economic Development.

Mr. Stuart W. Rockwell to the Secretary of State 501.BB Palestine/8–1549: Telegram

[Document 908]

Mr. Stuart W. Rockwell to the Secretary of State

Lausanne, August 15, 1949.

Palun 275. Following substance questions put in writing to all delegations by PCC August 15:

(1) Is delegation prepared to sign declaration according which (a) solution refugee problem should be sought in repatriation of refugees in Israeli-controlled territory and in resettlement of those not repatriated in Arab countries or in zone of Palestine not under Israelis.

It is understood that repatriated refugees will become ipso facto citizens of Israel and that no discrimination will be practiced against them both regarding civil and political rights and obligations imposed upon them by law of land.

Also understood that repatriation and resettlement will take place subject technical and financial aid to each party by international community.

(b) In case survey group should be charged by UN with establishment development projects in Near East of which main purpose would be to facilitate repatriation, resettlement and economic and social rehabilitation of refugees, all parties will undertake to facilitate task of group and take all possible measures to aid in implementation of such solutions as group might propose?

(c) All parties will state that above mentioned understanding concerning refugees will not prejudice lights which parties reserve in connection with final territorial settlement?

(d) Funds for emergency aid extended to refugees must be renewed until above-mentioned technical and financial aid shall have been allotted by international community?

(2) Without committing its government and considering that no detailed statistics exist regarding refugees, is delegation prepared present provisional estimate of approximate number refugees its government would be ready to accept?

(3) What territorial adjustments does delegation desire be made to working document annexed to Protocol of May 12?1

Rockwell

1 Mr. Rockwell suggested to the French and Turkish Delegation that they “make concerted effort persuade all parties give affirmative answer re refugees subject Palun 275 and persuade Arab delegates make politically feasible replies to question re territory.” He also urged that the Department, after consulting the Turkish and French Governments, make appropriate representations as soon as possible to the interested Arab States and Israel. (Palun 276, August 15, 5 p. m., from Lausanne, 501.BB Palestine/8–549)

The Consul at Jerusalem (Burdett) to the Secretary of State 501.BB Palestine/8–1549: Telegram

[Document 909]

The Consul at Jerusalem (Burdett) to the Secretary of State

confidential Jerusalem, August 15, 1949—3 p. m.

519. MAC meeting yesterday considered Jordan complaint re expulsion by Israel of Arabs from triangle territory taken over by Israel under terms armistice agreement (Amman’s 136, July 181 ). According to Riley Israel took position would not permit return any Arabs expelled except as part of general solution refugee problem at Lausanne. These Arabs would be included in 100,000 Arabs. In personal conversation with Captain Ali Nuwar, Jordan representative, in presence of MAC Chairman Ballentine2 Dayan stated Nuwar could bring question to vote in MAC and force Israel repatriate expellees but “they would regret it if they returned”. Riley commented to Consul General that although Israel position direct violation armistice agreement he hesitated advise Ballentine to force vote since would not be responsible for treatment accorded returning Arabs. He considered this typical example tactic negotiating by threat and admitted UN powerless determine whether Arabs, if they returned, received fair treatment.

Believe above incident throws further light on true value proposal repatriate 100,000 Arabs.

Sent Department 519; repeated Tel Aviv 1, Baghdad 51, Beirut 101, Damascus 57, London 4, Geneva for USDel PCC 50, pouched Amman, Cairo, Jidda.

Burdett

1 Not printed.

2 Col. Samuel S. Ballentine of the United States Marine Corps, who was a United States Military Observer with the Truce Supervision Organization and who was designated by General Riley as Chairman of the Mixed Armistice Commission for Israel and Jordan.

Memorandum by the Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern and African Affairs (McGhee) to the Secretary of State 501.BB Palestine/8–1649

[Document 910]

Memorandum by the Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern and African Affairs (McGhee) to the Secretary of State 1

confidential [Washington,] August 16, 1949.

Subject: Palestine Conciliation Commission

Discussion:

Mr. Porter, the United States Representative on the Palestine Conciliation Commission, returned to the United States from Lausanne on August 12. Since his return to the present situation at Lausanne and in Palestine has been discussed in detail in the Department and in consultation with Mark Ethridge who visited Washington for this purpose. Mr. Porter’s general conclusion, with which we agree, is that no real basis for conciliation between the parties exists at the present time. The underlying reasons for this conclusion are set forth in the attached telegram (numbered paras. 1–5 of Tab A).2

In view of this situation, it is believed that the most effective approach to a Palestine settlement at the present time would be on economic grounds rather than on political grounds as has previously been the case. It is therefore proposed that the following procedure be followed: 1) The Palestine Conciliation Commission should as soon as possible establish the proposed Economic Survey Mission which would proceed to the Near East, study existing data, consult interested governments and authorities and on this basis prepare a report to the General Assembly through the PCC containing its recommendations for economic development and settlement of the refugee question. Before establishing the Mission interested NE governments would be requested for advance assurances they would cooperate with the Mission and would give great weight to its recommendations (last 4 paras. Tab A).

2) The PCC should submit a progress report to the UN relating its efforts at conciliation during the past seven months and its establishment of the Economic Survey Mission.

3) The PCC should then recess for the time being. Meanwhile, the PCC will leave its Principal Secretary (Dr. Pablo de Azcarate) in Jerusalem, the Commission’s official headquarters, for such activities as may be necessary. The Commission may be reconvened at the request of Dr. Azcarate or any one of its three members if future developments require such action.

4) The PCC should reconvene at Lake Success when the Economic Survey Mission has completed its report (estimated at about November 1).

5) The PCC should at that time submit a further progress report to the UN incorporating the findings and recommendations of the Economic Survey Mission. This report should also include the PCC’s own recommendations as to whether the Commission should continue its activities or whether it should be replaced by some new agency.

6) The Department is of the preliminary opinion it may be advisable to replace the Commission by a single individual such as an Agent General to have responsibility for conciliation, economic development, refugee resettlement and relief and possibly Jerusalem. No decision need be reached regarding the future of the PCC at this time as it is still being studied. Meanwhile, this question will be discussed with other interested governments to ascertain their views.

7) Mr. Porter tentatively plans to return to Lausanne about August 20 for the purposes described in steps 1) and 2). Mr. Porter also plans to stop off in Paris where he hopes to discuss steps l)–5) with our Embassy, the French Foreign Office and the French representative on the PCC. This step is considered imperative to enlist French support; otherwise the French representative on the PCC might attempt to hinder the action recommended in this memorandum because of his personal inclination toward indefinite conciliation. A proposed telegram to Paris is attached (Tab B).3

Recommendations;

It is recommended that: 1) you approve the foregoing procedure and

2) that you approve the attached telegram (Tab B).4

[Here follow concurrences and a list of attachments.]

1 Sent through Mr. Rusk and initialed by him.

2 For text of circular telegram as actually sent, see infra.

3 Secretary Acheson, on August 18, informed President Truman that he and Mr. Porter recommended the course outlined in Mr. McGhee’s memorandum. Mr. Acheson’s memorandum of the conversation states that “The President approved our taking that course.” (Secretary’s Memoranda, Lot 53 D 444, Secretary’s Memos)

4 The telegram was sent to Paris as No. 3068 on August 18. It read as follows: “For Bruce from the Secretary. Ambassador Paul Porter, US Rep PCC, plans arrive Paris Aug 19 enroute Lausanne. Recent developments at Lausanne re Palestine appear require new procedural approach for which we need strong French support. It would be appreciated if you would request Schuman to arrange consultation in Paris on Aug 22 between Boisanger, French Rep PCC, and French FonOff officials concerned.” (501.BB Palestine/8–1849) Robert Schuman was the French Foreign Minister. A 2-hour talk was held on the morning of August 22. Mr. Boisanger was said to have “expressed his appreciation usefulness and importance economic survey in providing basis eventual political settlement and accepted general lines policy put forward by Porter. Boisanger concerned, however, that adjournment PCC be so handled as to make entirely clear machinery for negotiation remain available to parties and not abandoned. Also desired recess should not take place until commission had received and examined Israeli and Arab replies on territorial question shortly expected. Porter stated this agreeable to him so long as matter dealt with promptly as possible preferably within one week.” (telegram 3459, August 22, 5 p. m., from Paris, 501.BB Palestine/8–2249)

The Secretary of State to Certain Diplomatic and Consular Offices 501.BB palestine/8–1649: circular telegram

[Document 911]

The Secretary of State to Certain Diplomatic and Consular Offices 1

confidential Washington, August 16, 1949—6 a. m.

Reference current developments relating gen Palestine question, Dept analyzes present situation as fol: 1) PCC: Hope for real progress at second phase Lausanne talks beginning July 18 has not been realized. Although both sides wld welcome peace, neither side is prepared at this time to make concessions which wld make settlement possible. Israeli offers re Gaza strip or repatriation 100,000 Arab refugees are unacceptable to Arabs. Arab position which is based on rigid adherence to para 11 of GA res Dec 11 and May 12 protocol with its map indicating 1947 partition boundaries is unacceptable to Israelis. No real basis for conciliation therefore appears possible at Lausanne.

2) GA: GA will discuss Jlem and refugee questions during forthcoming session and will probably discuss other aspects Palestine question including boundaries in connection with these items or as separate item on agenda. Israelis wish to avoid GA debate, Arabs look forward to it.

3) Israel: Israel is concerned with domestic problems and has allowed public opinion to develop within Israel to such an extent that it is almost impossible for Israeli Govt to make substantial concessions re refugees and territory which wld open way to settlement and friendly relations with Arabs. Israel prefers instead to maintain status quo in Palestine. Objectives seem to be (1) Absorption of almost all Palestinian refugees by Arab States and (2) de facto recognition of armistice lines as boundaries.

4) Arab States: Arab states are also concerned with domestic problems and are reluctant to take any forthright action for time being. Basically Arabs believe agreement with Israel at Lausanne wld require new concessions or at minimum formal acquiescence in status quo re refugees and territory. Arab reps consider agreement on either basis politically impossible for them because of polit repercussions which might result at home. Status quo is therefore preferable pending GA.

5) Refugees: Israel is willing to contribute to limited extent. Arabs privately agree that it will probably not be possible for most refugees to return to Israel and that it will be necessary to resettle them in Arab territory, primarily Syria, Jordan and Central Palestine. Arabs will not, however, take this position publicly. Although Arabs realize UNRPR funds are rapidly being depleted, necessity for early solution to overall refugee question has not resulted in constructive action on part of Arabs possibly because Arabs fatalistically anticipate UN particularly US and UK will assume responsibility at last moment.

6) Economic Survey Mission: Proposed mission is still under urgent consideration in Dept. Implementation has been delayed pending determination re personnel in Washington and in Lausanne pending clarification of Israeli and Arab positions. Dept expects, however, to be ready to proceed with Economic Survey Mission shortly.

In view foregoing analysis, Dept considers that most effective approach to Palestine settlement at present time wld be on basis of econ report by Economic Survey Mission rather than on polit agreement at Lausanne. Dept does not rule out possibility of further concessions by Arabs and Israelis and some measure of agreement between them under auspices of PCC but considers major emphasis shld be shifted to Economic Survey Mission. It is contemplated Economic Survey Mission might briefly visit NE, study existing data, consult interested govts and authorities and on this basis report its recommendations for econ development and settlement of refugee question to GA through PCC.

Economic Survey Mission wld report, for example, which NE countries wld be able to absorb refugees and to what extent in each case under present circumstances. Economic Survey Mission wld also report whether internatl econ and financial aid wld be required and to what extent such aid wld assist NE countries in recovering from dislocations arising from recent conflict and wld increase their ability to absorb refugees. Report and recommendations of Economic Survey Mission wld cover all possible aspects of Palestine question on econ grounds.

Dept has been contemplating instructing AmReps at Damascus, Amman and Tel Aviv to request FonOff for assurances that Govt wld cooperate with Economic Survey Mission in supplying info and wld give great weight to recommendations of Econ Survey Mission. AmReps at Beirut, Baghdad, Jidda and Cairo wld also be informed but primarily for purpose of requesting cooperation of respective govts as it is doubted resettlement of refugees wld prove feasible except for token numbers in these countries. It wld be pointed out that advance assurances were essential to justify estab of mission and to indicate serious consideration which respective govts wld be willing to give its recommendations. It wld also be pointed out that in absence of such assurances or other constructive action by Israel and Arab states long-range refugee resettlement and even short-range refugee relief wld undoubtedly be delayed.

Dept considers, however, that it wld be inappropriate to approach FonOff re Economic Survey Mission for several days in view Zaim overthrow and probable Arab preoccupation with this matter. Meanwhile your comments re analysis and shift of emphasis to Economic Survey Mission are requested.

Acheson

1 At London, Paris/Ankara, Arab capitals, Jerusalem, Tel Aviv, and Lausanne.

Mr. Stuart W. Rockwell to the Secretary of State 501.BB Palestine/8–1649: Telegram

[Document 912]

Mr. Stuart W. Rockwell to the Secretary of State

restricted Lausanne, August 16, 1949—11 a. m.

Palun 277. Arab delegates in private meeting with PCC August 1 [15?] delivered informal reply re Israeli proposal concerning refugees.

Following main points:

Arab expectation Jews would advance reasonable proposals not realized. According terms December 11 resolution nearly 1,000,000 refugees must return their homes and Jews have offered accept less than 100,000. Moreover Jews in basing their proposal on all territory now under Jewish control ignore May 12 protocol.

Jews cannot oppose return large number refugees on economic ground while encouraging mass immigration of Jews. Re objections on security grounds must be recalled international security is assured by UN.

Arab delegates reiterate request in their May 23 memo for return all refugees coming from areas allotted to Arabs by partition plan such as western Galilee, Jaffa, etc. Return these refugees does not depend on will Jewish occupying authorities who do not have right interfere in affairs population occupied regions over which they do not exercise sovereignty.

After this only question to be discussed is that of refugees to be repatriated to regions allotted to Jews by partition. If Jewish proposal can be understood as applying only to this territory Arab delegations would not be opposed to its adoption as basis discussion problem refugees from this region.1

Rockwell

1 Mr. Rockwell advised, on August 16, that in “View unrealistic and unhelpful nature Arab reply to Israeli proposal re refugees PCC has decided not to transmit to Israelis at present, but await Arab replies to questions on refugees asked by PCC August 15. PCC hopes efforts made Lausanne and by member governments in Arab capitals will result in more reasonable approach to refugee problem by Arab delegates.” (Palun 280 from Lausanne, 501.BB Palestine/8–1649)

The Consul at Jerusalem (Burdett) to the Secretary of State 867N.48/8–1649: Telegram

[Document 913]

The Consul at Jerusalem (Burdett) to the Secretary of State

secret Jerusalem, August 16, 1949—3 p. m.

522. Comments follow on Tel Aviv’s 607, ninth received thirteenth.

1. Obliged reiterate opinion expressed Contel 500, August 2 and 505, August 31 that Israel offer repatriate 100,000 refugees amounts mainly to “gesture”. Israel figures on Arabs in Israel areas quoted Contel 504, third,2 call for reduction of 100,000 by 25,000 “infiltrees” and families of breadwinners estimated by Arabs at 30,000, leaving total of 45,000 eligible for admittance under new offer. Conditions of return described by Comay (paragraphs 11 and 12 of Contel 500) and confirmed by Department’s infotel August 10.3 Apart from propaganda aspect (which might assist in breaking Lausanne deadlock) believe offer fails conform even to substantial part to December 11 GA resolution and US policy with respect either to numbers or conditions of repatriation of refugees.

2. Judging on basis press articles and public comments Jerusalem, reaction to refugee proposal not comparable to intense controversy generated by such questions as arms embargo and absorption of immigrants. ConGen surprised by lack of stronger outburst. Hard to conceive transparent ruse employed by Ben-Gurion (Tel Aviv’s A–211)4 would succeed more than momentarily in throwing well-informed and intelligent Israel public off scent. Consider more plausible explanation advanced by Jerusalem editor who asserted public realizes no real prospect exists of return 100,000 in immediate future.

3. Agree fully with Tel Aviv as stated Congram A–94, July 63 that Israel will resist effort change present temporary armistice lines. However, in addition to reaction in Israel to such change, attention should be given to effect on Arab states of acquiescence in Israel’s retention of territory seized by force mainly during periods of SC imposed truce. SC resolution of August 19, 1948 states “no party is entitled to gain military or political advantage through violation of truce”. Furthermore, all armistice agreements signed by Arab states on understanding demarcation lines were temporary and pacts include written provisions recognizing principle of no political gains during truce and stating agreements are without prejudice to final political settlement. ConGen believes on over-all basis more stable peace will result if territorial adjustments insisted upon.

4. Past experience of Arabs in Israel territory, regardless of statements of good faith of Israel Government instills little confidence that they will receive just treatment in future. (Contels 305, April 19, 330 April 26, 519 August 15).5 Little real possibility is seen that UN can guarantee to Arabs human rights and fundamental freedom set forth in UN universal declaration on human rights of 1948. This reality together with conditions Israel imposing for return, led ConGen to suggest shift in emphasis to territorial changes provided in treaty.

5. Tel Aviv’s 6076 in effect recommends abandonment or emasculation of US policy on boundaries and refugees as enunciated by Jessup November 20, constantly repeated and reaffirmed in Deptel 331, August 97 with approval of President. ConGen submits that in lieu of special pleading of inability and unwillingness of Israel to conform, attention might be directed to settlement within broad framework US policy. Solution imposed by Israel with force or threats of force on UN, US and Arab states will hardly contribute to lasting peace, or fail to strike at vitals of moral authority upon which UN and US world leadership hinges.

Department pass Lausanne.

Repeated Baghdad 52, Beirut 102, Damascus 60, London 45, Cairo 25, Jidda 10. Pouched Amman.

Burdett

1 The latter not printed, but see paragraph one of telegram 607, p. 1292 [Pg. 1292 is part of Doc. 894].

2 Not printed; it reported that during a foreign policy debate on June 16, Mr. Sharett placed the total number of Arabs in Israeli-held territory at 155,000 (867N.5011/8–349).

3 Not printed.

4 Dated August 5, not printed, but see footnote 2, p. 1292 [Pg. 1292 is part of Doc. 894].

3 Not printed.

5 None printed.

6 Dated August 9, p. 1292 [Pg. 1292 is part of Doc. 894].

7 This was a repeat of Unpal 223, p. 1291 [Pg. 1291 includes portions of Doc. 892 and Doc. 893].

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in Israel 501.BB Palestine/8–849: Telegram

[Document 914]

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in Israel 1

secret Washington, August 16, 1949—7 p. m.

526. Dept is at loss to understand Israeli reaction to substance Deptel 476 July 26. Dept did not rule out direct talks between high Israeli and Arab officials if such talks shld appear advisable to supplement discussion at Lausanne or otherwise to accelerate developments (ref Embtel 602, Aug 82 ).

Dept also regrets to note Israeli “take it or leave it” attitude re refugees. We are firmly convinced that primary responsibility for refugees rests with Israelis and Arabs and that both parties must work together constructively to solve problem. Dept believes consideration shld also be given by Israelis to public opinion of Arabs with whom Israel must live in NE and to world public opinion with which Israel must reckon in GA as well as local Israeli opinion.

While foregoing is for your confidential info, you are authorized to make use of substance this tel in such further conversations as you may have on this subject with Israeli officials.

Acheson

1 This telegram was repeated to London, Arab capitals, Bern (for Mr. Porter), and New York.

2 Not printed; but see footnote 1, p. 1257 [Pg. 1257 includes portions of Doc. 861 and Doc. 862].

Mr. Stuart W. Rockwell to the Secretary of State 501.BB Palestine/8–1749: Telegram

[Document 915]

Mr. Stuart W. Rockwell to the Secretary of State

confidential Lausanne, August 17, 1949—4 p. m.

Palun 283.

[Here follow two paragraphs on discussions between the Jerusalem Committee and Israeli officials concerning the movement of additional government offices into Jerusalem, as reported to the Department in telegram 506, August 3, from Jerusalem (867N.01/8–349).]

New subject: Jerusalem Committee has now adopted text draft instrument for submission to PCC and is in process drafting accompanying report. Final text represents compromise French and US views but does not do violence to essential points US position and includes major number Department’s drafting suggestions. French reluctant adopt any text at this time, and growing concern French delegation over Vatican opposition to division Jerusalem between Israel and Arab autonomy only overcome by firm US attitude re necessity submitting proposals to PCC which follow closely basic provisions May 18 draft, and willingness compromise on following points without which no French agreement likely: (1) Immigration.

(2) Final decision disputes between religious communities over Holy Places in Jerusalem to rest with international tribunal in event a Commissioner’s efforts toward settlement fail.

Re (1), provision, now so drafted as to have little meaning, reads as follows: “Article 5. The responsible authorities of Jewish and Arab zones shall not carry out an immigration policy of a nature to change the present demographic equilibrium of the area of Jerusalem.”

Re (2), French FonOff follows Vatican view that Commissioner cannot be entrusted with final decision in disputes concerning status quo.

US representative in agreeing above changes has emphasized final decision on draft rests with PCC. Important step will have been taken however when draft submitted to PCC with approval French representative Jerusalem Committee. This should be accomplished in few days if no further instruments from Paris. Text of draft and report will be airmailed.

Rockwell

The Chargé in Egypt (Patterson) to the Secretary of State 501.BB Palestine/8–1749: Telegram

[Document 916]

The Chargé in Egypt (Patterson) to the Secretary of State

secret Cairo, August 17, 1949—6 p. m.

774. Under Secretary Hassouna Pasha in conversation sixteenth referred to SC’s action in lifting arms embargo. Hassouna speaking for Prime Minister Sirry Pasha expressed earnest hope that US Government might see its way clear to implementing embargo lifting through abolition of numerous present restrictions on export of arms from US.

In reply I stated that I would bring his views to attention my government pointing out my belief that US Government while favoring arms for defence was allergic to weapons capable of use in offensive warfare.

Any positive action which the US Government may be disposed to take in above sense might possibly be made conditional on like lifting by Egyptian Government of its own restrictions dating from Palestine hostilities with especial reference to interference with ships, crews and cargoes in Egyptian ports or transiting Suez Canal.1

Patterson

1 Cairo had advised, on August 16, that “there is no truth in rumors that the Egyptian Government will no longer search shipping passing in Suez and destined for Haifa. As previously reported, what the Egyptian Government undertook in its regulations was to confine its attention to war matériels.… A few days ago five American cars consigned to Tel Aviv were seized by the authorities in Alexandria. Details of this seizure are being obtained from the Consulate General at Alexandria and immediate protest will be made to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs based on the assurances which they have given regarding the nature of cargo to be interfered with.” (airgram 857, 501.BB Palestine/8–1349)

Editorial Note [Document 917]

Editorial Note

The Department of State, on August 18, prepared a report entitled “United States Policy Towards Israel and the Arab States”; and on August 31, Secretary Acheson transmitted a copy to Secretary of Defense Johnson, in a message which referred to the latter’s communication of May 16 (890.00/8–3149). Regarding the communication of May 16, see the last paragraph of Secretary Johnson’s memorandum of the same date to Admiral Souers, page 1012 [Pg. 1012 is part of Doc. 659].

The report was submitted on September 1 for the consideration of the National Security Council; see editorial note, page 1339 [Pg. 1339 includes portions of Doc. 930 and Doc. 931].

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern and African Affairs (McGhee) 501.BB Palestine/8–1849

[Document 918]

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern and African Affairs (McGhee)1

secret [Washington,] August 18, 1949.

Participants: Eliahu Elath, Israeli Ambassador

Uriel Heyd, First Secretary, Israeli Embassy

NEA—Mr. McGhee

NE—Mr. Wilkins

Problem:

(1) President Truman’s reply2 to President Weizmann’s letter of June 24.

(2) Alleged division between White House and State Department.

(3) Developments at Lausanne re Israelis and Arabs.

Action Required:

(1) To transmit summary and full text of President Truman’s reply to the American Embassy in Tel Aviv.

(2) None.

(3) To instruct the American Embassy in Tel Aviv to refute the myth that the PCC and US discouraged direct talks between Israelis and Arabs.

Action Assigned To: NE

Discussion:

The Israeli Ambassador called on me today at my request to discuss various matters relating to Israel and the Arab states. We had a most frank and friendly discussion throughout.

(1) I told the Ambassador that President Truman had replied to President Weizmann’s letter of June 24 and I asked the Ambassador if he would be kind enough to transmit the President’s reply to President Weizmann. As the Ambassador was willing, I handed him a sealed envelope containing the President’s reply. I also handed the Ambassador a copy of the President’s reply for his own informal and confidential information. I pointed out that President Truman’s response should not be made known in any way and that I was providing Mr. Elath with a copy in order to keep him informed of the attitude of the US and because of our confidence in him. Mr. Elath asked me if he could inform the press, whose correspondents even then were waiting in the reception room, that President Truman had replied to President Weizmann’s letter. I said that I thought this inadvisable inasmuch as President Weizmann himself had not yet received the letter and it seemed likely that the press might attach unwarranted significance to a reply at this time. It was, in fact, a coincidence and was not related in any way with Ambassador Porter’s return to Lausanne, Ambassador Elath agreed.

(2) I informed Ambassador Elath of the contents of a recent exchange of messages between the Secretary of State and Ambassador Porter in Lausanne3 with regard to certain information which Mr. Porter reported that Mr. Shiloah had received from Mr. Eban with respect to Arab refugees and territory in Palestine. The Ambassador said that he was uninformed regarding the source at the White House from whom the information reported was obtained, and suggested that the report might be based on a misunderstanding of his own recent interview with President Truman. I told the Ambassador that we were not inferring in any way that his conversation was the basis for this report. I stressed the unity of the White House and the Department regarding recent developments concerning Palestine. At the Ambassador’s request I provided him with paraphrases of copies of the exchange of messages in question.

(3) Ambassador Elath questioned me with respect to Ambassador Porter’s recent consultation with the Department and asked whether any instructions had been given Mr. Porter prior to his return to Lausanne. I replied that Mr. Porter visited Washington on routine consultation. I said that the US as a member of the Conciliation Commission was still pursuing a policy of bringing the parties together on outstanding issues and that we hoped particularly that agreement could be reached regarding refugees and territory. I added that according to reports from Lausanne there appeared to be no real basis for conciliation at the present time because of the widely divergent views held by the Israelis and the Arabs. Our main objectives in the NE are peace and stability. A refugee solution was absolutely necessary. The US as well as other members of the UN was consistently reviewing the general situation to determine whether some new approach might not be devised which would assist the Israelis and Arabs to reach agreement.

The Ambassador replied that in the opinion of his Government agreement was prevented by two important factors: (1) Direct talks between the Israelis and the Arabs were consistently being discouraged not only by the Conciliation Commission but particularly by the US.

(2) The Arabs did not actually expect refugees to return to Israel and had no territorial demands. It could be seen, therefore, that the US position was more extreme than that of the Arabs.

I told the Ambassador that the US Government was not opposed to direct talks. I said that Mark Ethridge and Paul Porter had strongly urged the parties to negotiate directly. The Arab representatives in Lausanne and elsewhere had, on the other hand, thus far been unwilling to meet the Israelis directly. There were many reasons for this refusal, including such factors as Israeli leaks to the press concerning earlier meetings, and the Arab belief that such meetings if they resulted in concessions might lead to political repercussions in Arab capitals.

I asked the Ambassador in what respect our position in regard to Arabs and territory was more extreme. He replied that we were insisting that Israel repatriate 250,000 refugees and relinquish the Negev. He said Israel could not undertake either of these steps for economic and security reasons. I observed that the Ambassador’s statement in regard to the US position was incorrect. I said we had consistently made it clear that the US was endeavoring to assist the parties and would support any fair reasonable agreement which was freely reached between them.

Regarding refugees, the US had not stated that Israel should repatriate 250,000 refugees. It had pointed out, however, that there were 750,000 refugees and that Israel and the Arab states had primary responsibility for that. Statistical and technical information which is presently available indicated that this total number might be taken care of if the Arab states were able to absorb 500,000 and if Israel were able to repatriate a total of approximately 250,000. On the other hand, actual disposition of the refugees was a matter for determination between the parties and might be handled either directly between them or through the CC.

With respect to territory, I recalled that the US had never expressed a specific territorial proposal and referred in this connection to Dr. Jessup’s statements before the UN on November 20–26, 1948. As was the case with refugees, a settlement of the territorial question was one for determination between the parties either directly or through the Conciliation Commission.4

1 Drafted by Mr. Wilkins.

2 Dated August 13, p. 1305 [Pg. 1305 is part of Doc. 904].

3  Palun 263, August 3, and Unpal 223, August 9. The former is not printed; but for its substance, see Unpal 223, p. 1291 [Pg. 1291 includes portions of Doc. 892 and Doc. 893].

4 The Department summarized this memorandum for Tel Aviv in telegram 536, August 19, 8 p. m. (501.BB Palestine/8–949). It then concluded that “In such conversations as you may have with official and unofficial Israelis, you are authorized strongly to follow same line as McGhee re refugees and territory. Dept is particularly concerned that you refute myth re PCC and US discouragement of direct talks between Israelis and Arabs.” No. 536 was repeated to London as No. 2982 and to Paris, Ankara, Arab capitals, Jerusalem, Bern (for Mr. Porter), and New York.

Editorial Note [Document 919]

Editorial Note

Replies to the Department’s circular telegram of August 16 (page 1317 [Pg. 1317 is part of Doc. 911]) were sent by various posts beginning August 19. Damascus (telegram 491, August 19), Baghdad (telegram 500, August 20), Beirut (telegram 432, August 20), Amman (telegram 320, August 22), and Cairo (airgram 896, August 24) agreed on the desirability of shifting emphasis from political to economic factors. Jidda (telegram 493, August 20) made no direct comment but offered no objection. Tel Aviv (telegram 640, August 19) concurred.

Jerusalem (telegram 526, August 22), on the other hand, expressed doubts on the efficacy of the shift on the grounds that an “Instinctive reaction may occur on part of both Arabs and Israelis against creation of ‘yet another commission’”. Jerusalem also noted the “Problem of formulating terms of reference of economic mission consistent with UN resolutions and of such nature both Israel and Arab states will agree give great weight to its recommendations.” Jerusalem’s “most serious objection” centered on the fact that the “Establishment of economic survey mission and shift to economic grounds might be construed as acceptance of present political status quo involving achievement by Israel of objectives re refugees and boundaries.”

London (telegram 3351, August 23) agreed that new tactics were required but considered “it important that in shifting to economic approach, we should not relax pressure for political settlement lest we encounter pitfall Beith points out.” Mr. Beith had noted that with the shift of emphasis from political settlement, there would be a tendency for the territorial situation to freeze.

All replies cited above are filed under 501.BB Palestine.

Memorandum by the Acting Secretary of State to the President 501.BB Palestine (E)/8–2449

[Document 920]

Memorandum by the Acting Secretary of State to the President

Washington, August 24, 1949.

Mr. Gordon R. Clapp, Chairman of the Board of Directors of the Tennessee Valley Authority, today accepted appointment as Chairman of the Economic Survey Mission which was recently set up by the Palestine Conciliation Commission. In order to stress the importance which we attach to this Mission, it is proposed that you should make a statement following the announcement of Mr. Clapp’s appointment by the Secretary-General of the United Nations.

The purposes of this Mission will be to examine the economic situation in the countries affected by the recent hostilities in Palestine, and to make recommendations which will enable the governments concerned to further such measures and development programs as are required to overcome the economic dislocations created by the hostilities; to reintegrate the refugees into the economic life of the area on a self-sustaining basis within a minimum period of time; and to promote economic conditions conducive to the maintenance of peace and stability in the area.

The attached statement1 not only emphasizes the importance which we attach to the Survey Mission but also generally outlines United States policy towards the Near East. It is hoped that such a statement of policy will be helpful to both the Israelis and the Arabs in reaching agreement which will permit a return of normal conditions to the area.

James E. Webb

1 For the statement as actually released by the White House on August 26, see Department of State Bulletin, September 5, 1949, p. 333.

The Chargé in Egypt (Patterson) to the Secretary of State 501.BB Palestine/8–2449: Airgram

[Document 921]

The Chargé in Egypt (Patterson) to the Secretary of State

restricted Cairo, August 24, 1949.

A–899. On calling August 21 on Under Secretary Hassouna Pasha, I raised subject Department’s circular telegram, August 16, 4 a. m.,1 respecting Departmental note of August 12 to Egyptian Chargé, Washington, regarding desirability removal of trade restrictions in view removal arms embargo. In so doing, I recalled to Hassouna Pasha his own recent request that the U.S. Government, in view of arms embargo lifting by Security Council, should likewise cancel American rules and regulations in implementation of arms embargo.

Hassouna Pasha stated that he had not yet received Department’s above-mentioned note August 12. However, Egyptian Government has removed restrictions on commerce through Egyptian waters and ports aside from implements of war, such as arms and ammunition. Hassouna Pasha stated that this meant manufactured weapons and ammunition and did not include raw materials or even manufactured articles, such as rubber tires acceptable for use on military vehicles. On my pointing out, in view of arms embargo lifting, even these residual restrictions should be removed by Egypt, Hassouna Pasha countered by indicating that so long as the U.S. Government had not cancelled its own regulations limiting shipment of arms to the Middle East, in respect of Egypt, Egypt should not remove its own restrictions. If arms and ammunition were being supplied to Israel but not to Egypt, and if Egyptian restrictions were removed prior to U.S. action, Egypt might find itself powerless to prevent armament of Israel. However, Hassouna did not make any categorical promise that if the U.S. cancelled its current restrictions on export of arms, Egypt would lift its own restrictions on passage of arms and ammunition destined to Israel or its ports or waters.

It would be helpful if I might be informed of the Department’s thinking on the subject of this airgram.

Patterson

1 Not printed, but see footnote 3, p. 1304 [Pg. 1304 is part of Doc. 903].

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern and African Affairs (Hare) 501.BB Palestine/8–2549

[Document 922]

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern and African Affairs (Hare)

top secret [Washington,] August 25, 1949.

Subject: Status of PCC Activities and Export-Import Bank Loan.

Participants: Mr. Eliahu Elath, Ambassador of Israel

Mr. George C. McGhee, Assistant Secretary

Mr. James G. McDonald, American Ambassador to Israel1

Mr. Raymond A. Hare, Deputy Assistant Secretary

Action Required:

To explain our position on the above to the Israeli Ambassador and to make similar explanation to the Israeli Government through the American Embassy in Tel Aviv.

Action Assigned to:

NEA; NE.

Discussion:

In the course of a luncheon conversation on August 25, Mr. McGhee mentioned to the Israeli Ambassador the discouragement which we had felt as the result of reports given us by Mr. Paul Porter, American Representative on the PCC, regarding failure to achieve sufficient progress by the conciliation process. However, Mr. McGhee expressed confidence in achieving an ultimate solution and was particularly hopeful that events might take a more constructive turn with the setting up of the Economic Survey Mission. He was confident that the Israeli Government would understand the significance of this measure and would afford the Mission full cooperation.

Mr. Elath replied that he did not share Mr. McGhee’s pessimistic impression of the course of the conciliation talks and he was convinced of the importance of keeping such negotiation on an active basis. However, he was in agreement with Mr. McGhee as to the promising possibilities of the economic approach and felt that it might do much good provided that it were made clear that conciliation was not being put on the shelf. Mr. McGhee said that he was in entire agreement regarding the desirability of not discouraging the conciliation process in any way. He felt, however, that by putting emphasis at this stage on the economic aspect of the problem, the prospect of general settlement would be considerably brightened.

Mr. McGhee then observed that he had been informed that Mr. Souers, of the Export-Import Bank, had recently talked with Mr. Gass2 regarding the status of the Export-Import Bank loan to Israel. From what Mr. McGhee had been able to learn, it would appear that the matter as presented to Mr. Gass might well have given rise to misunderstanding and he wished to make a few remarks by way of clarification. There was no question of suspension or cancellation of the loan, but merely of reviewing the situation in the light of recent developments, which, unfortunately, had not borne out the hopes for a peaceful settlement on which the original decision had been taken. However, this was only an act of prudence and in line with procedure normally followed in evaluating conditions for foreign financial assistance in reaching final decision on specific projects. Furthermore, it was anticipated that the situation arising out of the appointment of the Survey Mission might inject a more constructive note into the situation and make for greater clarification.

Mr. Elath responded with obvious emotion that the report which he had received from Mr. Gass had been extremely upsetting to him since it cut across the type of relationship which he felt should exist between Israel and the United States and of which he was a personal exponent. According to the information which he had received from Mr. Gass, the Export-Import Bank had stated: (1) that the decision to hold up action on the remainder of the loan had been taken very reluctantly by the Bank after long discussion in which the Bank had on several previous occasions refused to take action on economic or refugee grounds despite urging by the State Department; (2) that the Bank did not consider that there were economic grounds on which to justify the action taken; (3) that the decision reached had been as a result of a State Department “veto” for purely political reasons. Mr. Elath said that he had sent a full report on the matter to his Government and had not yet received their reply, but in the meantime his personal reactions were the following: (1) The action taken by the Bank at the apparent behest of the State Department clearly constituted a “breach of promise”. Not only was it thus a question of principle, but it would also have certain very specific repercussions in Israel, where commitments had been made on projects covered by the remainder of the loan.

(2) The decision could only be interpreted as attempted duress but it should be made clear that such tactics would not succeed. In fact, they could only be expected to have the opposite result.

(3) Action of this type, if it became known, could only serve to weaken the present government of Israel. Any such weakening would be contrary to the interests of the United States since another government could not be expected to be as friendly or cooperative.

(4) Such action would serve to render more difficult the efforts at conciliation being made at Lausanne and would be particularly unfortunate in connection with the activities of the proposed Economic Survey Mission.

Mr. McGhee thereupon reviewed and amplified the statements which he had previously made, particularly emphasizing the fact that there was no suspension of the loan as such and that any suggestion of failure to live up to a commitment was completely untenable. He added that there was no intention to exert duress, as should be evident by the timing of the discussions with the Bank and the fact that there was no specific action which this Government was currently urging the Israeli Government to take. Mr. McGhee said that as far as the Economic Survey Mission was concerned, it was entirely by chance that these two matters had come up at the same time and that there was absolutely no connection between them. In conclusion, Mr. McGhee said that he was glad to have had this occasion for a frank exchange of views and was confident that any present doubts in this connection could be dissipated in the course of subsequent discussions.

Mr. Elath expressed regret that he had felt impelled to speak so strongly in the course of a friendly luncheon conversation, but added that, like Mr. McGhee, he was glad to have been able to discuss the matter in full sincerity and frankness.

1 Ambassador McDonald left Israel on August 9 to return to the United States for consultation. On August 25, he saw President Truman. At various other times he spoke with Clark Clifford, Under Secretary of State Webb, George C. McGhee, and other State Department officers and with Pentagon and other Government officials. He also spoke extensively with nongovernmental persons. The Ambassador’s account of his consultation is given in his My Mission in Israel, pp. 184–191 [Pgs. 184–191 include portions of Doc. 78, Doc. 79, Doc. 80, Doc. 81, Doc. 82, Doc. 83, Doc. 84, and Doc. 85].

2 The names of Messrs. Souers and Gass are obviously transposed in the source text.

The Consul at Jerusalem (Burdett) to the Secretary of State 501.BB Palestine/8–2549: Telegram

[Document 923]

The Consul at Jerusalem (Burdett) to the Secretary of State

confidential Jerusalem, August 25, 1949—noon.

532. Consulate General has not seen completed draft proposals (intel August 23, 10 a. m.1 ) for Jerusalem. From conversations with UN secretariat here, understands commissioner entrusted by Article 6 with ensuring protection of and free access to Holy Places and by Article 12 with exclusive control of Holy Places and routes leading to them. Because definite possibility of disturbances at Holy Places or routes leading to them, suggests Commissioner receive specific authority to call on local Arab and Jewish authorities to assist him in maintenance order should he consider this necessary. Commissioner should not be forced rely entirely on his own guards, which might well prove inadequate.2

ReDeptel 304, July 22:3 Would appreciate learning what procedure PCC proposed to adopt in determining delimitation of Arab and Jewish zones.

Sent Department 532, repeated Geneva 54 (for PCC).

Burdett

1 Not printed; this circular telegram summarized the substance of Palun 283, August 17, from Lausanne, p. 1321 [Pg. 1321 includes portions of Doc. 913, Doc. 914, and Doc. 915].

2 The Department informed Lausanne on September 1 that it concurred in the suggestion made in telegram 532. (Unpal 230, 501.BB Palestine/8–2549)

3 This was a repeat of Unpal 199, to Bern, p. 1245 [Pg. 1245 includes portions of Doc. 849 and Doc. 850].

Memorandum by William J. McWilliams , Assistant to the Director of the Executive Secretariat Secretary’s Daily Meetings, Lot 58 D 609

[Extract]

[Document 924]

Memorandum by William J. McWilliams , Assistant to the Director of the Executive Secretariat

secret [Washington,] August 26, 1949

Subject: Summary of Daily Meeting with the Secretary

Participants: The Secretary

The Under Secretary

Mr. Rusk

Mr. Kennan

Mr. Thorp

Mr. McWilliams

Mr. Nitze

. . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Item 3. Israeli Loan Application

Mr. Rusk reported the difficulties in which we found ourselves as a result of action by the Export Import Bank in advising the Israelis of the delay in consideration of their loan application. In accordance with the President’s directive, our object had been to drag our feet. However, the Export-Import Bank had advised the Israelis that they were agreeable to going ahead with the loan application but that the State Department had ordered it held up. Mr. McGhee was to talk to Ambassador Elath this morning and the Secretary said that he would take it up with the President at the Cabinet meeting since Mr. Niles1 had already approached the President about it.

Note: The Secretary took the matter up with the President and talked to McGhee after his return from Cabinet meeting.2

1 David K. Niles, Administrative Assistant to President Truman.

2 The editors have been unable to find any evidence of what Secretary Acheson told Mr. McGhee after the Cabinet meeting.

Memorandum by the Assistant Secretary of State for Congressional Relations (Gross) to the Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern and African Affairs (McGhee) 501.BB Palestine (E)/8–2649

[Document 925]

Memorandum by the Assistant Secretary of State for Congressional Relations (Gross) to the Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern and African Affairs (McGhee)

[Washington,] August 26, 1949.

There is a potential impact upon the Congress which may result from the proposed shift from a political to an economic emphasis in the handling of the Palestine situation (Department’s circular telegram of August 16). My principal concern is related to the difficulty which we may encounter when we go to Congress next session to request further funds either for refugee relief or for economic development and resettlement in the Near East.

You will recall that when we talked last May with Senators Connally and Vandenberg they both emphasized that in working out any arrangements involving the grant of additional funds it would be essential that there be evidence that the Israeli Government is doing its full part and making appropriate contribution to the solution of the problem. While I realize that the Department has tried its best to get the Israelis and the Arabs to make some contribution to the settlement of the refugee problem, the fact is, I believe, that they have done practically nothing. Congress will require evidence that the states in the Near East are doing something for themselves before any additional United States help will be given.

My concern is that the Economic Survey Commission [Mission] might submit recommendations to the General Assembly (through the PCC) which will bypass the political problem, ignore the fact that the Arabs and the Israelis are doing nothing to help solve the problem themselves, and in effect commit the United States, along with a small group of other states, to make further substantial financial contributions either of an outright relief type or related to economic development of the area.

I believe we must tread very carefully on the matter of committing Congress. You will recall that the Senate Report on the Refugee Bill stated: “The Committee believes, however, that as a matter of general policy, our delegations to the General Assembly should exercise extreme care not to take any action which commits the Congress to expenditures for such voluntary programs to which all members do not contribute under the regular United Nations budget.”

The Secretary of State to the United States Mission at the United Nations 501.MA Palestine/8–2449: Telegram

[Document 926]

The Secretary of State to the United States Mission at the United Nations

confidential Washington, August 27, 1949—3 p. m.

443. Reurtels 9641 and 9872 concerning second meeting UNRPR Ad Hoc Advisory Committee.

Dept agrees GA action for provisional continuance of UNRPR will be required before Nov. 1, but considers that relief program beyond immediate period should not be considered until report of Economic Survey Mission has been submitted. We feel that determination of relief requirements for 1950 and method of financing should be considered by GA against background of Survey Mission report which would probably not be available before Nov. 1. Consequently GA action early in the Assembly should merely provide an extension of life for UNRPR, call on members for additional contributions to meet $32 million budget, and authorize the Secretary General to advance sufficient funds from the Working Capital Fund for one or possibly two months operation in extremity, such advances to be paid from a supplement to the regular budget. Although we hope GA action on the Palestine question, including refugee relief, can be completed by Dec. 1, an advance for two mos operations would be more prudent.

While recognizing possible difficulties in obtaining favorable GA action along foregoing lines without indication of 1950 requirements, we feel that because of connection between relief requirements and estimated numbers who might be taken off relief in 1950 as a result of implementation of recommendations of Economic Survey Mission, it would be desirable to avoid submission of overall figure before Mission report. Per Capita cost figures would however be useful.

If SYG concurs in foregoing procedure we believe meeting of Ad Hoc Advisory Committee might be useful in preparing ground for provisional GA action.

Acheson

1 Dated August 23, 5:27 p. m., not printed; it relayed information from Secretary-General Lie that the General Assembly would probably give priority to the problem of extending assistance to the Palestine refugees (501.MA Palestine/8–2349).

2 Dated August 24, 10:33 p. m., not printed; it advised of Mr. Lie’s hope that the General Assembly would complete consideration of the refugee relief problem before November 1 and of official estimates that UNRPR funds would hold out through November (501.MA Palestine/8–2449).

The Chargé in Israel (Ford) to the Secretary of State 501.BB Palestine/8–2949

[Document 927]

The Chargé in Israel (Ford) to the Secretary of State

confidential Tel Aviv, August 29, 1949.

No. 215

Subject: Israel Attitude toward Economic Survey Commission.

Sir: I have the honor to transmit as enclosures to this despatch copy of a memorandum dated August 15, 1949 from the United Nations Conciliation Commission for Palestine regarding the formation of an Economic Survey Commission to study conditions in the Middle East with a view to facilitating the repatriation and resettlement of Arab refugees, and copy of the Israel delegate’s reply to the memorandum dated August 23, 1949.1 These communications were handed to the Embassy on August 24, 1949 by a representative of the Israel Foreign Office, and while it is appreciated that copying them [for transmittal?] to the Department may be a duplication of work, I nevertheless feel that the two communications taken together are of sufficient importance for future reference as to warrant them being made the subject of this despatch.

The enclosures are believed to be self-explanatory and to require little if any comment at this stage. Stress, however, should be placed on the nature of the Israel delegate’s reply to Chapter II of the memorandum having to do with territorial settlement. The ironclad determination of the Government of Israel not to surrender any of the territory now physically occupied either by its citizens or by its Army or by both is clearly apparent in this portion of the reply, and it would be misleading and perhaps even dangerous to assume that Israel will give up any appreciable part of the territory which it now considers its own either by right of conquest or otherwise.2

Respectfully yours,

Richard Ford

1 Neither printed.

2 The Israeli reply asserted that all areas allotted to the control and jurisdiction of Israel under the terms of the armistice agreements with its four neighbors were to be formally recognized as Israeli territory. Any changes in the final delimitations of frontiers were to be brought about only after negotiation and agreement with those neighbors. The reply also stated that the Government of Israel would facilitate the task of the economic survey mission and give full consideration to its proposals but that it considered the resettlement of refugees in Arab territories was the primary method of solving the refugee problem, although Israel would contribute by “agreeing to a measure of resettlement in Israel.”

Mr. Stuart W. Rockwell to the Secretary of State 501.BB Palestine/9–249: Telegram

[Document 928]

Mr. Stuart W. Rockwell to the Secretary of State

secret Lausanne, August 29, 1949—7 p. m.

Palun 288. PCC took following decisions August 29:

1. Formally adopted Jerusalem statute and draft declaration re holy places outside Jerusalem area and decided forward both shortly to SYG. PCC made several amendments to Jerusalem statute as presented by Jerusalem committee of which following most important: a. Preamble, after referring to provisions of December 11 resolution concerning Jerusalem, states that UN “hereby establishes, in the exercise of its full and permanent authority over Jerusalem area, permanent international regime for the Jerusalem area in accordance with the following provisions”.

b. Article 3 “all matters not reserved by the present instrument to the competence of the UN commissioner and thereby is provided for hereinafter are delegated to the respective competence of the responsible authorities of the two zones”.

PCC believed above changes would strengthen position of UN authority in Jerusalem, at least on paper, and would increase likelihood of obtaining affirmative votes for statute from Catholic nations in GA. PCC recognized changes would probably also strengthen Israeli opposition.

2. Re telegram from SYG proposing Azcarate as UN representative in Jerusalem subject Palun 286,1 decided cable SYG that PCC preferred Azcarate remain as Principal Secretary PCC and therefore requested list other candidates be cabled soonest.2

3. Decided adjourn Lausanne on or about September 15 and reconvene New York on or about October 20. During this period Azcarate will proceed Jerusalem maintain contact with parties and report to commissioners any developments or any communications or proposals parties may care to make.

Rockwell

1 Dated August 23, from Lausanne, not printed; it stated that the Palestine Conciliation Commission had decided to appoint a UN representative in Jerusalem in accordance with the GA resolution of December 11, 1948, and that this action had been taken largely on French initiative. The French were said to have been disturbed by recent Israeli moves and statements indicating intention to make Jerusalem the Israeli capital and to feel that the presence of a UN representative would have some slight deterrent effect upon the Israelis and might facilitate establishment of an eventual international regime in Jerusalem. Mr. Porter indicated that he had “no illusion of effectiveness this move” but expressed the belief that “no useful purpose would be served by opposing.” (501.BB Palestine/8–2349)

2 The Palestine Conciliation Commission appointed Alberto Gonzalez Fernandez United Nations. Representative in Jerusalem on September 10 (telegram Palun 316, September 10, from Lausanne). Mr. Gonzalez, who was the Colombian Alternative Representative at the United Nations, proved unable to serve, however, “owing illness his wife.” (telegram 1172, September 21, 11 p. m., from New York) Consul Burdett concluded that whether the “illness physical or diplomatic, Israeli will … draw conclusion hostile and even threatening tone of press and speeches responsible. Will encourage use same tactics against any other representative named and will strengthen Israel belief UN not prepared to insist on internationalization in face of determined Israel opposition.” (telegram 593, September 23, 4 p. m., from Jerusalem) The three telegrams cited in this footnote are filed under 501.BB Palestine/9–1049, /9–2149, and /9–2349, respectively.

Mr. Stuart W. Rockwell to the Secretary of State 501.BB Palestine/8–3049: Telegram

[Document 929]

Mr. Stuart W. Rockwell to the Secretary of State

secret Lausanne, August 30, 1949—11 a. m.

Palun 290. Arab delegates August 29 delivered to PCC 19 page joint reply1 to questions put by PCC to all delegates August 15 (Palun 275).2 Israeli reply expected August 30.

Substance Arab reply as follows, based on USDel informal translation from French.

Question (1–A)—Arab delegates cannot subscribe to any act or declaration which would prejudice provisions of December 11 resolutions concerning refugees. However Arab states desire continue aid refugees while defending their inalienable right to return to their homes. In this spirit Arab delegates welcome proposed declaration and state they are in position to study its accomplishment in framework of above principles, taking into account refugees to be settled in Arab Palestine, in Jewish territory and in international zone of Jerusalem.

Question (1–B)—if survey group is established, Arab delegates will recommend to their governments that they facilitate mission of group and take all measures which they shall judge opportune and possible to assist in carrying out solutions which group may propose.

Question (1–C)—Reply affirmative.

Question (1–D)—Reply affirmative.

Question (2)—Syrian and Jordan delegates are in position to declare that their governments are able to receive, after considering findings of survey group, those refugees who do not return to their homes, provided international assistance is furnished. For well-known reasons would be difficult for Egypt to envisage resettlement of refugees in its territory but when eastern frontier of Egypt has been rectified Egyptian delegate would be disposed to examine question in light of prevailing conditions and international assistance. Same reasons make it difficult for Lebanon to accept refugees.

Question (3)—Areas belonging to Arabs according to May 12 protocol and now under Jewish authority are of nature to make important contribution to resettlement of refugees. Compensation can be of two kinds—purely territorial compensation and compensation for resettlement of refugees not readmitted to Jewish territory. Jews seem determined prevent return of majority of refugees. Therefore, in addition to areas belonging to Arabs according to May 12 protocol, such as western Galilee, Ramleh, Lydda, Jaffa, Beersheba, Jed Faluja, Arab delegates believe they have right to claim, as compensation for refugees not readmitted to Jewish territory, the Negev and eastern Galilee.

Egypt must insure its security and not be separated from Arab world. Jordan must also think of its security and desires direct contact with Egypt. Moreover, central Arab Palestine will benefit by direct access to Mediterranean. For all these reasons Arab delegates consider that all of Negev must be included in Arab Palestine.

As regards eastern Galilee, it is in majority Arab in population and ownership of property. Legitimate Lebanese and Syrian security reasons, in addition to principle of compensation, militate in favor of return of eastern Galilee to the Arabs.

Arab reply concludes with statement that regarding above proposals Arab delegates ready to consider any suggestions PCC may care to make.

Rockwell

1 The reply was in the form of a letter dated August 29 from the Heads of the Arab Delegations to the Chairman of the Palestine Conciliation Commission (A/AC.25/AR/17, IO files).

2 Dated August 15, from Lausanne, p. 1313 [Pg. 1313 includes portions of Doc. 907 and Doc. 908].

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom 501.BB Palestine/8–3049: Telegram

[Document 930]

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom

secret Washington, August 30, 1949—6 p. m.

3126. Embtel 3325 Aug 23.1 Depts attitude re direct talks has not changed. Dept has always held to view that direct talks between high Israeli and Arab officials shld be encouraged, if such talks wld contribute to discussions at Lausanne and wld enhance possibility of obtaining an agreed settlement. Ethridge and Porter have made this viewpoint abundantly clear to Israeli and Arab dels at Lausanne and have continuously endeavored promote such talks. It will also be recalled USG actively supported proposal that Egypt and Israel shld hold direct talks on Gaza Strip.

In a very few instances Dept has not favored proposed negots owing to special circumstances (timing, duress, etc.) which gave reason to believe that such negots would not be constructive step toward agreed settlement. Such cases have been exception to consistent policy of encouraging direct negots whenever practical.

Re desirability Jordan undertaking direct conversations Dept has recd no info indicating that Jordan or any other Arab state has changed attitude and is prepared at this stage to enter into such conversations either at Lausanne or elsewhere. However if any real evidence does exist that the direct talks between Jordan and Israel at this stage could commence and wld contribute to settlement of Pal problem Dept wld be far from opposed.2

Acheson

1 Not printed; it recounted a conversation with Mr. Burrows who was said to recall “several months ago US Government had taken line with Jordan of discouraging direct negotiations. Since that time, Jordan Government has on several occasions inquired of UK Government its attitude re desirability undertaking direct conversations with Israelis. UK Government, in order to concert with what it understood to be US views this subject, has discouraged Jordanians. Burrows inquired whether Department’s views have now changed.” (501.BB Palestine/8–2349)

2 The Department repeated this telegram on August 31 to Paris as No. 3239 and to Ankara, Arab capitals, Tel Aviv, and Jerusalem (501.BB Palestine/8–3149).

Editorial Note [Document 931]

Editorial Note

In a note of September 1 to the National Security Council, Admiral Souers submitted for the consideration of the Council a draft report by the Secretary of State entitled “United States Policy Toward Israel and the Arab States.” The note stated in part that the report was “prepared in light of the developments of the past year and in view of the conclusions reached by the Joint Chiefs of Staff in NSC 47 [see page 1009 [Pg. 1009 is part of Doc. 659]] . . . . The Secretary of State, in transmitting the enclosure, stated that the report was on the present position of the United States not only with respect to Israel but also to the Arab States, with particular reference to the problems arising out of the recent hostilities in Palestine, and that the Department of State is of the opinion that the situation in the Near East is of such a character as to require reference to certain aspects of policy toward the Arab States in defining the United States position toward Israel.” The report is numbered NSC 47/1 (S/S–NSC Files, Lot 63 D 351).

In a memorandum of September 27 to Mr. Rusk, Max W. Bishop of Mr. Rusk’s staff indicated that portions of NSC 47/1 were not acceptable to the Department of Defense (867N.48/9–2749). After considerable discussion with officers of that Department, informal agreement was reached “to rewrite certain paragraphs in that paper … It would be much appreciated if you could have these revised paragraphs substituted for the corresponding paragraphs in NSC 47/1.” (Mr. Rusk’s letter of September 29 to Admiral Souers, 867N.00/9–2949)

NSC 47/1 is not printed herein, inasmuch as NSC 47/2, which incorporates the revisions, is printed in full on page 1430 [Pg. 1430 includes portions of Doc. 995, Doc. 996, and Doc. 997]. There appear below, however, the sections of the earlier paper for which substitutions were made in the later version, as follows:

“[7]c. The technical abilities of the Israelis, coupled with their access to Western technical and financial assistance principally from United States sources, have already resulted in much greater economic opportunities and higher standards of living in Israel than those among the neighboring peoples. In the absence of assistance to the Arab states this disparity will tend to increase in the future and to result in further tensions between Israelis and Arabs. On the other hand, Israel’s program for large-scale economic development, required to implement successfully its ambitious immigration policy, will make it dependent for the foreseeable future upon large-scale external financing through foreign capital investment, loans, and voluntary contributions.

[7]d. Israel’s military establishment, although small by Western standards, has proved itself adequate to resist the poorly equipped, ill-trained and badly led armies of the Arab League states in the course of the recent hostilities and to occupy considerable territory beyond that awarded under the partition plan. In the future, however, the cohesiveness of the Israeli Army, like the government itself, may be affected by pressures from extremist elements. Moreover, so long as Israel continues to be isolated from her neighbors, Israel will be burdened by the high costs and accompanying psychological effect of maintaining a state of military preparedness.

[15]a. The political and economic stability and security of the Eastern Mediterranean and the Near East are of critical importance to the security of the United States.

[15]b. It is in the national interest of the United States to have the respect and, in so far as possible, good will of all the peoples of the Near East, Jews and Arabs alike, and their orientation toward the West and away from the Soviet Union.

[15]d. The foregoing can best be achieved by asserting constructive leadership in the solution of the economic, social, and political problems of the area, and on an impartial basis as between Israel and the Arab states.

City of Jerusalem:

[16]h. We should support the principle of the internationalization of Jerusalem. This might be accomplished along the following lines: (1) United Nations control of the Holy Places;

(2) Division of the city into areas to be administered by the respective adjacent states; and

(3) The establishment of obligations on the part of the adjacent states to observe basic requirements with respect to demilitarization, free access and observance of human rights, and the establishment of a system of compulsory arbitration to determine whether these obligations are being fulfilled.”

Finally, paragraph 21 in NSC 47/1 reads exactly the same as its counterpart in NSC 47/2, except for the substitution of new wording for the last sentence. In the earlier paper, this sentence reads as follows:

“Any US or UN assistance under such a program should be supplementary to but coordinated with such efforts as Israel and the Arab states are able and willing to make to help themselves, should be designed to promote mutually advantageous economic relations between Israel and the Arab states and to integrate their economies into a broader international economy, and should allow ample and increasing scope for private enterprise.”

Memorandum by the Secretary of State to the President 501.BB Palestine/9–149

[Document 932]

Memorandum by the Secretary of State to the President

confidential [Washington,] September 1, 1949.

Subject: Policy with respect to Arms Shipments to the Arab States and Israel.

On November 14, 1947, the Department decided, in view of the situation in the Near East with respect to Palestine, that the issuance of licenses for the export of arms, ammunition and other war matériel intended for use in Palestine or neighboring countries should be suspended pending clarification of the situation in that area. This decision was made public in the Department’s press release of December 5, 1947. Subsequently the Security Council in its resolutions of May 29 and July 15, 1948, called upon all states to refrain from shipping war matériel to the affected area.

On August 11, 1949, the Security Council, in the light of reports submitted by Dr. Bunche, and a resolution introduced by Canada and France, determined that the armistice agreements which had been signed by Israel on the one hand, and Egypt, Lebanon, Jordan and Syria on the other, had superseded the truce arrangements, provided for by its resolutions, including the provisions with respect to the shipments of war matériel. The United States supported this action, and Senator Austin made a statement in the Security Council, the pertinent portion of which is quoted herewith: “So far as the United States is concerned, it does not intend to allow the export of arms which would permit a competitive arms race in the area. Export of arms to this area of the world should be strictly limited to such arms as are within the scope of legitimate security requirements, again as recommended by Dr. Bunche. We hope that prudence will prevail not only among the parties but among all nations of the world which are in a position to supply arms and that they will pursue a policy similar to that which we intend to pursue.

It is essential that the resources of this area be used for works of peace, for economic development, for the resettlement of refugees, and for the achievement of higher standards of living for the populations of the area. It would be tragic and wholly wrong if the resources of the area were to be dissipated in an unproductive arms race.”

In view of the foregoing, the groundwork has now been laid to change the existing US arms export policy with respect to the Arab states and Israel. The Department has already received inquiries on this point and it is necessary that this Government’s arms export policy be determined in order that such inquiries as are made may be answered.

Your approval is therefore requested for the following recommendations formulated with the above in view:

(1) That requests for the export of arms to the Arab states and Israel be considered and acted on in the light of the principles laid down by Senator Austin and existing US policy governing such exports generally. This would mean that arms shipments from the United States to Arab states and Israel would be limited to those which are determined necessary: (a) For the purpose of maintaining internal law and order by the Government concerned in the reasonable and legitimate exercise of constituted authority.

(b) For the purpose of providing for reasonable requirements of self defense.

Shipments of arms to the affected areas will not be permitted by this Government if, in its opinion, such shipments would adversely affect the maintenance of peace and security in the area.1

(2) That informal discussions be initiated with representatives of the British and French Governments for an exchange of information and for consultations on shipments of arms to the Near Eastern area.

1 A marginal notation states that President Truman approved Secretary Acheson’s memorandum on September 1. At the same time, he directed that “no public statement be made of this and that it be treated as a routine matter, becoming known as export approvals are made. Following such approvals, it is anticipated that questions will be raised at the President’s or the Secretary’s press conferences. They are to be answered casually.” (memorandum of September 4 to Mr. Ross by Thomas F. Power, Jr., Deputy Secretary-General of the United States Delegation at the United Nations, USUN files)

The British Embassy to the Department of State 501.BB Palestine(E)/9–149

[Document 933]

The British Embassy to the Department of State

confidential

55/121/49

Palestine

1. While pursuing with the State Department plans for the Survey Group the Foreign Office have also had under consideration what policy should be adopted by the United Kingdom Delegation at the forthcoming General Assembly when the future of the present Palestine relief measures is debated. They have reached the following conclusions: (a) The final solution of the1 problem lies in resettlement, and not in relief. The emphasis should lie heavily on resettlement when further international help is considered.

(b) The final settlement of the refugee problem can only be reached within the framework of a territorial settlement for Palestine. Moreover, Israel and the neighbouring Arab States have an inescapable responsibility in regard to the refugees which they must be made to acknowledge if they are to receive large scale financial help from outside for development projects in connection with resettlement.

(c) It should be represented to the Arab States concerned that whatever territorial settlement is finally reached and whatever number of refugees Israel is persuaded to accept there is bound to remain a “hard core” of refugees with which they will have to cope. They cannot escape this responsibility by postponing a political settlement, and they may well forfeit international help for resettlement by doing so.

(d) Development projects will not be able to absorb all the refugees for a period of years after the development projects are started. Even though the latest estimate for United Nations relief for Palestine refugees suggests that relief can be carried on until December (i.e. two months longer than previously estimated), the Survey Group will hardly be able to make its report, let alone secure the necessary finance before the present relief runs out. There will, therefore, be a gap in the provision of relief which will have to be filled.

2. The Foreign Office believe that the State Department shares their reluctance to continue relief without being certain that resettlement is on the way. Equally the Foreign Office fear that the number of refugees to be settled might drastically be reduced by illness and death if no provision, other than that of local governments, were to be made to fill the gap before resettlement. The Foreign Office therefore wish to proceed on the following lines as soon as the constitution of the Survey Group may definitely be spoken about:— (a) To put to Israel and the Arab States the basis for a settlement contained in the attached paper2 and urge them to reach final agreement within this framework as soon as possible on the lines set out in subparagraphs (b) and (c) of paragraph 1 above.

(b) To warn these governments that existing funds for relief are expected to run out in the autumn or early winter, and that it is at present highly problematical whether further funds for relief will be forthcoming from the United Nations. However much either side may argue that they are not themselves responsible for the refugee problem the fact remains that the refugees are in their territory and will constitute a very great burden if no settlement is reached and the provision of financial help for resettlement is thereby discouraged. (A British approach to the Jordan Government, which has done so much more than any other for the refugees in proportion to its now exhausted resources, would have to be on somewhat different lines.)

(c) Explain the functions of the Survey Group and hold out the3 financial help for resettlement schemes.

In the approach described above the British Government would not speak of further plans for relief but would be prepared to take the following lines at the General Assembly when the matter comes up. Provided the Survey Group is duly constituted with the task of reporting to the Conciliation Commission and makes recommendations to the appropriate bodies for the financing of development projects leading to resettlement the United Kingdom Delegate could announce at the United Nations Assembly British willingness to participate in further interim relief measures (provided contributions already promised to UNRPR are paid up) in the ratio of one to nine as against all other international contributions including that of the United States, i.e. the United Kingdom contribution would form one in ten of the total contribution. The upper limit of the British contribution would be £500,000 (in inconvertible sterling as before) and funds could not be voted until the 5th April 1950. The Foreign Office feel that the present United Nations relief scheme has relied too exclusively on American and British contributions and that every effort should be made to secure proportionate contributions from other member States.

3. The debate in the General Assembly is likely to raise the question in what proportion it is considered that refugees should be resettled as between Israel and the Arab States. The Foreign Office is aware that the United States Government have been pressing Israel on this subject and would be grateful to learn of what number in excess of 100,000 the United States Government consider Israel should take. It is clearly difficult to fix an exact figure but the Foreign Office consider it important that agreement should be reached on an approximate figure.

4. From information in possession of the Foreign Office it seems that the three delegated authorities (the International Red Cross, the League of Red Cross Society and the Quakers) at present engaged in Palestine refugee relief will be extremely unwilling to continue their work under the UNRPR unless fresh funds are in sight by October and there seems to be a real danger of the present relief measures breaking down unless something can be offered by that date.

5. The Foreign Office would much appreciate the observations of the State Department on the above proposals and would be most grateful if these observations could be received within the next week.

Washington, 1st September 1949.

[Enclosure]

Proposed Basis of Settlement Between Israel and the Arab States

(i) Acceptance of refugees by both sides in proportions to be determined.

(ii) Israel’s proposal to incorporate the Gaza strip with the refugees at present in it could form part of a general settlement subject to the following conditions: (a) It should be made clear that there is no question of a mere deal between territory and acceptance of responsibility for refugees. Territorial compensation for the Gaza strip should be found elsewhere by Israel for the Arabs—see (iii) below—provided the Arabs demand such compensation.

(b) Some safeguards should be devised in regard to the future treatment of the Gaza refugees in Israel; they should be permitted to return to any part of Israel where they had property or special interests and they should be able to earn a livelihood and presumably have full rights of citizenship.

(iii) Territorial compensation for the Gaza area (if ceded) and for other areas held by Israel but not allotted to her under the 1947 Plan should be provided if the Arabs demand it. The following areas appear politically and geographically suitable for this purpose i.e. contiguous to other Arab areas:— (a) A land-bridge in the southern Negev between Egypt and Jordan.

(b) An area in the Negev north of Beersheba connecting with Arab central Palestine.

(c) An area along the Egyptian frontier south of El Auja.

(d) The restoration of part or all of Western Galilee.

(e) The Ramleh–Lydda area.

The Foreign Office see no reason to insist that any one of these areas should form the exclusive field for compensation. They could, if necessary, be combined in various proportions. This would certainly provide greater flexibility for the discussions. But the shape of the eventual territorial compensation should in any case be governed by the requirements of either side in regard to communications and outlets to the sea (see (iv) below).

(iv) Communications and outlets. If the territorial compensation to the Arabs were to be in the form of the award to Jordan, or to Jordan and Egypt, of part or whole of the Southern Negev, thus providing a land bridge between Egypt and Jordan, Israel should have guaranteed freedom of access and communication to the Red Sea. Equally the Arab States should have guaranteed freedom of communication and access to the Mediterranean. If another solution were adopted for the Southern Negev there should nonetheless be guaranteed freedom of communication and access across it between Egypt and Jordan and between Israel and the Red Sea. An alternative method of providing for freedom of communication and access might be by a neutral zone or zones.

(v) A free port (or at least a free zone for all Arab States) should be established at Haifa with an arrangement by which Iraqi crude oil could be freely exported in return for the provision by Iraq of normal supplies for the Haifa Refinery.

(vi) There should be a partition of Jerusalem for administrative purposes with international supervision, particularly of the Holy Places.

(vii) Central Arab Palestine should be incorporated in Jordan

(viii) Israel and the Arab States concerned should agree to share for their mutual benefit the waters of the Jordan and Yarmuk.

1 At this point, there appears the word “refugee” in longhand. There is no indication of the authorship of the insertion.

2 See below.

3 At this point, there appear the words “hope of” in longhand. There is no indication of the authorship of the insertion.

Terms of Reference of the Economic Survey Mission [Document 934]

Terms of Reference of the Economic Survey Mission 1

September 1, 1949

Terms of Reference of the Economic Survey Mission

The Palestine Conciliation Commission,

Desiring further to implement paragraphs 10 and 11 of General Assembly resolution 194 (III) of 11 December 1948, and to obtain information which will serve as the basis for recommendations for further action by the General Assembly, Member States, appropriate specialized agencies, and interested organizations, and

Having noted the declarations of representatives of Israel and the Arab States with respect to repatriation, resettlement and compensation of refugees,

Pursuant to the authorization granted to it under paragraph 12 of the foregoing resolution,

1. Hereby establishes under its auspices an Economic Survey Mission to examine the economic situation in the countries affected by the recent hostilities, and to make recommendations to the Commission for an integrated programme: (a) To enable the Governments concerned to further such measures and development programmes as are required to overcome economic dislocations created by the hostilities;

(b) To facilitate the repatriation, resettlement and economic and social rehabilitation of the refugees and the payment of compensation pursuant to the provisions of paragraph eleven of the General Assembly’s resolution of 11 December 1948, in order to reintegrate the refugees into the economic life of the area on a self-sustaining basis within a minimum period of time;

(c) To promote economic conditions conducive to the maintenance of peace and stability in the area.

2. Instructs the Economic Survey Mission to include in its recommendations an operational plan for carrying out the recommended programmes together with the estimated costs and methods of financing.

3. Authorizes the Mission, pursuant to paragraph 14 of the General Assembly’s resolution of 11 December 1948, to invite the assistance of those Governments, specialized agencies and international organizations which may be able to facilitate its work.

Recommends that the Survey Mission approach its task along the following lines:

In collaboration with the Governments concerned: (a) Explore the measures which can be taken by the Governments concerned without outside financial assistance to achieve the objectives of paragraph 1 above;

(b) On the basis of existing plans and surveys, examine proposals submitted by the Governments concerned for economic development and settlement projects requiring outside assistance which would make possible absorption of the refugees into the economy of the area on a self-sustained basis in a minimum time with a minimum expenditure;

(c) Examine other economic projects which can, with outside assistance, provide temporary employment for the refugees not employed on the development and settlement projects of paragraph (b);

(d) Examine such other development, and settlement projects requiring outside assistance which, though not associated directly with the employment and settlement of refugees, would serve to achieve the objective of paragraph 1;

(e) Estimate the number of refugees who cannot be supported directly or indirectly through the employment envisaged under paragraphs (a)–(d), together with the estimated period during which direct relief will be required and the cost thereof;

(f) Study the problem of compensation to refugees for claims for property of those who do not return to their homes, and for the loss of or damage to property, with special reference to the relationship of such compensation to the proposed settlement projects;

(g) Study the problem of rehabilitation of refugees, including matters concerning their civil status, health, education and social services;

(h) Propose an organizational structure to achieve the objectives of paragraph 1 within a United Nations framework, to coordinate, supervise and facilitate measures for relief, resettlement, economic development and related requirements such as community service facilities, bearing in mind the interests of all Governments concerned.

1 September 1949.

1 Dated September 1, 1949; reprinted from GA (IV), Ad Hoc Political Committee, Annex, volume i, 1949, p. 29.

The Secretary of State to the Acting Representative at Vatican City (Gowen) 766A.67N/8–1249: Telegram

[Document 935]

The Secretary of State to the Acting Representative at Vatican City (Gowen)

secret Washington, September 1, 1949—1 p. m.

16. Re conversation on Jerusalem reported urtel 33, Aug 12,1 Dept desirous obtaining broadest possible support for proposals to be presented by PCC. With this in mind, suggest you seize opportune occasion to make fol points to Tardini: US Govt appreciates having Vatican’s views as expressed by him and itself is strongly in favor internatl regime for Jerusalem. US Rep on PCC became convinced at early stage that essential problem confronting Comm was formulation practical proposals having good chance acceptance and which cld be placed in operation resulting in settlement this problem. Plan under consideration by Comm wld provide full UN control and protection Holy Places with provision UN guards for this purpose. Jerusalem area wld be demilitarized. Although substantial powers govt for Jewish-Arab auths deemed necessary to acceptance plan, UN Authority in Jerusalem wld possess real powers preserve character internatl regime and assure protection of and free access to Holy Places.

PCC has devoted arduous work in attempt devise plan which will satisfy essential demands of all concerned. We believe acceptance of plan outlined above will not be possible unless it receives utmost support from Christian community. We earnestly hope Vatican will agree this formula presents best possible satis and practical outcome PCC conscientious endeavor fulfill extremely delicate task assigned it by GA. FYI Cardinal Spellman understood to have transmitted to Vatican copies recent correspondence with Pres re Jerusalem (Dept’s despatch No. 5, July 52 ), Vatican in turn transmitted to French Rep PCC. Additional correspondence between Cardinal and Dept being pouched to you.3

Acheson

1 Not printed; it reported a conversation between Mr. Gowen and Msgr. Domenico Tardini, described as the “Vatican Acting Secretary of State,” in which the latter advanced the firm view that “Jerusalem and environs should be placed under international control as indicated by UN in 1947 and again in 1948. Such international control with proper guarantees would assure lasting peace, tranquility [in] Holy Land.… Placing Jerusalem under international control would create buffer area which neither Jews nor Arabs would violate.” (766A.67N/8–1249)

2 Not printed.

3 Mr. Gowen, on October 4, reported that Monsignor Tardini had given him the major objections of the Vatican to the formula on Jerusalem proposed by the Palestine Conciliation Commission. He was said to have repeated “many times that only through true and effective international regime and not through international control would it be possible achieve what Vatican would consider fair and proper settlement of this vital problem.” One of the more specific objections was the Commission’s acceptance “with some limitations Arab and Israeli sovereignty over their respective zones. However, it facilitates conflicts between two neighboring groups and complicates commissioner’s role who is placed without adequate powers between two sovereign groups.” (telegram 41 from Vatican City, 867N.01/10–449)

Mr. Stuart W. Rockwell to the Secretary of State 501.BB Palestine/9–149: Telegram

[Document 936]

Mr. Stuart W. Rockwell to the Secretary of State

secret Lausanne, September 1, 1949—5 p. m.

Palun 294. Israeli delegation September 1 delivered to PCC written reply1 to questions put by PCC to all delegations August 15 (Palun 275).2 Substance reply as follows:

1. Israeli delegation prepared sign declaration along lines chapter 1 of PCC memo (re refugees) subject to precision on following points: a. Israel considers solution of refugee problem to be sought primarily in resettlement in area territories but is prepared contribute by agreeing to measure of resettlement in Israel.

b. Israeli Government cannot bind itself in advance to implement such solutions as survey group may propose but will undertake to facilitate task of group and give full consideration to any proposals group may put forward.

Israeli delegation desires stress its understanding that any repatriation in Israel would take place subject to financial assistance furnished by international community and that such assistance would be extended to resettlement of Jewish refugees from Arab controlled areas Palestine.

Israel’s willingness facilitate task of survey group rests within framework of numerical contribution which it has declared itself ready to make to solution of refugee problem.

Israeli delegation reiterates that Israel can agree to repatriation of refugees to Israel only as part of overall settlement of refugee problem and of Palestine conflict.

2. Re territory, Israeli delegation considers that in addition to territory indicated on map attached to protocol of May 12 all other areas falling within control and jurisdiction of Israel under terms of the four armistice agreements should be formally recognized as Israel territory. Adjustment of frontiers so created will be subject to negotiation and agreement between Israel and Arab Government in each case concerned.

By this adjustment no territory is added to Israel which forms part of the four Arab states or was ever awarded to them by any international instrument or held by them under any agreement. No territory in which the four states exercise authority or jurisdiction under the armistice agreements is added to Israel.

If this adjustment not made, territory awarded to Israel under international instrument or held by it under an agreement (armistices) would be awarded to one or more Arab states.

Israeli delegation holds that only this adjustment falls equally in its effects on rights and positions of each party, makes no encroachment on existing sovereignties, and preserves juridicial status and stability achieved by the existing agreements.

Rockwell

1 The reply was in the form of a letter dated August 31 from Mr. Shiloah to the Chairman of the Palestine Conciliation Commission (A/AC.25/IS/36, IO files).

2 Dated August 15, from Lausanne, p. 1313 [Pg. 1313 includes portions of Doc. 907 and Doc. 908].

Memorandum of Conversation, by Mr. Harlan B. Clark of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs 501.BB Palestine(E)/9–249

[Document 937]

Memorandum of Conversation, by Mr. Harlan B. Clark of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs

confidential [Washington,] September 2, 1949.

Participants: Mr. McGhee, NEA

Mr. Hare, NEA

Mr. Gardiner, NEA

Mr. Clapp, Economic Survey Mission

Mr. Clark, NE

Dr. [Charles] Malik, Lebanese Minister

Dr. M. B. Chiati, Egyptian Chargé d’Affaires

Dr. Yusuf Haikal, Jordanian Minister

Abdullah Ibrahim Bakr, Iraqi Chargé d’Affaires

Ahmed Abdul Jabbar, First Secretary, Saudi Arabian Embassy

Problem:

The Arab diplomatic representatives made inquiry as to the objectives of the Economic Survey Mission and the scope of its activities.

Action Taken:

Mr. McGhee and Mr. Clapp outlined the projected work of the Mission, emphasizing its area-wide character and the necessity for cooperation by the Arab States with the Mission if its objectives are to be achieved.

Action Required:

It was agreed that copies of the text of the terms of reference of the ESM would be made available to the Arab diplomatic representatives.1

Action Assigned to: NE

Discussion:

The officers in charge of the Arab diplomatic missions in Washington called at their request to meet Mr. Gordon Clapp, Chief of Mission of the United Nations Economic Survey Mission. Mr. McGhee introduced the Arab diplomatic representatives to Mr. Clapp, and Dr. Malik opened the discussion by stating that those present would be interested in having more information about the objectives of the Economic Survey Mission and its terms of reference. Mr. McGhee said that copies of the United Nations press release in this regard would be made available to the Arab missions but that in general the terms of reference encompassed all aspects of an economic approach to the problems which confronted the Palestine Conciliation Commission. He said that in frankness it had to be admitted that the work of the Palestine Conciliation Commission on a political basis had thus far not been productive of solutions to outstanding problems. Since these problems were closely bound up with the economic situation in the area it was thought that progress could best be achieved at the present stage by determining the needs and potentialities of the area, as well as how through economic measures these potentialities could be developed and thereby contribute to a solution of the problem of the refugees and other issues with which the Palestine Conciliation Commission is faced.

Mr. Clapp said that, being an engineer and not concerned with politics, he would confine his activities to technical matters. Moreover, he proposed to study the area as a unit and not on a country-by-country or any other basis which would not permit full realization of the potentialities of the economic resources available. He referred, for example, to water resources which cut across country boundaries or were shared by adjoining states, such as were found in the TVA system. He and his staff of TVA engineers had found that unless they could plan river control schemes on an area basis, regardless of state boundaries, they could not provide for full utilization of these resources. It had also been found that the engineers could not make development plans work unless the people of the area cooperated fully in carrying out recommendations as to soil management and conservation, as well as all other phases of the TVA program. The same principle would no doubt apply in the Near East where similar cooperation by the respective governments and peoples was the keynote to successful realization of any programs which the Survey Mission might recommend, and artificial barriers which might be found to exist should not stand in the way of such cooperation.

Dr. Malik inquired as to when Mr. Clapp would leave and he replied that it would be within a matter of days. Mr. McGhee said that Mr. Clapp would be accompanied by Deputies nominated by the United Kingdom, France and Turkey and that Secretary General Lie would shortly be announcing their appointment. In selecting the Deputies and other members of the mission’s staff, care had been taken to obtain as wide representation as possible of interested United Nations agencies such as the FAO and WHO. Dr. Malik inquired as to whether Mr. Clapp had selected a headquarters for his Mission and Mr. McGhee replied that, while this was a matter for the United Nations to decide, some consideration had been given to Beirut as a possible headquarters. He inquired whether Dr. Malik felt that his Government would welcome the selection of Beirut as this purpose, bearing in mind that Lebanon would offer certain advantages including the presence there of buildings which had been constructed for the UNESCO meeting. Dr. Malik said that he was sure that his government would welcome the visit of the Mission but that he would like to have as much advance notice as possible in order that the necessary arrangements could be made.

Shaikh Jabbar inquired whether the Survey Mission planned to visit all the Arab countries and Mr. Clapp replied he hoped he would be able to do so but that he would have to concentrate most of his time in those countries most directly concerned. Shaikh Jabbar said that he had that in mind since he understood that it was those countries actually bordering on Israel which had been most directly concerned. Mr. McGhee recalled that the King of Saudi Arabia had already undertaken to accept certain categories of refugees and had also made contributions of petroleum products for the refugee program. It might be most useful, therefore, for Mr. Clapp to investigate the possibilities as to whether Saudi Arabia might not also be able to receive other categories of refugees. Shaikh Jabbar said that all the Arab States were willing to help out in connection with the refugees in so far as such action did not adversely affect their other “problems” in connection with Palestine.

Mr. Bakr stated that Iraq had already compiled a number of surveys which might be useful in connection with Mr. Clapp’s study of Iraq’s river development projects. Mr. Clapp said that he wished to make full use of all available studies since it was not possible in the short time available to the Mission to make detailed independent surveys of each individual project.

Dr. Malik said he wished Mr. McGhee would clarify what he and Mr. Clapp had said concerning the Economic Survey Mission’s terms of reference. Specifically, by approaching the economic problems of the Near East from an area basis was it envisaged that the Arab States would be called upon to cooperate with Israel and would the elimination of what had been referred to as “artificial barriers” refer to trade barriers with Israel? Mr. McGhee replied that he realized the difficulty of this problem to the Arab States but it was naturally the hope and objective of the United Nations to remove artificial barriers in the area which constituted obstacles to the resumption to normal conditions, and which thereby constituted a threat to area and world peace. At some stage trade must be resumed throughout the area; oil would again flow through its pipelines; and airplane and shipping services which have existed in the past would be restored to full operation. Mr. Clapp stated that it was obvious no useful purpose would-be served by his mission if it should recommend that development schemes be implemented and if it should develop that the resultant increased production of the area could not find its way to the logical market outlets in the area. Shaikh Jabbar said that the more he learned about the scope of the Mission’s activities the more limited he believed were its possibilities for success.

Mr. McGhee said that implicit in the entire undertaking of the Survey Mission was the understanding that there would have to be outside assistance to implement the recommendations which would be made. This was clear, for example, in the President’s statement in announcing Mr. Clapp’s appointment, the contents of which were familiar to all those present. He was sure it was understood that this government could make no commitments in this connection in advance of Congressional authorization but the desire of the United States to support the work of the Economic Survey Mission was manifest. With that in mind, it was also clear that the President could not recommend to Congress that it provide financial support for the implementation of any plans recommended by the Mission should it appear in advance that such plans were doomed to failure by virtue of artificial barriers and restrictions maintained by states in the area. Such barriers as are clearly artificial must in time be eliminated if any solution to the problems is to be successful.

Dr. Malik said that it was apparent that conditions could only be stabilized in the Near East if at some stage the State of Israel and the Arab States settled down to live together in peace. However, he felt that this government had a definite responsibility to give guarantees to the Arabs States which would enable them to do so. Mr. McGhee replied that this Government was lending the fullest possible support to the endeavors of the United Nations to facilitate the final settlement of the Palestine controversy and would continue to do so. Its function in this respect was not, however, to impose the terms of such a settlement upon the parties to the controversy. It was rather for the Arab States and Israel to work out, through the machinery which the United Nations had set up, the bases of a settlement that would provide the guarantees of peace which Dr. Malik had in mind.

1 Mr. McGhee, in letters to the Arab diplomatic representatives on September 7, enclosed copies of the press communiqué issued by the Palestine Conciliation Commission on August 24. The communiqué outlined the objectives and functions of the Economic Survey Mission (501.BB Palestine (E)/9–749).

Mr. Stuart W. Rockwell to the Secretary of State 501.BB Palestine/9–449: Telegram

[Document 938]

Mr. Stuart W. Rockwell to the Secretary of State

secret Lausanne, September 2, 1949—8 p. m.

Palun 295. Following comments USDel on Arab-Israeli replies PCC questionnaire (Palun’s 290 and 294).1

1. Refugee—replies refugee questions seem fairly satisfactory in circumstances. Although Arab position on, return of refugees continues be as set forth Palun 277,2 Arabs can be considered to have accepted principle of resettlement, and Syria and Transjordan have formally stated they can receive those refugees who do not return. This seems substantial step forward, although by “those who do not return”, Syria and Transjordan theoretically mean those refugees who are left over after large numbers have returned to areas Palestine allotted Arabs by partition and to areas which will remain in Israel. Israel has once more formally committed itself to measure of repatriation. Although Arab position is as stated above, and Israelis state the wish only repatriate as part overall settlement refugee problem and Palestine conflict, and both sides say they can do nothing without international assistance, Arab and Israeli replies may be considered as political agreement on sharing responsibility for solution refugee problem.

Israeli and Arab agreement on necessity for continuation relief funds pending establishment repatriation and resettlement project should be helpful when time comes seek further relief funds from UN.

2. Survey group—Israelis and Arabs at Lausanne have made commitments to facilitate task survey group and give full consideration its findings. Neither side has committed self to accept findings group, and Israeli has limited its willingness facilitate groups work to framework refugee proposition it has already made.

3. Territory—Arabs have weakened their territorial position by demanding more than partition gave, and by basing their demands upon confused mixture of May 12 protocol, need for Arab territorial continuity, alleged desire to secure territory for refugees in compensation for their lost homes, security needs, and plain desire for more territory. Arabs were clearly unable to agree among themselves on common territorial position and so threw everything into the pot, apparently leaving it to PCC or GA to decide what pieces should be pulled out given to them. Arab representatives have privately admitted this first territorial position is unreasonable but state they made it so because they knew Israeli position would be equally unreasonable.

Israeli territorial position, although mentioning May 12 protocol cannot be considered as based on it since it contemplates no adjustments in favor Arabs. Israeli emphasizing alleged legality their position view international instrument (November 29 Resolution) and international agreements (armistice) conveniently disregarding clause in armistice agreements safeguarding territorial claims parties.

Wide divergence territorial positions parties and rigidity Israeli position once more reveal unlikelihood arriving at voluntary agreement. USDel believes that no matter how attractive proposals of survey group may be to Arabs, there is little likelihood of proceeding from present armed truce line to more stable conditions unless Israel can be persuaded to relinquish some of territory it has occupied beyond partition lines. Some measure of agreement has been achieved on refugees, but judging from attitude representatives here, Arabs will not accept any territorial solution which makes the armistice lines, perhaps with minor modifications, the final boundaries of Israel. Syria and Transjordan, however, will probably in the end agree to put into effect survey group recommendations for resettlement of refugees actually in their territories even if there has been no territorial agreement and substantial numbers of refugees have not returned to Israeli controlled areas.

Rockwell

1 Dated August 30 and September 1, respectively, from Lausanne, pp. 1337 [Pg. 1337 includes portions of Doc. 928 and Doc. 929] and 1349 [Pg. 1349 includes portions of Doc. 935 and Doc. 936].

2 Dated August 16, from Lausanne, p. 1319 [Pg. 1319 includes portions of Doc. 912 and Doc. 913].

Mr. Stuart W. Rockwell to the Secretary of State 501.BB Palestine/9–249: Telegram

[Document 939]

Mr. Stuart W. Rockwell to the Secretary of State

restricted Lausanne, September 2, 1949—10 p. m.

Palun 296. PCC September 1 sent Jerusalem statute to SYG.1 September 2 submitted to parties draft declaration on holy places outside Jerusalem and sent copy to SYG. September 2 also adopted draft terms reference for survey group as submitted by USDel on basis Department’s suggestions.

Rockwell

1 The text of the transmitting letter of September 1 and the “Draft Instrument Establishing a Permanent International Regime for the Jerusalem Area” are printed in United Nations, Official Records of the Fourth Session of the General Assembly, Ad Hoc Political Committee, Annex to the Summary Records of Meetings, Annex, vol. i, p. 10. The Draft Instrument provided for four principle organs to govern the area of Jerusalem: a Commissioner to represent the United Nations in the area who would ensure the protection of and free access to the Holy Places, supervise the permanent demilitarization and neutralization of the area and ensure the protection of human rights and the rights of distinctive groups; a General Council; an International Tribunal; and a Mixed Tribunal. The area of Jerusalem was to be physically divided into a “Jewish zone” and an “Arab zone.” All matters not reserved to the four principal organs were to remain within the competence of the responsible Jewish and Arab authorities in each of the zones.The Palestine Conciliation Commission, on November 9, issued a statement in reply to critical comments on the Draft Instrument. The statement noted that the plan was “based on the present division of the City” and left “to the Governments of the adjoining States virtually all normal powers of government within the Arab and Jewish parts of Jerusalem respectively and makes it possible for them to retain or alter the present local administrations without hindrance from outside. Provision is made, however, for limited measures designed to protect the proper interests of the international community in Jerusalem and to facilitate peaceful relations and normal intercourse between the authorities and inhabitants of the Arab and Jewish parts of the divided City.” The full text of the Commission’s statement is printed in ibid., p. 15.

Editorial Note [Document 940]

Editorial Note

The Palestine Conciliation Commission, on September 2, sent a letter to the Heads of the Arab and Israeli Delegations, which transmitted the text of a draft declaration on the “Holy Places, Religious Buildings and Sites in Palestine Outside the Jerusalem Area.”

The purpose of the letter was to secure acceptance of the Declaration by the Arab and Israeli Governments, thereby giving their formal guarantees to the Commission with respect to the subject matter of the declaration.

Neither the Israeli reply of November 8 nor the joint reply by the Arab Delegations on November 15 directly accepted the draft declaration. The former expressed Israeli “readiness solemnly to give formal guarantees for the free exercise in Israel of all forms of worship; for the preservation of Holy Places, religious buildings and sites in Israel, and for the associated amenities; for the granting of rights of visit, access and non-disturbance; and for appropriate measures in regard to taxation.” The reply stated, however, that it would be preferable to take up the actual formulation of a declaration in the light of the forthcoming discussions at the General Assembly.

The Arab reply was in the form of a separate declaration, which repeated the language of the first five articles of the declaration of the Palestine Conciliation Commission, with minor language change, but which made no reference to the last three articles.

The texts of the letter and declaration of the Palestine Conciliation Commission and the Israeli and Arab replies are printed in GA, 4th sess., Ad Hoc Political Committee, Annex, volume I, pages 29–32.

Memorandum by the Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern and African Affairs (McGhee) to the Assistant Secretary of State for Congressional Relations (Gross) 501.BB Palestine(E)/9–349

[Document 941]

Memorandum by the Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern and African Affairs (McGhee) to the Assistant Secretary of State for Congressional Relations (Gross)

[Washington,] September 3, 1949.

In your memorandum of August 26 you express concern regarding difficulty which might be encountered if we should be placed in the position of going to Congress next session to request further funds for refugee relief or economic development in the Near East without evidence that the Arabs and Israelis were making serious efforts of their own to meet their problems.

I wish to assure you that those of us who have been working on this problem have had this aspect very much in mind. Our original tactics in the Palestine Conciliation Commission were to insist that the refugee problem was a responsibility which had to be shared by both the Arabs and the Israelis and that economic assistance would only be forthcoming after a sufficient degree of political agreement had been reached and the parties had requested economic assistance on a cooperative basis. Unfortunately, despite the strenuous efforts of both Mark Ethridge and Paul Porter, progress in the PCC by the conciliation process was negligible, and it was their joint recommendation that an effort be made to break the impasse by an examination of the economic aspects of the problem through a Survey Mission in advance of substantial political agreement.

In so doing, however, it has always been clearly understood that agreement on certain basic issues in the political field will be an essential precedent to any economic assistance as a result of the recommendations of the Survey. We have made no advance commitment to furnish such assistance. In other words, we hope the recommendations of the Survey Mission may solve enough of the economic aspects of the problem to make possible enough political agreement to get on with the economic program.

As you doubtless know, Gordon Clapp, Chairman of the Board of Directors of the Tennessee Valley Authority, has been appointed head of the Economic Survey Mission and will be leaving for the Near East within about a week. He and his group should complete at least a preliminary report by November 1 for consideration by the forthcoming General Assembly.

Mr. John C. Ross to the Secretary of State 501.BB Palestine/9–349: Telegram

[Document 942]

Mr. John C. Ross to the Secretary of State

restricted New York, September 3, 1949—12:03 a. m.

1045. Letter from Eban received today stated that Israeli representative on Egyptian-Israeli MAC August 29 raised question embargo at Suez. By two to one vote MAC decided it was entitled request Egyptians not interfere with cargoes passing through Suez. Eban reports Egyptian stated he could not discuss matter MAC since it was outside its province. Eban states, however, that Egyptian representative indicated informally that all restrictions would be lifted except for war material.

Ross

The Secretary of State to Certain Diplomatic Offices 501.BB Palestine(E)/9–349: Circular telegram

[Document 943]

The Secretary of State to Certain Diplomatic Offices 1

restricted Washington, September 3, 1949—3 a. m.

Initial reaction Arab states to announcement of ESM for NE unenthusiastic in part and even suspicious of Mission’s motivation. You are instructed bring this to early attention of appropriate FonOff officials, expressing Dept’s strong hope that govt to which you are accredited, as one of sponsors of ESM, will instruct its Missions and info services in NE to make every effort elucidate objectives of and extend maximum dipl and publicity support to ESM.

Important to note emphasis on technical basis of Mission, composed of engineers, agriculturists, and other technicians, and to avoid at present juncture to greatest possible extent affront to Arab susceptibilities that will arise inevitably from emphasis on Israeli-Arab cooperative effort.2

Acheson

1 At London, Ankara, and Paris.

2 London, on September 7, conveyed the contents of this telegram to the Foreign Office, which stated that it would instruct its Near Eastern Missions to extend support to the work of the Economic Survey Mission (telegram 3596, September 7, 6 p. m., from London). Two days later London reported further reflection by the Foreign Office and its decision to “await Department’s reactions to wider approach to Israel and Arabs on Palestine settlement, which British Embassy Washington was instructed on August 30 to discuss with Department, before instructing its missions in Near East to extend diplomatic support ESM” (telegram 3642). The two telegrams from London are filed under 501.BB Palestine(E)/9–749, /9–949.

The Secretary of State to the Legation in Lebanon 501.BB Palestine(E)/9–349: Telegram

[Document 944]

The Secretary of State to the Legation in Lebanon

secret Washington, September 3, 1949—2 p. m.

476. Urtel 450, Aug 31.1 You shld seek early appointment with FonMin and clarify Dept’s position re his views along fol lines:

Establishment of ESM did not stem from action of USG, as FonMin implies. On contrary, ESM was activated by PCC as UN organ, under clear authority granted it by para 12 of Dec 11 res, and after close consultation with SYG of UN. PCC decision was made fol discussions with all dels to PCC and submission Aug 15 of written questionnaire to all dels at Lausanne, informing them re proposed functions and objectives of ESM. Written joint reply to questionnaire received by PCC Aug 29 from Arab dels (reftels being rpted separately for info) clearly indicated approval of ESM’s objectives and readiness recommend that their respective govts extend full support and facilities to ESM. Dept assumes Arab dels kept their respective govts fully informed these official communications. FonMin will doubtless appreciate that, since ESM constitutes sub-body of PCC, Lausanne as seat of commission was logical and convenient place through which to channel official notification this question to dels to PCC.

You shld make special effort to dissipate FonMin’s fears that establishment of ESM implies abandonment by UN or US of political or other functions of PCC. USG deeply hopeful that agreed settlement offering legitimate prospects for long range stability and peace in NE can be obtained, and believes approach through ESM as well as continued efforts on political level essential to achieve such settlement. From point of view of USG, therefore, establishment of ESM constitutes reinforcement of work of conciliation; practical effort to deal on an urgent basis with economic dislocations related to hostilities, of which refugee problem in Lebanon is particularly critical instance; and means of providing PCC with technical info for incorporation into its recommendations to GA for action at autumn session.

In view Leb Govt’s frequently expressed desire for external assistance in economic development, Dept is somewhat surprised over FonMin’s reaction to this concrete step to obtain info on basis of which internatl assistance might be forthcoming. While Dept appreciates FonMin’s candor in discussing ESM with AmLeg, we greatly regret attribution of ulterior motives to US or UN sponsorship thereof. It is Dept’s understanding that “increasingly grave econ conditions” which FonMin stresses are not confined solely to Israel. It is task of ESM to examine these conditions in all countries in area with view to recommending to UN measures for their early improvement.

From point of view of USG, survey mission is by no means instrument designed to force Arab-Israeli cooperation. USG is firmly convinced that solution to econ problems of NE can derive solely from free will and initiative of nations concerned, and certainly not from imposition of any solution or program by UN or its member states. FonMin shld be aware that imposition of any such program or of material assistance required to implement it, is completely contrary to principles and traditions of US.

US rep on PCC and Dept were deeply gratified with cooperative tenor of Arab dels’ reply of Aug 29 with respect to ESM, and feel confident that FonMin’s preliminary reaction constitutes no invalidation of his del’s statements. We appreciate FonMin’s stated willingness receive ESM, but hope Leb Govt will in no way prejudge results of mission’s work and will extend it same cooperation and support which have characterized all Leb’s relations with UN and its organs. On part of USG, we are deeply interested in success of ESM, as means of promoting political settlement and as contribution to econ betterment of NE. As such, USG is prepared to consider carefully such aid as this Govt might properly extend under UN auspices to carry out mission’s recommendations, provided such aid is desired and effectively utilized by states directly concerned.2

Acheson

1 Not printed; it reported that the Lebanese Foreign Minister “made it clear that he has greatest reservation concerning survey’s usefulness and considerable scepticism as to its true objectives.… He stated he believes the real purpose of the mission, although undisclosed, is to provide a means for relieving the increasingly grave economic conditions in Israel; that the timing of the mission could be no ‘coincidence’.… Furthermore, he could not but regard the survey mission as an instrument designed to force the Arab states into economic cooperation with Israel … Foreign Minister also was disturbed by the timing of this survey as he could not but conclude that it would mean an end to any further effective negotiation for political settlement at Lausanne.” (501.BB Palestine/8–3149)

2 This telegram was repeated to Bern for the American Delegation at Lausanne and to Cairo, Damascus, Baghdad, Jidda, Amman, and Tel Aviv. The Department, in a circular telegram of September 3, 1 a. m., to diplomatic officers at each of these posts except Bern, authorized them at their discretion to express the views set forth in telegram 476 in discussions with governments to which they were accredited (501.BB Palestine(E)/9–349).

Mr. Stuart W. Rockwell to the Secretary of State 501.BB Palestine/9–349: Telegram

[Document 945]

Mr. Stuart W. Rockwell to the Secretary of State

confidential Lausanne, September 3, 1949—8 p. m.

Palun 299. PCC September 3 sent letter to Israeli Delegation referring to Israeli reply to PCC territorial question and stating that in opinion PCC any reference to armistice agreements in connection with final settlement territorial question should be considered in light clauses in agreements safeguarding rights and claims of parties and stating that armistice demarcation lines are not to be construed in any sense, as political or territorial boundaries.

PCC felt it desirable make this formal representation for record and to avoid possible misunderstanding in future.1

Rockwell

1 Mr. Rockwell, on September 5, informed the Secretary of State that Article 16 of the Jerusalem instrument “does not delineate line between [Arab and Israeli] zones. In letter transmitted SYG September 1, PCC explained that since demarcation line intimately connected final settlement Palestine problem, PCC does not deem advisable for present make any proposal re actual demarcation and believes instrument can be put into effect with present line as provisional without prejudice to establishment definitive line at later stage. Possibility PCC proposing specific demarcation line to GA thus left open.” (Palun 300 from Lausanne, 501.BB Palestine/9–549)

Mr. Stuart W. Rockwell to the Secretary of State 501.BB Palestine/9–549: Telegram

[Document 946]

Mr. Stuart W. Rockwell to the Secretary of State

restricted Lausanne, September 5, 1949—5 p. m.

Palun 303. PCC September 5 sent letter to all delegates informing them of forthcoming arrival survey group Lausanne, stating the PCC would shortly send delegates letter containing observations and suggestions re replies to PCC questionnaire, and conveying to delegates PCC plans to adjourn Lausanne between 15 and 20 September to reconvene New York second half October. Letter explained that in deciding upon adjournment PCC desired give interested governments time study above PCC observations and suggestions and anyway bad proceed New York view presence on GA agenda of items concerning PCC. Delegates also informed commissioners at their entire disposition during recess and that Azcarate proceeding Jerusalem maintain contact with parties.

Letter also transmitted for signature parties draft declaration re refugees suggested and prepared by USDel and based upon those principles on which replies to PCC questionnaire showed parties were in general agreement. USDel proposed such declaration in order obtain more precise evidence of political agreement re refugees than devious replies to PCC questionnaire and in order that PCC might be able make public concise indication of progress during second session PCC. Although in replies to questionnaire parties said they willing sign declaration along these lines, by no means certain they will do so.

PCC observations and suggestions mentioned above will be very general in character and by no means in form of final PCC position on refugees and territory.1

Rockwell

1 Mr. Rockwell, on September 6, advised that “neither side wished sign draft declaration subject Palun 303. View public opinion at home Arabs unwilling sign declaration which mentions concessions they have made re refugees without reference to their territorial position. Israelis object to signing declaration which would imply they agreed Egypt and Lebanon not in position accept large numbers refugees. PCC may consider press release as compromise.” (Palun 305, 501.BB Palestine/9–649)

Memorandum Prepared in the Department of State IO Files: SD/A/C.1/261

[Document 947]

Memorandum Prepared in the Department of State

confidential [Washington,] September 6, 1949.

Compensation for Property Losses of Palestine Refugees

The attached memorandum indicates the present thinking of the Department on the question of compensation for property losses sustained by Palestine Refugees.

As suggested in the memorandum it would facilitate the carrying out of the contemplated United Nations program if the Survey Mission could 1. Consult with appropriate Israeli officials with a view to obtaining as soon as possible a survey of refugee property in Israel, with an estimate of its value.

2. Consult with such private or official persons in Arab countries as might be able to assist in connection with an estimate of the value of refugee property in Israel.

3. Consult with other appropriate persons, particularly including UNRPR and its component organizations, in order to obtain recommendations for possible procedures for receiving and evaluating refugee claims for loss or damage to property.

compensation

I. Principle of Compensation

The General Assembly, in its resolution of December 11, 1948, laid down the following principle of compensation for the Palestine refugees:

“11. Resolves that the refugees wishing to return to their homes and live at peace with their neighbors should be permitted to do so at the earliest practicable date, and that compensation should be paid for the property of those choosing not to return and for loss of or damage to property which, under principles of international law or in equity, should be made good by the Governments or authorities responsible;”

The general principle of compensation thus enunciated should continue to be adhered to. However, due to developments in 1948, the principle should be made to apply to those who do not choose or are unable to return to their homes, including those who, although repatriated, do not have their property restored. The resolution is regarded as being equally applicable to bona fide refugees, whether Arab or Jewish. There were relatively few Jews resident in Palestine who fled from their homes as a result of the hostilities, but some claims in this category are to be anticipated.

In the same resolution the Palestine Conciliation Commission was instructed to facilitate the payment of compensation. No progress was made due to the lack of a basis for political negotiations between the parties. It is now felt, however, that the United Nations, through the Survey Group and such appropriate authority as may be designated by the General Assembly should carry this work forward. The refugees for the most part were not nationals of any Arab state at the time they lost their property and did not enjoy diplomatic protection of such states, and consequently no state derived any rights, legal or equitable, from loss or damage to refugee property. Consequently it seems to be a task for the United Nations, by negotiation, to take steps to protect their interests, and not that of the Arab government.

The Israeli Government has consistently accepted the principle of compensation, but has always linked with this the assertion that it has war claims against the Arab States by virtue of the alleged fact that the war was caused by Arab aggression. We consider that any war claims by Israel are in an entirely different category from compensation for refugee property and should not be treated as counterclaims or as in any way related to this obligation.

Compensation should be made on the basis of the property losses actually incurred by the refugees. It is not contemplated that more than a fraction of these losses will be actually compensated, nor that a full and complete evaluation of these properties should be attempted. However, this should be the basis in theory and as far as possible in practice.

Most of the property losses can probably be compensated by means of a lump sum payment into the fund for development projects for resettlement. This would be on the theory that most of the refugees lost no more than they would receive when resettled, i.e., living quarters, land, tools, etc.

On the other hand, there should be some kind of prorata compensation to individuals who lost property in excess of the bare essentials. A possible formula would be that if it were determined for example that two-thirds of the losses were in bare essentials, two-thirds of the compensation could be paid into the resettlement fund. The other third would then be available for proration among persons whose losses were more substantial.

II. Determination of Compensation and Distribution of Amount Paid

According to the foregoing principles, it will be necessary, in due course, to receive and evaluate individual claims of refugees. The survey group might undertake a preliminary exploration of this problem, giving consideration to its feasibility and the type of procedure under the proposed Agent-General which would be most effective.

However, the determination of claims would not necessarily be a prerequisite to the negotiating by the appropriate United Nations Authority of a preliminary lump sum award by Israel. Such an agreement might have a proviso that if the amount paid proved less than a stipulated proportion of the finally approved claims, the matter would be reopened for adjustment.

Steps should be taken to obtain an estimate of property losses to be used as a negotiating basis. This estimate might be obtained through a survey of property held by the Israeli Custodian of Absentee Property. If the cooperation of the Israeli Government could be obtained this should make the general task easier and might make it possible for the Survey Mission to make a beginning. The question should at least be discussed with the Israeli Government with a view to obtaining its cooperation, but if such cooperation were refused, the Economic Survey Mission could so report. Of course, such a survey could not indicate all property losses. For example, most losses of personal property, aside from bank accounts, would not be shown.

Attempts should also be made to obtain such information through private and official persons in the Arab states who might be in a position to give an estimate of the property involved. The possible source of such information might be Mr. Sami Hadawi, a former official of the Palestine Government connected with land taxation and now employed in Palestine by the Jordan Government in a similar capacity. Mr. Hadawi is understood to have saved records which he compiled while a member of the Palestine Government. He can be reached through the American Legation in Amman.

While Israel’s payment will undoubtedly be less than the actual property losses, no reason is seen for her claim to limit compensation to “lands abandoned and previously cultivated.” Such property appears to be in no different case from residential and business property, and personal property.

Editorial Note [Document 948]

Editorial Note

The Department, on September 7, 6 a. m., sent a circular telegram to Ankara, Arab capitals, Brussels, The Hague, London, Paris, Rome, Tel Aviv, and Jerusalem. The telegram gave the text of paragraph 1 and subparagraphs (a) and (b) of Secretary Acheson’s memorandum of September 1, page 1341, with very slightly altered wording. It then continued as follows: “In light of foregoing, questions re US policy should be answered as follows: In pursuance of recent action of UNSC and US support thereof, US Govt now prepared receive applications for license export arms Arab States and Israel for consideration on individual merits.” (711.00111 Armaments Control/9–749)

In a further circular telegram of October 24, 8:25 a. m., to Baghdad, Beirut, Cairo, Damascus, and Tel Aviv for action and to Paris, London, and Jidda for information, the Department informed that the Mutual Defense Assistance Act of 1949 failed to provide for United States military assistance to Near Eastern countries. Inasmuch as these countries would not even be entitled to United States Government procurement assistance under that Act, the Department suggested that they might wish to have recourse to the American commercial arms market. The export of arms purchased from such sources would be permitted “within the limitations of the policies stated by the US representative in the Security Council on August 4” (711.00111 Armament Control/10–2449). Regarding the Mutual Defense Assistance Act of 1949, see Mr. McGhee’s memorandum of August 16 to Mr. Berkner and footnote 2 to that memorandum, page 45; regarding Ambassador Austin’s statement, see the editorial note, page 1283.

The Secretary of State to the United States Delegation at Lausanne 501.BB Palestine(E)/9–749: Telegram

[Document 949]

The Secretary of State to the United States Delegation at Lausanne

confidential
priority
niact Washington, September 7, 1949—5 p. m.

Unpal 233. Although surrey mission is instrumentality of PCC, in opinion of USG it is and shld be treated as autonomous in character by virtue of its technical purpose and high rank of participants. Clapp cognizant of this view. In order that ESM will have maximum flexibility and scope to fulfill its objectives, Dept believes PCC shld not endeavor constrict or redefine broad terms of reference under which ESM activated, or otherwise instruct ESM. You are instructed present US position this question if you perceive any effort this direction on part of other members PCC.

Acheson

Memorandum by the Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern and African Affairs (Hare) to the Deputy Under Secretary of State (Rusk) 867N.01/9–849

[Document 950]

Memorandum by the Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern and African Affairs (Hare) to the Deputy Under Secretary of State (Rusk)

secret [Washington,] September 8, 1949.

Discussion

There is attached a telegram from the U.S. delegation in Lausanne,1 reporting on the authority of the PCC representative in Jerusalem, that the Israeli Government proposes to move its capital to Jerusalem prior to the opening of the General Assembly. Reference to the possibility of such action was also made recently by Sasson, member of the Israeli delegation to Lausanne, in conversation with the French delegate to the Conciliation Commission.

In the event that the Israelis should take such action, it would prejudice effective action by the General Assembly on the statute for Jerusalem, and thereby impede progress towards a final settlement for Palestine. Moreover, such an Israeli move would probably create a strong Arab reaction, which could, result in seriously impeding the work of the Economic Survey Mission.

It is felt that this Government should make every effort to discourage such action by Israel, if it is in fact contemplated, in the interests of promoting a final Settlement and of supporting UN policy towards Jerusalem.

Recommendations 1. It is recommended that you sign the attached telegram.2

2. It is further recommended that you authorize me to call in Israeli Ambassador Elath and bring to his attention the report and this Government’s position on the question.3

1  Palun 301, September 5, not printed.

2 Marginal notation by Mr. Rusk: “Done.” Telegram 585 was sent to Tel Aviv on September 8 and stated in part: “If report appears have substance, you shld express to appropriate FonOff officials strong view of USG that such action wld be contrary to spirit and intent of GA res of Nov 29, 1947, and res of Dec 11, 1948, and consequently to desires of international community. By obstructing PCC and GA efforts obtain practical solution for internationalization Jerusalem, such action wld constitute serious setback to UN progress towards peace in Pal.” (501.BB Palestine/9–549)In reply, on September 11, Tel Aviv conveyed the assurances of Messrs. Eytan and Comay that the “rumored removal all government ministries to Jerusalem ‘either prior to or following’ fall session GA was ‘utterly without foundation’” (telegram 682, 501.BB Palestine/9–1149).

3 Marginal notation by Mr. Rusk: “OK.”

Memorandum of Conversation, by Mr. Edward B. McEnerney of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs 501.BB Palestine(E)/9–849

[Document 951]

Memorandum of Conversation, by Mr. Edward B. McEnerney of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs

confidential [Washington,] September 8, 1949.

Subject: Economic Survey Mission, Licensing of Munitions Exports for Near East.

Participants: Mr. El Kouny, First Secretary of the Egyptian Embassy

Mrs. Hope, NE

Mr. Clark, NE

Mr. McEnerney, NE

[Here follows discussion of various aspects of the Economic Survey Mission.]

Mr. El Kouny said he wondered whether the group would take cognizance of political considerations as well as economic considerations in the course of its work. He said it had all along been the understanding of the Egyptian government that the group would take political matters within its purview. Mrs. Hope said it was not expected that the group would consider political matters which fell under the authority of the conciliation commission itself. She explained that the Mission would confine itself solely to economic questions and that it was in no sense a policy-making organ. It was expected that Mr. Clapp’s recommendations would be based solely upon his technical observations.

Mr. El Kouny said he was interested in learning whether or not there had been any change in the United States attitude toward the shipment of munitions to the Near East. Mr. Clark said that a revision of our policy had been expressed in Senator Austin’s comments on August 41 before the Security Council. As a result of this change, the Egyptian government might now submit to the United States Government any requests which it might desire to make for export licenses on munitions. Such requests would be given consideration in accordance with their individual merits. Availability of military equipment would depend in part upon the needs of the Military Aid Program countries and the conditions of supply prevailing in the United States.

Mr. Clark inquired whether the Egyptian government has taken any further steps to relax the controls which it had imposed on shipping through the Suez Canal and Mr. El Kouny said that all of these controls had been relaxed. Mr. Clark said that he was very happy to know this inasmuch as the United States Government had made its views known to the Egyptian government that the restrictions which had been imposed on shipping were not warranted or in harmony with the Suez Canal convention. Mr. El Kouny said that he felt Egypt had been justified and that they had done what any government in the same position at that time would have done. He felt that the terms of the Canal Convention could not require Egypt to permit the passage through Egyptian waters of munitions destined for an enemy nation. He said that if Egypt were ever again confronted with the same situation she would take the same action. Mr. Clark said that it was encouraging to know that the controls had been removed.

Mrs. Hope showed Mr. El Kouny a copy of Senator Austin’s speech of August 4. He said he was confused by that portion of the speech which suggested that the United States licensing policy would be governed by a desire to avoid the development of an arms race in the Near East. He said this seemed to place special limitations upon the granting of licenses to Near Eastern countries. Mrs. Hope said that the United States position, as set forth by Senator Austin, was based on the assumption that the Near Eastern armistice would hold, and on a desire to pursue a course which would be consistent with the maintenance of peace in the Near East. Mr. El Kouny said that Egypt would not be applying to the United States for the types of equipment required for internal security. Material of that sort could be procured from other markets, but Egypt would wish to buy from the United States matériel with which to maintain the security of the Egyptian nation in its international relations. Mr. Clark said that questions of the sort which Mr. El Kouny had raised could only be settled through the actual operation of the United States licensing procedure when applications were received for export of arms to Near Eastern countries. Mrs. Hope added that she felt that the whole picture would be clarified in Mr. El Kouny’s mind when he had had an opportunity to read Senator Austin’s statement in full.

Mr. El Kouny thanked Mrs. Hope and Mr. Clark for the clarification which they had given him on both the embargo question and the question of the Economic Survey Mission’s work, and he reiterated the strong desire of the Egyptian government to cooperate to the fullest extent with Mr. Clapp’s group.2

1 See editorial note, p. 1283 [Pg. 1283 includes portions of Doc. 885 and Doc. 886].

2 The Department sent a copy of this memorandum of conversation to Cairo on October 5. Ambassador Caffery informed the Department, on November 1, that “It is trusted that El Kouny Bey did not create the impression that controls had been removed as they have not. They have, to a degree, been relaxed and there are far fewer cases arising than at any time since their imposition. Manifests are still regularly scrutinized and the fact that cargo seizures have been practically nil for the past month merely indicates that no offensive cargo has been discovered on the manifests. Added precautions of shippers and steamship companies alike are probably responsible for this.“It is hoped that no intimation be given American shippers or shipping companies that the war-time shipping regulations imposed by the Egyptians have been removed.” (airgram 1162 from Cairo, 501.BB Palestine(E)/11–149)

The Secretary of State to the United States Delegation at Lausanne 501.BB Palestine/9–849: Telegram

[Document 952]

The Secretary of State to the United States Delegation at Lausanne

secret Washington, September 8, 1949—5 p. m.

Unpal 240. Dept discussed with Porter Sept 7 developments at Lausanne re PCC. View Clapp’s arrival Lausanne and forthcoming departure of Econ Survey Mission for NE, Dept strongly believes PCC shld complete its work soonest and bring present session to close. Recessing PCC now wld give added emphasis to importance Econ Survey Mission. Prolongation might result in further hardening of position of dels which might create difficulties for Econ Survey Mission.1

Acheson

1 In a circular telegram of September 9, 6 a. m., to diplomatic and consular officers at Arab capitals, Tel Aviv, and Jerusalem for action and to Bern (for Mr. Porter), London, Paris, and Ankara for information, the Department observed that “Israeli and Arab reaction to date one of suspicion of ESM and American participation therein. Israelis see ESM as a plot to force greater measure refugee repatriation than Israel desires; Arabs interpret ESM as effort force Israeli-Arab econ cooperation and/or to achieve resettlement all refugees outside Israel.” The circular telegram also noted that the Dept had “requested UK, French and Turkish FonOffs instruct their missions and info services in NE render full diplomatic and publicity support to ESM.” (501.BB Palestine/9–949)

Memorandum by the Assistant Chief of the Division of International Organization Affairs (Halderman) 501.BB Palestine/9–249

[Document 953]

Memorandum by the Assistant Chief of the Division of International Organization Affairs (Halderman)1

confidential [Washington,] September 9, 1949.

Committee Allocation of the Palestine Question

problem

The problem is to determine the proper committee or committees to which the Palestine case should be allocated by the General Committee.

recommendations

1. All aspects of the Palestine case should be allocated to Committee 1, except for possible interim action to provide direct relief funds (see recommendation 3) and the normal function of Committee 5 on financial aspects (see recommendation 4).

2. The General Committee should recommend that Committee 1 should refer the question of direct refugee relief to Committee 3 for report back to Committee 1. The report of the United Nations Relief for Palestine Refugees would also be referred to Committee 3 to be considered in connection with future relief programs.

3. In the event that it is necessary to make interim provision for direct relief funds, due to the exhaustion of present funds, such question should be referred to Committee 3 for action early in the session. This action should be limited to provision of stop-gap funds.

4. The foregoing allocations would be without prejudice to the normal function of Committee 5 with respect to financial provisions.

5. Except as indicated in Recommendation 3, all aspects of the Palestine case, including Jerusalem, should be deferred until the final report of the Commission, including the report of the Survey Mission, is submitted. These reports are expected about November 1.2

discussion

The provisional agenda includes two items on Palestine: (1) Jerusalem and the Holy Places, and (2) direct refugee relief. It is expected, however, that a later item will be placed on the agenda based on the report of the Conciliation Commission including the report of the Survey Mission. These reports are expected to be submitted about November 1.

It is the position of the United States that these reports should be considered by Committee 1 and that this item should be the basis for the principal consideration of the United Nations program in respect of Palestine for 1950.

Overall Consideration in Committee 1

Due to the interrelation of the political and economic aspects of the problem as revealed by the experience of the past year, it is felt that the United Nations should establish an integrated program for 1950 to include all political and economic aspects. In order to achieve this integration it is considered that these matters should be placed in the hands of Committee 1 for overall consideration and recommendation.

Since the problem of achieving a political solution has proved to be integrally related to that of the solution of the refugee problem (repatriation and resettlement) it is appropriate to have the consideration of these two aspects take place together in Committee 1. The question of direct relief is somewhat separate and more appropriate for consideration in Committee 3. (Recommendation 2, discussed below.) However, in order to achieve the proper integration of this program with the others, it is recommended that it be placed in the hands of Committee 1 with the recommendation that it be referred from that Committee to Committee 3 for consideration and report back to Committee 1.

Direct Relief

It is considered that Committee 1 should refer the question of direct relief to Committee 3 for consideration and report back to Committee 1. The General Committee should make a recommendation to this effect in allocating the subject matter to Committee 1. The reasons for referring the question of direct relief for consideration in Committee 3 are: (1) Separation of the direct relief question from the large scale economic development programs will be conducive to a successful appeal for voluntary contributions for continued direct relief. If direct relief is considered in conjunction with such large-scale development programs, many delegations may consider that their voluntary contributions are unnecessary.

(2) Committee 3 will include the more “relief minded” members of delegations who should be more sympathetic to the plight of the refugees.

(3) Committee 3 has had more experience in dealing with relief matters and their judgment on this question should be of value. The program established by Committee 3 last year was highly and unexpectedly successful in bringing in the necessary contributions of $32,000,000.

(4) The subject of direct relief is normally within the terms of reference of the Third Committee which deals with social, humanitarian and cultural problems.

Timing

Since the consideration of most aspects of the Palestine case must necessarily be based on the Reports of the Conciliation Commission and the Economic Survey Mission, it is desirable that consideration be deferred until the receipt of these reports, probably about November 1. This is desirable in the interest of efficient management of the General Assembly and the conservation of time. As to Interim Relief Funds, and Jerusalem, see discussion below.

Interim Refugee Relief

Apart from the main consideration of the Palestine case there is possible need for action earlier in the session to provide interim funds to continue refugee relief until a more definitive provision can be made. This may be necessary because of the possibility that current funds will be exhausted by December 1, before General Assembly action on the overall question can be taken. The Ad Hoc Advisory Committee on Palestine Refugees is meeting September 29 to consider the need for such action on the basis of the financial situation of United Nations Relief for Palestine Refugees at that time. If necessary this provisional action should be taken in Committee 3, early in the session, and should consist of authorization to draw on the Working Capital Fund for an amount sufficient to carry on the relief operation for a short period.

Jerusalem

The Jerusalem question is substantively somewhat distinct from the other aspects of the Palestine case. However, it will normally be in Committee 1. It should preferably be taken up at the same time as the rest of the Palestine case, but further decisions may be necessary on this point in the light of the timing of the submission of the PCC proposals and the reaction of other delegations to them.

1 Mr. Halderman had prepared an earlier draft of this memorandum on September 2. The same day, he forwarded the draft to officers of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs, the Office of the Legal Adviser, and the Division of United Nations Economic and Social Affairs for comment (501.BB Palestine/9–249). The version of September 9 printed here was prepared presumably after comments by these officers.

2 With minor changes, including the consolidation of Nos. 3 and 4, the recommendations were sent to the United States Mission at the United Nations on September 13, for use in further consultations with the Secretariat (telegram 473 to New York, 501.BB Palestine/9–1349).

The Chargé in Egypt (Patterson) to the Secretary of State 501.BB Palestine/9–1049: Telegram

[Document 954]

The Chargé in Egypt (Patterson) to the Secretary of State

secret Cairo, September 10, 1949—9 a. m.

846. Re London’s telegram 35051 to Department September 1. In conversation with British Chargé my house September 6, Chapman-Andrews seemed surprised on my inquiry concerning the current Egyptian Government attitude toward transit through Suez Canal of military supplies destined for Israel, with especial reference to petroleum. I stated that according to information available to me, tankers were converging on Haifa from various directions and from various places of origin2 so that a decision, if not yet taken by Egyptian Government would appear a matter for very near future. I added that quite recently, however, Hassouna Pasha had orally assured me restrictions on transportation of merchandise in the direction of Israel would henceforward be limited to munitions of war which he described as being arms and ammunition and not including raw materials susceptible of military use or even manufactured goods of like potentiality, such as rubber tires.

Although oil could perhaps not be considered a raw material in that it might be immediately utilized for military purposes, the possibility existed that Hassouna Pasha could be considered as having tacitly assented to the passage through the Suez Canal of petroleum products.

Chapman-Andrews negatived this supposition, stating that his Embassy had obtained information concerning articles regarded by Egyptian Government as absolute contraband and that “carburants” of all kinds (by which French term he understood all petroleum products) were included.

The Under Secretary had spoken to Sir Ronald Campbell (before the latter’s departure) in much the same reassuring, but possibly illusory, sense as he had to me.

Accordingly, some special representations were evidently required if Persian Gulf or other oil were to be allowed through the Suez Canal to Haifa.

Continuing, Chapman-Andrews stated he proposed to request an audience of His Majesty in view of importance of the objectives and of extremely confidential nature of the negotiations. Chapman-Andrews did not hazard a surmise as to whether or not his approach to His Majesty would be successful since he believed the Egyptians fully to realize that the ultimate objective is not so much obtention of freedom from molestation in Suez Canal as the reopening of the pipeline from Iraq to Haifa.

He explained that the recent incident involving removal of WHO meeting from Alexandria (which is regarded as result of personal intervention of His Majesty in complete disregard of apparent desires and action of his Prime Minister who is concurrently Foreign Minister and Minister of Interior) revealed lack of authority of head of Egyptian Government as contrasted with powerful position of the Chief of State. To make absolutely certain that a decision of prime political and economic importance should not run the risks of being overruled, it now seems necessary, in Chapman-Andrews view, for recourse to be had to His Majesty.

On Chapman-Andrews inquiring if the American Embassy had taken occasion to raise the subject in conversation with Egyptian officials, I replied negatively adding that such information as had reached me had seemingly been supplied solely for purposes of information.

Sent Department 846, repeated London 99.

Patterson

1 Not printed.

2 For documentation on this subject, see pp. 91 [Pg. 91 is part of Doc. 14] ff.

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom 501.BB Palestine(E)/9–949: Telegram

[Document 955]

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom

secret Washington, September 10, 1949—2 p. m.

3281. Urtel 3642, Sep 9.1 UK reaction to request for dipl and publicity support of ESM difficult to reconcile with consistent UK support of ESM’s objectives in all previous interchanges with US, and with very fact of Brit participation on ESM. USG believes that failure ESM to achieve its objectives wld result in deferment political settlement foreseeable future, and that ESM therefore requires maximum support from outset. USG firmly convinced that success ESM is only present means creating atmosphere in which political-territorial settlement may be possible (Depcirtel 6:00 a. m. Aug 16), and that interjection political questions at present time might prejudice work ESM. This does not of course preclude raising of political questions as soon as acceptability and progress of ESM demonstrated, and atmosphere more auspicious for continuation political discussions.

Full US reply to UK Aide-Mémoire 2 expected within few days.

Acheson

1 Not printed, it reported that the British Foreign Office had decided to await the reactions of the Department to a wider approach to the Israelis and the Arabs on settlement of the Palestine problem before instructing its Near Eastern Missions to extend diplomatic support to the Economic Survey Mission (501.BB Palestine/9–949).

2 Dated September 1, p. 1342 [Pg. 1342 includes portions of Doc. 932 and Doc. 933].

Mr. Stuart W. Rockwell to the Secretary of State 501.BB Palestine/9–1049: Telegram

[Document 956]

Mr. Stuart W. Rockwell to the Secretary of State

secret
priority Lausanne, September 10, 1949—2 p. m.

Palun 317. Would appreciate urgent background information re announcement Radio Bulletin 2121 that ExImBank has approved $2,350,000 loan to Israel for port development. This seems entirely contrary to basic decision re remainder $100,000,000 Israeli credit which Porter told me had been taken in Washington and apparently indicates radical change in US attitude toward Israel (Unpal 218).2 There has been no alteration in position of Israeli delegation here on basic issues which would justify such change in US policy.

Announcement will place me in very awkward position vis-à-vis Israeli delegation, with members of which, on basis information brought by Porter and Unpal 218, I have been taking strong line re unlikelihood for present of large scale US-Israeli economic cooperation view Israeli attitude on main issues Palestine problem.

Agree with Clapp announcement particularly unfortunate view possible effect on cooperation Arab states with US.

Rockwell

1 Dated September 8, not printed; it stated that “The newly announced loan to Israel brings the total of credits established by the Export-Import Bank in favor of that country to $53,350,000. It leaves unallocated $46,650,000 of the $100,000,000 earmarked for Israel last January.” (News Division Files)

2 Dated August 5, from Lausanne, not printed, but see footnote 1, p. 1312 [Pg. 1312 is part of Doc. 907].

The Chargé in the United Kingdom (Holmes) to the Secretary of State 501.BB Palestine/9–1249: Telegram

[Document 957]

The Chargé in the United Kingdom (Holmes) to the Secretary of State

secret London, September 12, 1949—8 p. m.

3670. 1. Question UK diplomatic and publicity support for ESM discussed again today with Burrows in light Deptel 3281, September 10. Burrows emphasized FonOff anxious be all possible assistance and cooperate every way possible in work of ESM. As result Embassy’s representations (Embtel 3596, September 71 ) FonOff has already instructed British information services make every effort elucidate objectives ESM.

2. Burrows stated FonOff also willing extend diplomatic support to ESM, but wishes do so in most effective manner in order assure success. Primary objections Arab States, as expressed thus far, appear emphasize their fear that political objectives being subordinated to economic objectives and that their case consequently being prejudiced. He mentioned fear Syria and Iraq that if resettlement refugees in those countries is recommended, their case for resettlement in Israel or Arab Palestine have disappeared.

3. FonOff feels most effective means obtaining support Arab States for work of ESM is to reassure them on political aspects as well. This, in part, is what FonOff hopes for from wider approach. In these circumstances FonOff feels it will have greater success in selling ESM to Arabs within context wider settlement. Burrows understands our reply to UK aide-mémoire may be received tomorrow and hopes that it may then be possible proceed with approach.

4. It was pointed out to Burrows that replies to our approaches to Arab States and Israel had indicated suspicion of ESM. In these circumstances, time is of essence and it appears be matter of some urgency to take every possible opportunity to explain objectives of ESM in order dispel such suspicions before they harden and negate possibility ESM fulfilling its task. Both US and France are doing everything possible to assure that Arab States and Israel have proper understanding of this matter and UK cooperation this task would be helpful and perhaps crucial.

5. Burrows reiterated that FonOff hopes very much that reply its aide-mémoire will be received tomorrow and UK could then proceed wider approach. Meanwhile, FonOff will work out an approach on ESM alone for use in event there is any protracted delay in proceeding with wider approach.

Holmes

1 Not printed, but see footnote 2, p. 1359 [Pg. 1359 includes portions of Doc. 943 and Doc. 944].

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Secretary of State 867N.01/9–1349

[Document 958]

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Secretary of State

top secret [Washington,] September 13, 1949.

Subject: Conversation with Mr. Bevin on the Middle East

Participants: Mr. Bevin1

Mr. Dening2

Mr. Acheson

Mr. McGhee

Mr. Butterworth3

Ambassador Douglas

Ambassador Jessup

Mr. Satterthwaite4

Bevin opened the discussion on the Middle East with a complaint about Palestine. He said the United Nations appoint commissions which get nowhere and which lead to more and more faits accomplis which cannot be changed. He said this has happened in the matters of Jerusalem, boundaries, and Arab territories. Bevin said he was in favor of Abdullah having that portion of Arab Palestine which he now occupied and if there were no boundaries there was no Palestine. He said the present situation was unsatisfactory and the British were getting nowhere with the carrying out of their Eight Point Program, although we had approved it. McGhee said it was true that we had put forward no U.S. territorial settlement but we had through our representative on the PCC attempted to get both sides to get together. The Arabs want considerable territory, the Israelis do not want to give up any and their position in both territories and refugees are too far apart for hope of settlement in the PCC in the near future. More flexible proposals are needed on both sides if there is to be hope of conciliation. Bevin asked when it would come to a head? Mr. McGhee replied that the present possibilities of the Commission through conciliation had been exhausted. The Economic Commission although somewhat suspect by the Arab States, we nevertheless hope can induce the Arabs to accept refugees for resettlement and the Israelis to accept others for repatriation with offers of economic assistance. If solution to the refugee problem can be found, perhaps normal relations can in time be resumed. We do not think that there is much hope of a territorial settlement at this time. Bevin again said that the Jews make faits accomplis and the Arabs get nothing.

Bevin then said that the British were making progress with Egypt toward an important treaty. The discussions were going along quite well on military, political, and economic levels. But failure to settle the Palestine problem was blocking the whole Egyptian deal. McGhee again said that he thought we had to cope with the problem for a while.

Bevin then discussed the problem of getting oil out of Iraq. He said that what was needed was “running rights” to Haifa. He had in mind a joint board to manage the port of Haifa along the lines of the Port of London Authority. It could be well and impartially run. He thought the Jews could easily grant “running rights” without in any way involving the sovereignty question. This could be done quickly and would start the port running again. Bevin said, as we knew, oil was very important to Iraq and the rights could be given outside of any territorial settlement. Mr. McGhee said the Israelis had talked only about a free zone for Haifa like that at Salonika. Mr. Bevin said a free port would be better than a free zone, which, unless the port were controlled impartially, might not result in the oil and supplies being loaded. Bevin said he thought the Arabs would take such a deal. Mr. McGhee reminded him that the Arabs had up to now refused to cooperate or even talk with the Israelis. Bevin said that the Regent of Iraq did not reject this idea and he might be tempted to take the opportunity to share in the management of the port. This also might ease the outlet to the Red Sea Problem.

Ambassador Douglas inquired whether territorial settlement involving Abdullah might not complicate the whole Palestine situation. Bevin said that the Gaza strip was not so important. Mr. McGhee said that the other Arab States would probably oppose annexation of the occupied territory to Jordan and that the inhabitants might even oppose it or prefer the Israelis. We agree that Abdullah should eventually get it, but not until a general settlement had been reached. Before that time such action would probably create more problems than it would solve.

Bevin then reiterated his concern regarding the effectiveness of the various Commissions which had been set up. Getting to the refugee problem he said that the British had put up half a million in sterling. Mr. McGhee said we were optimistic for an ultimate solution and would be more so if it were not for the recent revolution in Syria. He said that it seemed possible to take care of nearly all of the refugees if the new Syrian Government would cooperate as Zaim had indicated he was willing to do. Some refugees might be left for a second bite.

Bevin then got another plug in for his Haifa scheme and said that if Haifa problems were settled Iraq might play ball on the refugees. I asked Bevin to explain what he meant by “running rights”. He said that since the territory behind Haifa and Haifa itself are in the hands of the Jews, the Arabs have no truck, rail or pipe line rights to deep water. The Jews are always in the position of stopping the trade at any time. He thought no one would agree to a corridor. I asked him if the problem would be met if “running rights” were granted temporarily for two years. Bevin said he would prefer to do it subject to notice as he thought a fixed period would create a row before the period was ended. Bevin again said he had no faith in the economic development commission or any other commission and that Palestine was still a nightmare to him. I asked Mr. McGhee to try to do something to stir the pot and Bevin said he thought if we could only get one practical thing done, we would be better off than we are now when everything is being frustrated.5

1 Mr. Bevin was in the United States to attend the Fourth Regular Session of the General Assembly, scheduled to meet at New York on September 20.

2 Maberly E. Dening, Assistant Under Secretary of State in the British Foreign Office.

3 W. Walton Butterworth, Director of the Office of Far Eastern Affairs; on September 29, he became the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs.

4 Livingston L. Satterthwaite, Chief of the Division of British Commonwealth Affairs.

5 For the joint statement by the United States and the United Kingdom on the Acheson–Bevin conversation, released by the Department of State on September 13, see Department of State Bulletin, September 26, 1949, p. 467.

The Department of State to the British Embassy 501.BB Palestine(E)/9–1349

[Document 959]

The Department of State to the British Embassy

confidential

Aide-Mémoire

It is believed that the United States and the United Kingdom are in substantial agreement in principle with respect to the Palestine question, and in this connection reference is made to informal conversations which took place in July and August between representatives of the United States Government and representatives of the British Government both in Washington and in London. However, it is desired to make certain specific comments on some of the points raised in the Aide-mémoire: 1 1. (a) The Department of State assumes that when the Aide-mémoire refers to resettlement in general terms, as in paragraph 1, (a), (b), and (c), it means to include repatriation. While it is true that major emphasis will have to be placed on resettlement, it is essential that repatriation should also play an important role in the solution of this question.

(b) While it is clear that the final disposition of the refugee problem would be facilitated and hastened by a territorial settlement, the Department of State believes that the refugee problem can be disposed of in large measure on the basis of existing territorial delimitations. In other words, the absence of a territorial settlement should not prevent the development and implementation of plans for the repatriation and resettlement of the refugees.

(c) The Department of State does not believe that the question of the disposition of refugees should be approached from the point of view that after Israel has accepted a certain number of refugees for repatriation the remainder will have to be resettled by the Arab states. On the contrary, it is believed that the ability of Israel and the Arab states to absorb the refugees should be determined on the basis of an authoritative technical study. It is probable that such a study will indicate that all the refugees can only be accommodated if a certain degree of international assistance is provided. It is anticipated that the Economic Survey Mission will be able to provide this authoritative study, as well as the scale of international assistance which would be required. It is therefore considered preferable to urge Israel and the Arab states to assist the Economic Survey Mission in its work and on the basis of technical and economic considerations, to accept repatriation and resettlement on the scale required to accommodate all the refugees.

2. (a) The Department of State feels that it would be inadvisable to put to Israel and the Arab states any specific plan for territorial settlement. It believes that the question of territorial settlement is a matter for determination by the parties concerned either directly or through the Palestine Conciliation Commission. However, it considers that a discussion of the problem of territorial settlement with the Arab states and Israel in order to obtain their views might be useful at a somewhat later date.

(b) In view of the fact that relief requirements for the next year cannot be fully assessed until the Economic Survey Mission has made its report, the Department of State hopes that it will be possible for the Foreign Office to withhold its determination concerning the maximum amount which it might contribute to the relief program. While we are fully in accord with the view of the Foreign Office that every effort should be made to secure proportionate contributions from other member states, the Department of State believes that the efforts of our respective governments to secure a more equitable distribution of the relief burden might be jeopardized if the proposed United Kingdom contributions were determined at this stage.

3. As the Arab states have thus far shown no disposition to discuss resettlement quantitatively, and as Israel’s offer to repatriate 100,000 refugees is not acceptable to the Arabs, it is clear that both will have to adopt a more flexible and compromising attitude in order that agreement can be reached. The Department of State believes that it should be stressed now and during the General Assembly, if the matter is raised, that Israel and the Arab states between them have the primary responsibility with respect to the refugee problem and should contribute to its solution in such a manner that all the refugees would be accommodated, through repatriation and resettlement. Under these circumstances, it would not be desirable to give even an approximation of the figures involved in connection with repatriation and resettlement.

4. While the Department of State does not have an analysis of the total contributions to UNRPR as of date, it understands that the anticipated contributions including a further United States contribution on the matching basis are not likely to be sufficient to finance UNRPR until the end of the current year. It is further understood that the Ad Hoc Advisory Committee of UNRPR which is scheduled to meet September 29, 1949, will be asked to review this situation and to make recommendations thereon. It is the view of the Department of State that if the funds received by UNRPR are not sufficient to insure continuation of operations until the end of 1949, the General Assembly should take interim action authorizing an advance from the UN Working Capital Fund to enable UNRPR to continue to that date, and pending General Assembly action on the 1950 program after receiving the report of the Economic Survey Mission.

In view of the lack of progress in the field of conciliation thus far and the subsequent decision to shift the emphasis from the political to the economic through the establishment of the Economic Survey Mission, the Department of State is of the opinion that it would be wise to defer an approach to the Arab states and Israel on political questions for the time being—at least until adequate time has been afforded for the Economic Survey Mission to demonstrate its effectiveness in creating a more favorable atmosphere.

Washington, September 13, 1949.

1 Dated September 1, p. 1342 [Pg. 1342 includes portions of Doc. 932 and Doc. 933].

The Consul at Jerusalem (Burdett) to the Secretary of State 501.BB Palestine/9–1349: Telegram

[Document 960]

The Consul at Jerusalem (Burdett) to the Secretary of State

confidential Jerusalem, September 13, 1949—4 p. m.

565. Deptel 360, September 7.1 ConGen wishes reiterate view expressed Contel 495 July 27 re importance delineating final line between Jewish and Arab zones in Jerusalem instrument to be presented to GA. Believes decision as to where line should run within international area of Jerusalem need not be affected by final boundary settlement and can be determined independently. It is supposed that in any final settlement Israel will retain corridor linking Jerusalem to Coast. Therefore same military and other factors must be considered in drawing line regardless of exact final boundaries. ConGen is obliged to differ strongly with PCC belief that present “provisional line” can be used without prejudice to establishment of definitive line later. Israel attitude towards “temporary” armistice lines indicated only too dearly its probable reaction to any future change. While under no illusion as to difficulties of imposing boundaries on Israel, ConGen firmly believes that only possibility of change lies in incorporating specific final line in Jerusalem instrument now. It is assumed PCC and US not prepared accept present line. Prospects of Arab support for international regime will be greatly increased by return of Arab quarters, while Israel opposition must be assumed in any event.

Following factors should be taken into account in drawing final line: 1. UN previously unwilling to recognize that conquest of territory by force confers legal right, particularly in Jerusalem which theoretically has been continuously under UN protection. Thus logical starting point is status quo November 29, 1947.

2. At same time, for practical administrative reasons, essential that Jewish and Arab zones be homogeneous entities avoiding to maximum extent possible corridors and enclaves. Therefore lines should be drawn creating compact Jewish and Arab zones which will involve retention by Jewish zone of some conquered Arab areas while surrendering large Arab quarters in southern Jerusalem and in addition certain Jewish sections which cut Arab quarters off from main Arab zone. In practice Israel would receive larger area than held on November 29.

3. Mount Scopus should be attached to Jewish zone probably by road to San Hadriya skirting Sheikh Jerrah quarter.2

Sent Department, repeated Tel Aviv 108; Department pass Amman 66, Bern 61.

Burdett

1 Not printed.

2 The Department of State, in reply on September 19, stated that the “PCC has not yet made final decision re inclusion demarcation line in proposals prior their presentation for consideration by GA” but was studying the situation. The Department of State also indicated that it would bear the suggestions in mind and would “consult with USDel, PCC, re problem prior next PCC session.” (telegram 378, 501.BB Palestine/9–1349)

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom 501.BB Palestine(E)/9–1349: Telegram

[Document 961]

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom

confidential
priority Washington, September 13, 1949—9 p. m.

3332. Fol tel received from New York:

(Code room: Please repeat to AmEmbassy London tel from New York no. 1113, Sept 13,1 control no. 4569.)

Despite earlier indications given to AmEmb Baghdad that Iraq wld receive ESM, Govt’s attitude has obviously hardened during past few days. Possibility such action stimulating similar attitude other NE states or even adoption common Arab League policy cannot be excluded. Latter wld of course spell deathblow to ESM.

Since ESM has already received setback, and time is of essence (urtel 3670 Sept 12), pls bring foregoing to attention FonOff soonest, together with Baghdad tel 211 to London, Sept 12,2 and emphasize desirability urgent Brit supporting action.3

Acheson

1 Not printed; it gave the text of the reply by the Iraqi Acting Minister for Foreign Affairs to Secretary-General Lie’s request that facilities be made available to the Economic Survey Mission. The reply, in effect, refused permission for the Mission to visit Iraq (501.BB Palestine(E)/9–1349).

2 This was a repeat of telegram 579 to the Department of State, not printed.

3 Mr. McGhee, on September 16, expressed his belief to Mr. Clapp that “chances obtaining cooperative attitude improved in view apparent revision attitude Arab dipl reps here as result our discussion this week re objectives ESM. Lebanese Min Malik expressed opinion Sept 14 road ahead for ESM shld be smoother henceforth and Iraqi Chargé stated he had telegraphed his govt recommending cooperation with ESM.“UK, Fr and Turks will extend full support in NE to ESM. UK undertaking urge Iraq revise its position as well as urge cooperation other Arab caps. We suggest you take no official cognizance Iraq’s rejection and, if questioned by press, express hope that, as ESM’s purposes are clarified, it will be welcomed by all members NE community.” (telegram 519, identified also as Esmis 2, to Beirut, 501.BB Palestine(E)/9–1649)

Position Paper Prepared in the Department of State IO Files, Lot 71 D 440, SD/A/C.1/273

1 [Document 962]

Position Paper Prepared in the Department of State 2

confidential [Washington,] September 14, 1949.

Jerusalem

the problem

The problem is to determine the position which the Delegation should take on the question of a permanent international regime for the Jerusalem area pursuant to Resolution 194 (III) adopted by the General Assembly on December 11, 1948.

recommendations

1. The United States should strongly support the proposals of the Commission. (Annex 1 contains the plan proposed by the Commission and comments for the guidance of the Delegation.3

2. If the PCC proposals are rejected by either the Arabs or by Israel either before or during the debate, the United States should continue to support the proposals as being the best chance of achieving an international regime and in the hope that the parties will acquiesce in a United Nations decision. This position might be changed in the light of developments.

3. Any amendments to the Statute submitted during the course of the debate should be considered by the Delegation and the Department in the light of the existing situation.

4. If the PCC proposals are defeated by vote of the General Assembly, the United States should wait and see what alternatives are advanced. At this stage the Delegation should consult the Department as to the future course of action.

discussion

[Here follow sections marked “Background of Problem”; the “Israeli Position,” which stated in part that “Representatives of Israel made it clear from the outset of the Commission’s work that the New City of Jerusalem was regarded as part of Israel and would not be relinquished to an international regime. The inhabitants of Jewish Jerursalem were Israeli citizens and it was, they asserted, inconceivable that Israel would take part in a plan which would oblige these citizens to live under another administration against their will”; and the “Arab Position,” which stated in part that the Arab States “have recently indicated their acquiescence in an international regime for the City. This position is believed entirely due to their present unfavorably [unfavorable] military position and that it expresses a wish for an international bulwark against further Israeli expansion.… The Arabs have been unanimous in making their principal demand that there should be an absolute United Nations guarantee that the international character of the City shall be preserved. The Commission proposals undertake to meet this demand by means of the provisions for demilitarization. The Arabs have also insisted, as part of the demand for safeguards, that there should be no corridor linking the City with the State of Israel. The corridor nevertheless exists and there is no prospect that it will be relinquished by Israel.”]

Position of the International Community.—The strongest element of interest in the Jerusalem settlement among the membership of the United Nations, apart from the Arab States and Israel, is found in the Catholic countries. While no great interest was manifested during the first half of the year, there have recently been evidences of increasing interest in the problem by the Vatican and various Catholic communities. This interest indicates a possibility of a strong demand for an international regime in the nature of a corpus separatum.

Basis for Recommendation 1.—The United States concurred in the opinion of its representative on the Commission that an international regime in the nature of a corpus separatum for Jerusalem would be rejected by Israel and that no useful purpose would be served by preparing one more plan which would share the fate of previous attempts of this kind by remaining a dead letter. The other two members of the Commission were at first inclined to favor proposals for a completely separate regime even though they agreed that such proposals could not be placed in operation. They were, however, persuaded by the United States Representative to attempt a practical approach which might be acceptable to the parties and at the same time fulfill the spirit and letter of the resolution calling for an international regime. Israel and the Arab states have both agreed to United Nations control of the Holy Places, which appears to be the focal point of international interest in the City. The proposals of the Commission call for a United Nations Authority with control over the Holy Places, including the provision of United Nations guards, and with supervisory powers over the other main subjects of international interest, namely, the observance of human rights and demilitarization. The United Nations Authority is also given power to participate with a Joint Board in the consideration of questions which relate to the efficient functioning of the City. These include such things as common services and utilities.

Subject to the restrictions of the international regime, the powers of Government would be entrusted to the adjacent states of Israel and, presumably, the Hashemite Jordan Kingdom. The details of the international regime would be incorporated in an instrument having the force of a treaty. The United Nations Authority, as well as the states concerned, is given the power to intervene diplomatically in case of alleged violations and, in case of a dispute, to submit the question for adjudication by an international tribunal especially created for the purpose.

In supporting this plan the United States considers that it fulfills the resolution of the General Assembly and makes adequate provision for those elements of the Jerusalem situation which are of particular interest to the International Community. It is believed that the provisions for international control are strong and can, if put into operation, ensure that the world interest in Jerusalem is safeguarded.

We feel that the establishment of a Jerusalem regime in the nature of a corpus separatum under the United Nations is entirely impractical. This is largely because it would be unacceptable to Israel but also because, even if accepted, it would call for United Nations commitments which the United Nations might be unwilling or unable to fulfill. In addition to heavy financial requirements such commitments would also include an obligation to maintain peace and order in a City which, if legally separated from the adjacent states, might very soon be faced with serious threats either internally or from outside.

It is believed that the United Nations should be willing to accept a genuine and substantial plan which has a good possibility of being accepted by the parties concerned and of being successfully placed in operation.

Demilitarization.—If the plan is attacked on the basis of details, rather than as a whole, a likely point of attack might be that of demilitarization. Israeli representatives have often said that after their experience of a year ago they could never again leave the Jewish population of the City unprotected. This is also a likely point of attack from the Arab side, particularly since they claim that the existence of the corridor gives Israel a strong military advantage which largely nullifies the effects of demilitarization. It is believed that we should not recede from the requirement that the City be completely demilitarized. This is an essential, and one of the strongest, elements of the proposed international regime without which it is doubtful that the plan would be accepted by the Members of the United Nations. The argument on the point of military advantage would be that both sides have direct access to the respective contiguous states and that the result is approximate equality.

The Corridor.—If the Arabs wish to reject the proposal they will undoubtedly make the existence of the corridor a basic argument. This will be linked with the question of demilitarization and the claim will be made that demilitarization is in effect non-existent on the Israeli side if there is a direct connection between Jerusalem and Israel. It is probable that the Arabs will only use this argument if they have decided to reject the plan, for there is no prospect that Israel will give up the corridor. It may, therefore, be useless to argue the matter except for the slight possibility that combined pressure may persuade the Arabs to change their position. The argument on this point would be that Jordan also has a direct link with Jerusalem and that the parties are, therefore, in a position of equality.

Basis for Recommendations 2 and 3.—In approaching the General Assembly debate on the Jerusalem question the United States has the general view that the PCC proposals represent virtually a last chance to achieve any substantial degree of internationalization going beyond international control of the Holy Places. This view may alter as a result of discussions during the Assembly period but appears well-founded in consideration of the widely divergent approaches to this question on the part of Israel, the Arabs, and the international community. The United Nations has adopted a procedure for bringing about a solution of the problem by appointing a Commission to consider all aspects and bring in proposals. The Commission has endeavored to take into account the conflicting views of the parties concerned and to present a plan calculated to reconcile their major claims. Meanwhile the conditions for achieving internationalization have been gradually deteriorating by reason of the progressive consolidation of the New City into the State of Israel, the filling up of former Arab quarters with new Israeli immigrants, the extension of Israeli civil administration and the movement of government bureaus to Jerusalem. Consequently, we feel that the United Nations should follow through strongly on the procedure it has adopted by making every effort to bring about acquiescence in the proposals of the Commission. If this fails the effort to achieve an international regime must start again from the beginning in circumstances that are even less favorable than when previous efforts were undertaken. Consequently, even if Israel or the Arab States reject the plan prior to a vote in the Assembly, we should nevertheless attempt to get a favorable Assembly vote on the chance that these parties may acquiesce in a United Nations decision.

If the proposals of the Commission fail in an Assembly vote there may reasonably be expected to be an effort on the part of the delegations of some Catholic countries to put up a plan of more far-reaching internationalization. Israel would be almost certain to oppose such proposals. The United States should cooperate in the search for a practical solution. Decisions will have to be made in the light of the proposals made, the attitude of the parties directly concerned, and possible strong developments in American Catholic and Jewish public opinion.

1 Lot 71 D 440 is the master file of classified records and correspondence of United States Delegations to sessions of the United Nations General Assembly for the years 1945–1965, as maintained by the Bureau of International Organization Affairs.

2 In connection with the Fourth Regular Session of the General Assembly; the paper is marked “Subject to Final Clearance.”

3 Not found attached.

Mr. Stuart W. Rockwell to the Secretary of State 501.BB Palestine/9–1449: Telegram

[Document 963]

Mr. Stuart W. Rockwell to the Secretary of State

confidential Lausanne, September 14, 1949—noon.

Palun 320. 1. In final meetings with chiefs all delegations September 12 PCC delivered notes containing observations and suggestions re Arab and Israeli replies to PCC questionnaire (Palun 303).1

Notes to both parties, after making number minor observations on specific points raised in replies, stated PCC did not believe would be useful at present offer detailed suggestions re refugees, since desired await ESM (Economic Survey Mission) report.

Notes then referred fact both parties had accepted May 12 protocol as basis for discussion territorial question, on understanding such discussion would bear upon adjustments which would be necessary make in order achieve agreement. PCC had come to conclusion Arab and Israeli territorial proposals exceeded limits of what might be considered in broadest sense as adjustments to May 12 map. PCC consequently requested delegations and their governments to reexamine question and hoped that when work resumed in New York PCC would find new proposals a practical working basis.

Notes then stated PCC held firm view that if governments did not make substantial modifications in proposals or advance new suggestions would be very difficult or even impossible carry on constructive negotiations re territory. PCC felt would be premature for it to present to parties any proposals involving more specific indications re such modifications. PCC felt, however, modifications should bear not only on territories claimed by Israelis and Arabs which lie outside boundaries allotted to them on May 12 map, but also upon territories allotted to them on same map.

Notes informed all delegations of PCC conviction that no excessive territorial demands should be allowed impede establishment normal conditions of political and economic life in NE.

2. Delegates orally informed PCC requesting government’s members PCC make representations in Israel and interested Arab States to emphasize importance member governments and PCC attached to submission by governments concerned of new and more flexible proposals on territory in order provide practical basis for discussions New York. Therefore, hope that Department after consultation with French and Turkish Foreign Offices re coordination will be able make such representations in near future.

Rockwell

1 Dated September 5, from Lausanne, p. 1361 [Pg. 1361 includes portions of Doc. 944, Doc. 945, and Doc. 946].

Editorial Note [Document 964]

Editorial Note

The Fourth Progress Report of the Palestine Conciliation Commission covered its activities for the period June 9 to September 15. After reviewing its efforts involving conciliation, the refugee question and the territorial question, it concluded as follows: “The Conciliation Commission hopes that, upon the resumption of its work in New York on 19 October 1949, it will receive from the Arab and Israel delegations replies to its note of 12 September 1949, which will be of a nature to permit the successful pursuit of its efforts to conciliate the points of view of the parties. The Commission also places great hope in the assistance of the Economic Mission, whose first report is expected at the end of October, in connexion with the solution of the outstanding questions, in particular the poignant problem of the refugees.”

The full text of the Fourth Progress Report is printed in GA, 4th sess., Ad Hoc Political Committee, Annex, 1949, volume II, page 9.

Regarding the note of September 12, see telegram Palun 320, September 14, from Lausanne, supra.

The Secretary of State to the United States Delegation at Lausanne 501.BB Palestine/8–849: Telegram

[Document 965]

The Secretary of State to the United States Delegation at Lausanne

top secret Washington, September 15, 1949—8 p. m.

Unpal 239. In view Palun 267, Aug 8,1 and subsequent info from Porter2 in Washington, Dept did not understand that ref was being made at this time to ExImBank loan in discussions with Israeli del (Unpal 218, Aug 51 ).

Depts position re loan has consistently been premised on achievement of peace in Palestine. In absence of peaceful conditions Dept obliged to review each application for allocation under loan to determine whether in light existing circumstances at time it shld be approved or deferred. Cancellation or long-term suspension of loan itself has never been under consideration at any time.

Re Haifa allocation Dept desired review application in accord above policy. ExImBank had, however, already taken position with Israeli reps that while allocation justified, Bank unable authorize in absence Depts agreement. Israeli Amb was seriously concerned and at loss to understand apparent difference of view between Bank and Dept. In these circumstances Dept considered it advisable to concur in position which had already been taken by Bank.

Israeli Amb understands Dept position that it will be necessary for Depts reps on ExImBank to continue their obligation to review all future applications under loan in light of situation in Israel and its internatl relations and that Israel shld not construe such action as either direct or indirect political pressure.

Acheson

1 Not printed, but see footnote 1, p. 1312 [Pg. 1312 is part of Doc. 907].

2 Mr. Porter, in a telephone conversation on September 23, informed Mr. Stabler that he had received a letter from President Truman accepting his resignation as U.S. Representative on the Palestine Conciliation Commission as of September 15 (501.BB Palestine/9–2349).

1 Not printed, but see footnote 1, p. 1312 [Pg. 1312 is part of Doc. 907].

The Secretary of State to the Legation in Lebanon 501.BB Palestine(E)/9–749: Telegram

[Document 966]

The Secretary of State to the Legation in Lebanon

secret Washington, September 15, 1949—8 p. m.

512. Pls seek immediate appointment FonMin and in ur discretion PriMin, and convey fol orally:

Leb reluctance support and cooperate with ESM (urtel 460 Sept 71 ) and reported desire interject question into Arab League politics difficult reconcile with long record Leb cooperation with UN and US. We regret FonMin’s tendency accept Amer press interpretations of ESM as authoritative statements US policy, particularly in light Dept’s assurances (Deptel 476 Sept 3 and Depcirtel Sept 9, 6 a. m.2 ) that ESM not designed force Israeli-Arab econ cooperation. PCC on repeated occasions and prior activation ESM outlined to Leb and other dels Lausanne objectives ESM, and received their assurances Arab cooperation therewith.

In view repeated discussion Leb officials emphasizing econ burden of refugees, Leb reaction to ESM difficult to understand, since one of ESM’s major purposes is to recommend means lifting such burden from Leb. Leb therefore stands to gain from cooperation with ESM on two counts, namely, in alleviation of strain produced by excessively large refugee population and in obtaining support for Leb’s econ development aspirations.

You shld point out that cooperation with ESM implies no prior commitment accept its recommendations, although we hope that sound techn basis on which they will be formulated will make them acceptable not only to NE states but to all govts in position extend financial support in their implementation.

From point of view USG, if ESM fails obtain necessary cooperation, we see no means obtaining settlement NE problems in foreseeable future. Conversely, if ESM meets with cooperation and good will from NE Govts, report will serve as basis constructive and beneficial action during coming months by GA and interested member states towards solution econ ills of NE.3

Inform Clapp foregoing.

You may make such additions or deletions in foregoing as you feel wld assure effective presentation.4

Acheson

1 Not printed.

2 Latter not printed, but see footnote 1, p. 1369 [Pg. 1369 includes portions of Doc. 951 and Doc. 952].

3 Minister Pinkerton, on September 19, sought authorization to delay the suggested representations to the Lebanese Government, inasmuch as Mr. Clapp had received complete cooperation from the Lebanese Government and because a reshuffling of the Lebanese Government seemed imminent (telegram 480 from Beirut). The Department gave the authorization the following day (telegram 535 to Beirut). This exchange of messages is filed under 501.BB Palestine(E)/9–1949, 9–2049.

4 The Department simultaneously instructed Damascus to arrange an immediate meeting with the Syrian Foreign Minister and make oral, informal representations along the broad lines of telegram 512 to Beirut (telegram 413, September 15, 8 p. m., 501.BB Palestine(E)/9–1549). Minister Keeley did so on September 16. He expressed the opinion that “ESM will be received by Syria following recognition [of the Syrian regime] but am not sanguine about Syrian cooperation in implementing any ESM recommendations that relieves Israel of obligation to carry out UN resolutions.” (telegram 552, September 17, noon, 501.BB Palestine(E)/9–1749)The Department, on September 15, also instructed Cairo to “continue to emphasize importance which US attaches to its [ESM’s] success, and shld recall to FonMin that PCC on number occasions prior activation ESM discussed ESM fully with Arab dels Lausanne and recd their assurances Arab cooperation therewith.” (telegram 921, 501.BB Palestine(E)/9–1549)

The Consul at Jerusalem (Burdett) to the Secretary of State 501.BB Palestine/9–1649: Telegram

[Document 967]

The Consul at Jerusalem (Burdett) to the Secretary of State

Jerusalem, September 16, 1949.

573. Sharett today issued following press statement:

“Instrument stands as its own condemnation. It is patently ineffectual in relation to purpose which it proposes to achieve. It bears no signs of real conviction on part of its authors as regards its real ability. It represents vain attempt to adapt theoretically conception of international regime for Jerusalem based on principle of separate sovereignty in administration to realities of situation. In process its authors were driven to fly in face of those realities. By every test of justice and realism instrument is anachronistic and incongruous.

It is idle to disregard fact that Jewish Jerusalem is today for all practical purposes and in every political military administrative economic social and cultural sense an integral part of Israel. But for that organic connection and complete identification it would not have survived, nor would it have been able to maintain itself. While problem of Jerusalem formed subject of theoretical discussion on international scene before number of successive bodies Jerusalem itself went through death agonies, defended itself successfully against its attackers and rebuilt its life. It could achieve this only as part of state of Israel, and with its help find it is impossible to break this connection without again jeopardising its existence.

Tacit assumption of instrument that crucial problems of state sovereignty and rights of inhabitants to national allegiance and full-fledged citizenship can simply be bypassed renders the whole scheme illusory.

Equally unreal is express assertion that affairs of Jerusalem can today be effectively administered by mixed Jewish Arab council of equal composition. All such theoretical experiments in constitution making at expense of Jerusalem’s vital interests are matter of past.

Idea that population of Jerusalem can be deliberately and artificially frozen either in total size or in racial composition is utterly fantastic. Provision contained in instrument with regard to immigration is not merely a denial of right of every Jew to go up and live in ancient mother city of his people; nor does it merely constitute a grave menace to Jerusalem’s economic future; it is simply unenforceable in practice if Jerusalem is to be treated as living body and not as metaphysical abstraction. In providing for complete demilitarization of Jerusalem, to be applied in future to Jewish and Arab parts of the city, authors of instrument have completely disregarded another cardinal fact—that Jewish Jerusalem is today surrounded on three sides by [Arab?] territory. Formal equality of demilitarization becomes sham when gross inequality is inherent in realities of security situation. Such inequality can only be remembered by ever present capacity for effective defence. Tragic experience is there to be learned from, not to be brushed aside with sublime light-mindedness as irrelevancy.

Instrument itself is further convincing proof that application of principle of international responsibility to regime of Jerusalem cannot and need not go beyond supervision of holy places unless, indeed, principles of international administration were confined to the Old City with its shrines and religious foundations. Growing number of Christian countries and even some churches appear to be ready to accept this conclusion. In any case, insistence of international regime affecting sovereignty and administration by no means represents united will of Christian world. In forthcoming assembly delegation of Israel will do its utmost to show injustice and impracticability of proposed plan, and to prove to satisfaction of unfeasibility of solution which would fully safeguard rights and interests of all faiths and religious institutions without encroaching upon freedom of Jewish Jerusalem and its indissoluble connection with its area Israel.”1

Burdett

1 Tel Aviv reported, on September 20, that “Strong opposition to PCC Jerusalem plan continues come from all sides, with menacing tones now being heard from such extreme elements as Herut (successors to IZL) and Communists.” A Herut rally at Tel Aviv on September 16 “pledged that Jewish youth would resume fighting underground in Jerusalem if government did not take lead in resisting plot against Jerusalem.” Chargé Ford concluded that “public opinion being whipped up to burning and possibly fighting point on question Jerusalem’s future.” (telegram 699, 501.BB Palestine/9–2049)

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in France 501.BB Palestine/9–1749: Telegram

[Document 968]

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in France

confidential Washington, September 17, 1949—6 p. m.

3489. USDel, PCC, reports that on Sept 12 PCC delivered notes containing observations and suggestions re Arab and Israeli replies to PCC questionnaire handed to Arab and Israeli dels on Aug 15. PCC informed dels territorial proposals exceeded limits what might be considered adjustments to May 12 protocol and annexed map. PCC requested dels and their govts to reexamine question and hoped that when PCC reconvened it wld find new proposals which cld be practical working basis.

USDel, PCC, reports that members PCC informed dels they requesting their govts make representations to Israel and Arab states concerned in order emphasize importance attached to submission by these states of more flexible and reasonable proposals on territory when PCC reconvenes about mid-Oct. Dept believes such approaches wld be desirable and that French, Turks and US shld coordinate efforts. However, as emphasis has been shifted for time being to ESM and as ESM shld be permitted proceed unencumbered by injection political questions, Dept feels that it wld be preferable to postpone suggested approaches for moment. Pls discuss foregoing with FonOff, and indicate Dept will consult further with Turk and French govts re approaches at later date.1

Acheson

1 This telegram was repeated to Ankara for similar action. Ambassador Bruce, on September 19, advised that the French Foreign Office agreed with the content of telegram 3489 and that it would “refrain from approaches and meanwhile concentrate on efforts to promote better understanding and better acceptance of ESM.” (telegram 3867 from Paris, 501.BB Palestine(E)/9–1949)The Turkish Foreign Office, on September 16, instructed its Missions to make the representations on territorial proposals requested by the Palestine Conciliation Commission (telegram 394, September 21, 5 p. m., from Ankara). Ankara, on September 22, advised that the Foreign Office had countermanded these instructions (telegram 396). The two telegrams from Ankara are filed under 501.BB Palestine/9–2149 and /9–2249, respectively.

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in Israel 501.BB Palestine/9–1949: Telegram

[Document 969]

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in Israel

secret Washington, September 19, 1949—1 p. m.

605. Dept concerned re reaction Israeli Govt to PCC proposals for permanent internatl regime in Jerusalem. Israelis have apparently rejected plan without even giving it thorough consideration which we believe it deserves. Discuss matter with FonOff and point out PCC has made diligent efforts reconcile position both parties and its conclusions have not been reached as result arbitrary decision. On contrary, they have been prepared only after careful thought and study of situation and represent PCC’s considered views as to practical approach to internationalization of Jerusalem. We hope Israeli Govt will give proposals most serious consideration and whatever objections they may have to plan will be presented to GA in conciliatory spirit which will assist GA in putting into effect desires of world community re Jerusalem.1

Acheson

1 This telegram was repeated to Paris, London, Ankara, Amman, Jerusalem, and New York. Chargé Ford discussed the subject matter of the message with Mr. Shiloah on September 23. The following day, he advised the Department that the Israeli spokesman left “no doubt either about his own disagreement with PCC plan or about his government’s determination to oppose it.” (telegram 710 from Tel Aviv, 501.BB Palestine/9–2449)

The Minister in Lebanon (Pinkerton) to the Secretary of State 501.BB Palestine(E)/9–1949: Telegram

[Document 970]

The Minister in Lebanon (Pinkerton) to the Secretary of State

secret Beirut, September 19, 1949—5 p. m.

481. Simes 1. For McGhee from Clapp.

1. Although fully cognizant of problems we face, I am not discouraged by initial reception we have encountered (Legtel 480 19th).1

2. I conferred at length Saturday, 17th, with Keeley. On basis his recommendation, I will not make immediate approach to Syria, but plan instead to go to Egypt first, perhaps end this week. Visit will be largely pro forma. Syria visit tentatively scheduled for next week.

3. I am convinced that early discussions Arab states should be along lines work projects instead relief, with less talk of resettlement during first stages. In early talks at Tel Aviv, I intend to begin exploratory talks on compensation as well as repatriation.

4. [Here follows one sentence on the arrival of three members of Mr. Clapp’s staff.]

[Clapp]
Pinkerton

1 Not printed, but see footnote 3, p. 1390 [Pg. 1390 includes portions of Doc. 966 and Doc. 967].

Editorial Note [Document 971]

Editorial Note

Secretary of State Acheson addressed the General Assembly on various subjects on September 21. Concerning the Palestine problem, he said that “it was a source of considerable satisfaction that the period of active hostilities in that country had been brought to a close by the conclusion of armistice agreements between Israel and the several Arab States. The efforts of the Acting Mediator and his staff in that connexion were worthy of high praise.

“Since the beginning of 1949 the United Nations Conciliation Commission for Palestine had been carrying on its work. While no agreed settlement between the parties had so far been reached, there was nevertheless hope that progress would be made in moving beyond the armistice stage to a real and permanent peace.

“Eventual agreement between the parties was essential for the political and economic stability of the area. Later during the session the Conciliation Commission would present a report, including the recommendations of the Economic Survey Mission which was in the Near East. On the basis of that report, the General Assembly should be able to provide such machinery as might be necessary further to facilitate and encourage agreement among the parties. The United States stood ready to give its full support and assistance to that effort.

“The plight of the Palestinian refugees presented to the world a pressing humanitarian problem. It was of the highest importance that the States immediately concerned should recognize and accept their governmental responsibilities with respect to the problem. As an interim measure, the General Assembly should make the necessary provision for the maintenance of those refugees until the time when they could again become self-sustaining members of the Near Eastern communities.

“It was the hope of the peoples of all faiths that the General Assembly would be able to act successfully upon the report of the Conciliation Commission in respect to Jerusalem. In the view of the United States Government, it should adopt a practical plan for a permanent international regime in the Jerusalem area and for the protection of, and free access to, the Holy Places.” (United Nations, Official Records of the General Assembly, Fourth Session, Plenary Meetings, Summary Records of Meetings, 20 September–10 December 1949, page 6)

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom 501.BB Palestine(E)/9–2149: Telegram

[Document 972]

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom

secret Washington, September 21, 1949—3 p. m.

3428. For your background info, Dept has for some time been disturbed by inadequate support given by Brit to ESM since its activation. For example (1) Brit failed to inform their missions to support ESM and explain its objectives to NE govts until US representations made to UK; (2) Morton, discussing ESM with USDel Lausanne, stated HMG seriously disturbed by turn of events re ESM and said he understood agreement previously reached that ESM wld consist govt reps empowered to suggest and conclude with NE states polit agreements for solution Pal problems based on repatriation resettlement projects; (3) Brit Chargé Amman informed US Chargé his scepticism re success ESM and regret over Brit involvement in ESM; (4) Bevin in Sep 13 conversation with Sec displayed negative attitude in general re Pal and said he had no faith in ESM or “any other commission”; (5) tel from Ted Aviv no. 124 to London Sep 20.1

UK attitude this question difficult to understand since Dept had understood all previous differences with UK re composition structure ESM fully reconciled (refer particularly to Deptel 2617, July 26,2 urtel 2978,3 July 28; Deptel 2770, Aug 4;4 urtel 3093, Aug 55 ). Dept hopes question inadequate support of ESM has now been satisfactorily resolved, (urtel 3711 Sep 156 ).

Although Brit now appear to be acting more energetically, you shld seek whenever appropriate and on continuing basis to emphasize importance which USG attaches to UK participation on ESM, UK support in field, and eventual UK contribution to implementation its recommendations. You shld inquire of FonOff re specific reaction each NE state to recent representations on ESM, explaining Dept’s desire for full info in order assure continuing coordination of action this regard, and to insure concerted effort by US, UK, Fr, Turk missions in NE to support and elucidate ESM’s purposes.

Pls report fully any evidence UK still reluctant extend support.

Acheson

1 This was a repeat of No. 700 to the Department; it stated that “In talk with British Chargé September 19 re ESM, he stated only specific instructions yet received from his government indicated some unwillingness ‘be too precipitate’ in lending support ESM in Israel because of opposition which had developed certain Arab states notably Iraq. Thus he said while he was authorized ‘in principle’ to coordinate his approach to Israel Government with those of US and French, he must necessarily ‘go slow’ until results of current negotiations with recalcitrant Arab Governments became known and position ESM vis-à-vis such governments had been clarified.” (501.BB Palestine(E)/9–2049)

2 Not printed, but see footnote 1, p. 1258 [Pg. 1258 is part of Doc. 862].

3 Not printed.

4 Not printed, but see footnote 2, p. 1258 [Pg. 1258 is part of Doc. 862].

5 No. 3093 not printed; it gave the observation of a Foreign Office spokesman that except for the personnel question, there seemed to be general agreement with the United States on the establishment of the survey mission (501.BB Palestine/8–549).

6 Not printed, it reported that the Foreign Office had sent telegrams late in the evening of September 14 to British missions at Arab capitals and Tel Aviv, requesting them to give diplomatic support to the Economic Survey Mission (501.BB Palestine (E)/9–1549).

Memorandum by the Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern and African Affairs (McGhee) to the Deputy Under Secretary of State (Rusk) 501.BB Palestine/9–2249

[Document 973]

Memorandum by the Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern and African Affairs (McGhee) to the Deputy Under Secretary of State (Rusk)

secret [Washington,] September 22, 1949.

Subject: Israeli reaction to PCC Jerusalem proposals

Since the proposals of the PCC were released to the press last week, an intensive and violent press and publicity campaign has been started in Israel condemning the proposals (Tab A).1 Moreover, the Foreign Minister and other government officials have made public statements against the proposals2 (Tab B). One particularly disquieting feature has been the threats of the Heruth (Freedom Party) to resume their terrorist activities if Jerusalem is internationalized. According to a recent press report, a former leader of the Irgun said in Tel Aviv on September 20 that “if the UN introduces conditions of foreign rule in the Israeli capital, then establishment of the underground would be inevitable” (Tab C).

There is also evidence that the Israelis are carrying on their campaign in this country.

According to a recent telegram from the Consulate General in Jerusalem, a New York Herald correspondent and a London Times correspondent stated that the Israeli Government is conducting the most intensive press and publicity campaign these correspondents have yet witnessed in their experience in Israel, in an effort to defeat the proposals (Tab D).

Although we have sent telegraphic instructions to the Embassy in Tel Aviv3 to discuss the matter with the Foreign Office and express the hope that the Israeli Government would give the proposals the most serious consideration, presenting their objections to the GA in a conciliatory spirit (Tab E), I feel that it would be desirable if you would call in Ambassador Elath and inform him of the Department’s views on the PCC proposals and of its deep concern regarding the attitude and line of action which the Israeli Government has apparently adopted. It may well be that if the Israeli Government persists in this attitude, the resultant situation will have a most unfortunate effect in connection with efforts to arrive at some peaceful solution of the Palestine problem.

Recommendations: 1. It is recommended that you call in Ambassador Elath and make the following points: (a) The Department is deeply concerned regarding the reaction of the Israeli Government to the PCC proposals and notes that Israel has apparently rejected the plan without giving it the thorough consideration which we believe it deserves.

(b) The PCC has made diligent efforts to reconcile the position of both parties and its conclusions have not been reached as the result of any arbitrary determination. On the contrary, they have been prepared only after careful thought and study of the situation and represent the PCC’s considered views.

(c) We believe that these proposals represent a fair and practical approach to the establishment of a permanent international regime in the Jerusalem area, and hope that whatever amendments Israel may have to the plan will be presented to the GA in a conciliatory spirit. We believe that Israel should approach this question on the basis of a desire to assist the GA in putting into effect the desires of the world community regarding Jerusalem—not on the basis of a desire to frustrate the plan.

(d) We believe that the continuation of what appears to be a press campaign in Palestine to defeat the proposals may have the most unfortunate effects in connection with efforts to find a peaceful solution to the Palestine problem. The threats regarding the resumption of terrorist activities are also most disquieting.

(e) It is possible that if present developments regarding the proposals continue, hostilities in the Jerusalem area might break out and might even spread to the rest of Palestine.

(f) It is recalled that Count Bernadotte’s assassination last September followed closely on a press campaign against his activities. At the present time there are numerous American, French, Belgian, and Turkish officials connected with the UN in Jewish Jerusalem whose lives may well be placed in jeopardy. The Ambassador is no doubt aware of the reaction which would be caused throughout the world if any of these people should become victims of the passions which are presently being aroused.

2. It is recommended that you approve the attached telegram5 to Tel Aviv informing our Embassy that we are calling in the Israeli Ambassador on this matter (Tab F).

[Here follow concurrences and a list of attachments.]

4 Ambassador Elath was called in on September 28; for the memorandum covering his discussion with Department officers on that date, see p. 1409 [Pg. 1409 includes portions of Doc. 980 and Doc. 981].

1 No tabbed materials in this memorandum found attached.

2 For the Foreign Minister’s statement, see telegram 573, September 16, from Jerusalem, p. 1390 [Pg. 1390 includes portions of Doc. 966 and Doc. 967].

3 See telegram 605, September 19, p. 1393 [Pg. 1393 includes portions of Doc. 969 and Doc. 970].

5 For a summary of the draft telegram as actually sent, see footnote 2, p. 1412 [Pg. 1412 is part of Doc. 981].

The Consul at Jerusalem (Burdett) to the Secretary of State 501.BB Palestine/9–2249: Telegram

[Document 974]

The Consul at Jerusalem (Burdett) to the Secretary of State

confidential Jerusalem, September 22, 1949—noon.

587. Message contained Deptel 3791 delivered to Riley last night.

He is considerably “perturbed” over Israel attitude and endeavoring to fathom motives. Feels Israel may be attempting to eliminate gradually UN participation in MAC’s in belief can obtain greater advantages without restraining influence of UN. Israel particularly annoyed at chairman’s developing into arbiter and at large adverse majority votes.

Developments follow: Egyptian MAC—Riley in receipt of another letter from Eytan stating Israel distressed to learn of Egypt’s refusal to accept “compromise” relocation of line (Contel 575, seventeenth)2 and expressing belief this due to Egypt’s effort to obtain military and political advantage from armistice. Eytan reasserted own position on line and stated Israel would use every legal means at its disposal to obtain acceptance. Claimed any effort to force different interpretation by action of MAC would be tantamount to alteration of armistice agreement and thus beyond competence of MAC (this statement opens way to declaring any decision by MAC interpreting armistice as alteration of terms and thus outside its jurisdiction). Riley called on Sharett to discuss question and latter reiterated Israel arguments stressing that armistice stood by itself and any other agreement at Rhodes could not be used in interpreting it. Riley differed strongly and suggested Israel accept MAC views on location of line; if Egypt later raised question of military post could argue troops were based on settlement (troops based on settlements permitted in defensive zone but armistice does not specify whether new settlements may be founded in defensive zone). Sharett agreed reconsider matter and answer today.

Jordan MAC—Special committee investigating also alteration of line to permit inclusion of Wadi Fukin within Arab zone. In exchange Israel now requesting area including other Arab villages. Question of Govt House again arisen. Previous efforts agree on line dividing area between Israel and Jordan not successful.

Jordan has presented complaint to MAC that Israel constructing blockhouses within former neutral zone which not yet divided. Israel claims are houses. Riley and UN officers consider edifices are constructed for use as military installations and give command of Jericho road. This is violation of article 2, paragraph 1 of armistice. Chairman raised matter informally with Biran, Israel deputy member MAC, who stated that if MAC by majority vote ordered investigation people and army would “become very excited” and shooting might occur. Riley feels best approach is to seek again agreement between Jordan and Israel on division of area and concurrently obtain Israel consent to demolish blockhouses. Hopes Israel will agree if area divided. He also considers demarcation line proposed during last negotiations as equitable.

Department may wish consider desirability pointing out to Jordan Government advantages of reaching agreement on Government House division thus perhaps eliminating this troublesome question.

Syrian MAC—during visit to Damascus, Riley persuaded Colonel Hinnawi to agree that chairman should determine what constitutes return to normal civilian life in demilitarized zones. Chairman thus can permit construction of houses Ein Gev area. Israel has taken no action on letter from MAC chairman calling for destruction of fortifications at Ein Gev.

Sent Department 587; repeated Tel Aviv 60, Beirut 114, Damascus 73; Department pass Amman 113, Cairo 30.

Burdett

1 Dated September 19, not printed; it expressed the Department’s serious concern about the situation developing in the Jordan, Syrian and Egyptian Mixed Armistice Commissions and its disquiet about various incidents and the “Israeli attitude in general.” It also instructed Jerusalem to inform General Riley of the Department’s concern and to keep the Department fully informed of developments (867N.01/9–1349). No. 379 was repeated to Amman, Damascus, Beirut, Cairo, and New York.

2 Not printed.

Memorandum by the Assistant Chief of the Division of International Organization Affairs (Halderman) 501.BB Palestine/9–2349

[Document 975]

Memorandum by the Assistant Chief of the Division of International Organization Affairs (Halderman)1

confidential [Washington,] September 23, 1949.

Palestine Political and Refugee Problems

problem

The problem is to determine the position of the United States as to action to be taken by the General Assembly with respect to the problems of achieving a political settlement of the Palestine case and the problems of direct relief, repatriation and resettlement of the Palestine refugees. The problem includes the main aspects of the Palestine case except Jerusalem and the Holy Places (see separate papers).

recommendations

1. Due to the interrelationship of the problems under consideration (discussion below), it is desirable that the General Assembly should establish an integrated organization for the future conduct of the Palestine case.

2. A United Nations Palestine Commission should handle the general supervisory and policy making functions. The present terms of reference of the Conciliation Commission might be used with suitable amendments to include the additional authority and responsibilities to be conferred upon it and to define the relationship between it and the other component parts of the integrated organization. The Commission’s operational director in the conduct of operations should be the Agent General referred to in the following recommendation. As regards the composition of the Commission the present states represented on the Conciliation Commission (United States, France and Turkey) might be continued. The Commission’s responsibilities in respect to Jerusalem, if any, will depend upon the action of the General Assembly on that problem.

3. The executive director for the operations of the Organization should be a single individual, designated as Agent General (or some other appropriate title) who would be given broad responsibilities for the direction of (1) the negotiation of a political settlement including boundaries and refugees, (2) the administration of direct relief, (3) programs for development projects bearing relation to the economic dislocations created by the hostilities, including the resettlement and repatriation of refugees, and (4) possible duties in connection with Jersualem. The Agent General would report to and be subject to instruction by the Commission on general policy questions.

4. In respect to the political settlement, the General Assembly would grant authority to the Commission to continue to assist in the negotiations between the parties on all phases. This program would be conducted primarily through the instrumentality of the Agent General.

5. In respect to direct relief the General Assembly should make provision for the machinery necessary for its administration and provide a plan for contributions from United Nations Members (similar to UNRPR). The Agent General should have a general supervisory function in respect of direct relief.

6. In respect to the development projects the General Assembly should take note of the intention of certain governments to provide funds for settlement and development, the projects to be coordinated by an “Authority”, probably consisting of the grantor states. The United States Government contemplates approaching the United Kingdom and France in this context.

7. In the fields of direct relief and development the details of what should be provided by the General Assembly concerning the structure of the component parts of the Organization and the relationship between them, cannot be precisely determined until receipt of the recommendation of the Economic Survey Mission.

8. Under the plan, therefore, there would be four components of the organization for which the Agent General would provide unified direction and coordination. United Nations funds as such would not be used except for the administrative expenses of the Commission, the Agent General and his staff. Funds for direct relief would probably come from the special contributions of United Nations Members. Funds for the development projects would probably come from those states participating in the program, from bank loans, and perhaps other sources including compensation paid for refugee property losses.

discussion

Inter-Dependence of Political and Refugee Aspects of Palestine Problem

The solution of the three problems outstanding in the Palestine case are in effect one problem with progress toward the solution of each to a large degree interdependent. A political settlement is unlikely unless arrangements are in train with respect to the resettlement and repatriation of refugees. Commitments for the resettlement of refugees are in turn dependent upon outside capital assistance for national development projects as well as upon progress toward a political settlement. Contributions toward emergency relief depend upon progress on a program for the resettlement and repatriation program so that an end to relief expenditures would be in sight.

Furthermore, the interdependence of the problems is such that in order to avoid a stalemate, a final solution of any of them must not be contingent upon action on another. On the other hand a program looking toward the solution of each is prerequisite to a program looking toward the solution of the others.

Necessity of Integrated Organization

On the basis of the foregoing assumptions, it is necessary to establish an integrated authority to provide unified direction and control of the programs looking toward the solution of each aspect of the problem. The Conciliation Commission has had broad functions relating to each phase, except relief, but it was not conceived, nor has it functioned as an operating agency. The General Assembly should therefore establish the machinery for the direction required to develop and operate an interrelated program.

component parts of the organization

A. The United Nations Palestine Commission

The United Nations Palestine Commission would probably consist of three states, i.e., the present members of the Conciliation Commission. It would conduct the general supervisory and policy function of the United Nations. It should not be in continuous session but could arrange to meet as necessary either in New York or elsewhere. The Agent General would stand in the position of its Executive in the field for the conduct of negotiations and the conduct of its supervisory functions over the other component parts of the organization.

The principal advantage of a Commission is that it would lend substantial support to the Agent General who will be subject to strong pressures from opposing parties. Government members of the Commission are in a good position to apply pressure directly on the states involved in the dispute. Such pressures might be decisively effective in support of the Agent General.

B. Conciliation

For the exercise of the functions under this heading, a relatively small staff would be required primarily responsible to the Agent General. The cost of this function would be carried in the regular United Nations budget.

C. Direct Relief

The United Nations, in establishing the UNRPR, undertook responsibility for providing direct relief for the refugees until August 31, 1949. Direct relief on a large scale will need to be continued until permanent resettlement and repatriation of the refugees or acceptance by the governments involved of full responsibility for them. A further appeal to governments for funds would not be productive unless projected against the background of a program looking toward the definitive solution of the refugee problem. In as much as the source of funds for relief should have as wide a base as possible, and since the appeal of all governments will need to be on a humanitarian basis, it is therefore proposed that the responsibility for the present functions of UNRPR be a part of the overall organization.

Contributions for this program would be on a voluntary basis.

D. Settlement and Development Authority

The Economic Survey Mission is charged with making recommendations in this context. The development of a suitable agency or authority for coordinating the participation of states (primarily the US, UK and France) in the projects for the resettlement of refugees within the framework of the proposed organization will require substantial preparatory work and negotiation because of the large funds required and because of the complex problem involved in assuring that the projects achieve the desired objectives.

The scope of the work of the “Authority” will require careful definition, particularly in respect to such matters as whether work relief, costs of the movement of refugees to their new countries, and other expenses incident to repatriation and resettlement should be borne by the states participating in this program or treated as expenses of direct relief. A second problem is the relationship between the Agent General and the Authority for purposes of coordination.

Consultations with the British and French are necessary to consider in some detail the problems involved in setting up such an authority and to reach agreement thereon including preliminary agreement on contributions. Such consultations will take place during the course of the Economic Mission, and final decisions cannot be made until at least preliminary results of this work are known.

E. Compensation

The problem of compensation is a distinct field which is nevertheless closely inter-related with the political and refugee aspects of the Palestine problem. In as much as the problem is one to be worked out by negotiation, the Agent General might be given authority to take steps to bring about the determination and fulfillment of obligations in respect of the payment of compensation for loss or damage to property owned by refugees, and to take appropriate measures to effectuate the equitable disposition of the proceeds of any such payments.

1 Transmitted to Mr. Rusk by Messrs. McGhee and Sandifer in a memorandum of September 23, which stated that if Mr. Rusk approved the plan, “we propose that it be discussed with the British and French as soon as possible, both within the Clapp Mission and in Washington.“We also propose to furnish the paper to the General Assembly Delegation with the notation that it should not be discussed with other delegations pending consultation with the French and British.” (501.BB Palestine/9–2349)

Memorandum by the Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern and African Affairs (McGhee) to the Deputy Under Secretary of State (Rusk) 501.BB Palestine/9–2649

[Document 976]

Memorandum by the Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern and African Affairs (McGhee) to the Deputy Under Secretary of State (Rusk)1

[Washington,] September 26, 1949.

Subject: Long Term Organization to Continue Work of Economic Survey Mission

Problem:

The terms of reference of ESM 2 include the preparation of a long term organizational plan to operate in the field of relief and resettlement of the refugees from hostilities in Palestine. At Mr. Clapp’s suggestion the outline of such a plan is to be prepared by the Department for ESM consideration. A draft to be submitted to Clapp is attached (Tab A).3

Discussion:

The enclosure outlines an organization (Near East Settlement and Development Authority) to function with the Palestine Commission (see separate paper on that subject)4 on the assumption that the US, UK and France agree to establish it. Other members of the UN may be admitted to NESDA. NESDA’s role would be advisory and coordinative; it would have a staff to continue the work of ESM, and it would be consulted by its member governments before assistance was furnished to states concerned. Funds to operate its programs would come from bank loans, compensation, grants from abroad, and other sources. It would have no veto over projects of its members, but its authority would stem from its knowledge of the area and undertakings to consult it before funds were made available for development.

NESDA’s work would be coordinated with relief operations of UNRPR or its successor through the Agent General.

NESDA would call on the UN and specialized agencies for administrative and technical staff.

It is proposed to discuss the establishment of NESDA with the UK and France through the ESM deputies and simultaneously in Washington with the Embassies, in order that timely action may be taken as necessary by this session of the GA.

Recommendation:

Authorization to proceed with these discussions along the lines of the attached paper is recommended.

[Here follow concurrences.]

1 Sent also by Mr. Sandifer.

2 Dated September 1, p. 1346 [Pg. 1346 includes portions of Doc. 933 and Doc. 934].

3 Not printed.

4 The editors are unable to identify this paper; possibly the draft to be submitted to Mr. Clapp is intended.

The Acting Secretary of State to the Embassy in Egypt 883.801/9–2149: Telegram

[Document 977]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Embassy in Egypt 1

secret Washington, September 26, 1949—12 noon.

954. [In] Connection with representations Brit making [to] Egypts re passage Suez Canal by Haifa-bound tankers and at suggestion of Brit Chargé, Brit Emb approached Dept under instrus FonOff with request Emb Cairo be authorized lend support in form general approach Egypt Govt urging lifting restrictions on passage thru Canal in respect all shipping. (Ref London’s Tel 3783, Sept 212 rptd Cairo as 955.) Neth Belg Nor Swed Turk and Ital being similarly approached by Brit with request their reps consult Brit Chargé in order determine if such action in fact desirable and if so time and manner of approach.

You authorized take such action. If approach made you shld base your arguments on (1) previous US approaches re freedom of shipping thru Canal (Deptel 759 June 9 19483 ) (2) fact armistice agreements have been concluded between Israel and Arab states (3) removal of UN and US arms embargo (Depcirtel Aug 16 4 a. m. and Depcirtel Sept. 7 6 a. m.4 ).

This approach is not of course connected with present activities Econ Survey Mis and shld there be evidence Egypt misinterpretation you shld informally clarify.

Since drafting foregoing Brit report Chapman-Andrews5 saw PriMin Sept 22 and outcome talk unsatisfactory. He will doubtless inform you re conversation as factor in determining desirability supporting action by US and other powers.

Dept also discussed with Brit Emb rep manner which supporting action might take and suggests you consider in detail with Chapman-Andrews. Brit Emb rep agreed with Dept solemn parade fon reps in Cairo to Egypt FonOff wld certainly become known privately and publicly in Egypt. Resulting publicity might subsequently prevent favorable Egypt action. Manner supporting action shld therefore be carefully arranged and might, in final analysis, determine whether supporting action wld be advisable at this stage.

Webb

1 This telegram was repeated to London.

2 Not printed.

3  Foreign Relations, 1948, vol. v, Part 2, p. 1108.

4 Neither printed.

5 Edwin A. Chapman-Andrews, British Minister in Egypt.

Memorandum by the Assistant Chief of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs (Wilkins) to the Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern and African Affairs (McGhee) 867N.00/9–2649

[Document 978]

Memorandum by the Assistant Chief of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs (Wilkins) to the Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern and African Affairs (McGhee)

restricted [Washington,] September 26, 1949.

Subject: Mt. Scopus situation

We have considered Dr. Senator’s request that the US Government make representations to Jordan regarding free access to Mt. Scopus1 but we believe that we should not take any action on this matter.

During the negotiations at Rhodes between the Israelis and Jordan, the Israelis insisted that Jordan accept certain conditions before they agreed to sign even a “cease fire.” Included in these conditions was free access to Mt. Scopus. Due to the fact that the Jordan Government wished to proceed to the armistice stage, it accepted free access to Mt. Scopus in principle.

Article VIII of the armistice agreement provided that a Special Committee would be organized to “direct its attention to the formulation of agreed plans and arrangements for such matters as either party may submit to it, which, in any case, shall include the following on which agreement in principle already exists: free movement of traffic on vital roads, including the Bethlehem and Latrun-Jerusalem roads; resumption of the normal functioning of the cultural and humanitarian institutions on Mt. Scopus and free access thereto; free access to the Holy Places and cultural institutions and use of the cemetery on the Mount of Olives; resumption of operation of the Latrun pumping station; provision of electricity for the Old City; and resumption of operation of the railroad to Jerusalem.”

To date the only matter that has been successfully handled by the Special Committee has been the resumption of the operation of the railroad. On all other matters the Special Committee was unable to formulate any agreed plans. The Jordan delegates, while maintaining that they still agreed in principle to free access to Mt. Scopus, were unable to reach any satisfactory agreement with the Israelis on how free access could be worked out. Mt. Scopus is a very strategic location overlooking the Old City and most of the main arteries leading to Arab Jerusalem from Jordan-controlled territory. Consequently, the Jordanians did not wish to give the Israelis complete freedom of passage without any form of control. Moreover, Jordan has also raised the question of the return of certain Arab quarters in Jerusalem which, it is assumed, were presented to the Special Committee under the phrase “such matters as either party may submit to it.”

The use of the Bethlehem road and the restoring of the electricity to the Old City are not very important to Jordan, as they have been getting along quite well without electricity and have built a secondary road to Bethlehem through Arab territory. What is important to them is the return of certain Arab quarters now held by the Israelis. Jordan is determined to make use of the Mt. Scopus situation as a bargaining point for their demands. There is nothing in Article VIII which requires Jordan to accept any “plans and arrangements” for free access to Mt. Scopus unless they agree to them. So far, Jordan has not agreed.

Because of this impasse the Department proposed to Jordan and Israel that both accept to refer matters on Article VIII, as well as the border questions involved in Jerusalem including demarcation lines, to the Mixed Armistice Commission under the chairmanship of General Riley. It was felt that Riley would be able to help the parties in “the formulation of agreed plans and arrangements” and might be able to produce compromise suggestions. Jordan accepted the proposal on the basis that it favored the return of normal life to Jerusalem. Israel accepted the proposal in principle but objected to the MAC dealing with the broader question of Jerusalem. In other words, Israel wished the MAC to consider only those points specifically mentioned in Article VIII of the armistice agreement.

Although we have pointed out to Israel on numerous occasions that acceptance of our proposal might enable the parties to settle their differences on the general subject of Jerusalem, without prejudicing the interest of the world community in the city, Israel has refused to go along with the proposal.

It is believed that it would be unwise for the Department to take any action on Dr. Senator’s request and that the question should be left to the UN and General Riley to handle as they think best.2

1 The request of David W. Senator, Vice President of the Hebrew University at Jerusalem, was made in a conversation with Messrs. McGhee, Wilkins, and Stabler earlier the same day (memorandum of conversation by Mr. McGhee, 867N.4212/9–2649).

2 The Department summarized this memorandum in telegram 636, September 30 6 p. m., to Tel Aviv and instructed Ambassador McDonald as follows: “In your talks with Israeli officials re PCC Jerusalem proposals, you might find it useful to point out above situation is one more reason why necessary for Israel to adopt constructive and reasonable approach to Jerusalem question. PCC plan wld seem to offer basis on which Israeli approach might now be based.” (867N.01/9–3049)

Memorandum by the Assistant Chief of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs (Wilkins) to the Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern and African Affairs (McGhee) 501.BB Palestine(E)/9–2749

[Document 979]

Memorandum by the Assistant Chief of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs (Wilkins) to the Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern and African Affairs (McGhee)1

secret [Washington,] September 27, 1949.

Subject: Emphasis on Work Belief by Economic Survey Mission.

Discussion:

There are attached two telegrams2 concerning the Economic Survey Mission’s intention of placing primary emphasis initially upon work relief projects “not necessarily implying permanent resettlement”, hi preparing its interim report. The telegrams clearly suggest that the question of permanent settlement projects would be deferred until the final report of the Mission, which will probably not be submitted until January 1, after the closing of the General Assembly.

Although the political considerations which motivated this tactical shift are understandable, the question of the time factor involved in the proposed schedule must be taken into account. If the preliminary report of the Mission is drafted solely or chiefly within the context of work relief projects, action in the General Assembly would presumably have to be confined to voting a large-scale relief and work relief program. Assuming that such a resolution could obtain the necessary votes in the Assembly, such a program would necessitate a greatly increased expenditure over a straight relief program, without materially advancing liquidation of the refugee problem, and would tend to further prolong the present political stalemate with respect to the refusal of both sides to get on with settlement of the refugee problem. Finally, the proposed emphasis would preclude action at the General Assembly to establish an Authority, which must be based principally on permanent settlement and development projects.

In view of the importance of the preliminary report of the Economic Survey Mission as a springboard for the establishment of the Authority, together with the advantage of obtaining concrete progress on permanent settlement projects where political conditions are favorable to their early initiation, notably in Jordan, it is believed that Mr. Clapp’s preliminary report should be drafted as a total program of relief, work relief, settlement and development projects, and that his final report should constitute a more detailed elaboration of these several aspects.

Recommendations:

It is recommended that these considerations be brought to Mr. Clapp’s attention in the very near future, perhaps in connection with transmittal of the working paper concerning the Authority, and that he be urged to draft his report in a manner calculated to give us a basis on which to obtain financing of long range projects as well as work relief.3

1 Sent also to Mr. Gardiner.

2 Not found attached.

3 Attached is an undated note to Mr. Wilkins from Mrs. Hope, stating that “This is the memo with which we tried to shift Clapp’s, approach.” The Department, on September 30, informed Beirut that the ESM intention to place its main emphasis on work relief in the early stages was causing concern, “lest ESM not include full consideration in interim report of operational plan … together with general approximation costs [and] methods financing.“Action by UNGA to establish organization under which resettlement and development can move forward is essential, and to assure consideration this session UNGA to permit operations to begin in 1950, interim report shld contain adequate documentation supporting organizational plans.” (telegram 574, 501.BB Palestine(E)/9–3049)

The Acting Secretary of State to Certain Diplomatic and Consular Offices 501.BB Palestine(E)/9–2749: Circular telegram

[Document 980]

The Acting Secretary of State to Certain Diplomatic and Consular Offices 1

confidential Washington, September 27, 1949—6 a. m.

Since majority NE govts now appear willing receive ESM, in future conversations with govt officials, you shld proceed on assumption govt will cooperate with ESM. Dept hopes as govts and peoples NE become accustomed presence and operations ESM, and as validity its purposes demonstrated, local criticism will abate and increasing measure genuine cooperation extended.

Continue report fully re local reaction ESM, including any significant evidence non-cooperation.

Webb

1 At Cairo, Tel Aviv, Baghdad, Damascus, Beirut, Amman, and Jerusalem. According to an undated memorandum by Mary E. Hope to Mr. Hare attached to this telegram, the message was not sent to Jidda because the Saudi Arabian Government had informed the United Nations of its refusal to receive the Economic Survey Mission.

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Deputy Under Secretary of State (Rusk) 501.BB Palestine/9–2849

[Document 981]

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Deputy Under Secretary of State (Rusk)1

confidential [Washington,] September 28, 1949.

Subject: Israeli reaction to PCC Jerusalem proposals.

Participants: Eliahu Elath, Israeli Ambassador

G—Mr. Rusk

NE—Mr. Wilkins

NE—Mr. Stabler

Problem: To inform Ambassador Elath of our concern over the Israeli reaction to the PCC proposals for the Jerusalem area.

Action Required: To inform Mr. Boss of USUN of Rusk–Elath conversation and probability Eban would approach him to discuss Jerusalem question.

Action Assigned To: NE.

Discussion:

I informed Ambassador Elath that I had asked him to come in connection with the Israeli reaction to the PCC proposals. I recalled that the GA resolution of November 29, 1947, included, inter alia, provisions for the full internationalization of Jerusalem. Since it was not possible to implement this resolution, consideration was then given in the spring of 1948 to the possibility of trusteeship for all of Palestine in order to provide governmental machinery for Palestine following the termination of the British Mandate. When the fighting in Jerusalem became more severe, the UN focussed its attention on the Jerusalem question and considered ways and means of solving that question alone. A special trusteeship for the Jerusalem area was among the plans proposed and I had had the occasion at that time to discuss this matter with Mr. Sharett. I told him that a practical plan should be adopted for a permanent international regime for the Jerusalem area which would permit the integration of Jerusalem, in so far as consistent with its special international character, with the people and institutions in the rest of Palestine. I recalled that Mr. Sharett had not seemed averse to such a plan. I indicated that we believed that the present PCC proposals represent a practical approach of this character. We were therefore surprised and puzzled by the strength and immediacy of the Israeli reaction and I had wanted to discuss the question with the Ambassador in order to clear up any misunderstanding which might have developed on their part regarding the plan. For example, I wondered whether their objections were based on the difference between annexation and something less than annexation.

The Ambassador indicated that Israel had no intention of annexing Jerusalem and believed there was no foundation for such a charge. I said that perhaps I had not made my meaning clear, as I was not speaking of previous press reports that Israel planned immediately to annex Jerusalem but was now referring to a final settlement of the Jerusalem question.

The Ambassador repeated that Israel had no intention of annexing Jerusalem but felt that the present PCC plan did not take into account several important factors in connection with Israel’s interest in Jerusalem. He said that several points had annoyed them. He said the paragraph on immigration would prevent Israel from developing the economic life of Jerusalem and from increasing its growth as a cultural and religious center for the Jews. On the question of security, the demilitarization and the limitation on the number of police placed in jeopardy the security of the 100,000 Jews who are resident in Jerusalem. Israel felt that in view of the fact that Jewish Jerusalem is surrounded on three sides by Arabs that it could not afford to neglect the important question of security. Moreover, he doubted whether the UN could provide the administration necessary to carry out the plan. He wondered how the General Council as proposed in the PCC plan would be able to operate and where the funds would come from to provide the $30,000,000 which the UN estimates is necessary for the administration of Jerusalem.

I indicated that on the matter of security it would seem unfortunate to start a competition on the size of the police forces and the quantity of armaments. I expressed the belief that these matters could be discussed in the GA and could be worked out satisfactorily in the General Council. With respect to the administration of Jerusalem, I thought his figures out of proportion, and in any event it was quite clear that the two areas would be administered and financed by the administering states. The General Council would only be called upon to consider matters which were common to both areas.

I then pointed out that the Catholic and Protestant communities in the US felt quite strongly about the problem of Jerusalem. We had tried to keep the question out of public debate, as we wished the matter considered along practical lines. We did not wish to have injected into the discussion the sentimental and emotional approach which would make it very difficult to arrive at a solution. We had considered Jerusalem as one problem in Palestine which could be settled without too much difficulty, and we had therefore been quite disappointed by the Israeli reaction. We wondered from the immediate strong press comments and statements by officials in Israel whether the Israeli Government had carefully considered the plan. We also wondered whether Israel and the US were talking about the same thing with respect to the meaning of the various provisions. I said I felt that more careful consideration of the plan by Israel and possibly talks between our people and the Israeli delegation in New York might result in dissipating some of the doubts which Israel had on various sections of the proposal. The Ambassador agreed and said he hoped it would be possible for Mr. Ross and Mr. Eban to get together.

The Ambassador said he felt it was unfortunate that the Israelis had not been consulted on the proposals prior to their submission to the UN. He felt that the Israeli objective in Jerusalem, i.e., the preservation and protection of the 100,000 Jews in Jerusalem, could have been better taken into account. Mr. Wilkins pointed out that the Jerusalem committee of the PCC, as well as others on the PCC, had discussed the proposals in detail with Israeli officials both in Tel Aviv and Lausanne during the past 8 months.

The Ambassador asked whether we had received any reaction from the Arabs with respect to the proposals. Mr. Wilkins said that Dr. Malik had made a speech in the GA which appeared to favor the proposals, and that informal talks with certain Arabs in Washington had indicated a generally favorable disposition.

The Ambassador then asked whether the US gave its support to the proposals. I replied that the US, as a member of the PCC, had participated in the drafting of the proposals, and that while final determination on the question was one for the GA, the US did give its support in general to the proposals. However, I indicated that it was quite possible that a number of amendments would be proposed during the GA discussions and that we were prepared to consider them.

I then informed the Ambassador of our concern over the reports from Jerusalem and Tel Aviv indicating that there might be a resumption of terrorist activities. I pointed out that there were a number of American as well as other foreign officials in Jerusalem, and ref erred to the fact that the situation in Jerusalem had been closely related to the assassination of Count Bernadotte. I expressed the hope that Israel would take the necessary measures to protect the officials in Jerusalem. The Ambassador said that the Israeli Government was aware of the situation and felt the atmosphere in Jerusalem was considerably better in this respect. However, Israel needed the help of the US in connection with the Jerusalem proposals in order to avoid the resumption of these activities.

In connection with possible discussion between our people in New York and the Israeli delegation, I suggested that Mr. Eban might also wish to talk with some of the other delegations, including Colombia, which had expressed much interest in the question of Jerusalem. Mr. Elath replied that Mr. Eban had already done this and found that the majority of the Latin American delegations were more interested in the free access to and preservation of the Holy Places than they were in the broader question of internationalization.

I requested the Ambassador to bring to the attention of the Israeli Government our concern with respect to present developments on the Jerusalem question.2

1 Drafted by Mr. Stabler, assigned to the Division of Near Eastern Affairs after his return from duty in Amman.

2 In telegram 631, September 30, 8 p. m., to Tel Aviv (repeated to Jerusalem, Amman, and New York), the Department stated that “During past month Dept has noted with concern continuation public statements by Israeli officials and increasing press campaign in Israel and, US with apparent purpose of creating public belief proposed PCC plan provided for rigid internationalization and thereby prejudiced mutual relations between Israel and Jews resident in Jerusalem.” The telegram then summarized the Rusk–Elath conversation of September 28 and concluded with an instruction “to discuss Jerusalem question with Sharett and other Israeli officials along foregoing lines in continuation of instrns contained Deptel 605, Sept 19, and conversations reported Embtels 703, Sept 23, and 710, Sept 24. You shld emphasize that our approach to Jerusalem question is based on fact that Jerusalem and area surrounding it necessary to its existence are of deep concern to three great world religions and that it is our hope that solution for Jerusalem’s many intricate problems will be achieved by calm and constructive means.” (501.BB Palestine/9–3049) Of the reference telegrams, Nos. 703 and 710 are not printed; but regarding the latter, see footnote 1 to telegram 605, September 19, p. 1393 [Pg. 1393 includes portions of Doc. 969 and Doc. 970].

The Acting Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom 501.MA Palestine/9–2949: Telegram

[Document 982]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom 1

restricted Washington, September 29, 1949—2 p. m.

3548. Dept concerned problem financing UNRPR pending GA consideration ESM Report which will furnish basis GA action future relief program. UNRPR cash expected run out about Dec. 15, after exhausting anticipated US contribution of $16 million matched by like sum from other countries, and supplies in pipeline about Jan. 15. UNRPR operating agencies seeking assurances continuation program as cannot take risks inherent in abandoning relief during winter.

Anticipated SYG will propose at UNRPR Ad Hoc Advisory Comite mtg Oct 4 GA be asked give early consideration this problem, prior receipt ESM Report, and seek auth advance of $3 million from Working Capital Fund to meet UNRPR requirements until Feb or possibly more to finance operations thru March. Dept most anxious avoid any GA action this question until ESM interim Report recd early Nov and until inter-related parts Palestine problem as whole can be considered by GA because any proposal to extend UNRPR operations even temporarily wld inevitably invite premature discussion future program, which can only be properly considered when ESM report recd. To meet gap in funds that will inevitably arise pending action by govs on GA res, and give assurances to agencies of continuation operations without prejudice nature and extent future program, Dept proposes recommend SYG appeal to IRO for assistance in form of supplies and funds for which no immed allocation by it to its own program expected. We believe IRO presently in position grant such assistance and wld hope favorable action cld be taken by it at Gen Council mtg Geneva beginning Oct. 11. IRO report on fin position as of March 31, 1949, showed unallocated funds equivalent to about $15 million of which substantial amount in sterling. Dept understands IRO presently unable apply large part these holdings to IRO operations and also IRO commodity inventories are high. View this situation and previous IRO assistance to UNRPR, Dept believes appeal IRO for assistance at this time shld result in favorable response.2

For your info Dept discussed foregoing with Brit Emb and asked for comments in hope estab identical position this subj at Ad Hoc Advisory Comite mtg Oct 4 and at IRO Gen Council.

Webb

1 This telegram was repeated to New York.

2 London, on October 1, advised of the preliminary views of the Foreign Office, namely, that the IRO should not be depended on for financial assistance and might help in a very limited way with supplies and that the IRO would be the best agency to take over the work of UNRPR (telegram 3946, 501.MA Palestine/10–149).

The Acting Secretary of State to the Embassy in Saudi Arabia 501.BB Palestine(E)/9–349: Telegram

[Document 983]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Embassy in Saudi Arabia

confidential Washington, September 29, 1949—7 p. m.

383. Dept informed1 [that] SYG of UN received tel Sep 26 from SAG notifying UN of its refusal receive ESM because dissatisfied with “trend of treating Pal problem”.

You shld call on FonOff immed or soonest pilgrimage terminated, and make fol points, using background contained Deptel 336 Sep 32 and Depcirtel Sep 9, 6 a. m.3 where relevant.

Dept disappointed SAG reaction and convinced latter based on misconstruction purposes ESM. You shld point out certain other Arab states were initially reluctant receive ESM, but when its objectives and non-polit character were clarified, this reluctance dissipated. With exception SAG, all Arab Govts to which SYG addressed communication (Egypt, Syria, Leb, Jordan, Iraq) have now expressed willingness receive ESM. SAG action difficult understand view King’s humanitarian interest in contributing alleviation refugee problem, as indicated by his request Aramco provide employment opportunities for Pal refugees. Moreover, SAG action appears to be reversal previously expressed interest in development and irrigation projects frequently discussed with Emb and Dept. You shld make clear cooperation with ESM implies no prior commitment accept its recommendations, although we hope sound techn basis on which they will be formulated will make them acceptable not only to NE states but to all govts in position extend fin or techn support in their implementation.

You shld express Dept’s hope Emb’s clarification purposes ESM will induce SAG reconsider at least to extent of receiving ESM informally and informing ESM of SAG’s techn and development needs. Foregoing has Amb Childs’ concurrence.

Rpt reply Beirut for Clapp.4

Webb

1 In telegram 1192, September 26, 11:57 p. m., from New York, not printed.

2 This was a repeat of No. 476, to Beirut, p. 1359 [Pg. 1359 includes portions of Doc. 943 and Doc. 944].

3 Not printed.

4 This telegram was repeated to Beirut. Jidda replied, on October 4, stating that “SAG is profoundly disillusioned with results achieved to date by UN insofar as benefit to themselves is concerned.… Now the King has expressed his disapproval of FCC or any branch of it, as well as his personal regret that none of the advice he gave in past to visiting American officials was heeded; and he will likely continue to believe that ESM is essentially a US project, however much we may explain its UN character. Embassy therefore questions whether it would be either good taste or good tactics at this time to press SAG with a new request for entry of ESM and for cooperation with it.” (telegram 587, 501.BB Palestine (E)/10–449)

The Minister in Lebanon (Pinkerton) to the Secretary of State 501.BB Palestine(E)/10–149: Telegram

[Document 984]

The Minister in Lebanon (Pinkerton) to the Secretary of State

secret
priority Beirut, October 1, 1949—11 a. m.

506. Simes 9. For McGhee [From Clapp].

1. Have completed first visits to Lebanon, Egypt, Transjordan and Syria, accompanied by deputies. I explained purpose of Mission emphasizing immediate task to report and recommend to UN by November 1 (now changed) a program of works for temporary employment of able-bodied refugees where they are as a basis for discontinuing or decreasing direct relief program. Asked cooperation of governments in such program without prejudice to their positions on repatriation, compensation or resettlement. Asked for their proposals re such able and useful works projects near refugee concentrations. Offered our experts for joint consultations with understanding that exploration of long-range economic development possibilities would begin after November 1 for later report. Visits arranged in atmosphere of abating suspicion that reception of Mission would indicate weakening attitude Arab States re repatriation and compensation endorsed by UN resolution and that agreement to temporary works program would lead to resettlement without agreement by NE Governments.

Egypt—three days. Brief conference with Prime Minister who was cordial and candid re Egypt’s inability to accept refugees in overcrowded present population.1 I emphasized immediate task Mission and asked cooperation on works program in Gaza area. Conference with Liaison Committee of government developed some ideas and permission was granted our experts to inspect Gaza area to see what can be done.

Dinner with Prime Minister. Trip to desert agricultural experiment station. Fairly good press. Invited to return for visit to Aswan and other developments.

Prime Minister endorsed temporary works program for refugees and is less adamant on repatriation issue than Arab League officials in his own government.

I had most profitable conversation with Ambassador Caffery.2

Transjordan—two days. Temporary works program and possible resettlement schemes freely discussed. Our experts joined us and began field trip both sides of Jordan. Government is ready to go just as far on resettlement as outside funds will permit. Desmond Morton trying to arrange immediate allocation of funds available from British loan to begin works program in Transjordan by Transjordan Government without awaiting Mission report. I have encouraged him to do so.

We had thirty minutes with King Abdullah who stated Arab case forcefully. He endorsed resettlement in Transjordan and insisted upon access to Mediterranean by means of Negev not corridor and no internationalization of Jerusalem. He had strong condemnation of UN handling whole Palestine problem including Bernadotte assassination. He hoped Mission would get action on its economic recommendations.

Syria—two days. You are familiar with difficulties in getting open door for Mission. We were well-received but with extreme caution publicly by government. We had two-hour conference with Foreign Minister Qudsi first day. He stipulated and explained conditions we must accept if government was to “permit” Mission to study possibilities in Syria. Orally conceptions seemed same as reported Keeley but because of delicate political situation of government and need for finding strong program of development helpful to resettlement in Syria, I asked to have conditions in writing for later discussion. Conditions in brief precluded any economic development studies having any relation to refugees. Keeley’s thorough briefing had prevented any unpleasant surprise in this respect.

I explained immediate need for temporary works program for refugees now in Syria and asked if his conditions precluded discussions or cooperation. I left him with clear understanding that we could not assign experts to long-range economic developments studies unless cooperation on temporary works program assured now.

Next day we had three hours negotiation with Qudsi on text of conditions. Some progress, and we adjourned until next week. Expect to get into Syria on workable basis. Government afraid to decide anything, but decree extending working rights to refugees is good sign. They want our help on long-range development but will not take position publicly that such developments will, or are intended to, facilitate resettlement, for fear this will weaken their position re repatriation and compensation. Qudsi knows land development will attract refugees but insists resettlement must be unstated corollary and not a subject for international discussion.3

2. We had planned to go to Tel Aviv after Damascus and had tentative date for September 30. In meantime we received official word via British that Israel Government refused to guarantee safety of Morton, British member of ESM. I immediately called off date by cable insisting upon responsible assurance from government for Mission as whole before any date would be set. Tentative date set for October 9 at their suggestion and subject to satisfactory answer mytel re security. Prior to this interchange, Tel Aviv expressed impatience over decision to visit Arab States first. Israeli Delegation raised question with me at Lausanne and later through UN ME channels. Obvious reason for visiting Arab States first is that is where refugees are and refugees are Mission’s main problem.

3. In official talks I have evaded formula for financing temporary works except to say it would require cooperation from local governments in supply materials, tools and equipment at least. At most international assistance for wages but probably less. Believe tentatively wages must come primarily from outside. Believe tentatively operating administration of works program should be in national government with supervising auditing and full inspectional functions in international agency with power to stop funds at any time (international organization to be transitional and changeable for longer program).

4. I have held full-dress conferences at each capital. Makes American press ideal by comparison.

5. American Missions at every capital indispensable our work and helped inconspicuously in many ways. Sands4 accompanied ESM and proved indispensable.

6. Trying to arrange Baghdad visit soon.

7. Preliminary report being drafted on relief extension, temporary works and will include ideas on compensation yet to be discussed at Tel Aviv. Long-range schemes and resettlement for later report. Important to get refugees to work first.

8. Do not expect interim report before November 10.

9. PCC parentage of ESM definite handicap to Mission. Suggest you keep this in mind in considering parentage of organization to carry on economic development programs.

Sent Department, repeated Damascus 76; Department pass Cairo 52, Amman unnumbered. [Clapp.]

Pinkerton

1 Harry C. Brown, Finance Officer and Acting Head of the United Nations Relief for Palestine Refugees office at Cairo, informed an Embassy officer that UNRPR had taken responsibility for the 5,000 to 6,000 refugees in Egypt at Kantara at the request of the Egyptian Government and had moved them to Gaza. He also stated that subsequently the Egyptian Government had made overtures requesting UNRPR to assume responsibility for the remaining Palestinian refugees in Egypt. These too were to be sent to Gaza, (despatch 881, October 1, from Cairo, 501.MA Palestine/10–149)

2 Jefferson Caffery, who had been designated Ambassador to Egypt on July 9.

3 Damascus, on October 10, reported that Mr. Clapp and Ms deputies met with Foreign Minister Qudsi the previous day and agreed on a satisfactory basis “for technical discussions and field inspection in cooperation with Syrian technicians re possibility temporary work projects to employ refugees. Longer range projects will be explored later probably after elections. ESM departed for Tel Aviv yesterday” (telegram 597. 501.BB Palestine(E)/10–1049).

4 William L. Sands, Jr., Second Secretary of Embassy in Lebanon.

Editorial Note [Document 985]

Editorial Note

The Bureau of Near Eastern, South Asian, and African Affairs, under the direction of Assistant Secretary of State McGhee, was created effective October 3, 1949. The Division of Near Eastern Affairs ceased to exist and was replaced by the Office of African and Near Eastern Affairs (ANE). Fraser Wilkins, at the same time, became Officer in Charge of Palestine–Israel–Jordan Affairs in the new Office. The Department of State, the following day, released a statement concerning these and other details of its reorganization; for text, see Department of State Bulletin, October 31, 1949, page 677.

The Acting Secretary of State to the Embassy in Egypt 800.8890/10–449: Telegram

[Document 986]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Embassy in Egypt 1

confidential Washington, October 4, 1949—7 p. m.

977. Since fall 1948 Amer Export Lines has been operating separate scheds Arab and Israeli ports. Company voluntarily adopted this policy because it feared NE Govts might seize cargoes or apply other restrictions vessels and passengers thereon calling both Arab and Israeli ports on same continuous voyage. As result efficiency of service has been impaired.

Because of improved NE situation company now proposes resume including Arab and Israeli ports on same scheds.

As stated previous tels, Dept is of opinion signature armistices, removal UN and US arms embargoes and peaceful conditions prevailing NE shld eliminate any possible obstacles resumption normal navigation and trade, movements passengers and cargoes etc. in eastern Med. Indicative of changed situation US has, for example, approved export license for four Beechcraft bombardier-trainers consigned Egyptian Govt and giving active consideration other applications for licenses mil equip destined NE Govts.

Discuss foregoing with FonOff stating USG trusts there will be no interference with normal operations Amer Export Lines or similar US services. Report reaction soonest together with estimate whether or not vessels likely encounter difficulties. Beirut take parallel action.

Urinfo: If response this approach not unfavorable Export lines tentatively plan inaugurate new policy by routing freighter on continuous voyage Arab and Israeli ports within the month.

Ur further info: Rep Brit Emb Washington informs Dept Sirry Pasha in July granted permission Brit luxury cruisers Coronia and Brittanic call Alex en route Tel Aviv this winter with no restrictions except on shore movements “Zionists” or bearers passports Israel or other govts not recognized by Egypt. Leb understood to have permitted at least two Bulgarian and one Danish freighters calling Beirut en route to/from Israel unload and load cargoes unmolested. (Beirut see ltr from Heald & Co Sept 14.2 )

Webb

1 This telegram was sent also to Beirut as No. 583 and was repeated to Tel Aviv, Haifa, Port Said, Alexandria, and London.

2 Ambassador Caffery spoke on varied subjects with King Farouk on October 10, including the subject of lifting Egyptian wartime shipping regulations. The Ambassador reported the conversation in telegram 943, October 12; for text, see p. 223 [Pg. 223 includes portions of Doc. 102 and Doc. 103].Beirut reported, on December 22, that the Lebanese Foreign Office had “prepared ruling to effect ships which have entered Arab port either before or after visit to Israeli port will be allowed enter Beirut. Note must receive Cabinet approval before signature.” (telegram 649, 800.8890/12–2249) This message also advised that the Lebanese Foreign Minister had informed Minister Pinkerton that “he would like to see Lebanon sign treaty with Israel and it would closely follow any Arab country other than Jordan in negotiations.”

The Chargé in Israel (Ford) to the Secretary of State 501.BB Palestine/10–549: Telegram

[Document 987]

The Chargé in Israel (Ford) to the Secretary of State

confidential Tel Aviv, October 5, 1949—1 p. m.

726. During hour’s general discussion October 4 of various pending matters with Comay Israel Foreign Office, I took occasion mention pertinent substance Deptel 637, September 30,1 stressing my government’s belief that present PCC proposals re Jerusalem represent practical realistic approach permanent international regime that area, pointing out our desire avoid injection arguments based on sentiment and emotion inherent in feelings of our vast Christian communities re Jerusalem issue, and expressing earnest hope my government that Israel will cooperate calmly and constructively in early solution Jerusalem problem.

Comay (who had report before him of Rusk–Elath talk2 ) underlining that he was speaking personally and not behalf his government said feeling general in Israel Foreign Office circles that PCC proposal “does not represent common ground” on which any discussion Jerusalem issue can be undertaken. He repeated Shiloah’s earlier assertion that Israel working on counterproposal of its own (Embtel 710 September 243 ) and said that until such plan finalized and ready for presentation GA he doubted that “any Israel official” would be prepared to discuss any phase of PCC proposal as drawn up and presented. He added in effect “at present our governments seem to be poles apart since while US obviously ready accept PCC proposal as starting point for discussions, Israel unable accept plan even in principle.” Comay also said “we hope USG fully appreciates deep-seated nature Israel public resentment against any effort deprive Israel of Jerusalem”.

Comment: Despite Comay’s assertion he not conveying his government’s thinking, I have generally found him fairly faithful echo his superiors. End Comment.

Sharett presently on vacation but expected back Tel Aviv October 6 at which time shall discuss with him substance Deptels 6364 and 637.

Sent Department 726; repeated Jerusalem 87; Department pass Amman 52, New York unnumbered for USUN.

Ford

1 Not printed, but see footnote 2, p. 1412 [Pg. 1412 is part of Doc. 981].

2 See Mr. Rusk’s memorandum of conversation, September 28, p. 1409 [Pg. 1409 includes portions of Doc. 980 and Doc. 981].

3 Not printed, but see footnote 1 to telegram 605, September 19, p. 1393 [Pg. 1393 includes portions of Doc. 969 and Doc. 970].

4 Dated September 30, not printed, but see footnote 2 to memorandum by Wilkins, September 26, p. 1407 [Pg. 1407 includes portions of Doc. 978 and Doc. 979].

The Consul at Jerusalem (Burdett) to the Secretary of State 501.BB Palestine/10–549: Telegram

[Document 988]

The Consul at Jerusalem (Burdett) to the Secretary of State

confidential Jerusalem, October 5, 1949—4 p. m.

604. Riley declared today crisis has now arrived in both Syrian and Egyptian MAC’s. He does not anticipate any resumption of hostilities. Following occurred:

Syrian MAC—at Damascus Col. Hinnawi flatly informed Riley Syria would not proceed with demolition of fortifications at Mishmar Ha Yarden and evacuation until Israel ceased violations of armistice in Ein Gev sector and carried out decisions of MAC. Added Syria entitled take six weeks from date Israel complied with MAC decisions to complete withdrawal from Mishmar Ha Yarden. Under terms of armistice required to evacuate by October 12. Riley hinted that instead of violating armistice herself Syria should refer Israel violations to SC. Hinnawi scoffed at this, stating Syria could never obtain just decision and if obtained UN would not enforce it. Riley showed Consulate General letter mentioned Contel 603 third1 from Syrian Foreign Office which lists Israel violations and strongly criticizes Chief of Staff for not forcing Israel comply. Major violations are failure Israel to remove settlement in Ein Gev demilitarized zone despite MAC decision given September 5 and failure destroy fortifications at Ein Gev despite directive from MAC chairman dated September 9. Letter concludes with statement that Israel violations have placed armistice agreement in jeopardy. Hinnawi requested Riley return to Damascus by eighth with written answer and discuss matter with Foreign Minister.

Riley states no question exists but that Israel has violated armistice and furthermore failed to carry out decisions of MAC and directive from MAC chairman. This has prevented successful carrying out of armistice terms. He feels Syria is erring in failing to report these violations to SC and instead retaliating by refusing to carry out terms of armistice which Syria previously observed faithfully. Riley hazarded guess that for international political reasons Syria may wish postpone evacuation of Mishmar Ha Yarden until after elections, especially when faced with Israel actions. Riley will attempt to persuade Dayan to remove settlement and destroy fortifications before eighth but is not hopeful.

Egyptian MAC—Shiloah still endeavoring prevail on Riley to write interpretive letter mentioned Contel 6032 as prior condition to Israel acceptance this decision (not yet rendered) on location of line.

Government House—UN administrative personnel now ordered to move to Beirut. This will leave only UN armed guard at Government House. Riley does not need this building and does not wish to assume responsibility for its preservation. In talks with both sides Government House treated as headquarters for PCC, Consul General believes UN should definitely retain Government House for use in future activities here.3

Sent Department 604, repeated Bagdad 64, Beirut 117, Cairo 33, Damascus 77, Tel Aviv 118. Department pass Amman 74.

Burdett

1 Not printed.

2 This message reported that Mr. Shiloah had requested General Riley to write a letter giving his opinion that nothing in the Israeli-Egyptian armistice agreement precluded Israel from founding new settlements in the Negev. General Riley had declined on the ground that such a letter would prejudice his neutral position. (501.BB Palestine/10–349)

3 Jerusalem, on October 12, reported information from General Riley that (1) “Israel destroyed fortifications at Ein Gev and removed settlement as agreed. Riley flew Damascus and informed Syrians who apparently satisfied. Are evacuating troops from Mishmar Hayarden sector today, and by agreement with Israel will complete destruction of fortifications and removal of mines within three weeks”; (2) “Israel and Egypt signed map on tenth showing line extending from center of Aqaba coastal strip in accordance with Riley’s and Egyptians’ interpretation.” (telegram 617, 501.BB Palestine/10–4249)The last paragraph of telegram 617 reported information from Mr. Shiloah that “Israel stood ready at any time to appoint representative to discuss directly with Arab states any mutual question in effort to reach either formal or informal final settlement. Added this standing offer made with full authority of Sharett and government.”

The Acting Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom 501.MA Palestine/10–149: Telegram

[Document 989]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom 1

restricted Washington, October 5, 1949—6 p. m.

3625. Agreed at UNRPR Ad Hoc Advisory Comite yesterday that SYG shld appeal IRO, WHO, UNICEF to continue assistance Palestine refugees in view recognized need for continuation relief during winter months even tho funds for program beyond Dec. must await GA action after report ESM. Understand appeal will be made in gen terms within next day or two.

SYG did not submit to Comite proposal for early interim action by GA for advance from Working Capt Fund as intimated in Deptel 35482 since financial position UNRPR adequate for needs thru Dec. He assured operating agencies that if GA action on continuation relief has not been taken early in Dec after having benefit of ESM recommendations he would request emergency action at that time.

ASYG Price indicated uncertainty re extent use Working Capital Fund for future program because of anticipated heavy demands for other purposes. IRO assistance therefore believed needed as supplement to Working Capt Fund advance to continue operations thru March before which time receipt gov. contributions unlikely.

Dept suggests IRO adopt gen res along lines 1948 Gen Council res which cld be based on appeal of SYG leaving to DG and SYG to work out specific arrangements. Under 1948 res IRO contributed 100,000 blankets to UNRPR, detailed personnel and loaned $1 million flour on reimbursable basis. Assistance of this kind does not imply any takeover action UNRPR by IRO as indicated paras 1 and 2 of Embtel 3946.3

Suggest Warren4 and Edmonds5 explore unapplied funds and supplies available in inventories to ascertain extent to which IRO might assist without impairing its present program. Mathews UKDel indicated he wld recommend to FonOff support appeal to IRO.

Webb

1 This telegram was repeated to Geneva for Mr. Warren.

2 Dated September 29, p. 1413 [Pg. 1413 is part of Doc. 982].

3 Dated October 1, not printed, but see footnote 2, ibid. [Pg. 1413 is part of Doc. 982]

4 George L. Warren, Adviser on Refugees and Displaced Persons in the Department of State.

5 Cecil J. Edmonds, Permanent Delegate of the United Kingdom to the General Council of the International Refugee Organization.

The Acting Secretary of State to the Embassy in Saudi Arabia 501.BB Palestine(E)/10–749: Telegram

[Document 990]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Embassy in Saudi Arabia 1

confidential
priority Washington, October 7, 1949—7 p. m.

400. View your observations (urtel 590 Oct 52 ) believe you shld defer submitting note to FonOff for present. Dept will urge Clapp call on Fuad Bey.

You shld call on Yassin to renew conversation reported urtel 585, Sep 303 and endeavor informally to exploit his suggestion SA observer be appointed. You shld point out that ESM maintaining HQ in Beirut, which wld be good vantage point for SAG rep to study ESM and receive info re its objectives.

FYI we hope view Fuad’s presence Beirut he might be named SAG rep.

Pls inform your Brit colleague of foregoing.

Webb

1 This telegram was repeated to London.

2 Not printed; it noted that officers of the American Embassy and British diplomatic officials at Jidda were in agreement that the odds were heavily against reversal of the Saudi Arabian refusal to receive the Economic Survey Mission. It also suggested that the Mission abandon the idea of visiting Saudi Arabia and proposed in its stead that Mr. Clapp call on Fuad Hamza, an influential royal councillor, then in Beirut to solicit his good offices with the King (501.BB Palestine(E)/10–549).

3 Not printed.

The Secretary of State to Certain Diplomatic Offices and the United States Mission at the United Nations 501.BB Palestine/10–1249: Circular telegram

[Document 991]

The Secretary of State to Certain Diplomatic Offices 1 and the United States Mission at the United Nations

confidential Washington, October 12, 1949—10 a. m.

Dept understands PCC plans reconvene formally Lake Success Oct 18. According recent info from Clapp, preliminary report will not be ready before Nov. 10. In view this sched Dept believes first formal session shld be deferred until receipt Clapp report.

Foregoing need not interfere with present travel plans PCC reps, since latter wld doubtless find it profitable proceed Lake Success consult together and with Israeli and Arab dels informally in advance of formal session.

Consult Boisanger, Yalcin and SYG re foregoing, stating that unless they perceive objection, we plan inform Israeli and Arab dels to PCC of our views.

Acheson

1 At Ankara and Paris.

The Chargé in Saudi Arabia (Hill) to the Secretary of State 501.BB Palestine(E)/10–1249: Telegram

[Document 992]

The Chargé in Saudi Arabia (Hill) to the Secretary of State

confidential Jidda, October 12, 1949—3 p. m.

606. I was received at Foreign Office this morning by YY1 after brief wait because he delayed in conference with British Chargé.

We renewed conversations on points in Embtel 585 September 302 with following results: 1. Economic Survey Mission. YY said British Chargé had recently come to see him second time strongly urging that SAG reverse its stand and receive mission. However, he had been in Mecca previous night with King and discussed whole matter with him at length and wished to state that SAG position remained unchanged (Embtel 585 September 30, paragraph 6).

YY remarked that SAG is convinced real objective of ESM is to seek means disposing refugee problem by resettling them in various Arab states thus doing away with one of principal reasons for Arabs continuing their fight against Israel (this apparently a new thought but somewhat in line with YY’s views as reported Embassy A–354 August 29).2

I said that important future benefits might be forthcoming from ESM and that USG hoped SAG would send observers ESM which has Headquarters in Beirut and remarked that I understood Fuad Bey Hamza now in Beirut. YY replied this correct and added that Fuad would make excellent representative for SAG. He inquired if ESM now holding any meetings in Beirut. I replied did not know but presumed that if not already soon would be. Then I asked if I could inform Department that Fuad will be SAG representative to ESM. YY replied I could say he is recommending him immediately and anticipates favorable decision. (This paragraph being repeated London as Embtel 88 October 12 and Beirut as 13.)3

[Here follows discussion of other subjects.]

Hill

1 Yusuf Yassin.

2 Not printed.

2 Not printed.

3 Fuad Hamza, on November 22, informed Ambassador Childs that he had not been appointed observer with the Economic Survey Mission and that Mr. Clapp had not called on him. In view of his return to Beirut in a few days, the Ambassador “urged him endeavor consult with Clapp informally and frankly. I said I believed it mistake for SAG in its own best interests not to have some contact with ESM. He promised see Clapp on his return and cooperate with him in every possible way informally.” (telegram 690, November 23, 10 a. m., from Jidda, 501.BB Palestine(E)/11–2349)

The Minister in Lebanon (Pinkerton) to the Secretary of State 501.BB Palestine(E)/10–1349: Telegram

[Document 993]

The Minister in Lebanon (Pinkerton) to the Secretary of State

secret Beirut, October 13, 1949—1 p. m.

539. Simes 17. [From Clapp.]

1. Discussions ESM with Sharett, Horowitz, Kaplan et al held at Tel Aviv in three long conferences. Sunday night (ninth) with Sharett and Israeli liaison committee headed by Horowitz. I explained purpose of first visit: (a) To get facts about 30,000 Arab and 18,000 Jewish refugees now receiving UN relief and to learn what government doing with and for them. I explained idea of temporary works program and asked their interest leading to economic assimilation Arabs now in Israel.

(b) To urge them more substantial acceptance of repatriation agreement established in UNGA resolution than Israel had proposed to PCC.

(c) To obtain current views re compensation and to urge agreement to reconsider position making compensation part of general peace settlement and linking it with claims for indemnity.

(d) Appealed to Israelis to demonstrate validity of high moral professions by implementing UN resolution on repatriation and compensation.

(e) To lay basis for exploration long-range development after interim report completed on refugee relief and works.

Response was long lecture on Arab responsibility for Arab-Jewish war and Israeli history from Moses to date. They defended unwillingness to repatriate in accord UNGA resolution by citing Arab refusal to accept UN partition. Sharett hinted doubt that offer between PCC to repatriate 100,000 Arabs could be carried out because of strong reaction of public and military chiefs against government’s offer to PCC. Position on compensation unchanged as stated to PCC.1

Monday morning (tenth). Again with Sharett, Horowitz et al. Horowitz presented at great length desirability and feasibility of resettling Arabs in Syria and Transjordan. I advised him that resettlement as solution had been made next to impossible even to discuss with Arab States, in fact because Israelis had identified it as their proposal.

Monday night. We got down to business about Arab refugees now in Israel. Arrangements made for staff to examine condition, number, work opportunities, etc. ESM will consider facts obtained as measure of practical problem of repatriation.

2. Please advise Marguerite Owen, TVA, Washington of my return Beirut.

Sent Department 539, repeated Tel Aviv 28. [Clapp.]

Pinkerton

1 Mr. Clapp’s reaction to his talks with the Israeli leaders was reported by the Manchester Guardian on October 12. In an article datelined Lydda the previous day, he was said to be “‘disappointed’ with Israel’s attitude to Arab refugee repatriation and compensation problems.… In Israel my hopes have not been realised.” (airgram 1871, October 14, from London, 501.BB Palestine (E)/10–1449)

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Officer in Charge of Palestine–Israel–Jordan Affairs (Wilkins) 867N.00/10–1449

[Document 994]

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Officer in Charge of Palestine–Israel–Jordan Affairs (Wilkins)

confidential [Washington,] October 14, 1949.

Participants: Mr. Greenhill, First Secretary British Embassy

Mr. Wilkins

(a) Problem: The internationalization of Jerusalem and the incorporation of Arab Palestine in Jordan.1

(b) Action Required: Orally to inform the British Embassy in Washington and the American Embassy in London of our views.

(c) Action Assigned to: ANE

Mr. Greenhill2 called this morning to discuss current developments regarding Palestine with particular reference to the internationalization of Jerusalem.

Mr. Greenhill reported that the Foreign Office was pleased that the United States Government had not adopted a rigid attitude regarding the present PCC proposals for the internationalization of Jerusalem and wished to make the following points with regard to present Arab and Israeli authority in Jerusalem: 1. Insofar as Israeli authority was concerned, the Israeli Government or a group owing allegiance to the Israeli Government already have authority in the Israeli area of Jerusalem. The Foreign Office did not believe equitable consideration could be given to the future of the Jerusalem area unless we knew what Arab authority there was—at least in principle;

2. Early action regarding the incorporation of Arab Palestine within Jordan would solve the question of Arab authority in Jerusalem.

The British Foreign Office had, therefore, requested the British Embassy to ascertain the Department’s urgent views regarding the following possibilities: 1. The General Assembly should be asked to approve in principle the absorption of Arab Palestine into Jordan as being in principle inseparable from a disposition of Jerusalem and of the refugee question (perhaps leaving boundaries and the status of the Gaza strip for later discussion);

2. The General Assembly should be asked to direct the Palestine Conciliation Commission under paragraph 2 B of the December 11 resolution (which makes it possible for the General Assembly and the Security Council to issue new directives to the PCC) to bring about the incorporation of Arab Palestine into Jordan at the earliest possible moment and to report on action taken to the next session of the General Assembly.

I recalled Mr. Bevin had previously raised this matter with the Secretary of State and that it was our opinion the incorporation of Arab Palestine into Jordan at this particular moment was premature.

I expressed the preliminary personal view that present Arab authority in Jerusalem was as valid as present Israeli authority in Jerusalem and that if either Jordan or the General Assembly took formal action regarding the incorporation of Arab Palestine into Jordan, Israel would probably take formal action regarding the incorporation within Israel of those areas in Palestine which it now occupies beyond the 1947 partition line (Western Galilee, the region between Ramie, Lydda and Beersheba and the northern section of the Gaza strip). I added that formal action by Jordan or the General Assembly might be expected to inject political factors into UN consideration of the Palestine question which was now being handled on technical economic grounds. I also recalled that the General Assembly had refused in the fall of 1948 to take action of the character now being suggested by the Foreign Office.

I said that we would give immediate consideration to the present British views and would inform him of our reactions.3

1 British Minister Kirkbride, on October 4, had expressed to Mr. Fritzlan his view that Jordanian annexation of Arab Palestine was the only way to prevent Israeli seizure of the area in a series of faits accomplis. Mr. Fritzlan replied that “while this might be true, timing such act of union important consideration and that ill considered hasty action on part Abdullah might cause much harm.” The British Minister “indicated apprehension lest failure US and UK agree soon to formal annexation might cause King take such precipitous action.” (telegram 364, October 5, 10 a. m., from Amman, 867N.014/10–549)

2 Mr. Denis A. Greenhill, First Secretary of the British Embassy.

3 Messrs. Wilkins and Greenhill met again on October 21 to discuss the Palestine situation; for the nature of their discussion, see footnote 3 to telegram 3828, October 25, p. 1452 [Pg. 1452 includes portions of Doc. 1007 and Doc. 1008].

The Secretary of State to Certain Diplomatic and Consular Offices 501.BB Palestine/10–1449: Circular airgram

[Document 995]

The Secretary of State to Certain Diplomatic and Consular Offices 1

secret Washington, October 14, 1949—2:15 p. m.

For your background info, Dept’s analysis Pal situation follows:

PCC .—Despite PCC efforts promote final settlement Pal, positions of parties concerned remain too far apart to offer hope definitive settlement foreseeable future, or even hope of producing area of agreement on which final settlement might be based. Next meeting PCC Oct 19 not expected produce any material improvement in conciliation efforts. Impasse aggravated by apparent conviction each side that time works to its advantage. In our view, reverse is true. Missions must endeavor through constant painstaking discussion with govts concerned to make them aware long range effects upon their own self interests of this impasse. Israel, while endeavoring extract full measure polit and territorial advantage during stalemate, is forced maintain high psychological and financial burden military preparedness at expense economic stabilization, and by prolonging its precarious isolation, is postponing establishment modus operandi with Arabs which is of highest importance to Israel’s future existence. Arab states, while counting unrealistically upon econ boycott to obtain polit objectives, are sacrificing opportunity for econ development and for social reform, further weakening resistance to revolutionary and opportunist exploitation, and bearing burden costly military preparedness to detriment of economy. Continued unreasonable and intransigeant attitude both parties is in opinion USG serving to crystalize world opinion against their positions and will undoubtedly make more difficult of implementation such measures leading toward final settlement which depend upon cooperation and collaboration of international community.

ESM .—We continue support work of ESM as means of providing new base on which polit agreement between Israel and Arab states might eventually be achieved, and of reducing refugee problem to level at which it no longer constitutes major security threat to NE area and to internatl peace. Therefore we believe substantial resettlement repatriation must he carried forward on basis present territorial delimitations and without prejudice to final territorial settlement.

Missions can help to dissipate prevailing charges that ESM is device force Israeli-Arab econ cooperation or plot to benefit Israeli economy, by means critical analysis ESM terms of ref and by means elucidating self-interest states concerned in projects recommended by ESM. Implementation ESM program is dependent in final analysis on full cooperation and initiative of states concerned.

US Policy.—While USG continues regard permanent solution of Pal question as a major objective its policy towards NE, Dept considers it essential that both sides be made increasingly cognizant their responsibilities for taking initiative in advancing towards settlement. Unilateral US dipl efforts urge more tractable attitude both sides, and to obtain compromises therefrom have thus far had no appreciable effect on position either party. Since states directly concerned must live with and adjust to any settlement which may be achieved, USG has emphasized repeatedly both in PCC and through dipl means hope that both parties wld utilize PCC as medium through which to conduct negots on practical basis rather than an arena for unproductive controversies, or that both sides wld undertake direct negots, particularly when it appears such negots will lead to constructive action towards final settlement. We will continue urge adoption these procedures by parties concerned. You shld endeavor counteract current propaganda that USG or PCC has ever endeavored prevent direct talks along foregoing lines.

Re nature final settlement, USG wld support agreement between parties concerned reached on basis free negot and mutual consent. If parties are unable agree we believe PCC cld with prior consent parties draft for their consideration compromise settlement of basic issues including territory and refugees. We do not consider it advisable at this time for US unilaterally to advance specific proposals for territorial settlement or for refugee distribution.

While USG will not advance settlement proposals on natl basis, it will urge consideration by parties of all reasonable proposals which may be advanced by UN or states directly concerned and will itself give consideration to support for such proposals on basis their individual merits. We will for example extend genl support in UNGA to PCC Jlem statute as basis for discussion, including support of such amendments as are designed to enhance its acceptability to both sides and to achieve best practical plan for internatl regime Jlem area. We will also be prepared consider in UNGA recommendations of ESM, as UN organ, for long range settlement and development program and for continuation relief.

Foregoing involves increasing emphasis upon UN as instrument through which to achieve final settlement and upon necessity for initiative by parties directly concerned in reaching solution Pal problem.

In UNGA consideration Pal problem, we hope debate will emphasize procedural rather than substantive matters and will be focused on establishment future machinery for treating polit econ refugee and relief questions in order facilitate coordinated UN action re Pal in future.

Although foregoing has been policy USG for some time, its formal communication to NE Govts at this time might be subject misinterpretation. However, in any genl discussions re Pal question, foregoing shld prove useful as basis for your remarks.

Acheson

1 At London, Pars, Ankara, Arab capitals, Tel Aviv, Jerusalem, and New York.

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom 501.MA Palestine/10–1249: Telegram

[Document 996]

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom

restricted Washington, October 14, 1949—6 p. m.

3726. Re Embtel 4104.1 Dept deeply concerned UK intention contribute only half million pounds Palestine relief. While requirements for continued relief program won’t be known until interim report ESM, Dept does not foresee any possibility cutting relief costs in half for coming year. Hopes UK will not make unilateral announcement amount its contribution prior ESM Report and opportunity US–UK consultation concerning financial implications Palestine refugee program.2

Acheson

1 Dated October 12, not printed.

2 This telegram was repeated to Geneva for Mr. Warren. An Embassy officer discussed the message with Mr. Burrows on October 17. The latter made no offer to increase the British contribution but indicated that the British had no plans to announce a contribution prior to the report of the Economic Survey Mission (telegram 4160, October 17, 7 p. m., from London, 501.MA Palestine/10–1749).

Report by the National Security Council on United States Policy Toward Israel and the Arab States S/S–NSC Files, Lot 63 D 351

1 [Document 997]

Report by the National Security Council on United States Policy Toward Israel and the Arab States 2

top secret Washington, October 17, 1949.

NSC 47/2

The Problem

1. To define and assess the policy which the United States should follow toward Israel and the Arab States, with particular reference to problems arising out of the recent hostilities in Palestine.

Analysis

2. The United Nations General Assembly on November 29, 1947, recommended the partition of Palestine into a Jewish state and an Arab state, with provision for economic union between them. It also recommended that Jerusalem be established as a corpus separatum administered by the United Nations. With the termination by the British Government of its mandate over Palestine on May 15, 1948, a provisional government of a state of Israel assumed power. The proclamation creating Israel did not define its boundaries, although the concurrent Israeli request for United States recognition referred to the boundaries set forth in the General Assembly resolution of November 29.

3. The Arabs of Palestine as well as the governments of the Arab states of the Near East rejected the General Assembly partition resolution, and no government was established for the Arab portion of Palestine as recommended by the resolution. Fighting broke out between Arab and Jewish irregular forces prior to termination of the British mandate, and, concurrently with the promulgation of the State of Israel, military forces of the neighboring Arab states entered Palestine and sporadic fighting broke out, particularly in the area between Tel Aviv and Jerusalem.

4. a. The area of the Jewish State as contemplated under the General Assembly resolution was approximately 5,600 square miles, the area of the Arab state 4,400 square miles. The proposed population of the Jewish state was approximately 550,000 Jews and 500,000 Arabs; that of the Arab state, 745,000 Arabs and 10,000 Jews; and that of Jerusalem, 100,000 Arabs and 100,000 Jews.

b. At the present time, the total area of Palestine under Israeli control or military occupation is estimated at 7,750 square miles. The present population of Israel consists of approximately 800,000 Jews and 70,000 to 100,000 Arabs. Jewish immigrants have been entering Israel at the rate of 25,000 monthly since May 15, 1948.

c. As a result of the hostilities, some 700,000 Palestinian Arabs fled or were expelled from Israeli-controlled territory. They took refuge in areas of Palestine under Arab military occupation and in the neighboring Arab states. The Palestinian Arabs, together with the Arab populations of the independent Arab states of the Near East, number about 35,000,000.

5. Prior to the outbreak of hostilities, the United States took a leading part in seeking a solution of the Palestine problem which would be acceptable to the interested parties. Since the failure of these attempts, the United States has actively supported the United Nations in its efforts to end the military conflict. The United States supported the General Assembly resolution of May 14, 1948, authorizing the appointment of a United Nations Mediator charged, among other functions, with promoting peaceful adjustment of the future situation in Palestine. It supported the Security Council resolution of May 29, 1948, calling for a cessation of hostilities for a period of four weeks and establishing an embargo on the import of arms to the Near East. After expiration of this truce period, this Government introduced a resolution, adopted by the Security Council July 15, 1948, ordering the governments concerned to desist from further military action and deciding that the truce shall remain in force until a peaceful adjustment of the future situation in Palestine is reached. The United States assisted through diplomatic means the efforts of the Acting United Nations Mediator to negotiate armistice agreements between Israel and the Arab states; armistice agreements have now been concluded by Israel with Egypt, Transjordan, Lebanon, and Syria. This Government jointly sponsored a resolution, passed by the General Assembly on November 18, 1948, establishing a United Nations relief program for Palestine refugees supported by voluntary contributions, as a means of assisting United Nations efforts towards restoration of peace in Palestine. On December 11, 1948, the General Assembly passed a resolution establishing a Palestine Conciliation Commission, charged with facilitating settlement of all issues outstanding between Israel and the Arab states. The Commission, composed of representatives of France, Turkey, and the United States, is currently engaged in efforts to carry out its tasks of promoting a territorial settlement for Palestine, formulating an international regime for Jerusalem, and seeking a solution to the Arab refugee problem.

6. In support of the efforts of the Conciliation Commission, the United States has made a series of strong representations to both the Arabs and the Israelis. This Government’s approach to the Arabs has been designed chiefly to induce them to accept the principle of substantial resettlement of refugees in the Arab states. The representations to Israel have been intended to convince it of the necessity of accepting the principle of substantial repatriation of refugees, and the principle of compensation to those states desiring such compensation for any territorial acquisition which Israel expects to effect outside the boundaries proposed in the partition resolution of November 29, 1947. The United States has warned Israel that if it continues to reject the friendly advice offered by this Government for the purpose of facilitating a general peace in Palestine, the United States Government will be forced to the conclusion that a revision of its attitude toward Israel has become unavoidable.

7. a. Up to the present, United States relations with Israel have been based upon our traditional support of the aspirations of the Jewish people to obtain a national home in Palestine. In support of this policy of sympathy and friendship towards the Jewish people, the United States extended immediate de facto recognition to the new state; supported Israel’s application for a $100,000,000 Export-Import Bank loan, of which it has up to the present time drawn $51,000,000; and supported its application for membership in the United Nations.

b. The present Government of Israel is intensely nationalistic in character, and maintains an internal policy of compromise dictated by the necessity of reconciling the demands of its extremist elements with the more moderate tendencies of the government party. The necessity of maintaining this internal balance makes it difficult for Israel’s leaders to meet external demands for compromise with respect to relinquishment of territory and readmission of refugees which are essential to final settlement in Palestine. It also results in further increasing Israel’s isolation among the neighboring Arab states and in reinforcing the charges of intransigence and expansionism which have been levelled against Israel. In addition Israel endeavors to pursue a neutral course in its relations with East and West. This position of neutrality is motivated by the desire to obtain further assistance from the United States, and to retain the diplomatic support of the Soviet bloc, to obtain military material therefrom, and to facilitate immigration to Israel of Jews from Eastern Europe. In view of the delicate nature of Israel’s internal political equilibrium, the government will be subjected to increasing pressures from political radical and extremist groups to the extent that it makes concessions to the Arab states or otherwise follows policies contrary to the views of these groups.

c. The technical abilities of the Israelis, coupled with their access to Western technical and financial assistance principally from United States sources, have already resulted in much greater economic opportunities and higher standards of living in Israel than those among the neighboring peoples. In the absence of assistance to the Arab states this disparity will tend to increase in the future and to result in further tensions between Israelis and Arabs. However, Israel’s program for large-scale economic development, required to implement successfully its ambitious immigration policy, will make it dependent for the foreseeable future upon large-scale external financing through foreign capital investment, loans, and voluntary contributions. There are forces at work which may tend to reduce the rate of immigration. These forces include improved conditions in Europe, restrictions in USSR and satellite countries on emigration, relative decrease of contributions from abroad for financing immigration, and reports of increasingly difficult conditions in Israel itself. At the same time, if immigration continues at the present rate Israel may be unable, even with large-scale external financing, to improve its economic condition sufficiently to prevent political and economic instability. This would result in Israel being faced with a pressing need intensively to develop sub-marginal areas and to expand industrialization within Israel. If unsuccessful, the Israeli Government might be tempted to seek additional territory.

d. Israel’s military establishment, although small, is a relatively modern and effective fighting machine which has proved itself adequate to resist the poorly equipped, ill-trained and badly led armies of the Arab League states in the course of recent hostilities and to occupy considerable territory beyond that awarded under the partition plan. It can be expected that the future effectiveness of the Israeli Army will increase with the implementation of current plans for training and reorganization. Arab military forces reflect the weaknesses of the Arab governments in that they have demonstrated their inability to act in concert against the Israeli Army. So long as there is the present wide discrepancy between the effective military power of the Israelis and of the Arabs, there remains, in the event of failure of non-military factors to control the situation, the danger of Israeli extremist pressure to resort to military action. Moreover, in the absence of a satisfactory modus vivendi between Israel and its neighbors, Israel will be burdened by the high cost and accompanying psychological effect of maintaining a state of military preparedness which in turn will detract from the effectiveness of any economic assistance given to that country.

8. a. United States relations with the Arab states have been traditionally based upon extensive cultural, educational, and religious interests in the Near East, which have been reinforced in recent years by growing commercial and economic ties with the area, including extensive petroleum interests. The political relations of this Government with the Arab states have suffered during the past several years because of basic differences in views on the subject of the future of Palestine. Despite this serious setback to Arab-American relations, and the deep-seated suspicion of our motives which has arisen, the Arab states for the most part still desire closer relations with this Government, and have requested from the United States economic, technical, and military assistance.

b. The intense and competing nationalisms and personal and dynastic rivalries which characterize the governments of the Arab states render them incapable of working together effectively or constructively in their own best interests. For the most part their internal policies pursue a course of inaction or of endeavoring to maintain the status quo. Their relations with one another are characterized by unproductive controversies and rivalries, and their principal unity lies in their implacable animosity toward and common fear of Israel. Because of the generally inferior quality of their statesmanship, and the inertia of their to be susceptible to exploitation by extremist elements and to the imposition of authoritarian and unrepresentative forms of government. The Arab governments will, under present conditions, endeavor to resist Soviet penetration or exploitation despite their weakness, and will continue to seek a more positive Western orientation.

c. The weakness of the Arab governments is reflected throughout the area in their retarded economic and social development, which has been further aggravated by the economic dislocations arising from the recent hostilities and by the presence of the Palestinian refugees in their territory. However, in the absence of progressive or capable leadership, the ability of the Arab governments to raise the living standards of their peoples above the level at which social revolution is a recurring threat will depend upon the provision of external technical and financial assistance.

d. The respective military forces of the Arab states also reflect the weaknesses of the Arab governments. In addition to their demonstrated failure to act in concert against the Israeli Army, their ability to maintain internal security will be seriously prejudiced as long as the arms embargo is continued. Moreover, until a firm settlement is obtained in Palestine, the disproportionate emphasis upon their respective military establishments at the expense of economic and social reforms will continue to burden the Arab states as well as Israel.

9. While the Near Eastern area has become a point of major interest to the United States only comparatively recently, the United Kingdom has had important strategic, political, and economic interests in the Near Eastern area for over a century. However, the objectives of both governments are now substantially the same although there are at times differences of opinion on methods and procedures. In addition we have had divergent views from time to time on the question of the future of Palestine. Nevertheless, the desirability for a common approach to problems and collaboration wherever possible has been clearly demonstrated by the useful results of our cooperation to date, particularly since the outbreak of World War II.

10. On August 11, 1949 the UN Security Council adopted a resolution expressing the view that the armistice agreements concluded between Israel and Egypt, Transjordan, Lebanon and Syria during the past six months supersede the Truce provided for in the Council’s resolutions of May 29 and July 15, 1948. In the United States view and in the view of other members of the Council this action brought to an end the stringent measures provided for in the resolutions of May 29 and July 15, 1948. Among these measures was the embargo placed on the parties to the dispute, and all other governments and authorities concerned, to refrain from importing or exporting war material and introducing military personnel into the affected area.

The United States view with regard to the export of arms to the area was expressed by Senator Austin in the Council on Thursday afternoon, August 4, as follows:

“So far as the United States is concerned, it does not intend to allow the export of arms which would permit a competitive arms race in the area. Export of arms to this area of the world should be strictly limited to such arms as are within the scope of the legitimate security requirements, again as recommended by Dr. Bunche. We hope that prudence will prevail not only among the parties but among all nations of the world which are in a position to supply arms and that they will pursue a policy similar to that which we intend to pursue.”

11. Analysis of the estimated funds which are likely to be available during the next few years from all sources, including both grant and loan funds, reveals that the development projects required for solution of the refugee problem will probably absorb most of the external financing available from all sources for the Near East. Therefore the questions of economic development and of solution of the refugee problem are indivisible and must be considered simultaneously and carefully coordinated.

12. Our policy toward Israel and the Arab states will be an important factor in determining whether they can be stimulated to constructive action in their own behalf to provide the basis for a stable and progressive political structure and a balanced and viable economy. If either Israel or the Arab states fail to take such action, the security of the Eastern Mediterranean and Near Eastern area and United States national interests therein will be jeopardized.

13. In addition our policy toward Israel will be an important factor in determining whether Israeli policy with respect to Jerusalem, Arab Palestine, and the Arab states develops along aggressive or peaceable lines. If Israeli policy develops along expansionist and aggressive lines, the security of the area and United States national interests therein will be jeopardized.

14. In view of the strong passions which have been aroused, it will be many years before relations between Israel and neighboring countries can become sufficiently stable as to be proof against sudden and violent disruption. The situation, accordingly, requires careful implementation on our part, over a long period, of an objective, impartial but firm policy which will instill moderation in both parties to the controversy and help to ensure that the competing nationalisms do not get out of hand.

Conclusions

15. Our policy toward Israel and the Arab states should be based on the fundamental propositions that: a. The political and economic stability of the Israel and Arab states is of critical importance to the security of the United States. In the NSC memorandum “Eastern Mediterranean and Middle East—Basic U.S. Position”, approved November 24, 1947, it is stated that: “The security of the Eastern Mediterranean and of the Middle East is vital to the security of the United States.”*

b. It is in the national interest of the United States to have the respect and, in so far as possible, good will of all the peoples of the Near and Middle East, Jews and Arabs alike, and their orientation toward the West and away from the Soviet Union.

c. The differences between the new Israeli state and the neighboring Arab states should be reconciled at least to the extent that Israel and the Arab states would act in concert to oppose Soviet aggression.

d. We should provide advice and guidance in the solution of the economic, social, and political problems of the area on an impartial basis, as between Israel and the Arab states, contingent upon the willingness of these countries to apply the maximum of self help.

e. There should also be close United States–United Kingdom collaboration wherever possible to achieve the basic objectives. In addition the United States should bear in mind the desirability of collaborating with France and with Turkey and other Moslem non-Arab states in the area for the same purpose whenever it is feasible and practicable.

16. We should continue our efforts to achieve a settlement of the Palestine problem along the following lines, working principally through the United Nations, but supporting those efforts through unilateral action and through joint United States–United Kingdom influence where appropriate:

Immigration:

a. Israel should in its own interests, accept the principle of coordinating the flow of Jewish immigration with the developing capabilities of its economy.3

Refugees:

b. Primary responsibility should rest with Israel and the Arab states for solution of the refugee problem, aided by such outside assistance as is available.

c. In accordance with the spirit of the General Assembly resolution of December 11, 1948, Israel should accept the principle of maximum possible repatriation of refugees who so desire, should begin immediately actual repatriation on a reasonable scale within the number to be agreed in a final settlement, and should carry out such repatriation to conclusion as quickly as possible.

d. The Arab states should accept the principle of substantial resettlement in their states of the large number of refugees who do not wish or who cannot be repatriated, and should take immediate steps to initiate such resettlement.

e. We should endeavor to obtain for the refugees adequate compensation from Israel for abandoned refugee lands and property in accordance with the General Assembly Resolution of December 11, 1948, and should resist efforts by Israel or the Arab states directly or indirectly to relate the question of payment of such compensation to the question of war indemnities.

f. We should be prepared within the framework of the United Nations, in accordance with policy already established, to support with financial and technical assistance a program for repatriation and resettlement, of Palestine refugees. Our contribution is contingent upon formulation of a plan which is satisfactory to us and has a reasonable chance of success at reasonable cost, upon full acceptance by the Arabs and Israelis of such a program and the responsibilities involved, upon their active cooperation in carrying out the program, and upon satisfactory contributions by other interested governments.

Economic:

g. We should seek to promote economic arrangements between Israel and the Arab states such as the resumption of commercial intercourse within and through the area, uninterrupted flow of petroleum products, and uninhibited operation of and access to internal and international surface and air transport facilities.

Territories:

h. We should assist the Israelis and the Arabs to achieve a final settlement of the territorial question in Palestine by agreement or, failing that, by supporting a Palestine Conciliation Commission proposal for presentation to the parties and, if necessary, to the UN or by some acceptable modus vivendi. Although the United States would be prepared to accept a solution freely agreed to by the parties, if it is necessary for the United States to state its views, it should advance the following policy which is consistent with that approved by the President:

If Israel wishes to retain any areas in Palestine allocated to the proposed Arab state under the UN resolution of November 29, 1947 and now occupied by Israeli forces, Israel should, if the Arab states so demand, make territorial compensation elsewhere and/or make other concessions of a non-territorial character as are required to reach an equitable agreement which could provide the basis for a lasting peace.

Jerusalem Area:

i. We should support the principle of the internationalization of the Jerusalem area as defined in the General Assembly Resolution of December 11, 1948. This might be accomplished along the following lines: (1) United Nations control of the Holy Places;

(2) Division of the Jerusalem area into sub-areas to be administered by the respective adjacent states under the supervision of the United Nations; and

(3) The establishment of obligations on the part of the adjacent states to observe basic requirements with respect to demilitarization, free access and observance of human rights, and the establishment of a system of compulsory arbitration to determine whether these obligations are being fulfilled.

17. In the light of the Security Council Resolution of August 11, 1949 and in order to promote internal security as a basis for general security in the Near Eastern area, we should permit the export of reasonable amounts of military material to Israel and the Arab states limited to such arms as are within the scope of legitimate security requirements.

18. We should by a policy of sympathy and firm leadership encourage Israel and the Arab states to develop friendly cooperation with the Western nations, to exclude or control subversive influences, and to achieve relations of good will and trust with one another.

19. We should endeavor to prevent discrimination against Jews in the Arab states and against Arabs in Israel.

20. Any kind of regional economic or political arrangement to include Israel and the Arab states seems now unlikely because of the dissensions and suspicions which prevail in the area, and may be quite unlikely for some time to come. However, it is a possibility which should be kept under continuing review in the light of developments in the area.

21. It is desirable that the economic opportunities of the peoples of the area should be raised above the level at which social revolution is a recurring threat. The United States should encourage the economic development and expansion of economic opportunities of the people of the area. We should, therefore, in addition to supporting a program for solution of the refugee and other economic problems, which is designed solely to restore the status quo ante, prepare or assist in the preparation of a coordinated long-range program of economic and social development for Israel and the Arab states to be implemented by both multilateral and unilateral action through (a) technical assistance; (b) loans from the United States Export-Import Bank and the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development; (c) grants or loans from interested UN states; (d) technical and financial assistance from appropriate United Nations agencies; or (e) a combination of the foregoing. Any U.S. or U.N. assistance under such a program should depend upon a real effort on the part of the Israel and Arab states to help themselves and each other in consonance with the principles enunciated in the above conclusions, should be coordinated with such efforts, should be designed to promote mutually advantageous economic relations between Israel and the Arab states and to integrate their economies into a broader international economy, and should allow ample and increasing scope for private enterprise.4

1 This lot is a serial master file of the National Security Council documents and correspondence and related Department of State memoranda for the years 1947–1961, as maintained by the Executive Secretariat of the Department of State.

2 This paper represents a revision of NSC 47/1, dated September 1; regarding the latter, see editorial note, p. 1339 [Pg. 1339 includes portions of Doc. 930 and Doc. 931].

* Memo for NSC from Executive Secretary, subject, “Documents Resulting from Conversations with the British in Regard to the Eastern Mediterranean and the Middle East”, dated November 19, 1947. [Footnote in the source text; for documentation on “The Pentagon Talks of 1947”, see Foreign Relations, 1947, vol. v, pp. 485 ff.]

3 Subparagraph 16a did not appear in NSC 47/1. Subparagraphs b through h are identical with those appearing in NSC 47/1, except for the relettering of the subparagraphs.

4 The National Security Council and the Secretary of the Treasury adopted NSC 47/2 on October 17 and submitted the paper to President Truman “with the recommendation that he approve the Conclusions contained therein and direct their implementation by all appropriate executive departments and agencies of the U.S. Government under the coordination of the Secretary of State.” (note of October 17 by Admiral Souers). The President approved the paper on October 20 and directed its implementation along the lines of the note (memorandum of October 20 by Admiral Souers to the National Security Council. S/S–NSC Files, Lot 63 D 351).

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern, South Asian, and African Affairs (McGhee) 501.BB Palestine/10–1849

[Document 998]

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern, South Asian, and African Affairs (McGhee)1

confidential [Washington,] October 18, 1949.

Subject: Jews in Iraq; Proposed SyriA–Iraq Union; Jerusalem; and Israeli attack in the Gaza Area.

Participants: Eliahu Elath—Ambassador of Israel

NEA—Mr. McGhee

ANE—Mr. Wilkins

ANE—Mr. Clark

ANE—Mr. Stabler

[Here follow introductory sections and the discussion on “Jews in Iraq.”]

2. Proposed SyriA–Iraq Union: 2 Mr. Elath said that reports his Government has received regarding the proposed SyriA–Iraq union had caused considerable concerned in Tel Aviv. Israel did not, of course, wish to intervene in the internal affairs of any country and did not wish to do so in this situation, particularly if union was popularly desired. However, his Government wished to inform the United States Government of its concern over the proposed union with respect to the security of Israel and the general stability in the Near East. His Government felt that such a union might bring with it disorders which would threaten the security of Israel, It might also give rise to the belief among the peoples of Syria and Iraq that the strength of the new state was such that it could take revenge on Israel for the defeat of the Arab states. Israel believed that the union of two weak states did not mean a strong state and in any event Israel could defend itself. However, it was possible that all the present armistice arrangements and any prospects for peaceful settlement of the Palestine problem might be upset by the union.

Mr. Elath also said that this union could have grave internal repercusions in Israel. The extremist elements might well regard the union as justification for action by Israel to annex Eastern Palestine. The Government, which would be extremely hard pressed by the extremists, would be placed in a most difficult position.

I told the Ambassador that we had received a certain amount of information concerning the proposed union and that there were certain aspects which have caused us concern. I indicated that it was, of course, the policy of the United States not to intervene in the affairs of other states and that while we would follow developments closely, the attitude which we adopted would necessarily be within the limitation of our basic policy regarding non-intervention. We neither supported nor opposed the proposals for a union of Syria and Iraq and believed the peoples of these two countries should have an opportunity of expressing their views concerning them through their own constitutional processes. I expressed appreciation for the expression of views of his government which I said we had, in fact, anticipated.3

With reference to the Ambassador’s remarks regarding the annexation of Eastern Palestine, I expressed the hope that Mr. Elath did not mean by this that the proposed union and the question of Eastern Palestine were in any way related. The Ambassador assured me that his remarks only meant to indicate the possible attitude of the extremists toward union.

3. Jerusalem: Referring to his talk with Mr. Rusk on September 28, Mr. Elath said that he had discussed the matter of the PCC Jerusalem proposals with Mr. Eban, Permanent Israeli Representative to the United Nations. Mr. Eban had informed him of his belief that most of the South American delegations to the United Nations agreed with the Israeli point of view with respect to Jerusalem. Mr. Eban, following the suggestion made by Mr. Rusk to Mr. Elath at their meeting on September 28, had also discussed the Jerusalem question with members of the United States delegation in order to clarify any misunderstanding which might exist between the two positions. From these discussions it was quite clear that basic differences existed between the United States and Israeli positions. Mr. Elath, believing that we would wish to avoid any headlong clash of views during the General Assembly consideration of the Jerusalem proposals, suggested the possibility that the United States and Israeli delegations might now work out some agreement of views. He implied that the United States should adopt a position more in line with that of Israel.

I told the Ambassador that the United States as a member of the PCC had participated in the drafting of the proposals for a permanent international regime of the Jerusalem Area and that we generally supported the plan. We recognized that amendments would probably be presented during General Assembly discussion and this Government was prepared to give careful consideration to any amendments which were advanced. Meanwhile, it was suggested that as the PCC was convening shortly in New York, the Israeli delegation might find it useful to consult with the Jerusalem Committee of the PCC in order to clarify any misunderstandings.

[Here follows an account of the discussion on Jerusalem and on the Israeli attack in the Gaza area; regarding the latter subject, see telegram 673, October 20, to Tel Aviv, page 1448.]

1 Drafted by Mr. Stabler.

2 For documentation on this subject, see pp. 180 [Pg. 180 is part of Doc. 76] ff.

3 Ambassador McDonald conversed with Foreign Minister Sharett on October 17. The proposed union of Syria and Iraq was the chief subject of discussion. Mr. Sharett exhibited “considerable perturbation” and indicated it “would be idle pursue peace objectives when surrounded by an earthquake.” The Ambassador gave as his “overall conviction” that “Sharett wishes distinctly to convey to me that ‘all bets are off’ re any previous commitment Israel may have made on territorial, refugee or any other settlement looking forward peace in NE if a fusion of Iraq and Syria is consummated.” (telegram 752, October 18, noon, from Tel Aviv, 790D.90G/10–1849)

The Minister in Lebanon (Pinkerton) to the Secretary of State 501.BB Palestine(E)/10–1849: Telegram

[Document 999]

The Minister in Lebanon (Pinkerton) to the Secretary of State

restricted
priority Beirut, October 18, 1949—noon.

549. Simes 19. [From Clapp.] Future organizational plans: 1. To clarify background suggestions which follow, appears advisable stress points on which ESM thinking at variance with Department. (a) Funds required by long-term development body for first year’s operations not likely exceed $5,000,000; mostly required to bridge present gaps between preliminary general surveys and saleable engineering plans. Presently countries possess volumes of engineering reconnaissance and generalized analysis, but no specific engineering work of the nature, required to make a project saleable or bankable. Governments here inexperienced in such matters, and guidance for considerable time required to bring schemes to point where positive action on complex project can be recommended. Therefore, for fiscal 1951, unnecessary and undesirable seek long-term development on modest scale. When November field work completed, ESM may be prepared to recommend more funds sooner.

(b) ESM can report continued progress in relationships with Syrian, Lebanese, Jordan Governments, but only because has studiously avoided pressure on resettlement. Opinion in Arab states remains so violently opposed to abandonment of rights of refugees to repatriation in Palestine that contemplation by Governments of settling them elsewhere would likely make governments more shaky. Practical advantages of local public works to prevent further deterioration morale, to cause added mobility in refugee populations, and to secure direct benefits from projects constructed, suffice to make such limited programs acceptable, and their effect will undoubtedly be to achieve in part the objective of resettlement but through choice of individual refugees. However, whatever ESM or its successors in the near future can accomplish will depend on the divorce of its activities, in Arab eyes, from any connection with political settlement of the Palestine war. ESM firmly of opinion that necessary connection between economic development activity and political conciliation should only take place at seats of government of interceding powers, and that consolidation in field, under agent general or other aegis, is unnecessary and doomed to frustrate economic approach.

2. Referring Department document suggesting NESDA 1 and September 23 paper headed Palestine Political and Refugee Problems, following are ESM views: (a) Agreed consolidation of PCC political operations under agent general sound. However, for reasons above-stated and in line with planning later set forth in this cable, would delete references in September 23 draft to relief, and to development. Agent general, representative of SYG, would be co-ordinate with chairman director of EFINDI (Economic and Financial Development Institute of Near East—have other suggestions on title) whose functions outlined below.

(b) While ESM finds much of NESDA draft acceptable, its present thinking would involve recommending the following steps: (1) Continuation of UNRPR only until April 1.

(2) Establishment early in 1950 at latest of new agency EFINDI by interested governments undertaking to contribute toward development plans of area. EFINDI’s functions in development substantially same as NESDA’s with reservations expressed Paragraph 1a this cable: further functions in regard to take over, under contract with SYG, of UNRPR operations as from April 1; planning and negotiation of arrangements for works projects with Governments; co-ordination of work of charitable agencies (the volume of whose direct assistance in meeting refugee needs has assumed very considerable proportions nearly equalling UNRPR assistance). Device of contract relationship with SYG avoids establishment of a third agency (or introduction of IRO, to which ESM opposed account IRO historical connection with Palestine immigration), permits close coordination of relief and work projects, and of work projects and developments. Hoped that SYG would agree support appeal for funds as for UNRPR for disbursement by EFINDI, but EFINDI would require authorization use such funds either for direct relief or wage payments.

3. EFINDI would endeavor work out satisfactory arrangements, at as early a date as practical, with Middle East Governments to take over relief operations from agencies, and to establish work relief projects with a view to eventual full financial as well as administrative responsibility for refugees. EFINDI would call on specialized UN agencies for assistance as appropriate in technical fields. Would start specific engineering studies forthwith.

4. Calculation under study to estimate funds required by EFINDI during calendar 1950, for relief and work relief. Very preliminary calculations indicate that costs may not exceed present UNRPR budget by amounts that appear unmanageable.

5. Have given only preliminary consideration methods staffing EFINDI. Most workable proposal yet suggested is to employ director and staff through member governments, and arrange detail of technicians when required from UN or UN specialized agencies. In many of its functions, EFINDI would fit US Point 4 plans and UN plans for technical assistance.

Have discussed foregoing with Morton and Labonne, and suggest Department take up with British and French. Would appreciate Department’s views on including Turkey in these considerations. While financial stake Turkey would obviously be small, there are advantages to increased interest. Consul general has been helpful colleague, and Turk’s presence EFINDI could help Arab states and improve Turk’s relationships Near East neighbors.

We are revising NESDA September 29 draft and Palestine September 23 draft to reflect above changes. Will telegraph or mail revision end of week. [Clapp.]

Pinkerton

1 Possibly the draft to be submitted to Mr. Clapp; see Mr. McGhee’s memorandum of September 26 to Mr. Rusk, p. 1403 [Pg. 1403 includes portions of Doc. 975 and Doc. 976].

The Ambassador in Israel (McDonald) to the Secretary of State 501.BB Palestine/10–1849: Telegram

[Document 1000]

The Ambassador in Israel (McDonald) to the Secretary of State

confidential Tel Aviv, October 18, 1949—1 p. m.

756. In conference lasting 90 minutes with Foreign Minister October 17, Ford and I discussed substance Deptel 636,1 6372 and 647.3 Foreign Minister first apologized his inability see Ford sooner explaining “press of business” had kept him otherwise occupied.

Re general question Jerusalem and particularly PCC proposals Foreign Minister did not depart materially from position heretofore laid down by lesser officials of Foreign Office (Embtels 726, October 5, and 740, October 10).4 He called PCC proposals “provocative, anachronistic” document, saying both immigration limitation and demilitarization features particularly “unrealistic”. He said Israel “fully aware” deep interest Christian world in safeguarding holy places but pointed out “fully 90 percent” these places in Arab hands and thus he was unable understand why Israel being “repeatedly importuned” in matter actually outside its control. He added Israel just as much concerned safeguarding its own holy place (specifying Wailing Wall and Rachael’s Tomb) which likewise remained Arab hands. He concluded by saying Israel “fully prepared approach Jerusalem question coldly and dispassionately” and “to give all consideration outside world opinion provided such outside opinion gives similar consideration to Israel’s interests”.

Re violence press campaign against PCC proposals and threats physical violence implied in Jerusalem Congentel 609 and from other “mysterious” sources, Foreign Minister inclined dismiss latter as “work of irresponsible but harmless trouble makers”. Press reaction showed depth of Jewish feeling re Jerusalem “which had lasted some thousands of years” and which PCC plan has merely “fanned into new flame”. This connection Foreign Minister cited “violent anti-Israel campaign” recently conducted by world Catholic press, all of which he said was based on “slanderous lies and misrepresentation”.

Comment: Ford concurs with me in belief that, pending discussion Jerusalem question by GA, no useful purpose would be served in further presentation subject here. I gather these people have formulated plans of their own for GA debate, and until then they appear to be stalling by plowing old ground. Moreover, rather graver subject discussed at same long conference (Embtel 752, October 185 ) has tended distract Foreign Minister’s attention from Jerusalem issue which for moment appears have more of an academic than active interest for him.

I am inclined to agree with Foreign Minister’s estimate of anonymous threats of violence although in view last year’s tragic happenings I propose bring each instance this nature, however far fetched, promptly to Foreign Minister’s attention. End comment.

Sent Department 756; repeated Jerusalem 93; Department pass Amman 57.

McDonald

1 Dated September 30, not printed, but see footnote 2 to memorandum by Wilkins, September 26, p. 1407 [Pg. 1407 includes portions of Doc. 978 and Doc. 979].

2 Dated September 30, not printed, but see footnote 2, p. 1412 [Pg. 1412 is part of Doc. 981].

3 Not printed; it directed Tel Aviv to bring to the attention of the Israeli Foreign Office the substance of telegram 609, October 6, from Jerusalem (501.BB Palestine/10–649). No. 609 advised that the Consulate General had received a “visiting card” from the New Underground for the Freedom of Jerusalem. The reverse of the card was said to bear a handwritten inscription to “tell Truman and Acheson through your facilities we will deliver all information to them.” The message also informed that General Riley had received a similar card, with the statement “withdraw your proposals and inform all your agents. Stop it. Otherwise you will go the same way as Bernadotte.” (867N.00/10–649)

4 Latter not printed.

5 Not printed, but see footnote 3, p. 1441 [Pg. 1441 is part of Doc. 998].

The Consul at Jerusalem (Burdett) to the Secretary of State 501.BB Palestine/10–1849: Telegram

[Document 1001]

The Consul at Jerusalem (Burdett) to the Secretary of State

secret Jerusalem, October 18, 1949—4 p. m.

627. Reference last paragraph Contel 617, October 121 reporting that Shiloah informed Riley Israel prepared designate representative for direct negotiations with Arabs at any time.

During recent talk with Riley, Glubb inquired whether Israel now ready for reasonable compromise settlement. Glubb expressed view present situation could not last and perhaps two countries could work out agreement. Riley states Glubb did not appear expect any major concessions from Israel and specifically admitted that not practical repatriate appreciable number refugees.

In entirely separate discussion Colonel Seif el Din, chief Egyptian delegate at Rhodes talks, commented to Riley on unsatisfactory nature present situation and desirability reaching some definitive agreement. Colonel Seif el Din stated its retention2 by Egypt not essential but some provision for refugees now there necessary.

Riley has at various times voiced concern over present impermanent armistice terms and desirability considering situation which will exist when present armistice agreements lapse after one year. He is reflecting on feasibility using MACs as medium for direct discussions between parties aimed at de facto agreements on wide range of subjects of mutual interest. Although not so labelled, agreements might become basis for permanent settlement. Riley realizes Israel anxious to initiate direct talks separately with each Arab state and believes Transjordan and Egyptian thinking may be veering this direction.

Comments—Consulate General would appreciate guidance from Department on this subject for discussions with Riley. Does Department believe encouragement should be given to direct talks between parties at present and are MACs considered suitable medium. Consulate General cannot conceive that Israel intends to relinquish any part of territory now held (except for minor border rectifications) or to accept any appreciable number of refugees. Talks and any resulting agreements therefore would be based on existing status quo. 3

Burdett

1 Not printed, but see footnote 3, p. 1421 [Pg. 1421 is part of Doc. 988].

2 Presumably, retention of the Gaza strip was intended.

3 Ambassador McDonald, on November 8, expressed his complete agreement with Mr. Burdett’s conclusions as set forth in the final two sentences of telegram 627 (telegram 810 from Tel Aviv, 501.BB Palestine/11–849).

The United States Representative at the United Nations (Austin) to the Secretary of State 501.BB Palestine/10–1949: Telegram

[Document 1002]

The United States Representative at the United Nations (Austin) to the Secretary of State

restricted New York, October 19, 1949—7:51 p. m.

1277. Palestine Conciliation Commission held first meeting of third session New York October 19. Delegations not present. Following highlights:

(1) Report of Azcarate—Principal Secretary Azcarate reported on his trip to Jerusalem and Arab States during recent recess. With regard to matters which PCC has instructed him take up in Near East, stated that Servoise was discussing question of blocked accounts with Egyptian and Israeli representatives and that there existed possibility for limited unblocking. Regarding possibility that Arabs resident vicinity armistice lines might be permitted work their land located in Israeli-held territory, Azcarate said that Israel and Jordan had reached agreement in principle that matter should be taken up in special committee created in Israeli-Jordan armistice agreement. Re reunion of separated families, representatives of Lebanon and Egypt had entered into contact with Israeli representatives and discussions were progressing satisfactorily. Efforts to persuade Israel accept PCC point of view re orange groves had produced completely negative results.

Israelis had informed Azcarate that reasons for movement government Ministries to Jerusalem were that Tel Aviv was too crowded and in order to give maximum economic and social life to Jerusalem. Israelis maintained that similar movement taking place in Old City, which had in effect become capital of Arab Palestine.

Azcarate informed PCC Jordan building new road to Bethlehem from Old City which will pass close to Government House. Israelis have constructed two block houses near Government House. These located in neutral zone according present line of demarcation in Government House area but under proposed new line demarcation, now being considered by Israel and Jordan, will lie in Israeli zone.

(2) PCC decided hold pro forma meetings with Arab and Israeli delegations in near future.

(3) PCC decided allow matter of appointment UN representative Jerusalem to die on vine by writing letter to SYG expressing regret SYG had been unable find candidate acceptable to PCC.

(4) View wide-spread misinterpretation draft Jerusalem statute, PCC instructed its legal adviser prepare explanatory study refuting main criticisms which PCC might consider releasing to press and members GA at later date.

Boisanger and Yalcin desire come Washington for consultations with Department. They consider it preferable such consultations take place with participation new US representative and hope he can be named by end of next week.

Austin

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in Israel 867N.00/10–1749: Telegram

[Document 1003]

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in Israel 1

confidential Washington, October 20, 1949—8 p. m.

673. FYI Oct 18 McGhee informed Elath our concern over report in Jlem tel 625, Oct 172 rptd to you 127. McGhee re-emphasized our view mil phase in Pal definitely finished and no justification for further mil action any sort. McGhee said Israeli actions this type cld only serve exacerbate present situation and make settlement more difficult. Elath was requested inform Israeli Govt our views.

Acheson

1 This telegram was repeated to Cairo and Jerusalem.

2 Not printed; it reported information from General Riley that Israeli armed forces had attacked Beit Hanun, a town on the northern tip of the Gaza strip which divided the Israeli and Egyptian zones. The Israeli-Egyptian armistice did not specifically permit or prohibit civilians in the area but Arab civilians had infiltrated during the summer to cultivate their orange groves and to harvest the now-ready crop. The attack drove out the civilians, Egyptian forces reporting 4 known dead and 19 wounded (867N.00/10–1749).

The Acting United States Representative at the United Nations (Jessup) to the Secretary of State 501.BB Palestine/10–2249: Telegram

[Document 1004]

The Acting United States Representative at the United Nations (Jessup) to the Secretary of State

top secret New York, October 22, 1949—1:02 p. m.

1285. Following learned in strictest confidence October 21 from Fawzi Pasha el Mulqi.

King Abdullah and Jordan Government have decided proclaim annexation Arab Palestine by Jordan on January 1, 1950. However, if Arab states by any chance move to set up independent state in Arab Palestine in intervening period, annexation will be proclaimed before January 1. Fawzi said United Kingdom approved idea of annexation and that he certain United Kingdom would extend terms Anglo-Jordan defense treaty to new territory. Just to be on safe side Jordan would request United Kingdom give formal undertaking re extension treaty before proclaiming annexation. If United Kingdom refused Fawzi thought Abdullah might not go ahead with plan.

Abdullah motivated by conviction Israelis will never give up any territory they now occupy and that he should take steps ensure retention that part Palestine occupied by Jordan. After annexation King plans hold elections for Jordan Parliament in which residents annexed area will participate.

Fawzi said that six months ago feeling against Abdullah in Arab Palestine was so strong, because of territory given up in Jordan-Israeli armistice agreement, that King risked being shot every time he went there. Now, however, his stock has risen to such a degree that he thinks he could even risk a plebiscite on annexation question if this were necessary. Main reason for this change, according to Fawzi, is that Arab Palestinians have come to realize that Jordan is only Arab state which can and will protect their interests.

Department please pass London as USUN 57, Amman as USUN 3, Jerusalem as USUN 6.

Jessup

The Secretary of State to the Consulate General at Jerusalem 501.BB Palestine/10–1849: Telegram

[Document 1005]

The Secretary of State to the Consulate General at Jerusalem 1

secret Washington, October 24, 1949—7 p. m.

400. Your tel 627 Oct 18. Dept has always considered direct talks shld be encouraged particularly when it appears such talks wld lead to constructive action toward final settlement (Deptel 354 Aug 312 and Depcirgram Oct. 14, 2:15 p. m.). Dept sees no reason why MACs shld not be medium for direct discussions on wider range of subjects (you will recall Dept’s proposal that Israel–Jordan MAC under Riley consider broader aspects Jlem question), but believes parties concerned must themselves make decision on this matter.

Dept does not agree that present armistice agreements automatically lapse after one year. Provisions are made in all agreements for revision or suspension by mutual consent any time or after one year in absence mutual consent conference may be convoked to review agreement but parties continue to be bound in all events by injunctions against resort to armed action of any sort. However, Dept does agree it most desirable efforts be made move beyond armistice stage.

Acheson

1 This telegram was repeated by airgram to London, Amman, Cairo, Beirut, and Damascus.

2 This was a repeat of telegram 3126, August 30, to London, p. 1338 [Pg. 1338 includes portions of Doc. 929 and Doc. 930].

The United States Representative at the United Nations (Austin) to the Secretary of State 501.BB Palestine/10–2449: Telegram

[Document 1006]

The United States Representative at the United Nations (Austin) to the Secretary of State

secret New York, October 24, 1949—11:59 p. m.

Delga 138. PCC met with Arab delegates October 24 at request Egyptian delegate who had been instructed by Cairo make certain observations. Following highlights of meeting.

Abdel Moneim began by recalling that from very beginning PCC discussions Egyptian Government had insisted upon return of Palestine refugees. Egypt had acquiesced in PCC moves designed facilitate final Palestine solution, such as May 12 protocol and sending ESM to NE, but still refugees not returned.

When ESM visited Egypt Abdel Moneim made following proposals to Clapp: 1. Original inhabitants Gaza area should be permitted cultivate hinterland other side armistice lines, which not being cultivated by Israelis. Such arrangement would improve food situation Gaza area.

2. Original inhabitants that part of Gaza strip which became no man’s land under Israel-Egyptian armistice agreement should be permitted return from Egyptian-occupied Gaza area.

3. The many refugees in Gaza strip who come from Beersheba region should be permitted return and cultivate lands which lying fallow.

Abdel Moneim concluded his remarks re refugees by asking PCC whether it possible consider refugee and territorial questions separately. Could Arab delegates make territorial demands without reference to disposition refugee problem? He asked for PCC guidance. PCC states that in its opinion there could be no lasting solution of one question without a solution of the other, but that progress could be made separately toward solution of each problem.

Abdel Moneim then referred to PCC letter to Arab delegates of September 2 transmitting text of draft declaration concerning Holy Places outside of Jerusalem1 (document A/AC/25/2). He said that in opinion of Egyptian Government Arab states, which traditionally have scrupulously respected Holy Places, were not the ones to ask to sign such a declaration. When UN had decided re more important Holy Places in Jerusalem, then Egypt would abide by this decision. When PCC asked him clarify, Abdel Moneim heatedly replied that in simple, terms Egyptian Government saw no reason sign declaration of this “minor aspect” Palestine problem while major issues covered in December 11 resolution remain unsolved. He thereupon orally committed Egyptian Government to protect such Holy Places in Palestine as might remain under Egyptian jurisdiction and said this should be sufficient for PCC.

All other Arab delegates strongly followed same line, refusing to sign draft declaration and orally making same commitment as had Egyptian. Fawzi Pasha (Jordan) suggested that PCC submit these oral declarations to GA as commitments Arab states re Holy Places outside Jerusalem.

Comment—This new common Arab front very likely is result maneuvers Fawzi Pasha to persuade Arab delegates support King Abdullah’s desire see status quo maintained in Jerusalem. The Department will recall that one of provisions of PCC draft declaration on Holy Places outside Jerusalem is that pending final settlement Palestine problem governments concerned would guarantee freedom of access to Holy Places in territory at present occupied under armistice agreements.

Abdel Moneim next informed PCC that upon instructions Cairo, Egyptian delegate was preparing draft declaration concerning rights of Arabs who are now or may be residents of Israeli-occupied territory. Declaration is to be based on declaration of human rights and genocide convention and will provide for formal guarantees concerning individual and property rights of Arabs in question. Egyptian delegate will submit this draft declaration to PCC with request that PCC ask Israeli delegate that arrangements be carried out for declaration to be made by Israeli Government.

PCC said would examine declaration as soon as Egyptian delegate made available.

Austin

1 See Palun 296, September 2, from Lausanne, and footnote 1, p. 1356 [Pg. 1356 includes portions of Doc. 939 and Doc. 940].

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom 501.BB Palestine/10–2548: Telegram

[Document 1007]

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom

secret Washington, October 25, 1949—5 p. m.

3828. US continues favor incorporation Arab Pal in Jordan but Dept considers action premature this time (Deptel 3768 Oct 191 ). Re action after GA (Embtel 4218 Oct 202 ) Dept believes matter might be reconsidered then in light GA action re Pal and gen polit and econ developments in NE. We have discussed matter informally with Brit Emb rep but made clear further consideration depended on developments.3

Acheson

1 Not printed; it summarized the conversation of Messrs. Wilkins and Greenhill on October 14; see p. 1426 [Pg. 1426 includes portions of Doc. 993 and Doc. 994].

2 Not printed; it conveyed what was described as the impression of the British Foreign Office that the United States might be “willing agree incorporation Arab Palestine in Jordan after GA.” (867N.014/10–2049)

3 Messrs. Wilkins and Greenhill discussed the Palestine problem again on October 21. The latter stated that “Adequate arrangements should be made for the safety of the Holy Places and access to them.” Later in the discussion, he said that “The United Kingdom was prepared to give general support to the Palestine Conciliation Commission’s plan for the internationalization of the Jerusalem area … It was not anxious, however, to take the initiative or to bring pressure to bear on Israel or the Arab states with regard to the plan.” He also stated that his Government would avoid discussing the incorporation of Arab Palestine into Jordan during the current session of the General Assembly but would wish such action realized at the end of the session.Mr. Wilkins’ memorandum of conversation notes that “I pointed out that the views of the Foreign Office with regard to Jerusalem were not completely clear to me. I said that if the United Kingdom Delegation confined its remarks in the General Assembly to the safety of the Holy Places and access to them, the impression might be created in the General Assembly that the United Kingdom did not generally support the internationalization of the Jerusalem area. Mr. Greenhill said this was not the British intention and that he would bring this point to London’s attention.”

Concerning the formal union of Arab Palestine and Jordan, Mr. Wilkins writes that “I again pointed out that it was too early to tell what action might be taken on this score as it would be necessary to await developments in the General Assembly and to consider the situation in the Near East after the end of the General Assembly before we would be in a position to determine what action could be taken” regarding the matter. (501.BB Palestine/10–2149)

The Secretary of State to the Legation in Lebanon 501.BB Palestine(E)/10–2549: Telegram

[Document 1008]

The Secretary of State to the Legation in Lebanon 1

confidential Washington, October 25, 1949—7 p. m.

642. Esmis 21. [To Clapp.] 1) On Oct 24 Dept officials discussed current thinking re ESM report and UN action in relief, resettlement and polit fields with reps UK, Fr and Turkish embs (Deptel 636 Oct 21).

2) Reps were supplied with a) diagram chart of UN structure2 which might result from anticipated GA action; b) Brief analysis this chart;2 c) Draft GA res2 which was drawn up on basis Legtel 5493 and Deptel 636 for purpose of clarifying our thinking (summary fols separate tel4 ) and d) draft proposal for long-term org (NESDA).2

3) Reps informed four documents were preliminary working drafts and were laid on table to coordinate joint thinking here and to keep in step with your joint thinking in Beirut.

4) Reps were requested ascertain views their govts re draft in light of reports from their reps on ESM.

5) Additional mtg planned in week or ten days. Meanwhile we propose, following receipt, to incorporate views contained in document forwarded from Damascus Oct 22 (Legtel 5565 ) as well as your further views based on Deptel 636.

6) Dept understands Gardiner plans return US during first week Nov via Paris and London. Brit Emb considers itinerary essential for purposes coordination.

Acheson

1 This telegram was repeated to Paris, London, and Ankara and to New York for the American Delegation to the Palestine Conciliation Commission.

2 Not found attached.

2 Not found attached.

2 Not found attached.

3 Dated October 18, not printed.

4 See infra.

2 Not found attached.

5 Identified also as Simes 22 and dated October 20, not printed; it stated that a draft revision of an Economic Survey Mission paper dealing with the political and refugee problems and a draft proposal for a long-term organization would be sent to the Department from Damascus on October 22 (501.BB Palestine(E)/10–2049).

The Secretary of State to the Legation in Lebanon 501.BB Palestine(E)/10–2549: Telegram

[Document 1009]

The Secretary of State to the Legation in Lebanon 1

confidential Washington, October 25, 1949—7 p. m.

643. Esmis 22. [To Clapp.] Summary important provisions preliminary working draft GA res re Pal2 fols:

Preamble: GA recalling Dec 11 res and having examined reports of PCC, ESM and UNRPR.

1. Organization: (A) Establishes UN Pal Comm consisting present PCC members to exercise gen policy supervision re Pal;

(B) Establishes UN Agent Gen Pal responsible direction UN activities re Pal;

(D) Decides continue UNRPR.

2. Political: (A) Calls on Israel Arab states seek agreement by negots conducted with Agent Gen or directly with view final settlement outstanding questions;

(B) Instructs Agent Gen facilitate and expedite effective negots by Israel Arab states in task achieving final settlement and, as circumstances may require, make recommendations to foregoing or to GA thru PCC as necessary;

(C) Requests Agent Gen collaborate closely with UNRPR and NESDA develop effective coordination.

3. Relief: (A) Takes note ESM report re need continue direct relief and develop short range employment projects;

(B) Determines on basis ESM report sum (tentatively $32 million) required;

(C) Urges UN members make voluntary contributions;

(D) Authorizes SYG to advance up to (tentatively $5 million) from UN working capital fund;

(G) Recommends UNRPR collaborate closely with Agent Gen and NESDA;

(J) Requests SYG call upon present operating groups continue services and, if subsequently unable continue, make other arrangements as required.

4. Refugees: (A) Calls on Arab states Israel assume their full responsibility solution refugee problem and facilitate measures internatl assistance;

(B) Takes note ESM report recommending NESDA and declarations certain UN members re willingness participate and urges estab NESDA;

(C) Instructs Agent Gen collaborate closely with NESDA.

5. Compensation: (A) Decides Pal Comm acting through Agent Gen shall have internatl status equivalent protecting state re refugee property losses;

(B) Calls on Israel Arab states to treat Commas having this status;

(C) Requests Israel Arab states notify Agent Gen if they wish undertake protection any Pal refugees;

(D) Instructs Agent Gen take measures effect determination and fulfillment governmental obligations under internatl law or in equity re compensation payments, make appropriate releases and effectuate equitable distribution proceeds.

Acheson

1 This telegram was repeated to London as No. 3834, Paris, and Ankara, and to New York for the American Delegation to the Palestine Conciliation Commission.

2 Presumably the draft resolution cited in paragraph numbered two in telegram 642, supra.

The United States Representative at the United Nations (Austin) to the Secretary of State 501.A Summaries/10–2549: Telegram

[Extract]

[Document 1010]

The United States Representative at the United Nations (Austin) to the Secretary of State

New York, October 25, 1949—11:55 p. m.

1290.

. . . . . . . . . . . . . .

The Council agreed without formal vote Oct. 25 to a suggestion by President Austin that discussion of demilitarization of Jerusalem be postponed pending GA Committee 1 consideration of the PCC report. Fawzi (Egypt), at whose initiative the question was placed on the SC Agenda, registered his disagreement with this procedure but did not formally object.1

. . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Austin

1 For the proceedings of the Security Council on the demilitarization of Jerusalem at its 453rd meeting, see SC, 4th yr., No. 49.

Memorandum by the Acting Secretary of State to the President 501.BB Palestine/10–2049

[Document 1011]

Memorandum by the Acting Secretary of State to the President

Washington, October 26, 1949.

The Palestine Conciliation Commission concluded the second phase of its work at Lausanne, Switzerland on September 16, 1949, and planned to reconvene in New York on October 19, 1949. Although it is not expected that the Commission will commence its formal sessions before November 10, 1949, on which date the report of the Economic Survey Mission is expected to be available, it is important that a United States Representative be in New York to participate in preliminary discussions. Mr. Paul A. Porter, who had been the United States Representative on the Palestine Conciliation Commission, submitted his resignation, effective September 15, 1949. The Department had hoped that Mr. Porter would be able to represent the United States again when the Commission reconvened but he has advised the Department that pending legal business makes it difficult for him to serve at this time.

I am submitting, therefore, for your approval, a request that Mr. Ely E. Palmer, a Career Minister in the Foreign Service, be given a recess appointment as United States Representative on the United Nations Palestine Conciliation Commission.

This appointment is made in accordance with the provisions of Section 2 (d) of Public Law 341, 81st Congress. By virtue of Mr. Palmer’s status in the Foreign Service as Career Minister, he will receive no additional compensation under this appointment.

There is attached herewith a recess commission for your signature if this recommendation meets with your approval.1

James E. Webb

1 Marginal notation by an unidentified Department officer: “Commission returned signed by President 11/3/49.” According to the Department’s announcement, printed in Department of State Bulletin, November 21, 1949, p. 785, Mr. Palmer’s appointment was made by the President on November 4.

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in Israel 811.516 Export-Import Bank/10–2849: Telegram

[Document 1012]

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in Israel

restricted Washington, October 28, 1949—5 p. m.

689. Board Eximbank Oct 26 authorized credit $20 million under $100 million to assist financing purchase US equipment materials services required for industrial projects designed to contribute industrial development Israel, as may be approved from time to time by Board.1 Int 3½%. Amortization 15 yrs.

Each project involving financing of more than $50,000 must be presented to Board for formal approval and projects this amount or under must be submitted from time to time for Boards administrative approval.

Israel already submitted 39 industrial projects amounting abt $11 million.

Board considered and approved financing 28 projects about $6.1 million. Eight projects about $2.7 million require further info and on three about $2.2 million Israeli not completed its study.

Acheson

1 The Department, on October 27, sent to Tel Aviv the text of the press release issued by the Bank concerning the $20 million credit. The release stated that this action brought to $73,350,000 the total credit extended to Israel by the Bank (telegram 687, 811.516 Export-Import Bank/10–2749).

The Consul at Jerusalem (Burdett) to the Secretary of State 501.BB Palestine/10–2949: Airgram

[Document 1013]

The Consul at Jerusalem (Burdett) to the Secretary of State

secret Jerusalem, October 29, 1949.

A–173. The Consulate General respectfully submits the following observations, admittedly general, regarding the future of Arab Palestine and the possibility of its annexation to the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan as seen from Jerusalem.

1. King Abdullah has definitely set his heart on the annexation of Arab Palestine, the sooner the better. Arab Palestine would include the Arab held sections of Jerusalem. His determination probably has been strengthened by reports of negotiations for the union of Iraq and Syria, thus diminishing prospects for fulfilment of the “Greater Syria Plan.” He is also getting old and would like to see his kingdom augmented before his death.

2. The United Kingdom supports this project and is inclined to favor immediate implementation. Although giving lip service to the internationalization of Jerusalem, the British apparently feel that only partition of the city is “practical” with the Arab section becoming part of Jordan. The British Consulate General in Jerusalem, at least, has held reservations regarding the possibility of internationalization for some time.

3. The United States has given its blessings to annexation but at a future date and as part and parcel of a final settlement of the Palestine problem. In addition, it continues to support internationalization of the entire Jerusalem area.

4. The other Arab states, particularly Egypt and Saudi Arabia, are opposed to annexation both from traditional hostility to the Hashemites and the realization that such action would further diminish any remaining prospects of their obtaining territory in Palestine.

5. Israel is also strongly opposed. Her general objection to any increase in the size and therefore the potential power of an Arab state is augmented in this case by the ingrained conviction that Jordan is only Britain in disguise and annexation would mean the return of the British by the kitchen door. Furthermore, an independent Arab Palestine would be relatively easy to control and would in all probability quickly degenerate into a vassal state, if not an actual part of Israel.

6. Should incorporation take place, particularly with the open or camouflaged sanction of the United States and/or the United Kingdom, Israel might quickly seize the opportunity and formally proclaim her sovereignty over all the areas she now controls including the Jewish sections of Jerusalem.

7. The Arabs of Palestine have been the principal victims of the events since 1947. They are depressed, disillusioned and lack any strong leader to replace the discredited old ones. A uniform characteristic is their growing contempt for the United Nations at least in so far as its activities in Palestine are concerned. The refugees have been remarkably patient and have occasioned surprisingly few disturbances; it would be still more surprising if their endurance does not break into disorders on a growing scale. Indications that the breaking point may be near are the increasing numbers who attempt to infiltrate back into Israel and the up-surge of individually organized raids across the demarcation lines. Complaints against living conditions and paucity of food are also growing.

8. Better informed refugees now realize that repatriation in the sense contemplated by the December 11, 1949 resolution of the General Assembly is out of the question and they no longer think the United Nations will enforce the resolution. However, no one dares to say so openly for the great mass of the refugees has been nourished on this illusion and a frank statement of the extent of the deception might kindle an explosion. It would certainly eliminate the chances of leadership of the person making the first announcement.

9. No love for King Abdullah is expressed in private conversation or felt for Jordan despite the King’s recent “triumphal parade” through Palestine. The King is commonly considered a despotic tribesman, and the Jordan Government autocratic in the extreme—the antithesis of the type of regime for which the younger intellectuals in Palestine are allegedly striving. What Palestinians fear is complete subordination to Jordan. Imbued with contempt for the “Jordanian Bedouin”, and conscious of both the small resources of Jordan itself and the scarcity of persons qualified to direct a modern state, they believe that in any joint state Palestinians should play an equal if not leading part. Particularly alarming to them is the present political and economic discrimination. Furthermore, resentment over cession of the Triangle lands is still smouldering and has permanently shaken confidence in the trustworthiness of King Abdullah as a protector against Israel.

10. Nevertheless, a growing number of the moderate, better informed elements appear resigned to the fact that there is no alternative to union with Jordan. They recognize that a viable Arab Palestine is impossible and that such a Lilliputian state would quickly be swallowed by Israel. Under specific conditions in the formulation of which they had a prior voice, incorporation with Jordan would probably be accepted.

11. Talk of union with Israel or close economic bonds between an independent Arab Palestine and Israelis heard. But, the conditions mentioned for this are the product of wishful thinking and clearly unacceptable to Israel. On the whole there does not appear to be any genuine, widely held desire to cooperate with Israel in a realistic manner.

12. Israel’s treatment of its present Arab population; its security arguments against repatriation of Arab refugees; the drastic differences between the semi-socialist communal state of Israel and the Arabs’ traditional mode of existence; and the chauvinistic basically anti-“goy” atmosphere in Israel; indicate that the interests of Palestinian Arabs would be served best by incorporation into Jordan.

13. Careful consideration should be given to the manner of achieving this union to minimize initial resentment and future friction. A unilateral decree of annexation without specific protection for the rights and interests of Palestinians would provoke deep, widespread bitterness difficult to heal. It might even occasion disturbances.

14. In the present circumstances union might be approached by the selection, or preferably election, of a group of Palestinian Arabs (not mere Abdullah marionettes) to represent Palestine and draw up with Jordan representatives an agreement for union under specific and acceptable conditions. The selection might be entrusted to the various mukhtars, heads of families, municipal organizations and committees from the refugees camps. The union could take the form of a kingdom under one crown but with each side of the Jordan possessing local autonomy and controlling its internal affairs. Responsibility for defense; and foreign affairs could rest in a joint body. Such an arrangement would require reduction in the arbitrary power of the King in practice if not in form, and explicit provisions against discrimination in favor of either unit of the Kingdom. Particularly important is permitting the Palestinian Arabs a prior voice in working out the arrangements which would make them responsible for the type of government organized and, therefore, give them a greater responsibility for its successful functioning.

Burdett

The Secretary of State to the Legation in Lebanon 501.BB Palestine(E)/10–2549: Telegram

[Document 1014]

The Secretary of State to the Legation in Lebanon 1

confidential Washington, October 31, 1949.

663. Esmis 27. For Clapp from McGhee. We have studied your informative and detailed message (Legtel 564 Oct 252 ) with care and have fol further views on your numbered paras: 1. We agree agent gen with primary responsibility pol matters shld not also be charged by UN with responsibility for operations in econ field. Agent gen shld however in practice coordinate his pol activities with econ activities of UNRPR and NEDI as indicated in Deptel 6363 and 643.4

2. We cannot agree NEDI shld handle direct relief and work relief in addition to its long range econ functions. USG is not willing to assume responsibility for admin direct relief and work relief. Device of contractual arrangement with UN is unacceptable because it wld generally be considered we had assumed responsibility on national basis. UK, France and Turkey may certainly foe expected react similarly. Congress wld certainly consider US involvement in NEDI as unacceptable if it included responsibility for relief even if trusted American were chairman and responsibility were limited by contract with UN. Furthermore we anticipate appeal for voluntary contributions for relief from UN members wld be prejudiced and fear such contributions wld not be forthcoming to full extent as UN members might assume NEDI had taken over.

UNRPR shld continue function through present operating agencies. We believe operating agencies can be persuaded continue participate in view gravity problem involved. In fact we see no other satisfactory answer to adm problem since any change from present system wld require organization and recruitment large staff for relatively short period. Experts tell us such staff is simply not available because of many international organizations operating in other areas of world.

3. We understand “NEDI” approximates “Social Club” in Arabic and believe it important title be included in interim report and suggest “NEDA” (Near East Development Agency).

4. Arguments shld prove as effective if UNRPR handles and coordinates its activities with NEDI.

5. We agree re US willingness and consider it essential your initial report contain specific long-range development program at least for central Palestine and Jordan as indicated in Deptel 636.

6. Although at outset UNRPR will have all funds, potentiality of NEDI shld gradually become apparent to NE govts as projects are developed.

Dept plans transmit further views re basic policy in next few days. [McGhee.]

Acheson

1 This telegram was repeated to Paris, London, and Ankara and to the American Delegation of the Palestine Conciliation Commission at New York.

2 Not printed; it gave Mr. Clapp’s comments on Department’s telegram 636 (501.BB Palestine(E)/10–2549); see footnote 3 immediately below.

3 Dated October 21, not printed; it advised that the Department agreed substantially with the content of telegram 549, October 18 (p. 1442 [Pg. 1442 includes portions of Doc. 998 and Doc. 999]) and offered various comments (501.BB Palestine (E)/10–1849).

4 Dated October 25, p. 1453 [Pg. 1453 includes portions of Doc. 1008 and Doc. 1009].

Memorandum by the Acting Secretary of State to the President 501.MA Palestine/11–149

[Document 1015]

Memorandum by the Acting Secretary of State to the President

Washington, November 1, 1949.

Subject: Payment of United States Contribution to United Nations Relief for Palestine Refugees

1. Public Law 25, 81st Congress, a Joint Resolution of March 24, 1949, authorized the appropriation of funds not to exceed $16,000,000 for the relief of Palestine refugees, in response to the message submitted by you to the Congress on January 27, 1949. Public Law 119, 81st Congress, appropriated to the President $12,000,000 for the relief of Palestine refugees, and an additional $4,000,000 for the same purpose, “to such extent as the President from time to time finds that other nations party to such United Nations agreement have met their obligations to the United Nations Relief for Palestine Refugees…”.1

2. The amount of $13,377,930 has already been paid to the United Nations, $1,377,930 of which was paid as a result of your finding of August 10, 19492 that other nations party to the United Nations agreement had met their obligations to the United Nations Relief for Palestine Refugees in the form and to the extent of contributions in the amount of $13,377,930.

3. The Secretary General of the United Nations has now informed the Secretary of State3 that “the total contributions in cash, kind or services donated by Governments other than that of the United States, as of September 15, 1949, amount to $15,759,745.” This figure exceeds by $2,381,815 the United States contribution to date. In view of this information, he requests that the United States Government make an additional contribution of $2,000,000 at this time, and states that he will submit a final statement in respect to the balance of the authorized United States contribution within the next two months.

4. The Department of State believes that the statement of the Secretary General is justification for a favorable finding by the President. The Department, therefore, recommends that the President find that, as of September 15, 1949, other nations party to the United Nations agreement have met their obligations to the United Nations Relief for Palestine Refugees in a manner and to an extent warranting a further contribution of $2,000,000 at this time by the United States Government, and that the President authorize the payment of a contribution of $2,000,000 as an addition to the payments of $13,377,930 previously made. A finding in respect to the balance of the authorized United States contribution will be requested later.4

1 Omission in the source text.

2 See footnote 3, p. 1283 [Pg. 1283 includes portions of Doc. 885 and Doc. 886].

3 Letter of October 13, not printed.

4 Sent along with Mr. Webb’s memorandum were “Four Contribution Charts,” which are not found attached to the Department’s record copy of the memorandum. Presumably the charts were copies of those transmitted with Secretary-General Lie’s letter of October 13. These comprised: (1) a recapitulation of donations by governments other than the United States for relief of Palestinian refugees ($15,759,745 as of September 30); (2) donations in cash and kind to the UNRPR fund made by each of 27 countries, other than the United States, as of September 15. The British contribution of $4,032,258 was the largest in this category; (3) expenditures totaling $5,698,283 for direct care of refugees and local services by Egypt, Lebanon, Syria, Jordan, and Iraq, as of August 31. The Egyptian contribution of $2,230,704 was the largest in this group; and (4) donations made by the United Kingdom, Eire, Denmark, and Sweden to the Red Cross and other voluntary organizations working with Near East refugees. As of September 15, these totaled $595,000, the British donation of $403,226 being the largest (501.MA Palestine/10–1549).The Secretary of State, on November 17, authorized Ambassador Austin to inform Secretary-General Lie that “the President of the United States has considered the statement made by the Secretary General and has found that the extent to which other governments have met their obligations to the United Nations Relief for Palestine Refugees allows him to authorize the payment of $2,000,000 as an additional United States contribution … [thus] raising the total United States’ contribution to $15,377,930.” (instruction 358 to New York, 501.MA Palestine/10–1549)

The Chargé in Jordan (Fritzlan) to the Secretary of State 867N.00/11–249: Telegram

[Document 1016]

The Chargé in Jordan (Fritzlan) to the Secretary of State

secret Amman, November 2, 1949—10 a.m.

390. In recent conversations with myself and other foreign representatives King Abdullah has openly expressed desire bring about permanent peace and conclude definitive treaty Jordan and Israel. Expressed view that without restraint UN and Arab League he could easily negotiate satisfactory treaty with Israel.

These expressions taken together with developments re future status Jerusalem, regarding which he and Israel have adopted equally intransigent positions, have doubtless been partly responsible for rumors King had undertaken secret direct negotiations with Israel looking to eventual settlement. Abdullah’s Aqaba trip added fuel to fire by suggesting to minds of some that he had gone there to contact Israeli agents.

Such negotiations were officially denied two days ago. Seems improbable these rumors have substance in fact. Were Abdullah to begin negotiations would be most difficult keep them secret and by becoming known his precarious position among Palestinians, unwilling yet compromise belief UN resolutions re boundaries and refugees should be implemented, would be greatly prejudiced at time when he seeking their support constitutional annexation Arab Palestine to Jordan. Furthermore revelation such negotiations would cause cabinet crisis alienating Palestine members whose services King strongly desires retain order give government more representative complexion.

Sent Department 390; Department pass London 95, USUN 14, Tel Aviv 59. Pouch Arab capitals, Jerusalem.

Fritzlan

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State 501.BB Palestine(E)/11–249: Telegram

[Document 1017]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State

confidential London, November 2, 1949—5 p. m.

4389. Wright last evening emphasized following points in informing Embassy officers that telegram embodying preliminary Foreign Office reactions to Department’s draft resolution on Palestine (Deptel 3834 October 251 ) had been sent British Embassy Washington for discussion Department: 1. Foreign Office doubts efficacy substituting one man agent general for present PCC. Foreign Office realizes that Department’s thinking at least in part conditioned by low esteem in which PCC held by Arabs and Israelis are result past efforts. However, Foreign Office feels this element is inherent hi Palestine problem and that same loss of esteem would in time attach one man agent general now attaches PCC.

2. In addition to foregoing point, Foreign Office feels it would be undesirable raise question establishing new political machinery at this session GA. Wright recalled that when British recently suggested raising question incorporate Arab Palestine into Jordan at this session GA, Department felt it would be undesirable since it would probably raise whole question of political settlement. Wright recalled Foreign Office agreed with us at that time. It now foresees same difficulty if this new question is raised.

3. Foreign Office feels it is important that NE states themselves would take responsibility for development, which should be done through their own local development boards rather than through UN body.

4. In accordance British policy keeping Soviets out of NE, Foreign Office apprehensive creation UN body such as NEDI might open door for Soviet infiltration.

Douglas

1 This was a repeat of telegram 643 to Beirut, p. 1453 [Pg. 1453 includes portions of Doc. 1008 and Doc. 1009].

The Secretary of State to the Legation in Lebanon 501.BB Palestine(E)/11–249: Telegram

[Document 1018]

The Secretary of State to the Legation in Lebanon

confidential Washington, November 2, 1949—7 p. m.

669. Esmis 29. [To Clapp.] Dept analyzes current situation re economic development and refugee problem NE as fol: (1) PCC created ESM for purpose examining economic situation arising from recent NE hostilities and recommending (a) means of overcoming economic dislocations; (b) reintegrating refugees into economic life of area; and (c) creating economic conditions conducive to permanent peace.

(2) Dept fully appreciates practical difficulties and political complications which have confronted you and congratulates you on ESM’s progress. It seems clear, however, that Israel is unwilling to consider repatriation of refugees except in limited numbers and only in context of final political settlement with Arab states. There seems no prospect of latter at present time. Arab states are unwilling, except in case of desert-poor Jordan, formally to consider extensive resettlement of refugees or to accept resettlement in return for international assistance for economic development. In other words existing impasse does not show signs of yielding to economic approach.

(3) Proof for this conclusion may be found in increasing emphasis which ESM has been forced to place on direct relief and work relief at expense of plans for long-range development.

(4) Dept does not believe present attitude Israel re repatriation, Arab states re resettlement is one on which UNGA or individual UN members including particularly US can base constructive future planning for development. ESM program drawn up principally in terms of relief and work relief with only passing reference to development will not in our view commend itself to GA, Congress, Parliament or any other legislature. GA would be confronted with necessity of voting for further voluntary contributions with no assurance of definite date of termination of relief or of integration of refugees into economic life of area. US, as one UN member, would be faced with difficult problem of requesting Congress for direct relief and work relief appropriation, possibly approximating sixteen million for 1949, without assurance of Israeli and Arab cooperation in permanent settlement of refugee problem. Dept cannot approach Congress on this basis.

(5) Dept is accordingly of opinion ESM, subsequently backed by US, UK, France, Turkey and other like minded UN members, shld embark on course of action outlined below. Altho concessions shld be made insofar as possible to sensibilities both parties in matters of form, recommendations shld be directed to solution basic problems without being overly influenced by opposition expected; otherwise intransigence of both sides will only be encouraged. (A) ESM shld inform GA of results of its investigations in NE and shld make complete set of recommendations to GA on basis ESM terms of reference, ESM’s own experience in NE and such technical reports as are now available to ESM, particularly those relating to central Palestine, Jordan and Syria. ESM will then be in position of having outlined problem to GA on technical economic grounds only and not based on any political factor. Recommendations may well include such matters as resumption trade, flow of oil, repatriation and resettlement, which will give this Govt basis for future diplomatic approaches on these questions.

(B) It will thereafter be possible for GA to study report and to determine what action it will recommend to Israel and Arab states and other UN members on economic grounds.

(C) Individual UN members will then have full opportunity of considering Israeli and Arab reactions to ESM report and of deciding what assistance they may be able to extend. US, UK, France and Turkey wld be able more realistically to formulate their concept of NEDA and whether it shld be advanced during or after GA.

(D) US wld have before it balanced ESM report, GA debate, Israeli and Arab reactions and UN recommendations on which constructive relief and long-range development plan cld be projected for presentation to Congress.

(6) Dept believes GA might establish organizational structure along fol lines: (a) UN agent to have coordinating responsibility for various UN activities relating to Palestine including conciliation, relief, and economic planning and development. Latter to be carried out by agency suggested in (d) below.

(b) PCC to continue conciliation.

(c) UNRPR to continue relief.

(d) Agency to be established for economic planning and development (NEDA).

Realize you may not wish make direct proposal concerning conciliation machinery, but your recommendation cld be based on assumption of need for continuing UN conciliation activities.

Foregoing has merit of keeping all activities within UN framework and at same time of maintaining flexibility under SYG for independent or concerted action of component agencies. ESM report wld not stress connection between political and economic activities.

(7) Cordier and Bunche, with whom McGhee has discussed current Palestine situation in general terms, agree ESM and subsequently UN shld take decisive action on basic issues at this time along lines suggested.

Dept wld appreciate ESM views soonest.1

Acheson

1 This telegram was repeated to London, Paris, Ankara, and New York, the last for the American Delegation to the Palestine Conciliation Commission.Mr. Sheringham advised on November 7, that the Foreign Office was in substantial agreement with the Department’s thinking as revealed in this telegram and that remaining differences were tactical and readily resolvable. The Foreign Office still had reservations concerning the UN Agent (see paragraph 6a and London’s telegram 4389, November 2, p. 1462 [Pg. 1462 includes portions of Doc. 1016 and Doc. 1017]) and was of the opinion that the establishment of NEDA should be postponed until after the current session of the General Assembly in order to gauge the reactions of the General Assembly and the Middle East countries (telegram 4459, November 7, 4 p. m., from London, 501.BB Palestine(E)/11–749).

Memorandum of Conversation, by Mr. Wells Stabler of the Office of African and Near Eastern Affairs 501.BB Palestine/11–349

[Document 1019]

Memorandum of Conversation, by Mr. Wells Stabler of the Office of African and Near Eastern Affairs 1

confidential [Washington,] November 3, 1949.

Participants: Mr. Boisanger, French Representative, PCC

Mr. Yalcin, Turkish Representative, PCC

Dr. Azcarate, Principal Secretary, PCC

Mr. de la Tour du Pin, French Advisor

Mr. Benard, First Secretary, French Embassy

Mr. Esenbel, First Secretary, Turkish Embassy

NEA—Mr. McGhee

UNA—Mr. Sandifer

UNP—Mr. Bancroft

Mr. Halderman

ANE—Mr. Berry

Mr. Mattison

Mr. Wilkins

Mr. Rockwell

Mr. Stabler

Problem: To discuss with the French and Turkish Representative on the Palestine Conciliation Commission the present and future situation in connection with the Palestine problem.

Action Required: None

Action Assigned to: ANE

Discussion: Mr. McGhee welcomed the members of the Commission and said that he was glad to have the opportunity to exchange views with them concerning present and future developments with respect to Palestine.

Mr. Boisanger said that the principal matter of concern to the Commission was the Israeli note of October 27 and felt that the Commission should make an unequivocal reply to that note refuting the assertions made by Israel. He mentioned that the Commission had received a telegram today from the United Nations Press Representative in Jerusalem indicating that the Israeli Government had stated that the note did not mean that Israel refused further negotiations with the Commission. However, it was necessary for the Commission to make a definite reply in order that there should be no misunderstanding. Mr. McGhee said he agreed with this point of view.

Mr. McGhee then suggested it was desirable that the Commission should make continued efforts to urge the parties to undertake direct talks. He understood that the American representatives on the Commission had themselves urged these direct talks and assumed the Commission as a whole believed that such talks would be desirable. Mr. Boisanger said that he agreed that direct talks were desirable but pointed out that while the Commission should insist on direct talks, there was nothing in the December 11 Resolution which obliged the parties to undertake such talks. He felt that the Arabs because of their previous firm stand would be unwilling to enter into direct talks. He also pointed out that previous experience indicated that when the Arabs and Israelis did get together for direct talks they were not successful. Mr. Bunche and Mr. Vigier had stated that from their experience it was always necessary for a third party to be present. However, both Mr. Boisanger and Mr. Yalcin agreed that it would be most desirable to urge the parties to meet together with the Commission and the Commission intended to pursue its efforts in this connection.

Mr. McGhee said that we fully understood the difficulties involved but felt that every effort should be made along these lines.

Mr. Boisanger then referred to the statement made by the Arabs that they felt conciliation had failed and therefore wished the Commission to undertake mediation. The Commission proposed to inform the Israelis of this view and to ask whether Israel would agree to mediation. He indicated that Israel feared that the Commission might produce a new plan which might deprive them of territory which they now held. However, he believed that it was desirable to establish at least the principle of mediation and he felt that Israel, if it refused mediation in principle would be placed in a very bad moral position with respect to the United Nations. Mr. Boisanger considered that there were a number of points on which mediation could take place without at the outset going into the more difficult questions. Mr. Yalcin wondered whether the United States Government would have the patience to bear with the mediation since this course of action would undoubtedly take a very long time.

Mr. McGhee said that he agreed that the Commission should inform the Israelis of the Arab desire for mediation and also felt that if Israel refused, it would place itself in a bad light. He suggested that there were a number of smaller matters which could be dealt with through mediation and suggested that the question of Mount Scopus might be one of them.

Mr. Sandifer indicated his belief that the Commission could undertake the mediation functions in that the Commission was empowered to conciliate which was a broader concept than mediation. It was pointed out that under the General Assembly Resolution of December 11, 1948 the Palestine Conciliation Commission had, in any event, inherited Count Bernadotte’s mediation functions under the General Assembly Resolution of May 14, 1948.

Mr. McGhee then explained briefly our views on the proposed organization of United Nations functions with respect to the Palestine case and indicated our belief that it was desirable to have a United Nations coordinating agent who could ensure that the three operating groups, PCC, UNRPR, and NEDA were functioning in unison. Since all the questions involved in the Palestine problem are inter-related, it is desirable that the three groups be coordinated. Mr. McGhee emphasized that these plans are entirely tentative.

Mr. Boisanger said that he was in general agreement with the proposed organization but felt it very important that in the General Assembly no substantive questions be raised. In this connection, he felt that the PCC should remain as it is in order that its terms of reference under the December 11 Resolution would remain the same. With respect to NEDA he said that he was worried by the possibility that Russia could join the organization. Mr. Yalcin expressed the same concern. It was explained that NEDA would be formed by the participating governments and additional membership could be limited by those governments. It could be assumed, therefore, that the Governments concerned would not permit Russia to join. Mr. Yalcin pointed out that if the PCC consisted of representatives of Governments, it would not be possible for the United Nations Coordinating Agent to instruct the PCC on political matters.

Mr. McGhee said that we agreed that it was desirable to limit the debate in the General Assembly to procedural matters if possible and we felt that the proposed resolution on organization could confine the debate.

Mr. McGhee then said that we were considerably worried by the lack of security in the PCC and we had been embarrassed by the fact that every time the United States representative made a statement, it was made available to the press. He felt that the Commission should address itself to this problem and if necessary could obtain a completely new staff. Mr. Yalcin emphasized that in any case this lack of security could not be attributed to Dr. Azcarate, Principal Secretary of the Commission. Mr. McGhee responded that he was not accusing anybody but he felt it was a matter to be dealt with.

The discussion then turned to the question of Jerusalem. Mr. McGhee informed Messrs. Boisanger and Yalcin that the United States gave its general support to the PCC proposals for an international regime in Jerusalem. However, we realized that amendments would be offered and we would be prepared to consider them in the light of their individual merits in contributing to the workability and acceptability of the plan. Mr. Boisanger and Mr. Yalcin expressed agreement with this point of view and said their delegations in New York shared the same view. Mr. Boisanger expressed the hope that it would be possible for the United States, French and Turkish delegations in New York to meet prior to the General Assembly consideration of the various Palestine problems in order to coordinate their action. Mr. McGhee said he thought this would be useful.

Mr. Boisanger hoped that it would be possible to enlist the assistance of the Chairman of Committee I in confining the discussion in Committee I to consideration of such procedural resolutions which may be presented. He expressed the view that the resolutions should not be too detailed. He said that all delegates, of course, would have to be heard but that after they made their speeches he hoped it would be possible for the Chairman of the Committee to channel further debate into consideration of the resolutions.

1 Initialed by Mr. McGhee.

The Chargé in Jordan (Fritzlan) to the Secretary of State 867N.00/11–449: Telegram

[Document 1020]

The Chargé in Jordan (Fritzlan) to the Secretary of State

secret Amman, November 4, 1949—1 p. m.

391. RefLegtel 3901 and Jerusalem Contel 6392 re likelihood direct negotiations between King Abdullah and Israel.

Discussed question with Kirkbride who stated categorically he did not leave King’s side during recent Aqaba trip and impossible King contacted any Israeli agent. Kirkbride states emphatically he has no reason believe King has established or intends in near future establish direct contact negotiations Israelis with view to permanent settlement.

Kirkbride agrees with me however unpredictable King may be, he fully realizes such negotiations this juncture and their revelation would be grave political blunders costing support those Palestinians now backing him who have fresh in mind unpalatable results negotiations King and Israel last winter. It doubtful King yet prepared openly abandon existing solidarity with Arab states re dealings with Israel.

Comment: Rumors direct negotiations still rife here. Doubtless based on King’s oft-repeated statement re desirability early settlement. However, there is often important difference between King’s expression his desires and intentions and actions actually willing undertake implement them. Most improbable King would undertake such negotiations without apprising Prime Minister.

Pouched Arab capitals, Jerusalem.

Sent Department 391, Department pass London 96, USUN 15, Tel Aviv 60.

Fritzlan

1 Dated November 2, p. 1461 [Pg. 1461 includes portions of Doc. 1015 and Doc. 1016].

2 Dated November 2, not printed; it advised of information that King Abdullah had established direct communication with Israel and had inquired whether Israel was prepared for a “reasonable” settlement and that Mr. Sassoon was anxious to start negotiations (790D.90G/11–249).

The Minister in Lebanon (Pinkerton) to the Secretary of State 501.BB Palestine(E)/11–549: Telegram

[Document 1021]

The Minister in Lebanon (Pinkerton) to the Secretary of State

confidential Beirut, November 5, 1949—noon.

588. Simes 28. Reference Esmis 29, November 2. Clapp conscious desirability taking firm line with Arab states and appreciated Department’s full cable under reply. All concerned here hope that text interim report, which will be in your hands within a week, will go far to clarify remaining points where local appreciation of issues differs from Department’s and leads to misunderstanding. ESM interim has been so drafted, in opinion of all deputies, that its recommendation regarding organization will not embarass national delegates to GA. ESM cannot, however, subscribe to organizational planning set forth in reftel. Inter alia Clapp cannot and will not recommend any US contributions to relief or works if UNRPR or any organization under SYG to handle program.

Reference paragraph 1 reftel, interim and final reports read together will be fully responsive to terms reference as outlined insofar as anything can be fully responsive to terms of reference at this stage.

Department is incorrect in assumption paragraph 3 reftel. Plans for long term development of scope and nature envisaged before Clapp left US, including those involving international river development, could yet be brought to stage where funds need be sought until engineering arid related inquiries requiring two years time have been completed. However, works programs now to be recommended represent beginnings of such development in locations where international issues are not involved. Term works relief as used ESM would not be confused therefore with home industries in camps etc. as proposed by UNRPR.

Reference paragraph 4, believe that approach of ESM is “pleable” to legislatures as it will recommend conclusion of relief within 18 months time. Thereafter financing of development might be considered, taking into account then political factors. ESM remains convinced that modest beginnings development under relief financing are essential prelude to such long term activity. The basic question here is whether US considers it essential to have a part in the Near East. If so, the US cannot turn its back on a situation it is judged to be partly responsible for.

Reference paragraph 5, Clapp agrees but points out importance giving full consideration to weakness and internal difficulties local governments.

Reference paragraph 5a, please see supra. Existing technical data inadequate for purposes considered by Department. Other items 5a and 5b must await final report.

Reference paragraph 6, regret unable cable all data leading Clapp to differ from Department’s views on economic organization. Gardiner will be able explain on arrival in Washington next week.

Sent Department 588, Department pass London 18, Paris 22, Ankara 18.

Pinkerton

Editorial Note [Document 1022]

Editorial Note

In a letter of November 5 to President Truman, King Abdullah of the Hashemite Kingdom of the Jordan stated that he had provided instructions to Fawzi el-Mulki, the Jordanian Minister of Defense who dealt with the Palestine question before the Palestine Conciliation Commission, concerning issues which threatened Jordan’s existence. He asked President Truman to exercise judgment with respect to the demands of Israel and the Arabs and to put restraints on the party whose demands were beyond the range of possibility. King Abdullah noted that he continued to have confidence in and rely upon President Truman’s message of March 28 (see page 878), and that he hoped for an opportunity to meet the President. (867N.01/12–149)

With respect to the presentation of King Abdullah’s communication to the Department of State in December, see Mr. Hare’s memorandum of December 1, p. 1515 [Pg. 1515 is part of Doc. 1051].

The Secretary of State to the Legation in Jordan 867N.00/11–549: Telegram

[Document 1023]

The Secretary of State to the Legation in Jordan

confidential Washington, November 5, 1949—5 p. m.

198. Senator, Vice President Hebrew University, accompanied by Amb Elath, again called on McGhee Nov 21 to discuss Scopus situation and urge US intervention with Abdullah to carry out armistice terms and permit free access to Scopus. Elath stated Israel Govt now prepared make certain concessions to Jordan to demonstrate desire reach agreement this point and that Israeli UN Rep wld so inform SYG.

McGhee reiterated our sympathetic attitude toward Senator’s objectives re resumption activities cultural and humanitarian institutions Scopus and suggested good use might be made of MAC for resolving Scopus question. MAC consists of Israeli and Jordan reps and was set up and is now functioning for questions of this kind. Furthermore submission to MAC would probably in long run be more effective than third country approach.

Pls inform FonOff re foregoing. Re Scopus, we hope Jordan Govt will be mindful of great interest in this country and elsewhere in functioning of humanitarian and cultural institutions and that it will continue approach problem in spirit of determination to resolve present impasse.2

Acheson

1 The first visit by David W. Senator bad taken place on September 26; Mr. Wilkins’ memorandum of conversation of that date not printed (867N.00/9–2649)

2 This telegram was repeated to Jerusalem as No. 408 and to Tel Aviv. Simultaneously, the Department sent its first two paragraphs to Tel Aviv in telegram 705, in which it instructed Ambassador McDonald to “discuss matter with FonOff and referring Dept’s proposal (Deptel 375 June 17) suggest MAC wld appear most appropriate medium through which Scopus and other question[s] this nature cld be resolved.” No. 705 was repeated to Jerusalem and Amman. The Department, at the same time, directed Jerusalem, in telegram 406, to inform General Riley in confidence of the substance of Nos. 198 and 705. Telegrams 198, 705, and 406 bear identical file numbers.

The United States Representative at the United Nations (Austin) to the Secretary of State 501.BB Palestine(E)/11–549: Telegram

[Document 1024]

The United States Representative at the United Nations (Austin) to the Secretary of State

confidential New York, November 5, 1949—6:28 p. m.

1317. For Tomlinson,1 UNE. Cordier today received cable from Clapp saying that he was omitting from his interim report all reference to technical assistance in the Near East so that it would deal exclusively with continuing relief assistance and work relief. There would thus be no mention of the need for, nor possible machinery and general outlines of plans for, economic development. Clapp also said that it would not be possible for him to come to Lake Success in November, stating he could answer questions by cable. He said that Gardiner was qualified to express his views on all ESM matters.

Cordier today replied to Clapp that it was most important that he come to Lake Success to discuss ESM report with PCC, Secretariat and GA delegates. Pointed out it would not be possible or appropriate for a non-UN staff member to explain to other delegates the views of the ESM. Cordier believes it most important that Clapp should be in New York to assist in holding the Palestine debate within bounds.2

Secretariat also objected to omission from interim report of any indication of need for long-range economic development. He told Clapp it was most important that Assembly should approve the principles and broad program for TA and development in the NE. Unless this were done, all such programs would be purely national actions and would probably lead to more political difficulties in the area. Cordier argued that it was most important that development program should have GA approval in principle. Cordier did not state to Clapp, but he and Lie believe, that unless member governments are given assurance that some long-range UN economic planning is afoot UN members will be reluctant to contribute to continued relief program.

Austin

1 John D. Tomlinson, Advisor to the Office of United Nations Economic and Social Affairs.

2 Mr. Clapp, on November 11, informed Mr. McGhee that he did not plan to return for the meeting of the General Assembly (telegram 594, identified also as Simes 29, from Beirut, 501.BB Palestine(E)/11–1149).

Editorial Note [Document 1025]

Editorial Note

The First Interim Report of the United Nations Economic Survey Mission for the Middle East was signed at Beirut on November 6 by Messrs. Clapp, Gokcen, Labonne, and Morton. It was transmitted to Secretary-General Lie by Hussein C. Yalcin, Chairman of the Palestine Conciliation Commission, in a letter of November 16. The letter stated that “The Conciliation Commission considers that this report constitutes a constructive approach to the Palestine refugee problem and believes that the General Assembly will wish to give urgent consideration to it. The Commission is of the opinion that the Assembly will wish to obtain additional information concerning certain of the findings and recommendations contained in the report. In this connexion, in the light of the arrangements made by the Secretary-General with the International Red Cross organizations and the American Friends Service Committee, particular reference is made to the recommendation that the number of rations issued should be reduced by one-third as of 1 January 1950.”

The Interim Report commenced with a table of contents, a foreword, and a discussion of “The Problem” and of the establishment, functions, etc., of the Mission. Then followed sections on interim findings and recommendations, which read as follows:

“Interim Findings

As a result of the Mission’s studies, discussions with Governments and investigations in the field, the Mission finds that: 1. The refugees themselves are the most serious manifestation of ‘economic dislocation’ created by the Arab-Israeli hostilities. The refugees represent about 7 per cent of the population in the countries in which they have sought refuge. About 65 per cent of the refugees fled to Arab Palestine and Gaza, almost doubling the population. Resolution of the demoralizing, unproductive and costly problem of the refugees is the most immediate requirement ‘conducive to the maintenance of peace and stability in the area’.”

2. The continuing political stalemate in the relations between the Arab countries and Israel precludes any early solution of the refugee problem by means of repatriation or large scale resettlement.

3. The relief supplied by the United Nations Relief for Palestine Refugees (UNRPR), the United Nations International Children’s Emergency Fund (UNICEF), the World Health Organization (WHO), and the many local and foreign voluntary agencies of charity operating in the Near East has averted a worse calamity. Were all direct relief to be cut off now, many refugees would face a winter of disease and starvation. Were charity alone to be provided for another year, it would be more difficult and costly to take constructive measures later. Nevertheless, the extent of direct relief provided through United Nations funds should be stringently cut within the next two months. There is no doubt that, however commendable it may be to extend international charity to the needy, rations greatly in excess of the number justifiable within the original intentions of the General Assembly of the United Nations have been and are being issued.

4. Work in place of relief cannot be provided immediately for all. One thing, however, is clear. Rather than remain objects of charity, the refugees who are idle must have an opportunity to go to work where they are now; work which would increase the productive capacity of the countries in which they have found refuge. Until such work has been found, those refugees who are idle must remain a burden upon others, the United Nations, charitable societies supported by voluntary contributions, or the countries in which the refugees now find themselves.

5. Useful, gainful employment can, however, be found for all the refugees able and willing to work. There are many potential opportunities for useful and productive work to improve and reclaim the land, increase the supply and use of water, strengthen and extend road systems and improve sanitation and shelter. Suitable employment for the refugees can be provided in many places, especially in Arab Palestine and Jordan, where nearly half the refugees are located (see appendix C).

6. This and other similar work could begin as soon as funds can be found to finance it. But the resources of the Arab countries sheltering most of the refugees are inadequate to cope unaided with the present cost of emergency relief alone, much less to finance the cost of putting the refugees to work. Money for this purpose must be found from outside sources.

7. The inability of the refugees rapidly to find for themselves gainful employment in the Arab countries is but a symptom of the need for development of the unused resources of the Near East, where lack of available capital is responsible for much idle manpower. This is a task for the Near Eastern Governments to do in their own way, and in due course, with the help of competent counsel and substantial financial credits.

Recommendations

In the light of these findings, the Economic Survey Mission makes the following recommendations, which are explained later in the report.

1. The emergency relief for refugees made possible by voluntary contributions from Member Governments of the United Nations should be continued through the winter months, and until 1 April 1950, under the present UNRPR system; the present minimum ration should not be reduced, but the number of rations issued should be reduced by 1 January 1950 from the present rate of 940,000 to 652,000 (for an analysis of the number eligible for relief, see appendix B). This would cost 5,500,000 dollars for the three months beginning 1 January 1950. Thereafter, further reductions should take place as men become employed in gainful labour and thus become ineligible for direct relief.

2. A programme of public works, calculated to improve the productivity of the area, and such continuing relief as will be needed should be organized as an integrated operation, in co-operation with the Governments of the countries where the refugees are located. This programme should be planned and arrangements negotiated with the appropriate Near Eastern Governments to begin 1 April 1950.

No more rations should be supplied by the United Nations after 31 December 1950, unless otherwise ordered by the United Nations at the fifth session of the General Assembly, at which Near Eastern Governments concerned would have an opportunity to present appropriate proposals.

Meanwhile, the agency handling direct relief on behalf of the United Nations should be empowered to negotiate with Near Eastern Governments for the latter to take over as soon as possible, and at latest by 31 December 1950, responsibility for the maintenance of such refugees as may remain within their territories.

This programme for the nine months from April through December 1950 would require 27 million dollars, which sum would include such relief as might be needed.

The United Nations should be prepared to continue the works programme until 30 June 1951 (subject to review at the fifth session of the General Assembly).

The works programme for the six months of 1951 would require 21,200,000 dollars.

Of the total of 53,700,000 dollars for the cost of relief and works projects for the eighteen months’ programme, the Mission estimates that approximately 25 percent, or 13,300,000 dollars, represents the cost of the necessary work materials, tools and equipment. The Mission considers that a considerable proportion of this sum, perhaps up to one half in certain cases, might be supplied by Governments of the countries in which the refugees are now concentrated.

This would reduce the amount required from outside sources for eighteen months from 1 January 1950 for a programme of relief and public works to approximately 48 million dollars, or an average of 2,700,000 dollars per month. This is the same as the present monthly rate of expenditure by the United Nations upon direct relief alone* (see appendix A).

3. An agency should be established to organize and, on or after 1 April 1950, direct, the programmes of relief and public works herein recommended. As a minimum requirement to the successful implementation of the relief and works programmes, the Economic Survey Mission urges that: (a) Subject to rendering such reports of its activities and accounting for its expenditure to the General Assembly of the United Nations as may be required of it and within the policies established in its terms of reference, the agency should have full autonomy and authority to make decisions within the sphere of activities entrusted to it, including the selection of its subordinate staff and the administration of funds made available to it.

(b) The agency should be located in the Near East.

(c) The personnel and assets of the UNRPR should be turned over to the new agency on 1 April 1950, or as soon thereafter as possible, in order that the functions of direct relief may be directed by the new agency in appropriate relation to the works programme.

(d) The agency should be authorized to take counsel with such Near Eastern Governments as may so desire, concerning measures to be taken by such Governments in preparation for the time when United Nations funds for relief and works projects shall no longer be available.”

The Interim Report concluded with sections entitled “Guiding Policies for Administration of Proposed Programme,” “Discussion of Findings and Recommendations,” and “Prospects for Employment” and four appendices entitled “Cost of Programme,” “Analysis of Refugees and Relief Recipients,” “Illustrative Outline of Works Projects,” and “Terms of Reference of the Economic Survey Mission” (GA, 4th sess., Ad Hoc Political Committee, Annex, volume I, pages 16–29).

* Should the United Nations decide to bring about a gradual reduction from 940,000 rations per day to 652,000 on 1 April 1950, through monthly reductions of 100,000, beginning on 1 February 1950, the cost of the alteration in schedule would amount to 1,200,000 dollars. If the United Nations should prefer to maintain the present rate of 940,000 rations per day, except as affected by work relief, throughout the calendar year 1950 and thus provide charity to many thousands who are not refugees, the cost of this alteration in schedule would amount to 7 million dollars. [Footnote in the source text.]

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Second Secretary of the Embassy in the United Kingdom (Root) 501.BB Palestine(E)/11–949

[Document 1026]

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Second Secretary of the Embassy in the United Kingdom (Root)

secret [London,] November 9, 1949.

Subject: The Interim Report of the Economic Survey Mission (ESM) to the Near East.

Participants: Mr. Arthur Z. Gardiner, Department of State

Mr. John F. Root, American Embassy, London

Mr. M. R. Wright, Assistant Under-Secretary of State, Foreign Office

Mr. Bernard Burrows, Head, Eastern Department, Foreign Office

Mr. J. G. T. Sheringham, Eastern Department, Foreign Office

Mr. Trefor Evans, Middle East Secretariat, Foreign Office

Mr. E. B. Boothby, Head, Refugee Department, Foreign Office

Mr. C. J. Edmonds, UK Representative, IRO

Hon. H. A. A. Hankey, Assistant, Personnel Department, Foreign Office

Miss Barbara Salt, Assistant, United Nations (Economic and Social) Department, Foreign Office

Note: Second conversation of two between Mr. Gardiner and Foreign Office officials.1

Mr. Wright said he and his colleagues were glad for the opportunity to have this preliminary discussion with Mr. Gardiner and to learn of the ESM thinking at first hand. He noted that any decisions of conclusions with respect to the ESM proposals would await his forthcoming talks in Washington.2

Mr. Gardiner then offered to give the group some of the background to ESM’s work. He said there had been two particular sets of problems. The first was a question of engineering opinion. There had been a certain divergence between the views of the TVA engineers and the British experts. The British contemplated a series of headworks in the Jordan area which would distribute, but not increase, the supply of water. Our experts felt that it would be more advantageous both from the point of view of costs and of results to undertake works which would increase the supply of water as well as bring it to the areas where it was most needed. They were sure that for a reasonable outlay a dam could be built at Wadi Zerqa and that in an integrated irrigation and development project at Wadi Zerqa some five thousand farm families, representing twenty-five to thirty thousand people, could be employed. The TVA experts have had extensive experience in the technique of building dams on limestone foundations and are convinced that one can be built satisfactorily at Wadi Zerqa so that no leakage will result. They were thinking in terms of a dam thirty-five meters high and so constructed as to allow for later expansion if necessary. These observations, Mr. Gardiner said, represented the best professional opinion available, and the TVA experts were ready to guarantee that the project outlined could be carried out successfully. Sir Desmond Morton himself was in accord with the American view. Mr. Gardiner added that in all probability TVA technicians could be obtained to assist in carrying out the Wadi Zerqa project.

Mr. Wright said that he would like to make his own position clear, in view of the fact that there seemed to have arisen some misunderstanding. He felt that the best advice should be taken and the best work decided upon. He wanted to emphasize this point and to repeat that the Foreign Office had no axes to grind. Mr. Gardiner replied that it seemed to be merely a case of doctors disagreeing.

The second big problem to which ESM had to apply itself had to do with the question of how to organize for the future. In deference to the views of the Department and the Foreign Office, ESM had cut a great deal out of the preliminary drafts of the interim report and had left the matter of long-term development in terms as general as possible. Clapp was determined not to recommend a nickel for relief or work relief under UNRPR or for that matter under any organization of the UN secretariat. It was simply too difficult to have a businesslike operation. The ESM itself had had sufficient difficulties on that score. Clapp wanted a group of thirty-five and got eighty-four, and it was difficult to keep track of just what this entire number was doing or what purpose they served. It was disconcerting to have a meeting one day and find a report on the meeting in the Palestine Post the next. Clapp had a phrase for the undesirables in the ESM secretariat: “incompetent saboteurs.”

ESM had in mind an agency composed of the principal contributing countries, responsive to the GA but independent and autonomous in carrying out the program of relief and work relief. ESM felt it could put to work large numbers of people within eight to ten months’ time. The two principal projects recommended (Wadi Zerqa and Wadi Quilt) would account for some 8,000 man-hours of work spread over eighteen months. Altogether ESM hoped to provide employment for 60,000 to 70,000 “breadwinners” through the work-relief projects.

[Here follow two paragraphs of technical discussion on the refugee question.]

Mr. Wright remarked that the presentation in the report was first class. He thought it was extremely encouraging that the Foreign Office, the Department and ESM seemed to be in fairly close agreement on their ideas. There were, of course, certain points in connection with the report which would have to be explored at some length in Washington. It might be useful, however, at this time, to discuss one or two of these points.

Mr. Burrows expressed concern over the political impact the cut in rations might have on the refugees themselves and on the authorities in the Arab states. The interim report emphasized that the saving realized through the recommended cut in rations could be applied to the public works program. This was no doubt desirable but what consideration had ESM given to the political repercussions of the cut in rations? He felt that this was a danger point which might be seized upon by the Arabs and that the Arab leaders might be forced into a position where they were obliged to oppose the plan as a whole. Mr. Gardiner explained there were two considerations behind ESM thinking: (1) It was incumbent on ESM to point out that a certain number of destitute persons were receiving relief. If it was the intention to provide relief for these destitute persons as well as the refugees, then this fact should be clearly recognized by the UN.

(2) The second point in ESM’s thinking was that the measure would tend to put a burden on the Arab governments, leading them to come to us with more specific proposals for work relief and development. The idea was to put the Arab states in a position of wanting to start trading with us, to take the initiative in requesting ideas and funds for development. The ESM had considered the point carefully and had decided on this particular proposal with the foregoing ideas in mind.

[Here follow two paragraphs of technical discussion on the relief and work questions involving the refugees.]

Reverting to the cut in rations, Mr. Burrows asked whether the Arab governments were aware of this proposal. Mr. Gardiner replied he thought it would be news, to them. Mr. Burrows asked whether it wouldn’t be desirable to prepare the Arab governments in advance. There was a danger that comment following announcement of the cut might develop in such an unfavorable way as to put the governments in an extremely difficult position and prevent them from dealing rationally with the whole report. Mr. Gardiner reminded the group that the proposals primarily concerned only three countries—Jordan, Lebanon and Syria. Mr. Gardiner thought there would be no particular trouble with Jordan and the Lebanon. Syria would be a somewhat uncertain factor until after the elections. Our Embassy in Egypt was concerned about Egypt’s reception of the proposals and Mr. Gardiner agreed that the report had little to offer in the Gaza strip.

There was a general discussion of the means by which the Arab countries might be forewarned of the ESM proposals, whether through the ESM, the PCC or our diplomatic missions. It was recognized that the report contained a certain amount of unpalatable medicine for all parties concerned, not only the Arabs, but that there was no way to avoid this entirely. It was agreed that the preparatory work which might be done among the Arab governments to avoid adverse reaction and insure a proper reception for the proposals should be carefully considered and that it was definitely a point to be taken up in the Washington talks. Mr. Burrows suggested that possibly our governments might refer in general terms to the fact that the report would soon be taken up by the GA, that while we were not familiar with the contents of the report, it was likely to contain certain unpalatable things for the respective countries concerned and that we hoped the governments as well as the press of these countries would weigh very carefully the ESM proposals in the light of the objectives we all desired. Mr. Sheringham brought up the threat to public security in the camps and elsewhere among the refugees that might result from the announcement of the cut in rations. He feared there might be riots and demonstrations and thought it might be only fair to warn the countries concerned in advance of these dangers. Mr. Boothby mentioned the possibility that the Arabs might marshal a move against the whole report in the GA.

In answer to a question about the future plans of Clapp and Morton, Mr. Gardiner explained that when the final touches had been put on the interim report, they planned to go to Tel Aviv. They intended subsequently to go to Syria but were postponing their visit until after the elections. Eventually they will make another complete circle of the Near East countries involved and will draw up another report, which will place the emphasis on future economic development. For this report they will draw heavily on the advice of their financial and economic experts.

Mr. Burrows noted the absence in the report of any statement on the numbers of refugees to be repatriated to Israel. Mr. Gardiner replied that ESM had purposely avoided this subject. He said there would be plenty of opportunity at the GA to refer to the December 11 Resolution. The facts seemed to be that Israel was going to take back very few refugees, but there was no point in saying so now or to give the Arabs’ hand away. It was, however, hard for him to see how Israel was going to take care of its own immigrants, let alone receive any large number of Arabs.

There was a general discussion on how the agency administering relief and work relief might be related to the UN. The British felt this point was especially important in view of the fact that the short-term agency might eventually develop into the group coordinating long-term developments. The British feeling was that the agency should be independent of the UN. It might be authorized and blessed by the UN and it might, as do other autonomous international organizations, report on its activities and submit its accounts to the GA. But it should not be controlled by the UN.

Mr. Gardiner said the State Department was determined that the agency would somehow have to be established within the “UN framework”—in other words, sponsored by and responsive to the GA. At the same time we were determined that it should be a business-like operation. He said the formula for its relationship to the UN remains to be worked out.

Mr. Gardiner remarked that the State Department will do its best to get our share of funds from Congress, but we certainly were not going to carry the burden alone. To get funds from Congress, there would have to be some assurances of substantial contributions from other countries. He did not know what these would be. Possibly if we subscribed half, we might expect a fifth or more from the UK. Mr. Burrows noted that this would mean a British contribution for the eighteen months at a yearly rate of $6,000,000. Mr. Gardiner said that we also expected to get something from the French and of course something in the way of local contributions from the countries where the projects were being carried out. There would also be certain amounts available from such international organizations as UNICEF.

Mr. Burrows noted that the view seemed to be gaining ground that the agency would not be a body possessing funds for development but a group of advisers engaged in drawing up and recommending projects and in seeking money for their implementation. Mr. Gardiner said that that was our view. We were certainly not going to turn over our check book to anybody. We had in mind that the agency would have full access to such lending organizations as the Export-Import Bank, and we expected the contributors of funds to examine the record of the agency’s deliberations before advancing money for a project. He reiterated that while we were concerned with somehow working “within the framework of the UN,” we certainly wanted a businesslike operation. We intended to “sit across the table” from the beneficiary countries, as it were.

Mr. Boothby remarked that the agency would gain no prestige for being tied to the UN, and Mr. Wright added that from their point of view any connection with the UN did not facilitate getting funds from the British Government. Mr. Gardiner said the answer remained to be seen. He emphasized Clapp’s statement that he cannot and will not recommend any US contributions to relief or public works if UNRPR or any organization under the UN secretariat is to handle the program.

Mr. Wright remarked that it was important that the UK contribution be in sterling and not in a hard currency and asked Mr. Gardiner what he thought the feeling in that respect would be. Mr. Gardiner felt that a sterling contribution would be possible, for there were relief and relief-work items, cement for example, that could be bought in the sterling area. He emphasized again that a UK contribution would help to sell the idea at home.

1 The first conversation took place the previous day; Mr. Root’s memorandum of the earlier conversation is not printed.

2 For documentation on these talks, see pp. 186 [Pg. 186 is part of Doc. 81] ff.

The Ambassador in Israel (McDonald) to the Secretary of State 867N.00/11–1049: Telegram

[Document 1027]

The Ambassador in Israel (McDonald) to the Secretary of State

confidential Tel Aviv, November 10, 1949—noon.

814. In hour’s talk with Comay, Israeli Foreign Office, November 9 on general matters, Ford took occasion discuss substance Deptel 705, November 5.1 Made specific reference June 20 aide-mémoire (Deptel 375, June 17) and suggested MAC seemed most appropriate medium for handling Scopus and other questions this nature. Comay was noncommittal other than to say Elath had sent similar information. He added, however, that McNeil of British Government had spoken to Eban in New York re possibility making “horse trade” on several items in Article VIII Israel–Trans Jordan armistice agreement. Comay said Israeli Government had authorized Eban to suggest that “if requested from right quarters” Israel would be prepared give Arabs free access to Bethlehem Road and provide electricity for Old City in exchange for free access to Scopus. Comay unwilling vouchsafe any explanation of British interest other than over-all one of “getting on with job” and also said no further steps appeared to have been taken following McNeil–Eban meeting. Comay stressed that his government, in suggesting such “deal” within Article VIII, did not intend thereby to establish precedent for handling other unsettled items that article or elsewhere in armistice agreement.

Comment: While Comay reiterated that his remarks were both “informal and unofficial”, Ford gathered impression he hoped suggested “trade” would be broached by neutral source (British or US) to avoid automatic refusal should it come from either Arabs or Jews. End Comment.2

Sent Department 814; Department pass Jerusalem 94, Amman 59.

McDonald

1 See footnote 2, p. 1471 [Pg. 1471 includes portions of Doc. 1023 and Doc. 1024].

2 Chargé Fritzlan, on November 10, advised that the Jordanian Foreign Minister and Acting Defense Minister were generally sympathetic to a return of cultural and humanitarian activities. The Foreign Minister indicated that, in return for access to Mt. Scopus, Israel must make a substantial concession which would contribute toward a resumption of normal living conditions in Jerusalem. Both Ministers were said to have viewed the matter as an appropriate one for consideration by the Mixed Armistice Commission (telegram 395 from Amman, 867N.00/11–1049).

Memorandum of Conversation, by Mr. Lucius D. Battle, Special Assistant to the Secretary of State 890.00/11–949

[Document 1028]

Memorandum of Conversation, by Mr. Lucius D. Battle, Special Assistant to the Secretary of State

secret Paris, November 11, 1949.

Participants: Secretary Acheson

Foreign Minister Bevin

Ambassador Douglas

Mr. Barclay1

Mr. Battle

During a conversation with the Secretary this morning, Mr. Bevin raised several questions concerning the Near East. Mr. Bevin said that he was very worried over developments in the Near East. He mentioned the emergence of new groups and new ideas in the Arab world.

He said that it was difficult for him to continue to urge Iraq and Syria not to get together in a union, when the underlying forces in that area were so strong for Arab unity. He said that he feared that Russia might start a cry for Arab unity, which would make our position more difficult. He said that he felt that the unity movement, as it gained momentum, would spread rapidly through the area.

He expressed concern over the French insistence on the status quo, which the French based on the 1919 settlement. Mr. Bevin said that the British had no real hold over the people in the area. He said that the situation was quite difficult and he believed would become increasingly so.

He mentioned that he had asked Mr. Wright to discuss the problem with the Department of State in Washington. Continuing, Mr. Bevin said that if he spoke to the French regarding their insistence on status quo, it would be regarded as a revival of old British-French jealousies. He expressed the hope that the United States could look into the matter and see if it were possible for the United States to take it up with the French.

Mr. Bevin asked if the United States had been considering these problems. In reply Mr. Acheson assured Mr. Bevin that the United States was greatly interested in these problems and mentioned that Assistant Secretary McGhee was making every effort to evolve a new approach to the area. Mr. Acheson said that the United States would continue to study and discuss these problems with the British.

Mr. Bevin mentioned that he thought it possible that Pakistan would try to set itself up as a leader of Moslem groups in that area in an effort to strengthen Pakistan’s position against Nehru.

Mr. Bevin mentioned that there appeared to be some difficulty in the proposed visit of the Prime Minister of Pakistan to Russia. Mr. Acheson mentioned the fact that the President had approved the idea of issuing an invitation to the Prime Minister of Pakistan to visit the United States, at a date to be set later. He said that the Government of Pakistan was being informed that Mr. Truman was agreeable to a visit from the Prime Minister and that if the Prime Minister indicated his willingness to accept, an invitation would subsequently be issued to him.

1 Roderick E. Barclay, Private Secretary to Mr. Bevin.

The Chargé in Jordan (Fritzlan) to the Secretary of State 867N.01/11–1149

[Document 1029]

The Chargé in Jordan (Fritzlan) to the Secretary of State

secret Amman, November 11, 1949.

air priority

No. 140

Subject: King Abdullah’s Terms for Permanent Settlement With Israelis

I have the honor to report that General Riley appeared in Amman yesterday and at his request I arranged a meeting between him and King Abdullah, at which I was present.

Through the medium of Samir Pasha Rifa’i, Minister of Court, the General and the King expressed themselves as follows on various phases of the Palestine question:

1. Demarkation of Line in Jerusalem Area

General Riley stated he hoped the King would appoint a Jordan member to the Special Committee of the Mixed Armistice Commission considering this problem in order that minor rectifications in the Arab-Jewish line in the Jerusalem Area could be effected. His Majesty expressed himself in favor of such a step and said he would consult Ragheb Pasha Nashishibi, Governor-General of Palestine, concerning it.

2. Direct Negotiations With View to Permanent Settlement

General Riley told King Abdullah that there was a strong and sincere feeling among responsible Jewish leaders (such as Ben-Gurion, Sharett and Eytan) that direct negotiations should be undertaken with the King or his representatives in order to effect permanent settlement of outstanding issues between the two countries. General Riley stated that the Israeli Government was prepared to open such negotiations on twenty-four hour notice. He added that he hoped he (the General) would be instrumental in helping bring about negotiations of this character as he believed the time was ripe for talks above the level of the Mixed Armistice Commission.

The King prefaced his reply by stating that he was beginning to feel that he had no obligation to the other Arab States in his dealings with Israel. His was the only Arab State which had any extensive border with Israel and he thought he should be free to decide when and how to negotiate with the Israelis. His Majesty continued by saying that he would begin direct negotiations with the Israelis immediately if the following points were accepted as the basis of a settlement: a. He felt it absolutely essential that Jordan have an access to the Mediterranean and he had decided that it would be most appropriate if Jordan obtained a corridor through Beersheba to Gaza. He thought, in the interests of all, Jordan should replace Egypt at Gaza and he believed he could arrange this with the Egyptians as he had persuaded them to evacuate Bethlehem and Hebron.

b. The Arab quarters at present included in the Jewish part of Jerusalem should be returned to the Arabs. It was especially inconceivable that the Hebrew University and the Hadassah Hospital should continue to function where they did. Compensation for these two places would be considered at a time when the subject of compensation of refugees generally arose for discussion.

c. In return for Israeli concessions on the above points, the King would permit the Israelis to restore and operate the potash works at the northern end of the Dead Sea. He would guarantee free passage to and from the works via Jerusalem.

In reply to the King’s statement, General Riley remarked that he thought His Majesty’s demands unrealistic and excessive in view of existing circumstances. Something in the direction of the King’s wishes might have been worked out eight months ago but at the present time the Israeli Government would never give serious consideration to such terms. The King replied that, in any case, such was his position and he could not enter into an agreement [argument?] concerning its merits. He said that if the Israelis listened to his proposals and accepted them, they would derive immeasurable benefits as he would guarantee peace for them from Gaza to Lake Tiberias.

Apropos of direct negotiations with the Israelis, the King remarked that recently the Lebanese Minister to Jordan had asked him if there was any foundation to rumors that he was negotiating directly with Israeli authorities stating that, if such were the case, Lebanon wished also to be included within the scope of the talks. General Riley laughingly observed that the Lebanese were hoping and praying that Jordan would begin such direct negotiations in order that they too could break the present deadlock. To this the King replied, “They wanted us to take the lead in war and now wish us to be the first to make peace.”

3. Entry of Christian Pilgrims into Arab Palestine from Jerusalem

General Riley raised this question in view of the expected arrival of considerable numbers of Christian pilgrims desiring to visit Jerusalem and Bethlehem during the Holy Year, saying that he had heard the Jordan Government had decided to refuse entry of such persons coming by way of Israel. (See Legation’s A–172, October 24, 1949.1 ) The General added that if pilgrims were permitted to enter Arab Palestine, there would be no question of their having to return to Israel and that Jordan would probably benefit considerably from an economic standpoint.

The King readily agreed that pilgrims coming from Israel should be allowed entry into Arab Palestine, but he thought they should be carefully screened to keep out Jewish agents and communists. He promised to give appropriate instructions to the Prime Minister. Assuming the Prime Minister is amenable to this change of policy, it is likely that a modus operandi on this question can be worked out. The Legation will not fail to bring to the Department’s attention developments in this regard.

Comments: The King was genuinely pleased to see General Riley whom he greeted most affectionately. The discussions were conducted throughout in a cordial manner and there were no recriminations.

Of course, there is not the least likelihood that the Israelis will listen to the King’s terms for a permanent Palestine settlement and there can be little doubt that His Majesty is aware of this. He would like very much to liquidate the whole affair, which is proving very burdensome as regards maintenance of occupation troops in Arab Palestine, and devote his energies to consolidating his domain and restoring the economic life of the country. However, the King seems to feel that the Israelis are more anxious than he is to come to terms and, therefore, he need not be in a hurry to reveal the irreducible minimum of his demands. He certainly displays great caution, determined, doubtless, to make no terms which will not contain real advantage for his country. Failure to obtain such advantages as a result of any negotiations would, of course, at the present juncture be a grave political blunder seriously jeopardizing his position.2

A. David Fritzlan

1 Not printed.

2 Chargé Fritzlan, on November 11, summarized his discussion with the British Minister, Sir Alec Kirkbride, concerning the question of the annexation of Arab Palestine to Jordan. He then commented: “From my observations at this post, I am strongly of the opinion that there is a considerable body of enlightened and progressive Palestinians who see in annexation of Arab Palestine to Jordan the only salvation for their country. They are wining to give a large measure of cooperation to the Jordan Government and there is reason to believe that the presence of Palestinians in the Government is acting as a check on the arbitrary rule of King Abdullah. Such Palestinians undoubtedly expect eventually that a constitutional monarchy in the true sense will be established in this country and that, through force of population and relative advance in most of the arts, they will be able to exercise dominating influence in a united country.” (Despatch 141 from Amman, 867N.01/11–1149)

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Acting Secretary of State 867N.01/11–1449

[Document 1030]

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Acting Secretary of State

confidential [Washington,] November 14, 1949.

Participants: U—Mr. Webb

NEA—Mr. McGhee

The Egyptian Ambassador

The Saudi Arabian Ambassador

The Minister of Jordan

The Minister of Lebanon

The Minister of Syria

The Chargé d’Affaires of Iraq

The Delegate of Yemen to the United Nations

The Secretary of the Yemenite Delegation to the United Nations

ANE—Mr. Stabler

Problem: On the basis of the decision taken by the recent Arab League Council Meeting the diplomatic representatives of the Arab states were instructed to present a joint memorandum1 to the United States Government requesting our intervention with Israel to implement the Protocol of May 12, 1949.

Action Required: To consider the position the Department should adopt on the joint memorandum.

Action Assigned to: ANE

Discussion: The Egyptian Ambassador, acting as spokesman for the Arab representatives, expressed appreciation at being received by the Acting Secretary. He said that at the recent Arab League Council Meeting the member states had considered the Palestine situation and had instructed their diplomatic representatives in Washington to present a joint memorandum to the United States Government bearing on certain aspects of the Palestine question. The Ambassador stated that the Arabs are greatly concerned, as is the United States, about the situation in Palestine. The Arab states have cooperated both with the United States and United Nations and have accepted their advice on a number of matters. They have also acquiesced in certain other matters on which the United States and United Nations have insisted. In keeping with this policy of cooperation the Arab states represented at Lausanne had agreed to sign the Protocol of May 12, 1949.

The Arab states were much concerned by the fact that Israel had shown no signs of cooperation or good will and had in fact refused further collaboration with the Palestine Conciliation Commission. He also referred to the fact that Israel had incorporated Jaffa in Tel Aviv in violation of the United Nations. Israel had also ref used to implement the May 12 Protocol. The Ambassador produced a map attached to the May 12 Protocol and pointed out that implementation of the Protocol by Israel would have solved not only the territorial but the refugee aspects of the Palestine problem. He indicated the numbers of refugees which the Arab states believed could be settled in the areas which would have been allocated to the Arabs through implementation of the Protocol. The Ambassador continued that the Arab states were entirely prepared to implement the May 12 Protocol and hoped the United States would use its influence with Israel to persuade the latter to act in a spirit of good faith and cooperation in proceeding with the implementation of the Protocol.

I thanked the Ambassador for the expression of views of the Arab Governments and for the memorandum which I said would be given careful consideration in the Department. I pointed out that it was the view of this Government that the United Nations and particularly the Palestine Conciliation Commission were the proper medium through which negotiations should be conducted. I also indicated that since this was a problem directly affecting the Arabs and Israelis, it was desirable that they should take the initiative in advancing towards a settlement. I also suggested that direct talks might also be employed. I emphasized that the United States would not advance any specific solution to either party, as the parties themselves must reach a mutually satisfactory agreement. Mr. McGhee said that this was quite true and stated that it emphasized that the United States was not in a position to urge specific proposals on either party. It was up to the parties themselves to take steps to reach an agreed settlement of the problem. I said that, of course, the United States stood entirely ready to assist the parties wherever possible in their desire to achieve peace. The main objective of the United States, and I felt sure also that of the Arab states, was the restoration of peace.

The Egyptian Ambassador said that with reference to the question of direct talks, it was extremely difficult for the Arab states to contemplate such talks in view of the fact that Israel disregarded United Nations’ decisions, had refused to work further with the Palestine Conciliation Commission and has constantly presented the world with faits accomplis.

The Iraqi Chargé d’Affaires then read a memorandum on instructions from his Government stating that while Iraq is in complete agreement with the other members of the Arab League, it is in a special position of not having participated in the talks of the Palestine Conciliation Commission at Lausanne. The Government of Iraq would, therefore, present in the near future a similar memorandum2 except for amendments necessary by reason of its special position.

I again expressed appreciation for the views which had been presented and the meeting ended.

1  Infra.

2 Dated November 14, not printed.

The Diplomatic Representatives of Various Arab States in the United States to the Secretary of State 501.BB Palestine/11–1449

[Document 1031]

The Diplomatic Representatives of Various Arab States in the United States to the Secretary of State

Memorandum

The Diplomatic Representatives of Egypt, Iraq, Jordan, Lebanon, Saudi Arabia and Syria, and the Head of the Delegation of Yemen to the General Assembly of the United Nations, acting under instructions of their Governments, have the honour to submit to the Honourable the Secretary of State of the United States of America the following:

The Governments of Egypt, Iraq, Jordan, Lebanon, Saudi Arabia, Syria and Yemen have been persistently opposed to any solution of the Palestine question that will not insure for the inhabitants of Palestine the exercise and enjoyment of their rights and the protection of their legitimate interests in keeping with the principles of the United Nations and the right of self-determination of peoples.

In supporting the rights of the Arabs of Palestine within the framework of these principles, the Arab Governments did not lose sight of the needs of international peace and security.

This is the reason why the Arab states were firmly opposed to the partition plan which was adopted by the General Assembly of the United Nations on November 29, 1947, being convinced that this resolution, which contradicts the above-mentioned principles, is also likely to trouble the peace of the Middle East. Their apprehensions did not wait long to be confirmed, since, increasing their terrorist activities in March and April 1948, the Jews had forced nearly two hundred thousands among the Arab inhabitants of Palestine to abandon their homes and seek refuge mainly in the Arab countries, obliging these countries to intervene militarily in order to prevent the complete extermination of these inhabitants.

The truce which was decided by the Security Council on May 29 and July 14, 1948 and which was accepted by the Arab Governments each time on the advice and insistence of the Government of the United States in particular, has not, any more than the general armistice, eliminated the danger.

The Arab Governments are conscious that a solution should be sought for this question and especially under the present international circumstances which call for active collaboration of all peace-loving peoples.

It is in this spirit that the Arab Governments, in response to the renewed appeal of the Government of the United States of America for reaching a realistic and peaceful solution of the problem, have agreed to collaborate to this end with the Conciliation Commission that was created by the United Nations General Assembly Resolution of 11 December last.

It is equally in this spirit that the Arab Governments signed at Lausanne on May 12, 1949 the protocol adopting the territorial provisions of the partition plan with the necessary adjustments, thereby bringing their attitude into conformity with the policy of the United States in this matter—the policy which was proclaimed by the American Delegate, Mr. Jessup, in the third session of the United Nations in Paris, was reaffirmed by the President of the United States in his message to His Majesty the King of Jordan, by the American representative in the Conciliation Commission, Mr. Ethridge, to the delegates of the Arab States, and finally by the representatives of the State Department at Lausanne.

In adhering, therefore, to the policy of the United States in this matter and in affixing their signatures side by side with that of the United States representative, the Delegations of the Arab Governments have the right to believe that some sort of gentleman’s agreement, providing reciprocal obligations, was concluded.

Nevertheless, no action has been initiated to put this protocol into effect until now, owing to the lack of good faith on the part of the Jews who have equally signed it.

The Arab Governments have grounds to believe that the Government of the United States would not lack the means necessary to induce the Jews to respect their signature and carry out the obligations resulting therefrom.

Considering the great concern of the United States Government for preserving peace in this particularly sensitive part of the world and its desire not to spare any efforts in the attainment of this peace, the Arab Governments would not waver in giving it their complete cooperation towards this end. But, it is necessary that the solution which was deliberately accepted by them in order to settle in an effective manner a problem liable to paralyze their action, must be implemented.

The Arab Governments have also solemnly affirmed during the last session of the Arab League, held in Cairo in October, their firm will to form a single front to the end of defending the peace against any danger from whatever source this danger originates.

They hope that the Government of the United States of America will not deny them its support in order to solve peacefully the problem which preoccupies them, permitting them in this way to join their efforts with its own efforts in the pursuit of other ends not less urgent.

Consequently, the Arab Governments trust that the United States Government will riot hesitate in giving them assurances that the peaceful solution concluded by common agreement at Lausanne in the protocol of May 12, 1949 will produce its full and complete effects, and that the United States Government will endeavor by using the effective means at its disposal and by direct action with the other interested party, to expedite this solution.

Washington, November 14, 1949.

Memorandum of Conversation, by Mr. Robert N. Margrave of the Munitions Division 501.BB Palestine/11–1149

[Document 1032]

Memorandum of Conversation, by Mr. Robert N. Margrave of the Munitions Division

confidential [Washington,] November 14, 1949.

Participants: Mr. George Ignatieff, Counselor, Canadian Embassy

Mr. G. E. Cox, Third Secretary, Canadian Embassy

BNA—Wm. L. Wight

MD—John C. Elliott

MD—R.N. Margrave

[Here follow the two introductory paragraphs dealing with United States policy concerning exports of arms to the Near East.]

Mr. Ignatieff stated that the Canadian Government had been approached by Israeli representatives with a request for quotations on various military items (for example, 500 .50 caliber Browning machine guns, 2,500,000 rounds of .50 caliber machine gun ammunition, 18,000 rounds 37 mm. AT proximity fuze ammunition, 50 105 mm. field guns, 150 artillery weapons higher than 57 mm., etc.). He queried whether the United States Government would consider exports of this order to be of considerable military significance with respect to the Near East. Mr. Elliott pointed out that although many unofficial rumors and “feelers” concerning Near Eastern desire for U.S. arms had come to the attention of the Munitions Division, to date exports from the U.S. to the Near East have involved no significant military items (largely sporting arms and civil aircraft parts). He added that this Government would regard proposed exports to the Near East of the nature and of the order described by Mr. Ignatieff as being of considerable military significance and, therefore, would be obliged to view such shipments with great concern.

Mr. Elliott informed Mr. Ignatieff that the Department is attempting to gather together reliable information as to the relative strengths of the various Near Eastern military establishments so that, along with information derived from consultation with the United Kingdom, Canada, Belgium, France, and Italy, this Government would have an adequate basis for considering significant military shipments to the Near East. He pointed out that the proposed consultations with these Governments (of which only that with the United Kingdom had been initiated) would result not only in a pooling of information with respect to Near Eastern arms exports on a post facto basis but also envisaged possible prior consultation with respect to proposed exports of considerable military significance. Mr. Ignatieff expressed the view that his Government would be pleased to consult further with this Government concerning this whole problem and hoped that Mr. Elliott would keep him informed of the progress of U.S.–U.K. discussions looking to the possibility of parallel and cooperative action concerning the central problem.1

1 On November 17, Mr. Elliott, who was Chief of the Munitions Division, conferred with a New York attorney, who had been asked by the Israeli Supply Mission in New York “to sound out informally the Department regarding the export to Israel of AT–6 aircraft for civil pilot training programs.” Mr. Elliott suggested that “AT–6’s were not the type of aircraft appropriate for a civil pilot training program” because of their high military potential and indicated that the Mission endeavor to obtain smaller aircraft (501.BB Palestine/11–1749).

The Acting Secretary of State to the Embassy in Egypt 711.83/10–1249: Airgram

[Document 1033]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Embassy in Egypt

top secret Washington, November 14, 1949.

A–581. Department has read with great interest Embassy’s telegram No. 943, October 122 reporting your conversation with King Farouk and believes this frank initial exchange of views will contribute to forming the basis for a new and improved phase of United States–Egypt relations.

While it is regretted that the King continues to place such emphasis on the Palestine question vis-à-vis US–Egypt relations the theme is well-known and it is assumed that you related to the King the efforts of this Government, in cooperation with the United Nations, to bring about a settlement of the Palestine question. The main concern of this Government is that there should be political and economic stability in the Near East area and it considers an early settlement on the Palestine question as an essential condition to that stability. In further discussions with the King you should emphasize that the self-interest of Egypt as well as of the other countries of the area can best be served by a resolution of the present impasse of the Palestine question.

The following comments and information on certain of the specific points raised by the King may be useful to you:

Training of Students—Training facilities have already been provided by the Air Force for two Egyptian officers in the field of photography and it is understood that the Army now has six Egyptian officers participating in training. Moreover, the Army and the Air Force are now considering the feasibility of providing training for an additional number of Egyptian officers and it is hoped that definite commitments can soon be made. For your information, the Department of Defense is in the process of determining training requirements under the Military Assistance Program and is, therefore, not in a position to make definite commitments at this time on training facilities for countries not included in present legislation.

While you may transmit foregoing information in general way to the Egyptian authorities, Department and Defense Department prefer that any specific information in regard to numbers or other details should be channelled through the Army or the Air Force Attaché to the Egyptian Defense authorities.

[Here follow observations on the resolution by the Security Council on August 11 which provided for the superseding of the truce arrangements, including the provisions with respect to the shipment of war materials, and a partial quotation from Senator Austin’s statement of August 7 that the United States did not intend to contribute to a competitive arms race in the Near East.]

Since the adoption by the Security Council of this resolution, the United States has approved several export licenses for Egypt covering such items as bombardier training planes, spare parts and a small amount of other material. In addition, the retransfer of lend-lease gun parts valued at $350,000 from Great Britain to Egypt has also been approved by the United States as is necessary in such cases.

The Department was encouraged to note that the King’s attitude at the time of your conversation appeared favorable to the lifting of Egyptian wartime regulations for the Suez Canal. While it is regretted no further developments in this connection have occurred since that time, it is hoped that the Egyptian Government will find means at an early date whereby it can raise the restrictions on the Canal.

Webb

2 For documentation on this subject, see pp. 165 [Pg. 165 is part of Doc. 71] ff.

The Acting Secretary of State to the Legation in Syria 890D.00/11–1549: Telegram

[Document 1034]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Legation in Syria

restricted Washington, November 15, 1949—9 p. m.

495. From McGhee for Minister Keeley. In conversation with me Nov 5 Syrian Min stated that in his judgment Syria must “line up” openly with US against Russia and requested my advice as to what Syria shld do to demonstrate this fact and promote area economic and political stability. He stated his personal conviction time has come for positive action in settling Pal controversy and proceed with economic rehabilitation in NE.

I welcomed his approach as statesman-like and said I had been disappointed by lack of progressive Arab leadership at present critical juncture. Experience indicates continued inability Israel and Arab states to reach agreement concerning outstanding Pal and econ questions does not operate to advantage of Arabs. It seemed to me that Syria, because of mature state of political development, natural leadership and great economic potential was in unique position to assert positive leadership in breaking impasse, and shld seize its opportunity to do so.

I said I believed Syria shld do two things: Cooperate to fullest degree with the UN and particularly the ESM, and commence direct talks with Israel for a peace settlement. I recalled President’s statement on appointment Gordon Clapp as Chairman ESM,1 which reflected sincere US interest take constructive part in planning practical program rehabilitation and economic development in Near East. Here was unique opportunity for Syria obtain practical benefits through cooperation with ESM on basis of whose activities US wld be more able to assist in economic planning. Syria cld express cooperation by early creation Development Board to cooperate with ESM and US. Likewise Syria cld earn gratitude Arab posterity by taking lead in achieving peaceful settlement Pal controversy. I sincerely believed it was in highest self-interest Syria find ways and means of engaging in direct talks Israeli Govt, however unpalatable this might seem at outset. Results cld only be advantageous to Syria and Arab world since every month’s delay brought new factors into situation none of which cld redound to ultimate benefit of Arabs.

Faiz Bey declared he wld submit these views his Govt and requested I ask you convey similar views both to present interim govt and to govt to be formed after the elections. You shld seek early favorable opportunity convey foregoing views to Syrian Govt unless you have comment which you wish to raise with Dept or at Istanbul meeting.2 You shld particularly suggest desirability formation Syrian economic development board draw up long range development projects and cooperate with technical members ESM. [McGhee.]

Webb

1 For the statement of August 26, see Department of State Bulletin, September 5, 1949, p. 333.

2 For documentation on this subject, see pp. 165 [Pg. 165 is part of Doc. 71] ff.

The Chargé in Jordan (Fritzlan) to the Secretary of State 867N.01/11–1649: Telegram

[Document 1035]

The Chargé in Jordan (Fritzlan) to the Secretary of State

secret Amman, November 16, 1949—10 p. m.

402. In hour conversation with King Abdullah this morning he gave me following exposé his attitude and recent actions re Palestine:

[Here follow four numbered paragraphs, broadly paralleling the report in despatch 140, November 11, page 1483, and stating in addition that the King expressed contempt for the “stalling and obstructive attitude” of the other Arab League members and observed that with the complete failure of the Palestine Conciliation Commission, he had no recourse other than to undertake direct negotiations with Israel. Of special note was the King’s statement that “he had recently received ‘high Jewish personality’ and had discussed possible terms. (Presumably this occurred last Sunday night which King spent at Shuneh.) Abdullah stated both he and Israeli agent agreed early peace highly desirable as armistice soon expiring.” The King’s terms, in addition to those set forth in despatch 140, were said to include a rectification of the existing line to restore the Jerusalem–Bethlehem road to Jordan and mutual free port facilities at Haifa and Aqaba. The King also expressed the hope that the Israelis would make reasonable concessions because of their “desperate” economic situation.]

(5) Abdullah stated he very desirous visiting President Truman and US. He wished me to convey to President fact that he harbors no hatred for Jews. Believes he could convince US Jew leaders reasonableness his attitude, and perhaps he and Weizmann (if also in US) might reach agreement.

(6) King hoped during coming months Israelis would take no steps or permit incidents (e.g. boundary incidents) which would prejudice chances early settlement, and he desired me convey this sentiment to Israelis through US Government.

(7) Commenting on present negotiations at Lake Success, King remarked he was sorry to see that Jordan PCC delegate was expressing agreement with other Arab delegates against wishes and instructions Jordan Government. In reply to my query His Majesty stated this especially true re status Jerusalem and presentation joint memorandum to Department, step he considered ill advised.

Comment: King’s desire early liquidation Palestine affair is natural. However, it is clear any settlement agreeable to His Majesty, whether achieved through UN or direct negotiations, must include substantial advantages for Jordan. Abdullah especially interested securing access to Mediterranean and replacing Egypt at Gaza.

King sincerely and strongly feels his position could be strengthened by visit to US. He feels policy US Government has served greatly strengthen Israelis and trips Weizmann to US has contributed largely to consolidating Israeli position.

Seems plausible that a visit by King to US, perhaps during coming spring, would serve focus US public attention on strategic importance Arab world to US and on urgent necessity providing solution such problems as fate Arab refugees. Possibly such a visit could contribute to adoption and success refugee aid program.1

Pouched Arab capitals, Jerusalem.

Sent Department 402; Department pass London 102, Tel Aviv 63, USUN 19.

Fritzlan

1 New York, on November 19, reported information from the Jordanian Representative at the United Nations that he had received instructions from King Abdullah adamantly opposing the internationalization of Jerusalem regardless of the position of the other Arab Delegations and the Israelis and directing him to explore the possibility of undertaking direct negotiations with the Israelis in New York. The Jordanian Representative was said to believe there was “no possibility Abdullah obtaining his territorial objectives from Israelis and that King playing with fire in contemplating direct negotiations.” (Telegram Delga 232, 867N.01/11–1949)

Memorandum of Conversation, by Mr. Wells Stabler of the Office of African and Near Eastern Affairs 501.BB Palestine/11–1749

[Document 1036]

Memorandum of Conversation, by Mr. Wells Stabler of the Office of African and Near Eastern Affairs

confidential [Washington,] November 17, 1949.

Participants: Eliahu Elath, Ambassador of Israel

Aubrey Eban, Permanent Delegate of Israel to the UN

NEA—Mr. McGhee

ANE—Mr. Berry

Mr. Wilkins

Mr. Rockwell

Mr. Stabler

Problem: Mr. Eban informed Mr. McGhee that Israel proposed to submit to the United Nations a separate resolution on Jerusalem which would take into account the primary interest of the United Nations in the Holy Places.

Action Required: None

Action Assigned to: ANE

Discussion: Ambassador Elath and Mr. Eban came in at their request this afternoon to inform the Department that Israel proposed to introduce an Israeli resolution on Jerusalem in the General Assembly. This resolution would take into account the primary interest of the world community in the Holy Places and would call for Israeli control of the Holy Places under United Nations supervision. It would also call for a United Nations Commissioner to be established in Jerusalem. His functions would be limited to the matter of the Holy Places. The Israeli delegation had carefully considered the Palestine Conciliation Commission draft instrument and had come to the conclusion that the various organs of United Nations Government would seriously interfere with and cut across present jurisdiction in Jewish Jerusalem. The delegation had also studied the recent clarifying statement of the Palestine Conciliation Commission and believed that statement was more closely related to the Israeli draft resolution than to the Palestine Conciliation Commission draft instrument. Mr. Eban pointed out that the situation in Jerusalem today is entirely different from that of two years ago. The United Nations had not assumed any authority in Jerusalem and as a result fighting had broken out. It now appeared that the United Nations was endeavoring to assume for itself authority which had not existed previously.

He believed that the Jerusalem question should be presented in the United Nations on the basis of determining what the interest of the United Nations is in Jerusalem. He felt that the answer would be that the primary interest of the United Nations in Jerusalem is the Holy Places. He believed that considerable sentiment existed among the delegations to the United Nations, that the United Nations should not interfere with the daily lives of the people in that area and should concern itself only with the Holy Places. While Israel could not, of course, speak for the other side, the Israeli proposal was based on the assumption that Jordan would make a similar offer.

He indicated that while other delegations would undoubtedly be willing to offer the same type of resolution, it was felt that it would be more dramatic for Israel, one of the parties most intimately concerned with the question, to present the resolution. He emphasized that Israel was anxious to avoid the injection of religious and emotional factors into the consideration of the Jerusalem question and he hoped that the General Assembly would take into consideration the attitude of the peoples most directly concerned.

He said that he wished to inform the department of the intention of Israel to introduce this proposal and to state that the resolution was not being introduced for tactical reasons to defeat the Palestine Conciliation Commission proposal. It was being presented on the basis of assuring to the United Nations its legitimate interests in the area. He hoped there might be United States support for this view.

Mr. McGhee expressed appreciation for Mr. Eban’s presentation and said that the United States, as a member of the Palestine Conciliation Commission, had participated in the drafting of the Palestine Conciliation Commission draft instrument and, therefore, gave its general support to them. We realized that there would be amendments offered and we would, of course, consider them in the light of their merits and of their contribution to achievement of agreement on a Jerusalem plan. He pointed out that our support of the Palestine Conciliation Commission draft instrument was not merely a formal one but was based on the conviction that the Palestine Conciliation Commission draft instrument offered the most reasonable basis for agreement. We had been somewhat disappointed that Israel had felt that it could not go along with the instrument but assured Mr. Eban that the views he expressed would be taken into consideration. Mr. McGhee stated that since the General Assembly had set up machinery for dealing with this question and had instructed the Palstine Conciliation Commission to submit detailed proposals for a permanent international regime in the Jerusalem area, it was up to the General Assembly to decide the question.

Mr. Rockwell pointed out that the Palestine Conciliation Commission’s clarifying statement should be taken as an indication of what the drafters of the Palestine Conciliation Commission draft instrument had in mind at the time they completed their proposals. He also stated that, generally speaking, it was the Palestine Conciliation Commission’s belief that the United Nations’ organization of administration provided for in the draft instrument would not conflict with the jurisdiction of the administering states, except in those matters of legitimate international concern. Then, in his control over the Holy Places, the United Nations Commissioner would to a certain extent share with Israel and Jordan in administering Jerusalem.

Mr. Eban said that the Israeli view was that the Palestine Conciliation Commission draft instrument would conflict with the jurisdiction of Israel in Jewish Jerusalem and regretted that the Palestine Conciliation Commission had approached this question from the wrong starting point. By this, he meant that the Palestine Conciliation Commission should have commenced with the actual situation existing in Jerusalem today taking into consideration the attitude of the people most directly affected. In this connection it was pointed out that the Palestine Conciliation Commission had, of course, followed the instructions of the General Assembly with respect to the preparation of its proposals.

Memorandum by the Secretary of State to the President 501.BB Palestine/11–2149

[Document 1037]

Memorandum by the Secretary of State to the President

Washington, November 21, 1949.

Subject: Instructions to the United States Delegation to the General Assembly on the Jerusalem Question.

When the General Assembly takes up the Jerusalem question in a few days, it will have before it the detailed proposals for an international regime for Jerusalem prepared by the Palestine Conciliation Commission of which the United States, France and Turkey are members.

The Commission prepared these proposals pursuant to the instructions which it received from the General Assembly by the Resolution of December 11, 1948, as follows:

“Resolved that, in view of its association with three world religions, the Jerusalem area, including the present municipality of Jerusalem plus the surrounding villages and towns,…1 should be accorded special and separate treatment from the rest of Palestine and should be placed under effective United Nations control.

. . . . . . .1

“Instructs the Conciliation Commission to present to the fourth regular session of the General Assembly detailed proposals for a permanent international regime for the Jerusalem area which will provide for the maximum local autonomy for distinctive groups consistent with the special international status of the Jerusalem area;”

Israel has rejected the Commission’s plan and has submitted an alternate proposal limited to United Nations supervision of the Holy Places. It now appears that the Hashemite Jordan Kingdom will also reject it on the ground that it does not favor an international regime for Jerusalem.

The Vatican has consistently advocated a stronger type of internationalization, under full United Nations control. You will recall that in correspondence with Cardinal Spellman you have assured him that this Government firmly supports the internationalization of Jerusalem and does not intend to recognize the sovereignty of any state in the City. The Department of State has also written in the same sense to Cardinal Spellman and other personalities and groups.

Having discussed the foregoing considerations with the Delegation in New York, the following instructions are proposed: 1. The United States objective at this session of the General Assembly is to obtain approval of an international regime for the Jerusalem area which (a) will adequately recognize the status of Jerusalem as the center of three great world religions and will provide for the necessary protection of and access to the Holy Places under United Nations supervision; (b) will contribute to peace and stability in the area; (c) will be workable; and (d) will take into account the interests of the principal communities in Jerusalem and the views of Israel and Jordan.

2. As a member of the Palestine Conciliation Commission, the United States participated in the formulation of the Palestine Conciliation Commission draft instrument and should support it, subject to clarifying amendments, as a basis for General Assembly consideration.

3. During the General Assembly discussion, the United States Delegation should state that it will examine on their merits any modifications of the Palestine Conciliation Commission Instrument and any new proposals. Such amendments or new proposals should be considered by the Delegation and the Department in the light of the possibility of reaching a general agreement.

4. For purposes of handling such amendments and proposals in the General Assembly and, if possible, reconciling them, the Department believes that the Ad Hoc Political Committee should create a subcommittee consisting of equal representation from members supporting Christian, Moslem and Jewish views. The Palestine Conciliation Commission might be invited to attend for advice and information

5. If in the working out of a settlement for the Jerusalem question the Assembly should be unable to agree upon detailed and definite arrangements, the United States Delegation should, after consultation with the Department, support some other form of temporary arrangements for the Jerusalem area which, pending further consideration by the General Assembly, would provide the necessary protection of and access to the Holy Places under United Nations supervision and which would offer further opportunity for reaching an agreement which would be acceptable not only to Israel and Jordan but also to the United Nations.2

Dean Acheson

1 Omissions indicated in the source text.

1 Omissions indicated in the source text.

2 In a memorandum of November 21 covering his conversation with President Truman, Secretary Acheson recorded: “I went over with the President the whole history of this matter, calling his attention to all the documents, starting with the first resolution of the General Assembly and continuing up through, the present recommendation of the Conciliation Commission. After considering what I said and reading the memorandum, the President approved it.” (501.BB Palestine/11–2149) The President’s action is also indicated by his marginal notation “Approved Nov. 21, 1949”.The Department, later the same day, telegraphed the five numbered paragraphs to the United States Mission at the United Nations as well as the fact of Presidential approval (Gadel 110 to New York, 501.BB/11–2149).

Working Draft Resolution Prepared in the Department of State 501.BB Palestine(E)/11–2349

[Document 1038]

Working Draft Resolution Prepared in the Department of State 1

restricted [Washington,] November 21, 1949.

Assistance to Palestine Refugees

The General Assembly,

Recalling its resolution 212 (III) of November 19, 1948, and 194 (III) of December 11, 1948,

Having examined the First Interim Report of the Economic Survey Mission, A–1106,2 and the Report of the Secretary General on Assistance to Palestine Refugees, A–1060,3

1. Expresses its appreciation to the contributing governments, to the United Nations specialized agencies, in particular UNICEF, WHO, UNESCO and IRO, to the ICRC, the League of Red Cross Societies, the American Friends Service and the numerous religious charitable and humanitarian organizations, all of which have made substantial contributions in their respective fields to the relief of the Palestine refugees;

2. Recognizes that continued assistance for the relief of the Palestine refugees is necessary to prevent conditions of starvation and distress among them, and that constructive measures should be undertaken at an early date to reduce the refugee problem with a view to the termination of international assistance;

3. Considers, on the basis of the estimate of the Economic Survey Mission, that $33,700,000 will be required for direct relief and works programs for the period January 1 to December 31, 1950, of which $20,200,000 is required for direct relief, and $13,500,000 for works programs; and that $21,200,000 will be required for works programs from January 1 to June 30, 1951, all inclusive of administrative expenses; and that direct relief should be terminated not later than December 31, 1950, unless otherwise determined by the General Assembly at its Fifth Session;4

4. Establishes the “Near East Relief and Works Agency” (NERWA): (a) to carry out in collaboration with local governments the direct relief and works program recommended by the Economic Survey Mission:

(b) to consult with Near Eastern governments concerning measures to be taken by them preparatory to the time when international assistance for relief and works projects is no longer available;

(c) subject to approval of its Advisory Commission, to assume such other functions as the ESM may recommend in accordance with its terms of reference;

5. Establishes an Advisory Commission consisting of representatives of France, Turkey, the United Kingdom and the United States to advise and assist the Director of NERWA in the execution of the program;

6. [Alternative A]5

Appoints ____________ as Director of NERWA responsible to the General Assembly for the operation of the program and, in the event of his death or disability, authorizes the Advisory Commission to appoint his successor:

[Alternative B]5

Requests the Secretary General to appoint the Director of NERWA on the nomination of the Advisory Commission;

The Director shall be the chief executive officer of NERWA responsible to the General Assembly for the operation of the program. He shall select and appoint his staff and shall to the extent possible utilize the facilities and assistance of the Secretary General and apply the staff rules and regulations of the United Nations. The Director shall, in consultation with the Secretary General and the Advisory Committee on Budgetary and Administrative Questions establish financial regulations for NERWA;

7. Requests the Director to convene the Advisory Commission at the earliest practicable date for the purpose of developing plans for the organization and administration of the program;

8. Urges Near Eastern countries concerned to establish local development boards to cooperate with NERWA;

9. Continues UNRPR as established under Resolution 212 (III) of the General Assembly until April 1, 1950, or until such date thereafter as the transfer referred to in paragraph 10 is effected, and instructs UNRPR to arrange for the gradual reduction in the number of rations from 940,000 to approximately 652,000 in accordance with the recommendation of ESM:

10. Instructs the Secretary General to transfer to NERWA the assets and liabilities of UNRPR by April 1, 1950, or as soon thereafter as the Director of NERWA may determine;

11. Urges all Members of the United Nations to make voluntary contributions in funds or in kind to insure that the amount of supplies and funds required is obtained for each period of the program as set out in paragraph 3 and states that to this end, voluntary contributions of non-Member states would also be accepted; contributions in funds may be made in currencies other than the United States dollar insofar as the program can be carried out in such currencies;

12. Authorizes the Secretary General, in consultation with the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions to advance immediately a sum of up to $5,000,000 from the Working Capital Fund to finance operations pursuant to this resolution, such sum to be repaid not later than December 31, 1950, from the voluntary governmental contributions requested under paragraph 11 above;

13. Authorizes the Secretary General, in consultation with the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions, to negotiate with IRO for an interest-free loan in an amount not to exceed the equivalent of $2,800,000 to finance the program subject to mutually satisfactory conditions for repayment;

14. Authorizes the Secretary General to continue the Special Fund established under Resolution 212 (III) of the General Assembly, and to make withdrawals therefrom for the operations of UNRPR, and upon the request of the Director, for the operations of NEEWA;

15. Urges UNICEF, IRO, WHO, UNESCO and FAO and other appropriate agencies and private groups and organizations, in consultation with the Director of NERWA, to participate in the program;

16. Directs NERWA to consult with the PCC in the best interests of their respective tasks;

17. Requests the Director of NERWA to submit quarterly reports, and such other reports as he deems necessary, to the Secretary General for transmission to the Members: of the United Nations and to nonmember governments which have contributed to the work of NERWA.

1 A memorandum of November 22 from Messrs. Sandifer and Hare to the Secretary of State notes that this draft resolution was “the result of intensive discussions in the Department during the past week and coincides with the views of Mr. Wright and his colleagues from the British Foreign Office with whom it has been discussed. The French and Turks appear to agree in principle.” (501.BB Palestine(E)/11–2349)

2 Not printed; regarding the report, see editorial note, p. 1472 [Pg. 1472 includes portions of Doc. 1024 and Doc. 1025].

3 See GA, 4th sess., Ad Hoc Political Committee, Annex, vol. ii, p. 14.

4 The memorandum by Messrs. Sandifer and Hare cited in footnote 1 above also stated that “400,000 refugees would be supported by the works program when it is in full swing. It is anticipated that this program would in fact lead to the permanent absorption of a substantial number of refugees in or near the areas where they are now situated although for reasons associated with Arab sensibilities, the Economic Survey Mission has not designated it as a resettlement program. “It is anticipated that the United States would need to contribute about 50% of the cost of the program. We indicated to Mr. Wright that it might be necessary for the United Kingdom to contribute about 25%, leaving the balance to be borne by France, the beneficiary governments, and other interested governments.”

5 Brackets appear in the source text.

5 Brackets appear in the source text.

The Consul at Jerusalem (Burdett) to the Secretary of State 867N.00/11–2149: Telegram

[Document 1039]

The Consul at Jerusalem (Burdett) to the Secretary of State

confidential Jerusalem, November 21, 1949—4 p. m.

655. Dayan on nineteenth gave following personal appreciation present Palestine situation. States is still in process taking over southern command; has established direct personal relations with Jordan and Egypt commanders in area; continues to follow activities of MACS and discuss them with Sharett.

1. Prospects favorable for direct negotiations with Jordan and Lebanon after termination GA which he expects will take no final action. Both have many open questions with Israel, particularly economic, whose solution would be mutually beneficial. King Abdullah long fed on belief Great Powers or PCC will force concessions from Israel. Now realizes just wishful thinking and will have to make direct settlement through own efforts.

2. Abdullah’s relations with other Arab states already very bad and he disappointed at outcome Arab League meeting. Agreement with Israel could hardly cause further deterioration and would permit King show his independence of action and defiance other Arab States. Abdullah has always dreamed of building personal kingdom during his lifetime and this furnishes strong inducement to reach agreement including incorporation Arab Palestine in Jordan. Abdullah one Arab leader who needs not fear popular reaction and overthrow his government. Assassination possible, but this danger always present.

3. Immediate agreement with Egypt and Syria more unlikely. Egypt commander stated could not act until after Egypt elections. Syria also would have to wait until next Syrian elections. However, problems with these two countries not serious.

4. Agreements need not take form of formal treaties. He personally would like to see establishment very close relations with Jordan which would give Israel Arab partner. Countries approximately same size; possesses many mutual problems that can only be solved through cooperation and joint enterprises. Mentioned potash works and development of Jordan Valley.

5. Abdullah entirely willing accept all refugees now in his territory so question of repatriation eliminated insofar as Jordan concerned.

6. Re boundaries, possible to make minor adjustments with Jordan to prevent owners from being cut off from lands. Abdullah has now abandoned hopes for return of Ramle and Lydda, and real corridor to sea naturally impossible. Lebanon needs boundary arrangement permitting labor in Lebanon to work their lands in Israel as during mandate.

7. Prospects best for economic agreements. Israel perfectly willing give Jordan free zone at Haifa and right transport any goods duty free across its territory using own transport and administering free zone. This would give Abdullah his own long desired outlet to sea. Arrangements could be made re-activate potash plants at both northern and southern ends of Dead Sea with produce shipped out as previously via Jerusalem. Under present, conditions Israel cannot export but neither can Jordan. If no agreement made, Israel will execute plan already prepared to build new road for exports.

8. Jerusalem most difficult problem. GA will take no specific action and then Israel and Jordan can work out agreement. Could take form either of complete partition of city cutting each side off entirely from other or cooperative arrangement. Latter preferred and could include free access to Scopus in return for free use of Bethlehem Road (other Israeli lately insisted on Israel-controlled corridor to Scopus and not merely free access). Solution of Jerusalem problem would also permit Israel “make peace with consular corps”.

Sent Department 655; repeated Baghdad 72, Beirut 130, Damascus 91, Jidda 15, Tel Aviv 135, London 68. Department pass Cairo 47. Pouched Amman.

Burdett

The Ambassador in Israel (McDonald) to the Secretary of State 867N.014/11–2249: Telegram

[Document 1040]

The Ambassador in Israel (McDonald) to the Secretary of State

secret Tel Aviv, November 22, 1949—4 p. m.

839. Re Deptels 729 November 181 and 672, October 20.2 In talk November 21 at residence with Eytan and Comay Ford and I again requested clarification recent Cabinet action re fusion Tel Aviv and Jaffa. After reiterating information given Embtel 808, November 8,3 Eytan said fusion was result of “informal Cabinet decision” and not in form of “decree,” that outside minutes of Cabinet meeting as which “decision” was reached nothing in nature of written document covering fusion existed, and that his government considered move “purely municipal administrative action without political implications.” He added that matter now rests with government committee appointed “to study fusion”, that committee now deliberating move, and that no further step will be taken “to make permanent situation which in fact has existed for many months” until committee renders its report.

Comment: Specifically answering questions Deptel 672, (1) Israel Foreign Office officially confirms “government has decided to form single municipality of Tel Aviv and Jaffa” (Embtel 808), (2) no decree exists according to Eytan, and (3) legal aspects and implications are at present shrouded in careful double talk of which foregoing is example. End comment.

McDonald

1 Not printed.

2 Not printed; it requested official confirmation concerning the reported issuance of a cabinet decree providing for the merger of Tel Aviv and Jaffa (867N.01/10–1849).

3 Not printed; it furnished the text of a letter from the Israeli Foreign Office which confirmed that the Government had decided to form a single municipality out of the two cities. The letter also advised that certain fringe areas formerly in dispute had been incorporated into Tel Aviv earlier in 1949 and that “Since the rest of Jaffa is fully occupied by Israelis, and since its municipal services are in fact provided by Tel Aviv, as an extension of its own, the government’s decision regularizes a situation actually existing.” (867N.01/11–849)

Memorandum by the Department of State to the President 501.BB Palestine(E)/11–2349

[Document 1041]

Memorandum by the Department of State to the President

secret Washington, [undated].

Subject: Palestine Refugee Program

On May 23 and 26 Mr. Webb discussed with you a proposed Palestine Refugee Program.1 At that time you agreed that the Department should proceed with the development of a program along the general lines set forth in its memorandum of May 9, 1949. On August 26, 1949, at the time of the appointment of Mr. Clapp as Chairman of the Economic Survey Mission, you issued a statement pledging the full support of this Government to this Mission and offering to give careful consideration to such assistance as we might render, under the auspices of the United Nations, in carrying out the recommendations of this Mission.

Mr. Clapp has just submitted his first report2 which recommends a combined direct relief and works program at a total cost of $54,900,000 for an eighteen months period from January 1, 1950, to June 30, 1951. The cost of direct relief would be $20,200,000 for the year 1950 and such relief would be terminated at the end of that year. The cost of the works program would be $13,500,000 for 1950 and $21,200,000 for the six months ending June 30, 1951.

The report further recommends that the present United Nations relief organization (United Nations Relief for Palestine Refugees) be terminated in April 1950 and that a new agency be established by the General Assembly of the United Nations to carry out both the direct relief and works programs as recommended by the Economic Survey Mission.

Mr. Clapp has indicated to the Department, but not in the report, that it is premature to embark upon a more ambitious program because: (1) the Arab Governments are not yet prepared to discuss resettlement on a large scale; (2) Israel has been unwilling to undertake repatriation of a substantial number; and (3) sufficent engineering has not yet been done to warrant the initiation of large expenditures. It is contemplated that works programs will merge into plans for longer range development.

The Department has given careful consideration to Mr. Clapp’s report and has prepared a draft resolution3 which supports his recommendations (Tab A). The proposed organizational arrangement gives full recognition to the interest and concern of the United Nations in the Palestine problem and at the same time provides a role for the United States, the United Kingdom, and France which reflects the preponderant financial responsibility which they must assume.

This draft resolution has been presented to the Bureau of the Budget, who have cleared it subject to clearance by the National Advisory Council. Time does not permit National Advisory Council clearance, and the Department desires, if you concur, to take action in the General Assembly without such clearance.

Had time permitted the Department would have preferred comprehensive consultation with Congressional leaders.

Recommendation

It is recommended: 1. That the United States Delegation to the General Assembly be authorized to introduce or support a resolution along the lines of the attached draft without, at this time, publicly indicating the amount which the United States might contribute;

2. That the Department be authorized to consult with other delegations regarding the amounts which they may be prepared to contribute on the understanding that the United States contribution to be requested from Congress would not exceed 50 percent of the cost as determined by the General Assembly;

3. That Congressional leaders be consulted to the extent possible by the Department of State4 on the proposed course of action.5

1 See Acting Secretary Webb’s memoranda of those dates, pp. 1042 [Pg. 1042 includes portions of Doc. 679 and Doc. 680] and 1056 [Pg. 1056 includes portions of Doc. 691, Doc. 692, and Doc. 693].

2 See editorial note, p. 1472 [Pg. 1472 includes portions of Doc. 1024 and Doc. 1025].

3 Not found attached. Presumably, it was the draft of November 21, p. 1500 [Pg. 1500 is part of Doc. 1038].

4 Marginal notation by Acting Secretary Webb: “This program approved by phone call to the President Nov. 23, 1949, 4:05 p. m.”

5 Thus, on December 2, a group of Department officers discussed the matter with Judge John Kee, Chairman of the Foreign Affairs Committee of the House (memorandum of conversation, by Arthur Z. Gardiner, 501.BB Palestine(E)/12–249).

Draft Defensive Security Pact Among the States of the Arab League, Prepared by the Egyptian Ministry of Foreign Affairs 890.20/11–2349

[Document 1042]

Draft Defensive Security Pact Among the States of the Arab League, Prepared by the Egyptian Ministry of Foreign Affairs 1

secret [Cairo ?, undated.]

Pursuant to the principles and objectives of the Arab League Pact and the Charter of the United Nations, and

In accordance with the sincere desire of cementing and strengthening the ties existing among the States of the Arab League, and the true wishes of those States to maintain their independence and to preserve stability and tranquility in their countries with the maintenance of their common inheritance, and

In compliance with the desire of the Arab State nations to unite together for common defense in order to maintain peace and security,

The States who are members of this Pact have come to the following Agreement:

Article I

The contracting states guarantee hereby that in order not to expose international peace and security to danger, all these states should settle their international disputes through peaceful ways in accordance with the Charters of the Arab League and the United Nations. These states also should not, in their international relations, compel themselves to use the force or threaten to use it in any way which is inconsistent with the principles of the Arab League and the United Nations.

Article II

To realize the objectives of this Pact in a most effective way, the contracting states should, in unity or separately, take effective continuous action through their special means and through cooperation among themselves to maintain and strengthen their forces as a single state and as a whole unity to stand against any military aggression.

Article III

The contracting states should, upon request from any of them, enter into consultation when the safety, the independence or the security of any one of them is in danger.2

Article IV

The contracting states agree that any military aggression against any one of them or against all of them is to be considered as directed against all of them. If such aggression has taken place each of them should, in accordance with its legal right to defend itself separately or as a whole group according to the text of Article 6 of the Arab League Pact and Article 51 of the United Nations Charter, help the state or states attacked. Each one of them must take immediately, separately or in cooperation with the contracting states, all necessary steps including the use of armed force to establish order and peace. The Arab League and the Security Council should be notified immediately of every such military aggression, or any threat for using force and the steps which may be taken.

Article V

The contracting states should announce that their international effective commitments, either among themselves or among them and any other state are not in contradiction with the text of this Pact, and that all of them guarantee that they will not conclude any international agreement which in any way contravenes this Pact.

Article VI

The Arab League Council is in charge of all affairs relative to the execution of this Pact. The said Council has the right to appoint a special committee of the Chiefs of Staff of the contracting states and this committee will recommend the necessary defensive steps to be taken.

Article VII

Ten years after putting this Pact into effect, each one of the contracting states may have the right to withdraw from the Pact one year from the date of announcing its desire to withdraw, to the Secretary General of the Arab League. The Secretary General of the Arab League will convey such announcement to the other contracting states.

Article VIII

This Pact and its supplementary documents must be ratified by each of the contracting states in accordance with each one’s constitutional procedures. Such ratification will be kept with the Secretariat General of the Arab League. This Pact is considered effective 15 days after its ratification, or after delivery to the Secretary General of at least four ratification documents of four states.

1 Furnished to Ambassador Childs on the initiative of King Ibn Saud; translated at the Embassy by Jidda in despatch 233, November 23.

2 In a memorandum of November 9 to Mr. Hare, Burton Y. Berry, Director of the Office of African and Near Eastern Affairs, stated that “Egypt, in an attempt to block recent moves towards Iraqi-Syrian federation, proposed the drafting of a collective security pact which provided for the armed participation of all Arab States in the event of an attack upon any member. Agreement in principle was reached, and such a pact is now being drafted for consideration by the League Council at a subsequent meeting. It is open to question whether the pact, even if signed and ratified, will ever become more than a paper agreement.” (890B.00/11–949). Mr. Berry’s memorandum also gave his view that the meeting of the Arab League Council from October 22 to 29, at which the proposed pact was introduced, “appears to have been an attempt to prop up the tottering structure of the Arab League.” For documentation on the proposed Iraqi-Syrian federation, see pp. 180 [Pg. 180 is part of Doc. 76] ff.

The Ambassador in Egypt (Caffery) to the Secretary of State 867N.00/11–2349: Telegram

[Document 1043]

The Ambassador in Egypt (Caffery) to the Secretary of State

top secret Cairo, November 23, 1949—1 p. m.

1094. Mytel 1060 November 14.1 Hassan Youssef told me last night that Shirine gave him Sassoon’s letter which he gave to the King. The King said that he saw no object in dealing with Sassoon, for three reasons: First, he does not know with what authority Sassoon speaks; second, Sassoon is leaving soon for Ankara as Israel representative; third, it is better in any event to wait for the Department’s reply to the recent Arab note.2

In connection with the third point I told Hassan Youssef to tell the King that in my opinion the Arab suggestions were unrealistic and anything but helpful at this juncture. He replied, “in that case what shall we do? Would it be possible to proceed on the basis of the existing demarcation lines between Israel and the Arabs?” He added quickly, “of course we could not admit to the other Arab states that we are talking of this, but if your people thought well of it I think we might get somewhere.” He added also that this was only his own suggestion.

I said, “I can tell the State Department you suggested it”.

Sent Department 1094, repeated Athens 33 for McGhee.

Caffery

1 Not printed; it advised that General Riley had brought a secret letter from Mr. Sassoon “to Ismail Shirine King’s brother-in-law proposing meeting at El Auja between representatives of the two parties to explore possibility reaching general agreement between Egypt and Israel.” (767N.83/11–1449)

2 Of November 14, p. 1488 [Pg. 1488 includes portions of Doc. 1030 and Doc. 1031].

Editorial Note [Document 1044]

Editorial Note

The General Assembly, at its Fourth Session, dealt with (1) the question of a permanent international regime for the Jerusalem area and the protection of the Holy Places and (2) the question of assistance to Palestinian refugees.

The Ad Hoc Political Committee of the Assembly devoted 13 meetings to the first of these matters, from November 24 to 29 and from December 5 to 7. The Committee’s proceedings during the earlier of these periods are printed in United Nations, Official Records of the Fourth Session of the General Assembly, Ad Hoc Political Committee, Summary Records of Meetings, 27 September–7 December 1949 (hereinafter identified as GA 4th sess., Ad Hoc Political Committee), pages 246–306.

Several proposals were offered to the Committee and on November 29, general debate concluded, whereupon Subcommittee 1 was appointed to examine the proposals (ibid., page 305).

The Chargé in Israel (Ford) to the Secretary of State 867N.01/11–2449: Telegram

[Document 1045]

The Chargé in Israel (Ford) to the Secretary of State

secret
priority Tel Aviv, November 24, 1949—1 p. m.

842. Eytan called me to Foreign Office November 23 to announce in “strictest confidence” that King Abdullah had “informally invited” Government of Israel to enter into negotiations for final peace treaty and that Israel had “formally accepted” invitation November 21. Eytan said Jordan reply expected momentarily and that while it was anticipated initial talks would be “largely exploratory” in character his government was determined enter “wholeheartedly” into discussions and hoped achieve “early favorable results.” Eytan then referred to Israel Government note October 28 to PCC saying gist this note was “direct negotiations” and that present Jordan offer appeared to be “first fruits” October note and also “vindication” Israel’s long-held belief in efficacy direct negotiations.

Eytan then stressed his government’s hope that “we may be left alone to negotiate with Jordan in our own fashion” and that no “third party influence or interference will be brought to bear” in forthcoming negotiations. He said insofar as he knew only USG through Ambassador Elath had been apprised new development1 and was uncertain whether King had informed British. He urged entire matter be kept secret for present.

Comment: Eytan not normally demonstrative, restrained with difficulty his elation. From his manner there would appear to be no doubt about Jordan offer. Incidentally he regretted “good news” had not been available for Ambassador McDonald prior his departure early morning November 23 for Istanbul. End comment 2

Sent Department 842, repeated Jerusalem 96, London 139, Department pass Amman 60, Istanbul for Ambassador McDonald unnumbered.

Ford

1 Ambassador Elath had informed Mr. Hare of the new development on November 22. The Ambassador had indicated that “it might also be necessary at some stage to call upon the United States Government to facilitate the progress of the [Israeli-Jordanian] talks”; and had expressed the hope that “we would be willing to use our influence should it be required to bring about agreement.” Mr. Hare, in reply, had “thanked the Ambassador for this information and said that as he well knew the United States Government had favored direct talks and that our principal objective on this question was the restoration of peace and stability in the area. We should, of course, welcome any free negotiations which would achieve this objective.” (memorandum of conversation by Mr. Stabler, 867N.01/11–2249)

2 Chargé Ford, on November 28, reported information from a British source that Messrs. Shiloah and Sassoon had left the previous afternoon to hold the first direct peace talks with Jordanian representatives that same night. The source had also provided information from Minister Kirkbride that the initiative for the talks had come from the Israelis rather than from King Abdullah (telegram 846 from Tel Aviv, 867N.01/11–2849).

Editorial Note [Document 1046]

Editorial Note

A conference of American Chiefs of Mission in Near Eastern countries was held at Istanbul from November 26 to 29. The agreed conclusions (see page 168 [Pg. 168 includes portions of Doc. 72 and Doc. 73]) embodied a ninth item entitled “Current Israeli-Jordan Peace Negotiations and Annexation of Arab Palestine to Jordan.”

The Acting Secretary of State to the Consulate General at Istanbul 501.BB Palestine(E)/11–2649: Telegram

[Document 1047]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Consulate General at Istanbul

secret Washington, November 26, 1949—2 p. m.

338. For McGhee.

1. Brit informed Dept USGADel late this week they support ESM report and genl lines US draft res. Brit desired, however, to reexamine (a) structure proposed agency (UN director and Advisory Comm) as against possibility utilizing IRO and (b) if IRO not considered suitable, of creation of donors commite to direct relief and public works program either in addition to or in substitution for Advisory Comm.

Brit also stated their support ESM report shld not be considered commitment to specific financial contribution as they not ready at this time to indicate extent Brit contribution.

Nov 25 Wright and Hare agreed (a) proposed agency preferable to IRO since latter associated by Arabs with Jewish immigration, since IRO in process winding up its affairs, and because it not constituted handle proposed ESM program; (b) that comite of donors wld be cumbersome and complicating either as addition to or substitute for Advisory Comm, that if changes required it wld be preferable increase membership Advisory Comm by one or two states such as Denmark. Genl question wld, however, be kept open pending further talks in NY between US, UK, Fr and Turk in light developments at UN.

Dept stated it understood Brit position re commitment at this stage re specific financial contribution and observe US similar position.

In view possibility genl Ad Hoc Polit Comite debate re Jlem may conclude early next week and need for coordination on ESM res in NY, further discussions will be concentrated NY. Meanwhile, Dept will continue Work with UK, Fr and Turk here.

2. During early part debate Ad Hoc Polit Comite Nov 25 Israel rejected PCC statute grounds plan wld impose internationalization against local right self-determination. Egypt rejected statute since plan wld mean partition and ultimate annexation. Syria acceded to demands for internationalization, indicating willingness study PCC statute. UK and Canada believe statute represents desirable and practical solution. Brazil agreed support PCC plan. Nicaragua thought it might serve basis for discussion. New Zealand favors real internationalization Jlem area. View Abdullah’s insistence, Jordan expected deliver statement opposing internatl regime. Chile said PCC plan rests on false juridical position and GA shld limit self to holy places. If a subcomite unable agree on a Jlem res, Bolivia believes PCC plan shld be accepted as compromise. Netherlands, doubting agreement re Jlem possible this session believes GA shld decide on principle internationalization, and send commissioner for holy places pending final action.

3. Iran Govt reliably reported to have handed expulsion orders 36 Iraqi Jews two Iraqi Christians. To AmEmb query Iran Govt stated order not confined Iraqi Jews but apply all Iraqi subjects, in accordance decree Council Mins passed Oct 5 in Shah’s presence. Govt states relations with Iraq strained owing recent Iraqi restrictions on Iranian cits in Iraq, allegedly affecting large Iran population Kerbala, and recent expulsion number Iranians. Dept’s instructions Tehran being repted you separately.

Webb

The Vice Consul at Jerusalem (Roberts) to the Secretary of State 867N.01/11–2949: Telegram

[Document 1048]

The Vice Consul at Jerusalem (Roberts) to the Secretary of State

secret Jerusalem, November 29, 1949—4 p. m.

666. French Consul General Neuville today intimated King Abdullah and Ben-Gurion holding secret meetings either in Jerusalem area or in South but actual location talks unknown. General Riley discounts meetings on basis King’s statement that although ready to treat would wait outcome of UN Assembly.

Same source inferred Arabs and Jews negotiating exchange of Mt. Scopus and Sheik Jarrah quarter for Arab quarters in South Jerusalem. Riley believes this report may stem from his account of recent conversations with King.

Sent Department 666; repeated Tel Aviv 136; Department pass Amman 79, Istanbul unnumbered.

Roberts

Memorandum of Conversation, by Mr. Wells Stabler of the Office of African and Near Eastern Affairs 767N.90i/11–3049

[Document 1049]

Memorandum of Conversation, by Mr. Wells Stabler of the Office of African and Near Eastern Affairs

secret [Washington,] November 30, 1949.

Subject: Jordan–Israel Talks

Participants: Mr. Greenhill—British Embassy

Mr. Wilkins—ANE

Mr. Stabler—ANE

Discussion:

Mr. Greenhill read telegrams from the British Minister in Tel Aviv and the British Minister in Amman concerning the Jordan–Israel talks.

The British Minister in Tel Aviv reported a conversation with the Israeli Prime Minister. Mr. Ben Gurion indicated that Messrs. Shiloah and Sassoon met with the Jordan representatives on November 27. The talks were preliminary in nature, but Mr. Ben Gurion indicated he thought that agreement could be reached on all points except the question of the Negeb. Mr. Ben Gurion said that he was under the impression that Jordan had raised the question of the Negeb at the request of the British Government. The British Minister replied that he understood Jordan was acting under its own initiative in this case, and according to the Minister, Mr. Ben Gurion received his statement with satisfaction.

British Minister Kirkbride in Amman reported that the talks had taken place on the 27th at the King’s winter quarters at Shuneh. The King had greeted the Israeli representatives but had not taken part in the discussions. Samir Rifai Pasha1 had acted as the Jordan delegate.

It was agreed at the outset that the talks were of an exploratory nature and that it was desirable to take up the principal points or urgent matters first. Samir Pasha said that Jordan considered access to the Mediterranean of vital importance. The Israelis agreed in principle, but discussions as to how it could be implemented were left to another meeting. The Israelis then asked Samir Pasha whether Egypt would be willing to give up the Gaza Strip to Jordan. Samir Pasha replied that this is a question which would have to be taken up at the appropriate time between Jordan and Egypt and did not seem a proper subject for discussion with the Israelis.

The conversation then turned to the subject of the Negeb and Samir Pasha said that Jordan considered it should have a common frontier with Egypt and that the Arab States should be connected by land. Jordan believed that Israel should give up part of the Negeb in return for which Jordan would assure to Israel free access to Aqaba. Jordan would also request a free zone in Haifa. Sassoon pointed out that this question would raise considerable difficulties as the Negeb was the only land area in which Israel could expand.

It was decided that no decisions need be reached at the present meeting and that the questions would be left until another meeting.

The conversation then turned to Jerusalem and both Jordan and Israel agreed that they were opposed to the internationalization of Jerusalem. The Israelis pointed out that there were two matters in Jerusalem which were of secondary importance and which could be settled later if the main questions were resolved. These points were access to Scopus and the return of Arab quarters. It appeared that Israel was prepared to give up the Arab quarters.

The Israelis then said that they had one question to ask and certain information to give. The question was whether if Jordan should annex Arab Palestine, the Anglo-Jordan Treaty would extend to Arab Palestine. Samir Pasha replied that it would, whereupon the Israelis indicated that they would have further to say on that. The Israelis then informed Samir Pasha that the United States Government had been informed of the intention to proceed with these direct talks and that it had encouraged Israel to reach agreement with Jordan. The Israelis also indicated that the British were aware of these talks. They expressed the hope that even if it was impossible to keep secret the fact that the conversations were proceeding, there would be a high degree of security regarding their substance.

It was agreed that another meeting would take place on Thursday, December 1.

Kirkbride commented that the King appeared to be over-optimistic as always.

1 Jordanian Minister of Court.

Editorial Note [Document 1050]

Editorial Note

The Ad Hoc Political Committee began general debate on the question of assistance to Palestinian refugees on November 30. France, Turkey, the United Kingdom, and the United States had submitted a joint draft resolution on the matter on November 29; for the text, see GA, 4th sess., Ad Hoc Political Committee, Annex, volume I, page 53. The representatives of these same nations, on December 1, introduced a revised draft resolution, which proposed that the General Assembly establish a Near East Relief and Works Agency “(a) to carry out in collaboration with local Governments the direct relief and works programmes as recommended by the Economic Survey Mission; [and] (b) to consult with the interested Near Eastern Governments concerning measures to be taken by them preparatory to the time when international assistance for relief and works projects is no longer available.” The text of this measure is printed ibid., page 55. For John G. Ross’ statement giving the support of the United States to the draft resolution, see GA, 4th sess., Ad Hoc Political Committee, page 308.

The Ad Hoc Political Committee continued general debate on the refugee question until December 2, at which time it adopted the joint draft resolution as amended, by a vote of 48 to none, with 6 abstentions. The proceedings of the Committee from November 30 to December 2 are printed ibid., pages 307–330.

Memorandum by the Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern, South Asian, and African Affairs (Hare) to the Secretary of State 867N.01/12–149

[Document 1051]

Memorandum by the Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern, South Asian, and African Affairs (Hare) to the Secretary of State

secret [Washington,] December 1, 1949.

Subject: Your Appointment With the Jordan Minister of Defense on Tuesday, December 6, 1949, at 3:00 p. m.

Discussion

The Jordan Minister of Defense, Fawzi Pasha el Mulki, now in the United States as Jordan delegate to the Palestine Conciliation Commission, is calling on you on Tuesday, December 6, 1949, at 3:00 p. m., to present a letter addressed to the President by King Abdullah of Jordan.1 A translation of the letter is attached for your information. (Tab A).2

Fawzi Pasha originally requested an interview with the President, but it could not be arranged because of the President’s schedule. The President suggested that you receive Fawzi Pasha in his behalf.

It is understood that Fawzi Pasha will discuss briefly his country’s attitude on the Palestine question, including the problem of Jerusalem.

Recommendations

1. It is recommended that you accept the letter on behalf of the President and express appreciation for Fawzi Pasha’s visit. You may wish to inform him that the letter will be brought to the President’s attention at an early date.

2. It is recommended that you take the following line with respect to the matters which Fawzi Pasha proposes to discuss:

(a) Jerusalem

King Abdullah opposes the internationalization of Jerusalem on the grounds that it would prejudice the security of Jordan. He believes that if Arab Jerusalem were demilitarized a gap would be created in Jordan’s defense lines and both Jordan and Arab Palestine would be exposed to possible Israel aggression. Consequently, Fawzi Pasha, acting as Jordan spokesman, has informed the United Nations that his Government considers that Arab Jerusalem should remain under Jordan control. Jordan has, however, guaranteed free access to and protection of the Holy Places.

You may wish to point out to Fawzi Pasha that the United States continues to support the principle of internationalization and express the hope that Jordan will cooperate with the United Nations in respect to the Jerusalem question.

(b) Palestine Settlement

Fawzi Pasha will probably refer to the President’s message of March 28, 1949, to the King (Tab B),3 and outline the present views of Jordan regarding a final settlement. In this connection, direct negotiations are presently proceeding between Jordan and Israel and it may be that Fawzi Pasha will express the hope that the United States will continue to give sympathetic understanding to the desire of Jordan to reach a settlement.

You might point out that the United States believes that it is in the best interests of the parties themselves to settle this question as quickly as possible. We hope they will work either through the United Nations or directly to achieve this end. It is suggested that you also indicate that the United States Government stands ready to assist the parties, both as a member of the Palestine Conciliation Commission and in such other ways as may seem desirable, in reaching a final settlement.

1 Dated November 5; see editorial note, p. 1470 [Pg. 1470 includes portions of Doc. 1021 and Doc. 1022]; a note by Mr. Brown of the Executive Secretariat indicates that King Abdullah’s communication was left with the Secretary by Fawzi Pasha on December 12.

2 Not printed.

3 Not printed.

The Secretary of State to Certain Diplomatic Offices 800.00 Summaries/12–149: Circular telegram

[Document 1052]

The Secretary of State to Certain Diplomatic Offices 1

confidential Washington, December 1, 1949—3 a. m.

Emb Cairo reports Min War issued secret instructions in effect lifting restrictions on passage shipping through Suez Canal and on normal operating schedules US ships Medit area, except those carrying war materials, incl fuels (infotel). Emb says instr beginning be carried out all Egypt ports. Eg customs official Alexandria informed ConGen ships carrying non-mil cargo to or from Israel can pass thru Suez Canal and Eg ports without restriction molestation, provided ships bound from Eg for Israel first call at another port.

Acheson

1 At Tel Aviv, Arab capitals (except Cairo), London. Paris, and Jerusalem.

The Chargé in Israel (Ford) to the Secretary of State 867N.00/12–149: Telegram

[Document 1053]

The Chargé in Israel (Ford) to the Secretary of State

secret Tel Aviv, December 1, 1949—1 p. m.

850. Embtel 846, November 28.1 Shiloah, Israeli Foreign Office, spent half-hour my home evening November 30 discussing Israeli-Jordan secret talks. He confirmed he and Sassoon had begun talks night November 27 at Abdullah’s winter palace Shuneh; that King had spent first ten minutes with them talking “genial generalities” and that thereafter he had delegated matters to Samir Pasha Rifai with his blessings and retired. Shiloah said subsequent 45 minutes discussions conducted with “friendly cordiality,” Samir and Sassoon being “old friends with much in common.”

Shiloah said neither King nor Samir brought up “old JaffA–LyddA–Ramle story” but concentrated solely on Jordan’s need for outlet to Mediterranean which, in Jordan’s eyes, meant “entire Negev in interests in both Jewish and Arab world contiguity.” Samir felt present Jewish wedge driven into Arab world must be removed in order justify to other Arab states any concession Jordan might now make looking to final peace settlement.

Jewish delegation’s reply, according Shiloah, was to effect Israel fully realized importance to Jordan of Mediterranean outlet and was prepared make “any reasonable offer” but not at cost of entire Negev. Shiloah argued that if Arabs wished avoid “inevitable Jewish expansionism” in future, they must not cramp Jewish state now. Israel delegates said some other solution short of Negev “must and could be found” and suggestion of Hebron–Gaza corridor was reportedly then put forward. Shiloah said he pointed out such an arrangement would necessitate agreement with Egypt but that this was matter for peaceful settlement between Jordan and Egypt. “We might be willing concede corridor if Egypt willing concede western terminal.”

Shiloah said talk terminated more or less on this note, that he and Sassoon were then dinner guests of King who was in “jovial reminiscing mood,” and that second secret meeting with same participants at same place was called for night December 1. He said he unable say yes or no to overall success first meeting but stressed its friendly atmosphere. He said he believes King wants peace “with or without Negev” and that if tonight’s or any future talks break down solely because of Negev, it would indicate to him that King was not acting solely for himself but for “third party.”

Comment: Shiloah rarely brings himself to utterance word “Britain” but that is of course his “third party.” In several recent talks with British Minister here he has repeatedly said insofar as he knows British Government is keeping hands off present trend of events, that his government “doesn’t care who holds the Negev as long as it is not the Russians,” and that while so-called Gaza corridor would be no sacrifice for Israeli if Arabs prepared swallow it to save face, he believed his government would applaud if only in interests getting on with job.

I stressed to Shiloah after last night’s talk keen interest my Government in progress present negotiations; pointed out he and Sassoon had assumed grave and delicate burden, the success or failure of which could have far-reaching consequences, and hoped he would keep me current on developments. End Comment.

Sent Department 850; repeated London 140; Jerusalem 98; Department pass Amman 62.

Ford

1 Not printed, but see footnote 2, p. 1510 [Pg. 1510 includes portions of Doc. 1045 and Doc. 1046].

Editorial Note [Document 1054]

Editorial Note

Subcommittee 1 made its report on the Jerusalem area to the Ad Hoc Political Committee on December 2. The report included a draft resolution which called on the General Assembly to restate its intention to place the area under a permanent international regime, which would make appropriate guarantees for the protection of the Holy Places, as originally set forth by the General Assembly in its resolution of November 29, 1947 (see footnote 1 to telegram 1271, Foreign Relations, 1947, volume V, page 1291).

The draft resolution, accordingly, called for the establishment of the area as a corpus separatum and designated the Trusteeship Council of the United Nations to discharge the responsibilities of the Administering Authority. The draft resolution, moreover, called on the Trusteeship Council to complete preparation of the Statute of Jerusalem and to proceed with its implementation.

The Subcommittee’s report is printed in GA, 4th sess., Ad Hoc Political Committee, Annex, volume I, page 57.

Memorandum of Conversation, by Mr. Wells Stabler of the Office of African and Near Eastern Affairs 867N.01/12–549

[Document 1055]

Memorandum of Conversation, by Mr. Wells Stabler of the Office of African and Near Eastern Affairs

secret [Washington,] December 5, 1949.

Subject: Israel–Jordan Talks

Participants: Mr. Greenhill—British Embassy

Mr. Stabler

Discussion:

Mr. Greenhill read a telegram from the British Minister in Amman regarding the progress of the Israel–Jordan talks. The Israeli representatives, Messrs. Sassoon and Shiloah, and Samir Rifai Pasha had met for the second time at Shuneh on December 1.

The Israeli representative informed the Jordan representative that Israel had come to the conclusion that it could not cede any territory as part of a settlement with Jordan. Samir Pasha replied that this view was irreconcilable with the earlier recognition by Israel of the necessity for Jordan to have access to the sea. It was necessary for Jordan to receive this access through territory over which Jordan had sovereignty. The Israelis said that this was very difficult and there were many points involved. Samir Pasha replied that in this event there appeared to be no necessity for proceeding further with the talks. Samir Pasha commented to the British Minister that the “visitors had been taken aback” by his statement.

The Israeli representatives then asked what scheme for settlement Jordan had in mind. Samir Pasha replied by asking whether the Israeli claim to the Negeb was based solely on its need for a reserve of land capable of development. The Israel representatives replied in the affirmative. Samir Pasha then suggested that in view of this, Jordan suggested a partition of the Negeb. Israel would take the northern part which was capable of cultivation while Jordan would take the southern part which could not be cultivated in any way. Thus Jordan would not only have access to the sea but also a common frontier with Egypt. The Israelis commented that this question could not be dealt with solely on the basis of the cultivatability of the land and that other factors entered into the situation. There then ensued a long argument which led to no conclusion.

The Israelis then said that they had three points which they wanted to discuss.

With respect to Jerusalem both Israel and Jordan were opposed to internationalization and thought that partition was the best solution. The Israelis asked whether Samir Pasha could give any views on partition to which Samir Pasha replied that he could not at this time. The Israelis then said that it was necessary for them to gratify certain religious elements in Israel. Consequently it was necessary for Israel* to have free access to the Wailing Wall. Samir Pasha said that he would bear this in mind.

The Israelis said that they wished to recommence work at the Potash Works in the Dead Sea and at the Hydroelectric Station at Nahariyim. Samir Pasha replied that Jordan was not prepared to accept this except as part of a general settlement.

The Israelis brought up the question of the Anglo-Jordan Treaty and asked if it were possible for the United Kingdom to keep its bases east of Jordan. While they had no real objection to British bases West of the Jordan, there was a psychological factor in Israel which had to be borne in mind. It would be easier for Israel to recognize greater Jordan if the British did not return to Palestine. Samir Pasha had nothing to say on this point. The Israelis then said that they assumed that Jordan insistence regarding the Negeb was the result of British strategical requirements. Samir Pasha denied this and said that to show the veracity of his denial he would offer an alternative to the Negeb. Jordan would accept a piece of territory from Hebron through Faluja to Majdal and another from Jenin through Nazareth to Acre. The latter strip would be a substitution of a common frontier with Lebanon for one with Egypt.

Samir Pasha requested the Israelis to return to Tel Aviv and obtain a straight answer on the question of access to the sea and cession of territory. The answer would show whether there was any use of meeting again. The Israelis promised that they would send a message concerning these points on or about December 4.

Samir Pasha commented to the British Minister that the Israelis appear determined not to break off the talks at that meeting and had been considerably shaken when Samir Pasha had suggested that in view of the Israel attitude on the cession of territory, no useful purpose would be served by continuing the talks. While the Israelis had been fairly adamant regarding the cession of territory, particularly in connection with the common frontier with Lebanon, there had been a number of hints that their position was not necessarily final. Samir Pasha said that the meeting had been conducted in a cordial atmosphere.

* to reoccupy the Jewish quarters in the old city and [Footnote in the source text; presumably Mr. Stabler intended that these words be inserted in the text.]

Editorial Note [Document 1056]

Editorial Note

The Ad Hoc Political Committee began consideration of the report of Subcommittee 1 (see editorial note, page 1518 [Pg. 1518 includes portions of Doc. 1053, Doc. 1054, and Doc. 1055]) on December 5. Mr. Ross stated that the United States remained convinced that the proposals of the Palestine Conciliation Commission were the best basis for a solution of the Jerusalem problem. He expressed regret that the recommendations of Subcommittee 1 did not constitute an improvement over those of the Conciliation Commission. He averred that the Trusteeship Council would have the virtually impossible task of putting into operation a new political system which failed to take into consideration the realities of the situation. The Trusteeship Council did not have at its disposal the force that might prove necessary in order to impose a regime on the population of the Jerusalem area which was obviously incompatible with its aspirations (GA, 4th sess., Ad Hoc Political Committee, page 343.

The Ambassador in Israel (McDonald) to the Secretary of State 867N.00/12–549: Telegram

[Document 1057]

The Ambassador in Israel (McDonald) to the Secretary of State

secret Tel Aviv, December 5, 1949—1 p. m.

859. Ford and I December 4 during hour with Ben-Gurion and earlier hour and half with Eytan and Comay canvassed: (1) Istanbul conference,1 (2) Israel position re Jerusalem, (3) re Egypt, (4) re Jordan, (5) Communism, (6) re ESM, (7) re Point IV, (8) US policy Near East.

1. Istanbul: I gave orally substance of agreed statement and also made five points McGhee and I drafted as basis my arguments here. (See my “main talk” memorandum in Department’s summary of Istanbul conference.)

Prime Minister showed keenest interest throughout, interjecting observations frequently and at conclusion my resume commented follows:

2. Jerusalem: In impassioned demand for “true reason” international community “intransigence” re Jews continued occupancy and rule of new Jerusalem, Prime Minister observed bitterly “Christianity still cannot accept nor tolerate fact that Jewish state now exists and that its traditional capital is Jerusalem”. Declaring that Israel would make any desired promise re safeguarding and guaranteeing free access to “places sacred to all mankind” he added “such promises hold good today and will be observed twenty or hundred years hence”. He concluded gravely “it would take an army to get Jews out of Jerusalem; and the only army I see willing to occupy Jerusalem is Russia’s”.

3. Egypt: Prime Minister eagerly seized on my suggestion re possible direct talks Egypt. “Peace with Egypt would mean peace and stability throughout entire Middle East” he declared and was obviously desirous such direct talks soonest. He had, however, no face-saving device to suggest. On contrary, he said “Gaza is now wanted by Abdullah and hence is not bargaining point between Egypt and Israel”.

4. Jordan: Prime Minister confirmed secret talks now in progress (Embtels 846, November 282 and 850 December 1) and seemed sanguine of outcome. Nonetheless, he emphatically subordinated effect Jordan peace to far more important need for Egypt peace. Eytan had previously enlarged on latest talks with Abdullah December 1, saying Negev no longer paramount issue and that talks now hinging primarily on Gaza and “free passage” or corridor. Other issues including partition Jerusalem, Latrun, Scopus–Bethlehem roads, potash concession and free port Haifa, he implied were manageable.

In answer my question re extension British treaty in event Jordan absorbs Arab Palestine, Prime Minister indicated as had younger colleagues gravity this issue. Prime Minister said “that’s something we shall have to discuss with British”.

[5.] Communism: Aside from his Jerusalem outburst, Prime Minister emphatically decried communism’s chances in Israel. “For three thousand years we Jews have refused accept regimentation and have repeatedly fought it at risk national extermination. Today we are still Jews and still fight regimentation”. Re reported Vatican fear communism in Jerusalem, Prime Minister emphatically said: “Rome will be Communist before Jerusalem”.

6. ESM: Prime Minister significantly made no comment on my relaying of Clapp’s judgment that continued unrestricted immigration to Israel would result in economic collapse.

7. Point IV: Prime Minister interested but non-committal this program other than to grunt at my disclosure that only 5 million dollars allocated entire Near East.

8. US policy Near East: Commenting on my statement that “after Istanbul I understand more clearly full implications new policy Near East”, Prime Minister said with evident conviction and pleasure: “US must in its own interests work out with or without Britain, American Near East policy; we think we can see it beginning to take shape”.

Comment: Throughout the two and half hours of our two talks formalities were dispensed with and our exchanges were forthright. End comment.

Sent Department 859, repeated London 141, Jerusalem 99, Baghdad 52, Beirut 77, Damascus 57. Department pass Amman 63, Cairo 72, Jidda 32.3

McDonald

1 For documentation on the conference of Near Eastern Chiefs of Mission held at Istanbul from November 26 to 29, see pp. 165 [Pg. 165 is part of Doc. 71] ff.

2 Not printed, but see footnote 2, p. 1510 [Pg. 1510 includes portions of Doc. 1045 and Doc. 1046].

3 Ambassador McDonald, the following day, sent a message to Clark Clifford, suggesting that he read telegram 859 (telegram 865, 867N.00/12–649).

Memorandum of Telephone Conversation, by the Secretary of State 501.BB Palestine/12–649

[Document 1058]

Memorandum of Telephone Conversation, by the Secretary of State

confidential [Washington,] December 6, 1949.

Subject: Voting in the UN on Jerusalem

The Secretary called Mr. Connelly at Key West this afternoon to report on the situation which would take place this afternoon in the United Nations on Jerusalem. He was doing this not to bother the President or to get any decision from him, but to explain what might seem a course by the United States delegation contrary to the President’s clear instructions. The Secretary said that he did not think that the proposed course was contrary to the instructions but thought that perhaps early press reports might look as though it were.

The Secretary said that his clear basic instructions from the President on this question of Jerusalem were that the United States should stick with the Palestine Conciliation Report unless and until something better comes along. If an agreement could be worked out between the Jews, some of the Arabs, and some of the Christian countries, the United States would be for that, but for the present, it is clear that we should not abandon the Committee Report in which we participated.

However, a subcommittee had been created which had made a report in the Committee of the whole. In this report, some of the South American countries and some of the Arab countries not involved directly, want to go back to the idea of a separate state for Jerusalem. The Secretary said that that had not been possible last year and it would not be possible now since neither the Jews nor Transjordan would accept it. However, the proposal has a majority of two. The Secretary said that we would vote against this.

The Swedes and the Dutch have brought up a proposal which may have a good deal of merit. Their proposal is to work out something along the lines of the PCC report, but less formal and less complicated. The United States position on this will be that we are not going to vote for that in the Committee but if, between the time it leaves the Committee and reaches the floor of the United Nations, the delegates could get together on this or some modification, the United States might be inclined to go along. At this point, however, if we voted for it, we would have everyone down on us; if we voted for the subcommittee report we would have the Jews down on us. The Secretary pointed out that we are now for the first time in the fairly good position when we can say to the Vatican and the Jews that they should get together and talk to each other, but that we were not going to coerce them.

Memorandum of Conversation, by Mr. Wells Stabler of the Office of African and Near Eastern Affairs 811.22767N/12–649

[Document 1059]

Memorandum of Conversation, by Mr. Wells Stabler of the Office of African and Near Eastern Affairs

secret [Washington,] December 6, 1949.

Subject: Training of Israeli Officers

Participants: NEA—Mr. Hare

Mr. Greenhill—British Embassy

ANE—Mr. Wilkins

ANE—Mr. Stabler

Discussion:

Mr. Greenhill came in today on instructions from the Foreign Office to inquire regarding our attitude on the training of Israeli officers. Mr. Greenhill said that some time ago the Israeli Government had approached the British Government with the request that Israeli officers be trained in England. The British Government had replied that since the Israeli Prime Minister had stated that Israeli officers were to be trained in the East as well as in the West, it could not agree to train any Israeli officers. Apparently this response had annoyed the Israeli Government, and it had recently again approached the British Government on the same subject, indicating that both the United States and France had agreed to train Israeli officers. The British Government was interested to know the attitude of the United States.

Mr. Hare said that while the arms embargo was in effect we accepted neither Israeli nor Arab officers for training. However, since the lifting of the arms embargo, we were prepared to consider requests. The Defense Department, in which the responsibility for these matters lies, is reviewing its training facilities in the light of the obligations of the Mutual Defense Assistance Program. We assumed that when the Mutual Defense Assistance requirements have been met, the Defense Department might be able to provide limited training facilities for the Israelis and the Arabs. Mr. Hare pointed out that it was necessary for us to maintain a balance between Israeli and Arab officers, particularly if the latter desired training facilities.

Mr. Stabler indicated that the question of security also entered into this question and that the fact that Israel would send its officers both to the East and to the West would undoubtedly be taken into consideration. Mr. Stabler also mentioned that we had received requests from Israel for training facilities for a large group of officers. He referred to recent newspaper articles reporting that the Israel Government was annoyed that its requests had been ignored. The Defense Department subsequently issued a statement that Israel’s request had been acknowledged and was under consideration.

Mr. Greenhill expressed appreciation for this information, which he said he would forward to London. He said that the British Government in considering this question had to bear in mind not only the question of security, but also the fact that bad blood existed between the British Army and the Israelis.

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Secretary of State 501.BB Palestine/12–749

[Document 1060]

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Secretary of State 1

confidential [Washington,] December 7, 1949.

Participants: The Secretary

Deputy Under Secretary Rusk

Mr. Moshe Sharett, Israeli Foreign Minister

Mr. Eliahu Elath, Israeli Ambassador

Mr. Wilkins—ANE

Problem: Current developments at the UN regarding Palestine.

Action required: None

Action assigned to: ANE

Mr. Sharett called on me this afternoon for the purpose of paying his respects during his current visit to the United States to attend the present session of the General Assembly and for the purpose of making known Israeli views on certain aspects of the Palestine problem.

Mr. Sharett informed me that it was a great relief for him to leave the present nightmare at Lake Success for the calm of Washington. He indicated that an “unholy alliance” of Arab states, Latin American states, the USSR and its satellites had brought about, in subcommittee of the ad hoc political committee, the adoption of an amended Australian resolution providing for rigid internationalization in the Jerusalem area. Mr. Sharett said that the ghost of November 29, 19472 was “stalking the scene” and that many representatives in the United Nations were bowing down before it.

I asked Mr. Sharett if any progress had been made in recently reported conversations between representatives of Israel and representatives of the Vatican in Rome. Mr. Sharett said he could tell me confidentially that while it should be understood that the Vatican did not approve of present Israel proposals regarding Jerusalem, a message had been sent to him to the effect that he continue his present line and that conversations could be continued later. Mr. Sharett said that this message meant the Vatican was not displeased with the manner in which the Israeli Government was conducting its relations with Catholic representatives within Israel and that, as the Vatican did not expect any action at the present session of the General Assembly, representatives of Israel and the Vatican could continue their current talks thereafter. Mr. Sharett believed that the Vatican was divided regarding the question of full internationalization for the Jerusalem area, but that it would maintain its present position of support for full internationalization pending action by the GA.

I asked Mr. Sharett what the views of the Israeli Government were with respect to Jerusalem. He informed me that his Government considered an agreement between the United Nations and Israel with respect to the Holy Places through the medium of a UN commissioner appeared to be adequate and said that arrangements of this character would make it possible for Israel and Jordan to take care of the practical affairs of everyday life in Jerusalem.

I observed that when I had last seen Mr. Sharett in the spring of this year3 I had pointed out to him that we envisaged, in the light of the General Assembly resolution of December 11, 1948, a practical arrangement for the Jerusalem area under the general supervision of the United Nations in which the authorities of the adjoining states would have responsibility for administration. I remarked that he had previously indicated that we were in general agreement and that his present views were at some variance with his former position.

I asked Mr. Sharett what he thought of the Swedish-Netherlands proposal4 regarding the Jerusalem area. Mr. Sharett replied that its concept appeared acceptable but that it contained a number of serious faults, including suspension of laws and regulations by the UN commissioner, the character of the Consular Court, and the prohibition on the establishment of national administrative agencies within Jerusalem. He also indicated that Israel had a number of other reservations and amendments to this proposal.

I asked Mr. Sharett what action he thought the United Nations might take regarding Jerusalem. Mr. Sharett replied that he thought the United Nations should restrict itself to a reaffirmation of its previously stated principles regarding the Holy Places, to a request to the parties concerned that they make arrangements with the United Nations regarding the Holy Places and to a call upon the parties that they cooperate with the United Nations in the reestablishment of peace in Jerusalem.

Mr. Sharett told me that, at Jordan’s request, Israeli representatives had been holding a series of exploratory talks with King Abdullah and his representatives and that, while he could not report any substantial progress, his Government was hopeful of the outcome. He said that this optimism was based on the present position of both governments in Israel and Jordan and that Israel was prepared to offer agreement to the incorporation of Arab Palestine in Jordan in return for peace from Abdullah. He said that no serious question of territory existed between Israel and Jordan and that Abdullah, desiring a port in the Mediterranean, was anxious to obtain the Gaza strip from Egypt and subsequently access, by means of road or strip, from Israel. Transfer of the Gaza strip was a matter solely between Jordan and Egypt. Israel would not be in a position to offer Jordan a territorial strip which would cut Israel in two but would be in a position to offer Abdullah free access from Jordan to Gaza.

I asked Mr. Sharett if Israel and Jordan had discussed the refugee question. Mr. Sharett said their representatives had not.

Mr. Sharett concluded by informing me that Israel was seriously apprehensive regarding frequent Arab announcements of a “second round” with Israel and regarding Arab rearmament through shipments of British jets and tanks. He said that Israel would appreciate my authorizing shipments of military supplies from the United States through the granting of export licenses. I said that I was not informed on this subject and that we would study it. Ambassador Elath said he would supply us with additional details regarding this matter.5

1 Drafted by Mr. Wilkins.

2 The date of the resolution by the General Assembly which called for the partition of Palestine and the establishment of Jerusalem as a corpus separatum.

3 See Secretary Acheson’s memorandum of conversation of April 5, p. 890 [Pg. 890 is part of Doc. 577].

4 The text of the draft resolution submitted by the Netherlands and Sweden on December 5 is printed in GA, 4th sess., Ad Hoc Political Committee, Annex, vol. i, p. 60.

5 Mr. Hare had sent a memorandum to the Secretary of State on December 7, prior to the latter’s meeting with Mr. Sharett, to brief him on the Israeli and United States positions on various important questions. The memorandum ventured into two questions which were not brought up directly during the Acheson-Sharett conversation, as follows: “F. Iraqi Jews—Israel has expressed official concern to the United States Government over the alleged persecution of Iraqi Jews and has conducted a strenuous campaign, both in the United States and elsewhere, on this subject.

“It is the well-established policy of the United States Government to urge that minorities of whatever faith in Near Eastern countries be treated in a manner compatible with the objectives of the United Nations with respect to human rights and fundamental freedoms. This question has been discussed by the American Embassy in Baghdad with many members of the Jewish community in Iraq, with American and European residents of Baghdad and Basra and with Christian and Moslem Iraqis of varying shades of political opinion. Our Embassy reports that despite certain difficulties experienced by the Jewish community in Iraq, factual evidence does not support the conclusion that Iraqis of the Jewish faith are being subjected to a campaign of genocide or of general persecution. Our Embassy is continuing to discuss this matter with the Iraqi Government and we hope that Israel and Iraq will bear in mind the need for approaching such questions in a moderate manner in order to avoid aggravating the situation.

“G. Arab Collective Security Pact and Israel’s Relations with the Arab States— Israel has expressed concern regarding the proposed Arab Collective Security Pact and has emphasized the dangers of such a Pact unless the Arab states cease to talk about preparations for a ‘second round’ war with Israel. Mr. Sharett has informed our Ambassador in Tel Aviv that United States or United Kingdom support for such a Pact prior to peace between Israel and the Arab States would strengthen Arab intransigeance and delay the achievement of such peace.

“We understand a committee of the Arab League is presently drafting a text of this Pact. We have not yet been informed of its full content. We have not, however, received any preliminary information, which would indicate that this Pact is preliminary to a resumption of hostilities by the Arab States against Israel.” (867N.01/12–749)

Editorial Note [Document 1061]

Editorial Note

The Ad Hoc Political Committee made its report to the General Assembly on December 7; for its text, see United Nations, Official Records of the Fourth Session of the General Assembly, Plenary Meetings of the General Assembly, Annex to the Summary Records of Meetings, 1949 (hereinafter identified as GA, 4th sess., Plenary, Annex), page 35. The report included two draft resolutions adopted by the Committee for consideration by the General Assembly. One concerned the questions of an international regime for the Jerusalem area and of the protection of the Holy Places, the Committee adopting the recommendations of Subcommittee 1 by a vote of 35 to 13, with 11 abstentions. The second draft resolution dealt with the question of assistance to the Palestine refugees, which the Committee adopted by 48 votes to none, with 6 abstentions. For the texts of the two draft resolutions, see GA, 4th Sess., Plenary, Annex, pages 38 and 39. For the proceedings of the Committee from December 5 to 7, see GA, 4th sess., Ad Hoc Political Committee, pages 339–368.

The Ambassador in Israel (McDonald) to the Secretary of State 867N.00/12–749: Telegram

[Document 1062]

The Ambassador in Israel (McDonald) to the Secretary of State

secret Tel Aviv, December 7, 1949—2 p. m.

869. In 80-minute talk with Shiloah at his request Dec. 6 my house, he observed as follows: (1) Jordan talks with Abdullah’s intermittent participation are continuing in “favorable atmosphere.” Central problem now is King’s insistence on Gaza outlet and control of corridor. Israel agreeable “free passage” and now searching for formula to satisfy Jordan without sacrificing Israeli sovereignty or dividing country. When Israel suggested possible Egyptian objection Jordan control Gaza, King replied: “Adjustment is possible with Cairo as family affair.” Shiloah said next meeting, probably December 8, is expected to be “crucial”, and possibly last before opening formal negotiations.

(2) Egypt, Shiloah said, is “dear my heart”. He echoed Prime Minister’s eagerness for early start negotiations (Embtel 859, December 5) and said Riley was recently agent to carry letter from Sassoon to Sherine, Farouk’s brother-in-law, and in confidence also of [to?] Egyptian Army and Foreign Office. No answer yet received this Israeli bid for negotiations. Shiloah “fears no progress unless US takes initiative bringing two countries together.” In Jordan talks, Israel had “made it perfectly plain that nothing would be agreed to which might further alienate Egypt.” He explained “Though Israel more intertwined with Jordan, peace with Egypt much more important.”

(3) Jerusalem was discussed briefly. In passing Shiloah made disquieting statement: “We shall, of course, expect part of old city in any final partition.” He anticipated no insurmountable obstacle to territorial adjustment in Jerusalem.

(4) Anglo-Jordan treaty’s extension to cis–Jordan1 would be “matter of grave concern” and Israel would “almost certainly insist that certain clauses, e.g., right to establish bases and maintain troops, be abrogated.” He echoed Prime Minister’s insistence this would require high level discussion with British.

(5) Shiloah asked if “Arab rearming and threats of second round” had caused concern at Istanbul. On my negative reply, he commented that Israel must regard seriously such rearming, especially that of Egypt with scores of tanks and some jet planes. He expressed fear that Arabs would interpret western shipment of supplies as approval of threats of second round. My assurances that US is convinced UK has no such purpose seemed not to satisfy Shiloah.

Sent Department 869; repeated London 142, Jerusalem 100, Baghdad 53, Beirut 78, Damascus 58, Jidda 33; Department pass Amman 64, Cairo 73, Karachi for McGhee.

McDonald

1 Presumably, on this side of the Jordan, i.e., the West Bank.

Resolution 303 (IV) Adopted by the General Assembly on December 9, 1949 [Document 1063]

Resolution 303 (IV) Adopted by the General Assembly on December 9, 1949 1

December 9, 1949

The General Assembly,

Having regard to its resolutions 181 (II) of 29 November 1947 and 194 (III) of 11 December 1948,

Having studied the reports of the United Nations Conciliation Commission for Palestine set up under the latter resolution,

I. Decides

In relation to Jerusalem,

Believing that the principles underlying its previous resolutions concerning this matter, and in particular its resolution of 29 November 1947, represent a just and equitable settlement of the question, 1. To restate, therefore, its intention that Jerusalem should be placed under a permanent international regime, which should envisage appropriate guarantees for the protection of the Holy Places, both within and outside Jerusalem, and to confirm specifically the following provisions of General Assembly resolution 181 (II): (1) the City of Jerusalem shall be established as a corpus separatum under a special international regime and shall be administered by the United Nations; (2) the Trusteeship Council shall be designated to discharge the responsibilities of the Administering Authority …;2 and (3) the City of Jerusalem shall include the present municipality of Jerusalem plus the surrounding villages and towns, the most eastern of which shall be Abu Dis; the most southern, Bethlehem; the most western, Ein Karim (including also the built-up area of Motsa); and the most northern, Shu’fat, as indicated on the attached sketch-map;

2. To request for this purpose that the Trusteeship Council at its next session, whether special or regular, complete the preparation of the Statute of Jerusalem, omitting the new inapplicable provisions, such as articles 32 and 39, and, without prejudice to the fundamental principles of the international regime for Jerusalem set forth in General Assembly resolution 181 (II) introducing therein amendments in the direction of its greater democratization, approve the Statute, and proceed immediately with its implementation. The Trusteeship Council shall not allow any actions taken by any interested Government or Governments to divert it from adopting and implementing the Statute of Jerusalem;

II Calls upon the States concerned to make formal undertakings, at an early date and in the light of their obligations as Members of the United Nations, that they will approach these matters with good will and be guided by the terms of the present resolution.

1 Reprinted from GA, 4th sess. Resolutions, p. 25.

2 Omission indicated in the source text.

Editorial Note [Document 1064]

Editorial Note

The General Assembly, in two meetings on December 9, considered that part of the Ad Hoc Political Committee report concerned with establishing an international regime for the Jerusalem area and with protecting the Holy Places; the proceedings of these meetings are printed in GA, 4th sess., Plenary, pages 572–607.

Mr. Ross expressed again the opposition of the United States to the draft resolution adopted by the Committee and reiterated support for the proposals of the Palestine Conciliation Commission (ibid., page 578). British Representative Cadogan also spoke in opposition to the Committee measure, while Soviet Representative Tsarapkin spoke in favor of it (ibid., pages 573 and 589).

The General Assembly, later the same day, adopted the resolution proposed by the Committee by a vote of 38–14, with 7 abstentions. The United States and the United Kingdom were recorded in opposition (ibid., page 607); for the text of resolution, see infra.

Editorial Note [Document 1065]

Editorial Note

The General Assembly, at a brief meeting on December 8, adopted the draft resolution dealing with the question of assisting the Palestinian refugees that had been proposed by the Ad Hoc Political Committee. The resolution was adopted by a vote of 47–0, with 6 abstentions (United Nations, Official Records of the Fourth Session of the General Assembly, Plenary Meetings of the General Assembly, Summary Records of Meetings 20 September–10 December 1949 (hereinafter identified as GA, 4th sess., Plenary), page 571).

The resolution was based on the First Interim Report of the Economic Survey Mission. It recognized that “continued assistance for the relief of the Palestine refugees is necessary to prevent conditions of starvation and distress among them and to further conditions of peace and stability, and that constructive measures should be undertaken at an early date with a view to the termination of international assistance for relief.”

The resolution also considered that “the equivalent of approximately $33,700,000 will be required for direct relief and works programmes for the period 1 January to 31 December 1950 of which the equivalent of $20,200,000 is required for direct relief and $13,500,000 for works programmes; that the equivalent of approximately $21,200,000 will be required for works programmes from 1 January to 30 June 1951, all inclusive of administrative expenses; and that direct relief should be terminated not later than 31 December 1950 unless otherwise determined by the General Assembly at its fifth regular session.”

The resolution established the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East to carry out the direct relief and works programs recommended by the Economic Survey Mission and to consult with Near Eastern Governments concerning measures to be taken by them preparatory to the time when relief and works projects would cease.

The resolution also dealt with such matters as the Office of Director of the Agency, an Advisory Commission, and the financing of the activities of the Agency. It closed with an instruction to the Palestine Conciliation Commission to transmit the final report of the Economic Survey Mission. The full text of the resolution (No. 302 (IV)) is printed in United Nations, Official Records of the Fourth Session of the General Assembly, Resolutions, 20 September–10 December 1949 (hereinafter identified as GA, 4th sess., Resolutions), page 23.

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in Israel 501.BB Palestine/12–949: Telegram

[Document 1066]

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in Israel

restricted   niact Washington, December 9, 1949—9 p. m.

755. Reference adoption amended Australian resolution regarding Jerusalem by General Assembly. Please take all possible steps in your discretion to urge upon Israeli Govt and its officials importance of preventing any statements or action which would inflame situation in Near East, particularly in view current Israeli-Jordan and possible further Israeli conversations with Vatican.

Sent Tel Aviv; repeated Amman for similar action except reference conversation with Vatican; repeated Jerusalem and USUN for info.

Acheson

The Ambassador in Israel (McDonald) to the Secretary of State 501.BB Palestine/12–1149: Telegram

[Document 1067]

The Ambassador in Israel (McDonald) to the Secretary of State

secret
niact Tel Aviv, December 11, 1949—1 p. m.

878. Immediately following receipt Department niact 755, December 9, Ford and I had Shiloah my residence for hour December 10 and were at office Eytan 45 minutes December 11.

In reply to Department message Eytan quoted Ben-Gurion as standing on today’s statement: “Israel’s position on question of Jerusalem found clear and final expression in statements by the government and all parties in Knesset on December 5. Jerusalem is an inseparable part of Israel and her eternal capital. No UN vote can alter this historic fact.” Ben-Gurion feels “nothing more now need be said.” There will be “special meeting government” this p. m.1

Eytan said Israel immediately after UN vote stopped all further transfer property to Russians under Knesset authority August 24. “Bulk of property” not transferred and “no more will be transferred.”

Eytan implied Israel not required take any action re UN decision until Trusteeship Council drafted and its implementation is begun. At point implementation “Israel may refuse access Jewish Jerusalem to TC representatives or merely refuse cooperation.” No decision these policies yet taken. Eytan expects and hopes that meanwhile Russia will press its advantage and make such demands in TC for participation government Jerusalem as will antagonize Western Powers and prevent agreement. He said “Moscow and Vatican each hopes cheat the other. Their alliance cannot last.”

Eytan was more optimistic than Shiloah about effects UN decision on Israel–Jordan talks. Next meeting will be December 13. Shiloah was pessimistic any agreement now except possibly on Jerusalem roads to Scopus and Bethlehem. Shiloah doubts Transjordan has or can secure consent Egypt transfer to Transjordan Gaza and strip. As to transit Transjordan to Gaza, Israel now offers road under Transjordan jurisdiction on model of US agreement Panama jurisdiction over road through Canal Zone. Eytan feels Abdullah more anxious than his advisers avoid break Israel talks.

Comment: Whole Israel shocked and pro-Russian sections stunned by success Russian-Vatican-Moslem combination. Russian cynicism is bitter pill for all, but especially for Leftists. Ben-Gurion and Cabinet now see absurdity Sharett’s policy insisting on balancing Russian “friendship” with that of US. I pressed this point cruelly with Eytan and intend do same with Ben-Gurion and Weizmann urging them speak and act accordingly. In particular I called Eytan’s attention to inexcusable anti-American despatches in Palestine Post which I believe enjoys directly or indirectly government subsidies thus putting it in different category from independent and party newspapers. End comment.

McDonald

1 In his statement before the Knesset on December 5, the Israeli Prime Minister stated in part: “We cannot today regard the decision of November 29, 1947, as being possessed of any further moral force since the United Nations did not succeed in implementing its own decisions. In our view, the decision of November 29 about Jerusalem is null and void.” The following day, the Knesset ratified unanimously the Prime Minister’s statement. (Despatch 304, December 12, from Tel Aviv, 501.BB Palestine/12–1249)

The Chargé in Jordan (Fritzlan) to the Secretary of State 767N.90i/12–1249: Telegram

[Document 1068]

The Chargé in Jordan (Fritzlan) to the Secretary of State

secret Amman, December 12, 1949—7 p. m.

418. Saturday p. m. I had long audience King Abdullah at Shuneh during which following discussed.

1. Istanbul Conference: Conveyed substance recapitulation conference conclusions to King who expressed pleasure US adopted strict impartial attitude vis-à-vis Israelis and Arabs and that US approved direct talks and willing encourage both sides settle differences this manner.

2. Jerusalem: King bitterly resentful regarding GA action re Jerusalem and especially critical attitude Arab States. Asked me convey US Government appreciation US opposition amended Austrian [Australian] resolution, protested he had many times declared he would not leave Jerusalem and he intended abide by these declarations. Derived some comfort from his belief internationalization will not be carried out.

3. ESM report: Abdullah very pleased GA adopted ESM report without dissent and obviously expects much benefit from RWRA.

4. Jordan–Israel negotiations: King fairly hopeful success. Raised question US moral support “reasonable” Jordan claims. I replied US did not wish become involved in negotiation as we believe durable settlement obtainable only through direct negotiations two parties concerned without intervention. King replied he understood our position but hoped if opportunity arose US would support any Jordan claims it considered reasonable (particularly concerned re outlet to Mediterranean) added he had recently detected more conciliatory Israel attitude attributing this to possible suggestions made by Secretary Acheson to Sharett during recent meeting.

After audience with His Majesty I had long talk with Samir Pasha Rifai re progress negotiations with Israelis. He said crucial point was manner arranging Jordan access to Mediterranean. Official Jordan position still demands south Negev across which road could be built connect Tafila at SE end Dead Sea with Gaza.

Samir stated Israelis proposed corridor Hebron to Gaza under Jordan “jurisdiction”. To this he replied allegedly that only alternative to south Negev which could be considered would be Hebron–Gaza corridor with full Jordan sovereignty but giving Israel transit rights at specific points. In addition Jordan would demand return certain land Tulkarm area as well as Israeli relinquishment all Arab quarters Jerusalem.

Samir added Israelis put forward claim for land west of Dead Sea to permit Israeli road link between potash works both ends Dead Sea. They also expressed concern possible establishment British bases Arab Palestine as having bad psychological effect.

December 8 talks were inconclusive and it seems next discussions, date not fixed, will be decisive. I have feeling neither King nor Samir will wish continue negotiations unless basic question access to sea can be solved satisfactorily.

Re obtaining Gaza from Egyptians Samir believes this will not be difficult as Egypt would like to be rid of refugees among whom Egyptian administration has been very unpopular. He feels this question can be resolved in time without great difficulty.

Re British bases in Palestine, Samir seemed feel some satisfaction might be given Israelis as from military viewpoint present bases would afford adequate protection. However, Jordan would never consider restriction British treaty of alliance to east bank Jordan River.

Sent Department 418, Department pass London 107, USUN 23, Tel Aviv 65, Jerusalem 147. Pouched Arab capitals.

Fritzlan

The Ambassador in Israel (McDonald) to the Secretary of State 501.BB Palestine/12–1249: Telegram

[Document 1069]

The Ambassador in Israel (McDonald) to the Secretary of State

confidential
niact
priority Tel Aviv, December 12, 1949—9 p. m.

880. Eytan called me to Foreign Office 6:30 p. m., December 12 expecting hand me advance copy Prime Minister’s “policy statement” on Jerusalem, first scheduled for delivery 8 p. m. Knesset session. However, unexplained last minute cancellation and speech now set December 13 Knesset.

Eytan unable give me advance copy, but said BG had “made definite point” avoiding any “inflammatory statements” in preparing speech, while at same time stressing Israel’s “rights” in Jerusalem and maintaining position heretofore held that Jewish Jerusalem “must remain sovereignty Israel.” Speech’s main purpose, said Eytan, is enable government set “moderate and positive lead” for country, thereby avoiding extremist groups gaining advantage and public feeling “going astray after strange gods.” Eytan said speech, broadly speaking, will announce “continuation of action” rather than suggest any new action.

Comment: I gather Israel proposes continue status quo ante vis-à-vis Jerusalem, e.g., town planning, maintenance certain government offices there, new construction, etc. and simply ignore existence GA resolution. End comment.

Sent Department 880. Department pass London 145, Jerusalem 101, Amman 65, Baghdad 55, Beirut 81, Damascus 60, Cairo 75, Jidda 35.

McDonald

The Secretary of State to the Egyptian Ambassador (Rahim) 501.BB Palestine/11–1449

[Document 1070]

The Secretary of State to the Egyptian Ambassador (Rahim)

The Secretary of State presents his compliments to His Excellency the Ambassador of Egypt and has the honor to refer to the Joint Note of November 14, 1949, which was presented to Acting Secretary Webb by the Diplomatic Representatives of the Governments of Egypt, Iraq, Jordan, Lebanon, Saudi Arabia and Syria and by the Head of the Delegation of Yemen to the General Assembly of the United Nations, submitting certain observations regarding the question of Palestine.

The United States Government appreciates this expression of views and considers them as indicative of the desire of the Governments of the Arab States to reach an early and peaceful settlement of the Palestine problem. The views expressed in the Joint Note have been given close consideration by this Government.

The United States Government considers that the United Nations, which has been seized with the Palestine problem since the matter was first referred to that body in 1947, is the proper medium through which a solution of the question should be sought. The General Assembly of the United Nations created the Palestine Conciliation Commission for the purpose of assisting the parties to seek agreement by negotiations conducted either with the Commission or directly. It is the hope of this Government that the parties concerned will continue to collaborate with the United Nations in its important task of bringing about a peaceful settlement of all outstanding issues.

It is for this reason that the United States Government considers that questions relating to the Protocol of May 12, 1949, signed under the auspices of the Palestine Conciliation Commission by Egypt, Jordan, Lebanon and Syria on the one hand and by Israel on the other, should more appropriately be discussed with the Conciliation Commission.

One of the principal objectives of the United States with respect to the Palestine problem is the restoration of peace and stability in the Near Eastern area. The United States Government is convinced that it is in the best interest of the parties themselves that they should take the initiative in advancing from the armistice stage to that of permanent peace and that they should employ all means at their disposal, including direct negotiations, to achieve this end.

The United States Government stands ready to assist the Arab States and Israel, both as a member of the Palestine Conciliation Commission and in such other ways as may seem desirable, in achieving a final settlement of the Palestine question.1

Washington, December 13, 1949.

1 Separate notes were sent to the diplomatic representatives of Iraq, Jordan, Lebanon, Saudi Arabia, and Syria on December 13. The same day the Department directed New York to convey orally to the Head of the Delegation of Yemen to the United Nations the substance of the notes. The Department explained that it was not desired to communicate in writing with the Head of the Yemeni Delegation since the United States did not maintain diplomatic relations with the present Government of Yemen, (instruction 383 to New York, 501.BB Palestine/11–1449) Mr. Ross carried out the instruction on December 20 (memorandum of conversation by Mr. Stabler, December 20, 501.BB Palestine/12–2649).

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Deputy Under Secretary of State (Rusk) 501.BB Palestine/2–1349

[Document 1071]

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Deputy Under Secretary of State (Rusk)1

confidential [Washington,] December 13, 1949.

Participants: Mr. Aubrey Eban, Israeli Representative to the UN

Dr. Moshe Keren, Counselor, Embassy of Israel

Mr. Rusk, Deputy Under Secretary

Mr. Wilkins, ANE

Problem; Implementation of the General Assembly Resolution of December 9 regarding Jerusalem.

Action Required: To consider the Israeli view.

Action Assigned to: ANE

Mr. Eban, accompanied by Dr. Keren, called on me this afternoon, at their request, for the purpose of discussing the Jerusalem question in the light of the adoption by the General Assembly on December 9 of a resolution instructing the Trusteeship Council to revise its statute for Jerusalem and to implement it.

Mr. Eban said he was glad the “nightmare” of General Assembly consideration of the Palestine question was over and that he appreciated the harmony which had existed between the Israeli delegation and the US delegation in the Assembly concerning the Jerusalem question.

I interjected that I appreciated Mr. Eban’s remark but observed that although we were agreed on opposition to the amended Australian resolution regarding Jerusalem, we had not been in agreement concerning the type of resolution which we felt the General Assembly should pass.

Mr. Eban said that this was correct but, now that the General Assembly had adopted the Resolution of December 9, he wished to discuss it from the point of view of immediate repercussions and future action.

Mr. Eban said that the immediate repercussions of the adoption of the General Assembly Resolution had been as expected in Israel. The people of Israel and the people of Jerusalem did not believe that Jerusalem could or should be separated from Israel. Mr. Eban anticipated that the Israeli Parliament would discuss the matter in detail and added that a resolution proclaiming Jerusalem as the capital of Israel and a motion of no confidence in the Government would probably be introduced. Mr. Eban remarked that because of the public reaction in Israel and the proposed discussions and resolutions in the Parliament the Prime Minister would probably be required to reassure the Israelis regarding the Government’s intentions.

I asked Mr. Eban exactly what was the juridical status of Jerusalem. He said it was exactly the same this week as it had been last week. There was no change in the juridical status of Jerusalem, nor was one intended.

Mr. Eban continued by remarking that the General Assembly Resolution of December 9 cut across the existing patterns of authority of Israel and Jordan in Jerusalem, that it cut across the existing armistice agreement between Israel and Jordan as far as Jerusalem is concerned, and that it cut across current talks between Israel and Jordan with respect to a settlement of the Palestine question, including the particular question of Jerusalem. Mr. Eban stated that it would be Israeli policy to bring about a “reversal” of the GA’s resolution of December 9.

With respect to the Israeli-Jordan conversations, Mr. Eban believed that a successful outcome might be forthcoming in a matter of hours, perhaps a few days, and that, in general, the General Assembly Resolution had probably accelerated a successful outcome to these talks, whereas it had probably made further Israeli talks with the Vatican impossible.

I asked Mr. Eban whether it would not be helpful if Israeli representatives continued to explore the Jerusalem question with the Vatican. He said that the Vatican was probably “elated” with the passage of the General Assembly Resolution of December 9, which the Vatican had not anticipated, and that he was not optimistic regarding further talks at this stage.

I pointed out that a successful settlement of the Jerusalem question involved not only agreement between Israel and Jordan but also between Israel, Jordan and other religious interests, including particularly the Vatican. I added that in order to achieve such agreement all of those interested would undoubtedly be required to compromise their official positions. I urged upon Mr. Eban the importance of endeavoring, in so far as the Israelis could, the continuation of further talks with the Vatican.

I remarked, with regard to the General Assembly Resolution of December 9, that it posed a number of legal questions and that it raised the question of implementation. I recalled that the Trusteeship Council was under instructions from the General Assembly and observed that the Assembly’s action, in so far as the members of the United Nations were concerned, had the status of a recommendation as had the Assembly Resolution of November 29, 1947. I remarked, regarding implementation, that the UN had no forces at its disposal and again expressed the hope that all of the parties interested in Jerusalem, both Israel and Jordan, as well as Catholic interests, would endeavor to work out together a settlement of the question. I said that the US as a member of the UN on the Trusteeship Council would work constructively in the Council.

1 Drafted by Mr. Wilkins.

The Secretary of State to the United States Mission at the United Nations 501.BB Palestine/12–1349: Telegram

[Document 1072]

The Secretary of State to the United States Mission at the United Nations

secret Washington, December 13, 1949—12 noon.

641. US rep on TC 1 shld be guided by fol considerations at TC mtg Dec 13 when question of Jerusalem arises.

1. Although US voted against res adopted by GA, TC is under direction of GA and shld make bona fide effort to carry out clear intention of Assembly. US as member of TC will discharge its responsibilities in attempting to carry out GA res but US member should avoid leadership in discussions. At same time because of our opposition to Jerusalem res in GA we shld be careful that our position in TC does not undermine or give appearance of undermining GA’s decision.

2. First task confronting TC is review and modification of statute of Jerusalem in accordance with para I (2) of GA res. This para refers to need for amendments in statute in direction of its greater democratization. Inherent in such problem is also need to consider element of workability and acceptance. Although Dept does not believe that TC shld initially take steps toward implementation of statute, Dept does believe that elements of workability and acceptance shld be taken into account in modifications of the statute.

3. In opening statement US Rep shld say that views of US on Jerusalem have been stated in Assembly but US believes that, under instructions from Assembly, TC must proceed to draw up draft statute for Jerusalem and US will cooperate to this end.

4. In light of fact that GA res was only adopted on Dec 9 Dept believes that all govts interested in question and particularly members of TC may need some time now to consider problem further and to have opportunity to study views expressed in GA. US would favor therefore adherence to present schedule of TC so that initial work on problem does not commence until latter part of Jan.

5. Although US Del shld not take any initiative on question of place of TC meeting if subject is reopened in TC, US should support holding winter meeting of TC in NY rather than Geneva.

6. If question of participation of Israel and Jordan in work of TC arises, US Del shld support invitation to them to participate without vote but US shld not at this stage initiate invitation to them since their presence might precipitate the issue of their compliance or noncompliance with GA res.

7. If move is made in TC to establish a subcommittee to work on statute US Del shld support subcommittee of the whole rather than smaller subcommittee. If despite our position smaller subcommittee is established US shld seek to avoid membership on such committee but shld not press this to point where it might appear that US is unwilling to assist TC in drafting statute.2

Acheson

1 Ambassador Francis B. Sayre.

2 The Department sent the text of this telegram to London on December 16 and authorized communication of its substance to the British Foreign Office (telegram 4505, 867N.01/12–1649).

Editorial Note [Document 1073]

Editorial Note

The Trusteeship Council, on December 13, began consideration of its responsibilities under the General Assembly’s resolution of December 9. Ambassador Sayre enunciated the views of the United States the same day, guided by the considerations set forth in telegram 641, supra. A summary of his statement is recorded in United Nations, Official Records of the Trusteeship Council, Second Special Session, page 37.

The Council, on December 19, gave consideration to a Mexican draft resolution (ibid., page 68), which proposed that the President of the Council be entrusted with the preparation of a working paper on the Statute of Jerusalem, to be submitted to the Council at the beginning of its sixth regular session on January 19, 1950. The draft resolution, as amended, was adopted by the Council by 11 votes to none, with 1 abstention (ibid., page 69).

Then on December 20, the Council considered a draft resolution (ibid., page 81), which expressed its concern at the removal to Jerusalem of various ministries and departments of the Government of Israel. Such action was said “likely to render more difficult the implementation of the Statute of Jerusalem.” The draft resolution also called on the President of the Council “To invite the Government of Israel to submit a written statement on the matters covered by this resolution.” The measure, as amended, was adopted by 5 votes to none, with 7 abstentions (ibid., page 84).

The texts of the two resolutions as adopted by the Trusteeship Council, numbered 113 (S–2) and 114 (S–2), are printed in United Nations, Official Records of the Trusteeship Council, Second Special Session, 8 December–20 December 1949, Resolutions, page 2.

The Chargé in the United Kingdom (Holmes) to the Secretary of State 767N.90i/12–1349: Telegram

[Document 1074]

The Chargé in the United Kingdom (Holmes) to the Secretary of State

secret London, December 13, 1949—7 p. m.

4948. Furlonge, who has now replaced Burrows as head of Eastern Department, Foreign Office, said today that two recent telegrams from Kirkbride report December 8 meeting between Israel and Jordan was very stormy. Principal bone of contention continued to be Jordan’s demand for access to Mediterranean. Israelis offered to give Jordan “jurisdiction” over corridor, but took strong stand could not alienate Israeli sovereignty over any territory. In presenting jurisdiction proposal, Israelis cited US-Panamanian agreement giving US right of access to Colon. Jordan turned offer down flatly. Israel reported to have argued could not give Jordan sovereignty over corridor, thereby splitting country in half, to which Jordan reported to have replied there was no question of splitting country in half, since Jordan desired southern Negev as well. Talks then adjourned sine die.

2. Prior to foregoing deadlock, parties discussed question of Jerusalem and there was agreement in principal regarding re-drawing present line to meet points re access Hebrew University, Wailing Wall, et cetera. Israel also requested cession of area containing power station on Yarmuk River, to which Jordan replied it had not entered into talks to discuss disposal of Jordan territory.

3. Towards end of session, Abdullah reported to have come into room and stated that there could be no peace settlement unless Israel prepared make some concessions. He must be able show territorial concessions in order justify his action with other Arab states. If such concessions not forthcoming, he would prefer see present armistice arrangements continuing in effect.

4. Decision as to next meeting left to Israel.

5. Furlonge clearly gloomy on prospects any settlement between two parties as result these conversations.

Department pass Amman as London’s 10.

Sent Department 4948, repeated Tel Aviv 79.

Holmes

Editorial Note [Document 1075]

Editorial Note

The Fifth Progress Report of the Palestine Conciliation Commission, dated December 14, reviewed its operations from September 16 to December 9. The report reviewed the problem of Jerusalem and the Holy Places, the refugee question and the territorial question. It concluded, in part, that “the Commission considers that it has received from the General Assembly in explicit terms the powers and obligations to undertake in the present circumstances a procedure of mediation and in consequence, to submit compromise proposals to the parties concerned.… Therefore the Commission hopes to undertake this task with the interested parties and thereby bring to a successful conclusion the mission entrusted to it by the General Assembly.” The full text of the Fifth Progress Report is printed in United Nations, Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifth Session, Annexes, page 9.

The Ambassador in Israel (McDonald) to the Secretary of State 867N.01/12–1449: Telegram

[Document 1076]

The Ambassador in Israel (McDonald) to the Secretary of State

secret
priority Tel Aviv, December 14, 1949—11 a. m.

885. Comment on Embtel 882 December 13:1 Eytan’s prognostications given me December 12 (Embtel 8802 ) that Prime Minister’s speech would contain “no inflammatory statements” hardly borne out in such remarks as these: “Decision is utterly incapable of implementation if only for the determined unalterable opposition of the inhabitants of Jerusalem themselves”; and “We are continuing with the transfer of the government to Jerusalem and hope to complete it as soon as possible”; and “There is nothing now to prevent Knesset from returning to Jerusalem. We propose that you take a decision to this effect”.

These statements obviously made (1) to forestall more drastic demands by government’s violently outspoken rightwing critics such as Herut and (2) to confound Communists and leftist Mapam elements supporting or apologizing for USSR stand on internationalization. Ben-Gurion evidently confident of instant favorable reaction of Israel to his bold directive.

Embassy observer present during speech and subsequent Knesset debate reports proceedings generally quiet and orderly with only applause coming final announcement by speaker that “after Hanukka recess” Knesset meetings will be held Jerusalem. End comment.

Sent Department 885, repeated Baghdad 47, Beirut 83, Damascus 62, Jerusalem 103, Jidda 37. Department pass Amman 68, Cairo 77, London 147.

McDonald

1 Not printed; it gave the text of the statement made by Prime Minister Ben-Gurion to the Knesset on December 13 (867N.01/12–1349).

2 Dated December 12, p. 1534 [Pg. 1534 includes portions of Doc. 1068 and Doc. 1069].

The Ambassador in Egypt (Caffery) to the Secretary of State 867N.00/12–1449: Telegram

[Document 1077]

The Ambassador in Egypt (Caffery) to the Secretary of State

top secret Cairo, December 14, 1949—7 p. m.

1152. Hassan Youssef Pasha said yesterday further in connection with the Sassoon–Cherine matter that in any case the approach on the Sassoon–Cherine level is not the proper level. He said “Why don’t you make yourselves go-between between Israel and Egypt? Only you could persuade the Israelis to put forth items which might form basis of settlement. In effect there is really only one outstanding issue: boundary adjustment. If settlement of the refugees becomes a fait accompli and if agreement can be reached on territorial adjustments, peace can be made.”

He said also that he doubts sincerity of Israel concerning taking care of refugees there if Israel obtains control of Gaza area. “If Egypt,” he continued, “could obtain in lieu of Gaza area the section which includes Beersheba and extending to Dead Sea, Egypt might settle those refugees there.”

He said conversations are under way to renew armistice but could give no details. He reaffirmed that Egypt had no desire to renew hostilities. “However, if Israel resumes hostilities Egypt will be obliged to do as well as she can.”

Caffery

Memorandum of Conversation, by Mr. Stuart W. Rockwell of the Office of African and Near Eastern Affairs 501.BB Palestine/12–1549

[Document 1078]

Memorandum of Conversation, by Mr. Stuart W. Rockwell of the Office of African and Near Eastern Affairs

confidential [Washington,] December 15, 1949.

Participants: Dr. Moshe Keren, Israeli Embassy

Miss Esther Herlitz, Israeli Ministry of Foreign Affairs

Mr. Hare, NEA

Mr. Wilkins, ANE

Mr. Rockwell, ANE

Problem: Attitude to be adopted re Israeli desire that Trusteeship Council not take certain steps in connection with Jerusalem case.

Discussion: Dr. Keren and Miss Herlitz called at their request at the instance of Mr. Eban. They said that Mr. Eban had heard that the Trusteeship Council was considering two matters: 1) The extension of an invitation to the Israeli Government to designate representatives to take part in the discussions in the Council on the preparation of a statute setting up an international regime for Jerusalem. 2) A draft resolution proposed by the French representative on the Council condemning Israel for recently taking action concerning Jerusalem in opposition to the provisions of the General Assembly resolution of December 9, 1949.

Re 1), Dr. Keren said that the Israeli Government hoped that no such invitation would be extended since Israel would be unable to participate in discussions looking toward the establishment of a regime to which it was firmly opposed. An invitation to participate would have to be refused, with resulting embarrassment both for the Trusteeship Council and Israel. Mr. Hare said that he thought it was customary for the Council to issue invitations to the interested parties to attend sessions of the Council when matters of interest to them were being discussed and that it might be difficult for the Council to make an exception in this case. He recalled that in the Somaliland case the Council had issued an invitation to Ethiopia despite the latter’s attitude on the matter. Mr. Hare could give no assurances as to what the US attitude in this instance would be, but we would keep the Israeli position in mind.

Re 2), Dr. Keren said that if the Council passed a condemnatory resolution public opinion in his country, already inflamed against the UN because of the December 9 resolution, would become even more bitter. Such a resolution would make it more difficult to obtain in a calm and dispassionate atmosphere a new and more realistic UN decision on Jerusalem. He very much hoped it would be possible to avoid bringing a resolution of this nature to vote in the Council.

Mr. Hare said that we had heard that the French representative had introduced a draft resolution, but that he had not seen the text. We did not as yet know what the attitude of our Government on this matter would be, but he wished to point out that a majority decision on Jerusalem had been taken by the United Nations and that the Trusteeship Council had been given certain specific instructions by the General Assembly. The United States was a loyal member of the United Nations and of the Trusteeship Council, and was naturally going to play its part when the Council considered the course of action to take. Dr. Keren said that of course he understood this.

Mr. Hare stated that there have recently been strong actions taken and statements made in Israel concerning Jerusalem, and that it was natural that these should provoke a reaction in the Trusteeship Council. The United States Government was concerned by moves taken in Israel likely to prejudice or complicate the work of the Trusteeship Council in the task assigned it by the General Assembly.

Both Dr. Keren and Miss Herlitz maintained that what had recently happened in Israel was merely a further development in the process of moving Government offices to Jerusalem which had been going on for some time. They said that despite strong pressure in the Cabinet to do so, the Government had refused to proclaim Jerusalem the capital of Israel. Certain statements had been made to appease public opinion, but in reality the situation was more or less the same as before.

Mr. Hare could not agree with this, and said that he thought that the recent events in Israel could not really be described as unimportant further steps in a gradual process. Much stronger things had been done and said in the past few days.

Dr. Keren then returned to the importance of public opinion in Israel, and said that no democratic government, in the face of a decision such as the one just taken by the General Assembly, could refuse to act as the people desired. We pointed out that as far as Jerusalem was concerned Israel had to reckon as well with world opinion.

When questioned as to where the capital of Israel actually was at the present moment, Dr. Keren said that Israel really would not have a capital until a constitution had been adopted. The provisional capital was at Tel Aviv, but both Tel Aviv and Jerusalem had the necessary attributes for a capital, particularly now that Government offices had been located in Jerusalem.

Dr. Keren then reiterated the hope that the Trusteeship Council would pass no resolution condemning Israel. Mr. Hare said again that he could give no assurances as to what the US attitude on the question would be, as we had not had time to study the matter thoroughly.

The Chargé in Jordan (Fritzlan) to the Secretary of State 767N.901/12–1549: Telegram

[Document 1079]

The Chargé in Jordan (Fritzlan) to the Secretary of State

secret
priority Amman, December 15, 1949—10 a. m.

421. Legtel 418 December 12. Yesterday evening I had hour and half talk with Samir Pasha Rifai re results fourth meeting with Israelis held Shuneh Tuesday1 nite presence King.

Following questions listed for discussion and trend talks as follows according Samir: 1. Territorial settlement including Jordan access Mediterranean.

2. Jerusalem.

3. Tulkarm triangle (approved for separate discussion after Israeli opposition).

4. Israeli road link along west shore Dead Sea connecting potash works.

5. Application British treaty Arab Palestine.

6. Present and future treaty obligations both parties (this inserted request Israel and aimed Jordan obligations under AL charter).

First question passed over on insistence Israelis (desiring doubtless test extent Jordan concessions before revealing their hand access to sea) but on Samir’s condition it be discussed before meeting ended as it was crucial question.

Be Jerusalem, Israelis demanded change line afford them contiguity of territory with Jew quarter and Wailing Wall in old city and with Mt. Scopus institutions. Samir recognized reasonableness former and King readily assented but Samir stated Jordan could not consider latter but would be willing guarantee free access. This of course predicated on conclusion general agreement which would change line giving Jordan Nablus, St Pauls and Bethlehem roads and territory east and would provide compensation for certain Arab quarters. Such arrangement seemed in general satisfactory to Israelis.

Re Tulkarm, Samir claimed return fertile triangle area absolutely necessary. This land had been held by Jordan and had been given up at armistice negotiations result of ignorance and stupidity.

Re question Israeli road link between potash works King gave immediate assent to Israeli demand. At this point Samir insisted on returning to discussion of question Jordan access to sea rather than taking up two questions re treaties.

After some discussion between Shiloah and Sassoon latter made dramatic statement effect that as evidence good faith part Israelis, and in appreciation King’s conciliatory attitude, Ben Gurion had decided in face serious opposition especially from military that Israel should give Jordan direct corridor from Hebron to Gaza (later amended to corridor from Hebron to Gaza via Beit Jibrin) with full sovereignty subject to three reservations: (a) there should be no military installations or bases in corridor; (b) Israelis should have free passage across it at least three places; (c) British treaty of guarantee not to apply corridor.

When King heard this proposal he expressed much pleasure and appeared believe agreement virtually reached. However, Samir replied proposal not acceptable. He had demanded South Negev and had indicated he would consider as alternative reasonable corridor with full Jordan sovereignty over it. He stated there were two reasonable and acceptable alternatives. One was Israeli relinquishment Western Galilee and suitable corridor to it, and other was corridor from Hebron to Majdal (slightly north Gaza) via Beit Jibrin and Faluja. He added Majdal only possible area which could be considered as point access in south because: (a) South coast very hilly with exception Majdal area and consequently Majdal offered only feasible site for port; (b) there existed road connection between Hebron and Majdal while no such link with Gaza; and (c) while Jordan hopeful eventually taking over Gaza from Egypt, this problematical.

Israelis replied they had no authority offer corridor to Majdal but agreed confer further with government.

Re Israeli reservations offer of corridor to Gaza Samir stated: (a) If Jordan agreed not establish military bases or installations in corridor it would ask Israel to give similar commitment re area both sides corridor to extent corridor width; (b) Jordan agreed in principle Israeli free passage at certain points across corridor but could not now commit itself to number of points. Question British treaty application to corridor not discussed but Samir believes injection this factor by Israelis indicative absence complete good faith.

Two remaining treaty questions deferred to later meeting.

Israeli delegates departed with intention requesting new instructions for possible future discussions for which date not set.

Comment: Apparent Israelis attempting obtain Jordan agreement on separate [apparent omission] in hope deferring central question Jordan access to sea. To counter such tendency Samir is making clear his refusal consider any aspects settlement except as integral part overall settlement, and agreement given on any particular question presumes reaching general agreement. I have strong feeling that neither Samir nor Prime Minister would be parties to agreement which did not embrace following as minimum: (1) corridor Hebron–Majdal with Jordan sovereignty over it; (2) Jerusalem line as giving Jordan Nablus, St Pauls and Bethlehem roads and territory east; and (3) return of Jordan Tulkarm triangle.

It is extremely doubtful that any Jordan government would agree to less. In general Samir seemed hopeful talks would succeed. Question of their continuation will depend upon Israelis.2

Sent Department 421. Department pass London 108, USUN 24, Jerusalem 148, Tel Aviv 66.

Fritzlan

1 December 13.

2 The Israeli version of the talks with the Jordanians on December 13 was conveyed to Ambassador McDonald by Mr. Shiloah the following day. The Ambassador’s account, as transmitted to the Department on December 15, was a brief one, going into detail only in connection with King Abdullah’s request for Majdal and Ascalon as his “sea exit” instead of Gaza. No direct mention was made in the Ambassador’s account of the Israeli proposal to give Jordan a direct corridor to the Mediterranean (telegram 893 from Tel Aviv, 767N.90i/12–1549).

Memorandum by the Acting Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern, South Asian, and African Affairs (Hare) to the Secretary of State 501.BB Palestine/12–1749

[Document 1080]

Memorandum by the Acting Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern, South Asian, and African Affairs (Hare) to the Secretary of State

secret [Washington,] December 17, 1949.

Subject: Message to Israeli Government Concerning Jerusalem.

Discussion:

You will recall that we had anticipated that at your Press Conference on December 14 you would be asked concerning the attitude of this Government on the move to transfer the Israeli Government from Tel Aviv to Jerusalem in opposition to the General Assembly Resolution of December 9. We had suggested that you might wish to state that in the opinion of the United States Government it would be most unfortunate if any of the parties interested in Jerusalem took action which would prejudice or complicate the settlement of the Jerusalem question. However, none of the correspondents present asked this question, and the Israeli Government has so far not received any official indication of our reaction to Prime Minister Ben Gurion’s declaration in the Knesset on December 13 urging the Knesset to move to Jerusalem or to the subsequent removal of the Prime Minister’s office from Tel Aviv to Jerusalem.

Neither the General Assembly Resolution of November 29, 1947, nor the draft statute for Jerusalem prepared by the Trusteeship Council in the Spring of 1948 specifically prohibited the establishment of the capital of Israel in Jerusalem. The General Assembly Resolution of December 9, 1949, again does not contain any such specific prohibition. Arrangements for the transfer of the capital to Jerusalem might eventually be worked out with the United Nations in the Trusteeship Council, but unilateral establishment of the capital in Jerusalem at this particular time will undoubtedly be construed as contrary to the spirit of the Resolution of December 9 and as open opposition by Israel to the United Nations.

Following the General Assembly’s adoption of its Resolution of December 9, the Department instructed its representative in Tel Aviv to urge upon the Israelis the importance of preventing any statements or action which would inflame the situation in the Near East, particularly in view of current Israeli conversations with Jordan and the Vatican1 (Tab A). This message apparently had little effect on the Israeli Government.

Under the circumstances, it is considered desirable that the Israeli Government be informed of our attitude on the latest developments concerning Jerusalem, and the attached telegram has been drafted. (Tab B)

Recommendations:

It is recommended that you sign the attached telegram.2

[Here follows the concurrence of the Office of the Special Assistant for Press Relations.]

1 See telegram 755, December 9, p. 1531 [Pg. 1531 includes portions of Doc. 1063, Doc. 1064, and Doc. 1065].

2 See telegram 768, December 20, to Tel Aviv, p. 1555 [Pg. 1555 includes portions of Doc. 1083 and Doc. 1084].

Editorial Note [Document 1081]

Editorial Note

The final report of the United Nations Economic Survey Mission for the Middle East was signed at Paris on December 18 by Chairman Clapp and the three Deputy Chairmen. The document was in two parts, the latter in the nature of a technical supplement. The two parts were released by the Palestine Conciliation Commission on December 28 under United Nations control No. AAC 25/6. The report’s conclusions and proposals comprise the following:

“The approach to economic development in the Middle East proposed by the Economic Survey Mission thus includes the following elements: 1. Recognition by the Governments of Middle Eastern countries, by the United Nations and by the Member Governments which desire to proffer friendly assistance to the Middle East: (i) That peace and stability cannot be achieved in the Middle East until the masses of its peoples are able to enjoy a higher standard of living than at present;

(ii) That the path to a higher standard of living for the population of the Middle East is a long one;

(iii) That, through the efforts of Middle Eastern peoples and Governments themselves, a higher standard of living can only be achieved through the development of the natural resources of Middle Eastern countries which, to begin with, should be reflected in an improved and modernized agriculture, without which substantial industrial opportunity is denied them;

(iv) That the obstacles to economic development leave few opportunities, if any, for the immediate prosecution of large-scale schemes or the fruitful application of large long-term credits for productive, self-liquidating developments;

(v) That the proposed public works programme to provide temporary employment for Palestine refugees, as recommended in the Economic Survey Mission’s Interim Report (adopted and approved by the General Assembly of the United Nations, by resolution 302 (IV) dated 8 December 1949), by mobilizing a great body of man-power, now idle, will improve the productivity of the countries where the refugees now reside and can be the start of larger developments;

(vi) That several of the Governments of the countries most directly affected by the recent hostilities between Arabs and Israelis need an opportunity to learn, by doing, the art and skill of planning, organizing and carrying out a development project, conceived on a small enough scale to be within the competence of those Governments, important enough to affect the country’s economy favourably, and comprising a sufficient variety of problems and technical requirements to afford overall training in a broad field, while being simple enough to assure success;

(vii) That the process by which the greater resources of the international community and the individual aid of friendly Governments are made available to the Middle Eastern countries must respect the sovereignty while strengthening the competence and independence of the country receiving assistance.

2. Prosecution of the programme of work relief for refugees to be inaugurated by the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees (established by the resolution of the General Assembly dated 8 December 1949) in such a manner as to shift more and more responsibility for the execution of the programmes on to the shoulders of the individual Governments and to ensure that these programmes for temporary employment include those projects which can add to the productivity of national and regional economies and lay the basis for subsequent larger developments offering a permanent livelihood to more people in the years to come.

3. Establishment by each of the Middle Eastern Governments of a national Development Board, fully contained within the sovereign jurisdiction of its governmental administration, charged with responsibility for planning balanced, overall development, defining and recommending individual projects, and providing for their execution, with the help of such technical and financial assistance from the international community or friendly Governments as each Middle Eastern Government concerned may seek.

4. (a) Prosecution by the Government of Lebanon of a pilot demonstration project to achieve a complete survey, field investigation and technical report, preparatory to the ultimate development of the Litani River as a unit;

(b) Encouragement and technical assistance by the international community, or individual friendly Governments, to the Republic of Lebanon in the definition and prosecution of the Litani investigation with an assurance that, should the Government of Lebanon find itself unable wholly to finance this investigation from internal resources, a request for external financial aid would receive careful and friendly consideration.

5. (a) Prosecution by the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan of a pilot demonstration project on the watersheds and stream bed of the Wadi Zerqa, and a pilot demonstration project on the watershed and stream bed of the Wadi Qilt, which will achieve the full and unified development and use of the waters of these wadis flowing into the Jordan River from the east and west respectively; by building storage dams, to stabilize the downstream flow of the wadis and thereby increase the year-round water supply, reduce the damage of floods and add to the areas under irrigation and cultivation; by using the development of these wadis as an opportunity to employ Arab refugees and as an encouragement for them to establish themselves as permanent and productive residents on the lands they thus bring into use; and by using these pilot demonstration projects as a special opportunity to provide technical and administrative experience in the overall planning and actual execution of public works.

(b) Financial and technical assistance to the Jordan Government by the international community, through the funds to be made available by the Member Governments of the United Nations for the refugee works relief programme, in order to begin these projects; together with an assurance that later requests for credits or grants with which to complete these pilot projects will receive careful and sympathetic consideration by the United Nations or by individual friendly Governments, prior to the conclusion of the refugee works programme.

6. (a) Prosecution by the Syrian Government of a pilot demonstration project on the Orontes River in the Ghab Swamps, to reclaim, by drainage and other devices, potentially fertile lands now useless and uninhabitable, and to provide homes and other facilities needed for the people who will be required to populate and till the land thus reclaimed.

(b) Encouragement and technical assistance by the international community, or individual friendly Governments, to Syria in the planning and execution of this project by the Syrian Government, with an assurance that, should the Syrian Government find itself unable wholly to finance this development from internal resources, a request for external financial aid would receive careful and friendly consideration.

7. Creation of a fund, not to exceed $10 million, by the Governments which, by action of the General Assembly, are called upon to appoint their representatives to form the Advisory Commission of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees; this fund to be available to the Advisory Commission, until expended, for allocation to Middle Eastern Governments as grants, reimbursable or otherwise as may be determined, for the purpose of facilitating research, technical studies and investigations in agriculture, engineering and other modern scientific aids to development, and assisting in the completion of pilot demonstration projects approved by the Advisory Commission, upon application made by the Middle Eastern Government concerned.

8. Preparation by the Governments of the Middle Eastern countries concerned, in consultation with the Advisory Commission of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees and in connection with the functions of that body as laid down in paragraph 7 (b) of the resolution of the General Assembly of 8 December 1949, of plans and recommendations for the further development of the economic and natural resources of the Middle East, with particular reference to those involving economic arrangements between two or more of the countries concerned.

This approach to the economic development of the Middle East and the policies and actions set forth herein are recommended for the early and careful consideration of the United Nations and the Governments whose active implementation of this approach will bring the Middle East into a hopeful and significant era of economic, social and political advance.” (pages 12–13)

The Consul at Jerusalem (Burdett) to the Secretary of State 867N.002/12–1849: Telegram

[Document 1082]

The Consul at Jerusalem (Burdett) to the Secretary of State

Jerusalem, December 18, 1949.

695. Today’s Post reports regular weekly Cabinet meeting will be held first time in Jerusalem December 20. Also reports repairs being completed on building for Ministries of Trade and Industry, Agriculture, Health, Police while Ministry of Foreign Affairs will not move for some time and Defense to remain in Tel Aviv. Claim some thousand accommodations being readied for government workers in Jerusalem.

Burdett

Memorandum by the Secretary of State to the President 501.BB Palestine/12–2049

[Document 1083]

Memorandum by the Secretary of State to the President

Washington, December 20, 1949.

In the Fourth Session of the General Assembly, just concluded, the position of the United States in the Jerusalem question was to support the proposals for an international regime for the Jerusalem area presented by the United Nations Palestine Conciliation Commission, of which the United States is a member. The Commission formulated these proposals in accordance with the instructions given to it by the General Assembly in 1948, which called for the establishment of a permanent international regime with maximum local autonomy.

With the exception of certain matters specifically reserved to the authority of the United Nations, the Commission’s proposals would have delegated all normal powers of Government in the Jerusalem area to the responsible authorities of the Arab and Jewish zones, i.e., the Governments of Israel and the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan. The principal functions reserved to the international administration were the control of the Holy Places, the supervision of the demilitarization of the area, and the protection of human rights in Jerusalem. A joint Council was provided to facilitate the operation of the City as a whole and an international tribunal to determine disputes arising under the Statute.

The proposals of the Conciliation Commission represented a middle ground between the two extreme positions, which were: 1. That Jerusalem should be a corpus separatum under a special international regime, separate from the surrounding area, and under full United Nations administration. This was the solution previously adopted by the General Assembly in its resolution of November 29, 1947. This solution could not be implemented due to the outbreak of fighting in Palestine and to the fact that the General Assembly recommendation of 1947 that there should be a Jewish and an Arab state in Palestine with economic union was never put into effect.

2. That the two sides of the city be under the sovereignty and authority respectively of Israel and Jordan. Israel favored an international regime limited to the Holy Places while Jordan was only prepared to give to the United Nations full guarantees for the protection of and free access to the Holy Places.

In the General Assembly this year Australia introduced a resolution incorporating the first of these extreme positions—i.e., the principle of full internationalization under complete United Nations control. This resolution immediately attracted the votes of the Catholic countries, (strongly urged by the Vatican), of the Arab States (except Jordan), and of the Soviet bloc. With minor modifications, it was adopted by 39 votes to 14, with 5 abstentions. The United States, United Kingdom and other states opposed the resolution on the grounds that it was unrealistic as it could not be implemented by the United Nations against the wishes of Israel and Jordan without the use of substantial forces. The United States delegation also pointed out that to set up a new City-State in Palestine would cost the United Nations large sums of money even on the assumption of willing cooperation by Israel and Jordan.

The United States delegation, while making clear its support of an international regime for Jerusalem, voted against the Australian resolution for reasons above stated and continued to support the proposal of the Palestine Conciliation Commission which in its view represented a sound basis for a solution, giving substantial recognition to the legitimate desires of Israel and Jordan and of the international community. We also emphasized that, although we would consider carefully any proposed amendments to the Palestine Conciliation Commission plan, we could not see our way clear to change our position except in favor of one which represented general agreement.

It seems certain that the Arab States supported the Australian resolution out of a desire to oppose Israel and that the Soviet group did so largely in order to block the extension to Arab Palestine of the control of King Abdullah of Jordan, regarded by the Russians as a tool of Great Britain, and to curry favor with the other Arab States. The Vatican, which has important religious interests in Jerusalem, doubtless realized that the Australian resolution could not be implemented, but probably supported it in order to achieve a better bargaining position in respect of Jerusalem.

The General Assembly resolution of December 9, 1949 reaffirmed the principle of the 1947 resolution that Jerusalem should be established as a corpus separatum under a special international regime administered by the United Nations. The Trusteeship Council was directed at its next meeting to complete the preparation of the draft Statute for the City, which it had drawn up in compliance with the 1947 resolution, to approve the Statute, and to proceed immediately with its implementation without permitting any actions taken by any Government to divert it from this task.

Israel has reacted to the General Assembly resolution of December 9, 1949 by taking the following action in the direction of moving the Israeli capital to Jerusalem, while refraining from a formal proclamation to that effect: 1. A statement by the Prime Minister that Jerusalem always had been and always would be the capital of Israel;

2. A statement by the Prime Minister that the movement of the Government to Jerusalem was under way, and would be accelerated;

3. Decisions to move the Parliament and the Office of the Prime Minister to Jerusalem.

Jordan has made strong official statements opposing the December 9 resolution.

The United Nations Trusteeship Council has already begun to consider the task of carrying out the General Assembly resolution and will continue its work in Geneva on January 19, 1950. The United States representative, Ambassador Francis B. Sayre, has been instructed that although we opposed the resolution in the General Assembly, we believe that the Trusteeship Council should make a bona fide effort to comply with its instructions from the General Assembly, but that the United States should avoid for the present taking a position of leadership.

In connection with the Israeli action in respect of moving the Government to Jerusalem, the French and Belgian delegations have introduced a resolution expressing concern and stating that such action is likely to render more difficult the implementation of the Statute. Ambassador Sayre has been instructed to abstain unless the resolution is revised to delete the reference to “implementation” of the Statute.

Conclusions

1. Our underlying objective is to achieve a solution of the Jerusalem problem which will meet with a considerable degree of concurrence by the world community and be acceptable to the two nations which are most directly involved.

2. We do not believe that this objective can be achieved under the terms of the General Assembly resolution because neither Israel nor Jordan will ever willingly agree to the establishment of Jerusalem as a corpus separatum divorced from their respective control.

3. However, as a member of the Trusteeship Council the United States should not give the impression that it is obstructing the Council’s work in carrying forward a General Assembly resolution adopted by a majority of the United Nations, and we should be willing to make a bona fide effort in the first phase of the Trusteeship Council’s work, namely, the drafting of a statute for Jerusalem. But: the United States should not support action in the Trusteeship Council looking toward the imposed implementation of the Statute for Jerusalem against the wishes of the parties.

4. When the statute is completed there will then be an opportunity available to the Trusteeship Council, in light of the comments of the interested parties, to consider whether it should take steps to implement the statute. If at that stage the Governments of Israel and Jordan express strong opposition to the Statute as drafted, the United States should make it clear that on the basis of these reactions it would be impractical to attempt to enforce such a solution on the parties, and that to impose on unwilling parties a recommendation of the General Assembly would not contribute to a viable solution of the problem.

5. To assist affirmatively in the settlement of the problem, the United States should privately encourage informal conversations between Israel and Jordan and the Vatican, but the United States should not take any part in such conversations. We might suggest that a single individual, such as Dr. Ralph Bunche, but not a representative of the United States, conduct quiet consultations with the parties and with the Vatican with a view to exploring the possibilities of an agreed solution.

The Trusteeship Council has asked its President (Garreau of France) to prepare a first draft of a new statute for consideration by the Council on January 19; he will be assisted in this task by Dr. Ralph Bunche.

6. It may be necessary in accordance with United Nations procedures for the General Assembly to consider the Jerusalem question at a special session in the spring of 1950 either as a consequence of the Trusteeship Council’s inability to proceed with implementation of the statute or of agreement arrived at between the parties.

7. We continue to believe, as we did as a member of the Palestine Conciliation Commission, that a reasonable solution should contain certain underlying principles, such as protection of and free access to the Holy Places under appropriate United Nations auspices, progressive demilitarization of the Jerusalem area, administration by Israel and Jordan of their respective parts of the City, and the maintenance of human rights and freedoms. However, it is our view that any solution agreed upon by the Christian world and by Israel and Jordan could be supported by us.1

Dean Acheson

1 Mr. Rusk sent a copy of this memorandum to Senator Austin in New York with a letter of December 21. The letter noted that “The President indicated his approval of what we had done and were doing on this matter, but since he had not had an opportunity to study the memorandum carefully, we do not believe that we should conclude that he intended his approval as a specific instruction to you.” Mr. Rusk stated he was sure that the memorandum “will be the basis for more specific instructions as they become necessary.” (501.BB Palestine/12–2149)

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in Israel 501.BB Palestine/12–1749: Telegram

[Document 1084]

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in Israel 1

secret Washington, December 20, 1949—1 p. m.

768. Pls convey fol to FonOff immed. US Govt has noted PriMin Ben Gurion’s statement concerning Jerusalem in Knesset on Dec 13 and subsequent reports of removal of PriMin’s office to Jerusalem.

As a friendly govt which has followed with interest and sympathy course of Israel’s development, US Govt desires to inform Israeli Govt that it considers particularly unfortunate any step or course of action on part of Israel likely to prejudice or complicate settlement of Jerusalem question, especially at moment when problem of Jerusalem is being studied by Trusteeship Council in accordance with terms of Res of UNGA of Dec 9, 1949.

Acheson

1 This telegram was repeated to Jerusalem and New York.

The Chargé in the United Kingdom (Holmes) to the Secretary of State 867N.01/12–2249: Telegram

[Document 1085]

The Chargé in the United Kingdom (Holmes) to the Secretary of State

secret London, December 22, 1949—6 p. m.

5079. Embtel 5062 December 20.1 Furlonge, Eastern Department FonOff, said today that UK study of extension UK–Jordan treaty to Arab Palestine was occasioned by recent Israeli inquiry whether treaty would automatically apply to any territory which Jordan might gain as result peace negotiations. Israelis intimated they would be less happy about reaching agreement if treaty were extended such territory.

Last evening FonOff instructed British Minister Tel Aviv to inform Israeli Government that question extension to any area acquired by Jordan is matter which concerns only UK and Jordan. He was instructed add, however, that UK has no intention establishing any bases in territory so acquired in time of peace, but that what UK might do in case of war or threat of war was another question which UK could not express its intention at present time.

British Minister Amman was instructed inform Jordan Government of foregoing message, but to add for Jordan’s own confidential information that it is firm intention of UK to apply treaty to any areas acquired by Jordan as soon as they have been incorporated within their state.

Asked if foregoing applied to any corridor which Jordan might acquire, Furlonge replied affirmatively.

When we recalled that he had told us December 19 that FonOff studying certain points on which it contemplated Jordan might ask its advice, Furlonge replied treaty was principal item. He reiterated it is desire UK to maintain hands off attitude toward Jordan-Israeli talks. However FonOff has also given Kirkbride some comments “mostly of technical nature” on question of corridor for his guidance in case he is asked by Jordan. Asked if establishment of corridor would pose any particular problems for UK, Furlonge replied in negative but stated FonOff did not think corridors were ever completely satisfactory arrangements.

Sent Department 5079; repeated Tel Aviv 84, Baghdad 118, Cairo 159, Jidda 66, Beirut 46, Damascus 77.

Holmes

1 Not printed.

The Secretary of State to the Secretary of Defense (Johnson) 501.BB Palestine(E)/12–2349

[Document 1086]

The Secretary of State to the Secretary of Defense (Johnson)

secret Washington, December 23, 1949.

My Dear Mr. Secretary: The Department of State is preparing for presentation to the next session of Congress proposed legislation for United States participation in the United Nations program for relief, work relief and economic development among the Palestinian refugees in the Near East. This program will follow recommendations made by the Economic Survey Mission under the United Nations in its first interim report to the Palestine Conciliation Commission. On the basis of this report the General Assembly of the United Nations unanimously adopted a resolution on December 8, 1949 which provides for the implementation of the recommendations of the Mission. For your ready reference we enclose a copy of the interim report and of the General Assembly resolution.

The cost of the proposed program is $54,900,000 for an 18 months’ period ending June 30, 1951 and, in view of attendant circumstances, the Department considers that a reasonable share of the total cost to be borne by the United States is 50 per cent. Therefore the Congress will be requested to appropriate $27,500,000 for contribution to the program, and for expenses incident to United States participation. The object of the program is the restoration of economic conditions conducive to the maintenance of peace and stability in the Near East area affected by the recent hostilities in Palestine. The Department is convinced that the course of action proposed by the Economic Survey Mission and approved by the General Assembly is necessary to achieve this end and that this course is prudent and wise. Strategic considerations underlying United States policy in the area were raised in a letter from Secretary Forrestal to the Department dated September 23, 1948 in which he transmitted a memorandum on the subject from the Joint Chiefs of Staff,1 and you referred again to this subject in a letter to me dated June 14, 1949 in which you emphasized the importance, to our long range interests, of solving the problem of the refugees and of other major differences between Israel and its neighboring Arab States.

Recent discussions have been held in an interagency group regarding the proposals of the Economic Survey Mission and the General Assembly resolution, and the Department of Defense has been represented at these discussions by Captain R. F. Pryce, U.S.N., who is therefore familiar with most recent developments.

The program must be ready for presentation to Congress early in January, and if a complete case is to be presented, it will be necessary for the Department of Defense to testify as to the strategic importance of maintaining stability in the areas affected. I hope that the Department of Defense will participate in the presentation.

Sincerely yours,

Dean Acheson

1 Regarding these papers, see telegram Telmar 19, September 28, 1948, to Paris, Foreign Relations, 1948, vol. v, Part 2, p. 1427.

The Ambassador in Egypt (Caffery) to the Secretary of State 883.00/12–2349: Telegram

[Document 1087]

The Ambassador in Egypt (Caffery) to the Secretary of State

secret Cairo, December 23, 1949—3 p. m.

1166. The King’s principal advisers after much recent discussion among themselves have decided to propose next week to the King that Egypt propose a definite boundary solution for peace with Israel. They have decided also to propose that this step be taken in the near future without waiting for the results of the election.1

Repeat to McGhee.

Caffery

1 This telegram was made a subject of a circular telegram sent December 27, 2 a. m., to London, Tel Aviv, Jerusalem, Amman, and New York. (800.00 Summaries/12–2749) Ambassador McDonald, in reply on December 31, 11 p. m., stated that “It would be helpful here if Caffery could elaborate Cairo’s attitude. I am sure Israel would welcome Egypt if approached directly or through US Government or otherwise. Sharett told me December 31 Israel had responded favorably to recent information Egyptian suggestions in MAC that those exchanges be broadened to include political issues. To date no Egyptian reply to Israel’s willingness broaden MAC.” (telegram 924, from Tel Aviv, 867N.01/12–3149)

The Chargé in Jordan (Fritzlan) to the Secretary of State 767N.901/12–2749: Telegram

[Document 1088]

The Chargé in Jordan (Fritzlan) to the Secretary of State

secret Amman, December 27, 1949—10 a. m.

431. I saw Samir Pasha Sunday morning, received following re meeting between him and Shiloah and Sassoon last Friday: Outset Samir asked Israelis what formula they devised satisfy Jordan’s claim access Mediterranean. Shiloah said after much consideration Israeli Government had decided could not give up [apparent garble] but would give Jordan sea front of about 3 km. just north Israel–Egypt line and possibly 3 additional km. if present no-man’s land on front divided between Israelis and Egyptians. Israelis would allow Jordan full sovereignty over corridor Hebron to this coast point width to be 50 to 100 meters. However, should Jordan later obtain Gaza strip from Egypt (Israel would support Jordan’s claim) Jordan must return coastal area obtained from Israel. Shiloah admitted this point access sea consisted rough country covered with sand dunes and would be little if any economic value though satisfying Jordan’s political ambitions.

To this proposal Samir replied Jordan access to sea was of importance purely from economic standpoint and Israeli offer therefore worthless. Also he could not think of corridor in terms of meters. Jordan must obtain substantial amount territory to justify peace settlement with Israelis to Arab world. Added he saw no point continuing negotiations unless Israel recognized validity these arguments. Finally he put Israelis on defensive by implying they had divulged to press such content recent talks which he thought were highly secret.

At this point King Abdullah injected conciliatory note and, Samir thinks, would likely have gone far accept Israeli proposal but for ill-considered remark by Sassoon that even if Israel made peace with Jordan they would have maintain large military forces view potential threat other Arab states. He added Israel could make substantial concessions Jordan only as part general settlement with all Arab states. Hearing this King became indignant expressing surprise that so little importance should be attached to agreement with Jordan.

Upshot of meeting was decision negotiations should continue though Samir expressed belief time had come inform Jordan Government progress talks and let Prime Minister decide if adequate basis existed for initiation formal discussions or whether matter should be dropped. Tentatively agreed after King returns from Baghdad and Samir from Tehran (proceeding Tehran tomorrow extend invitation to Shah visit Amman) Samir should discuss situation with Ben-Gurion in Jerusalem.

Comment: Samir anxious force issue access to sea and it seems clear Israelis must go much farther than they have accommodate Jordan if Samir will agree continue talks. He seemed tired and discouraged and somewhat indifferent outcome discussions. His meeting with Ben-Gurion should decide whether formal negotiations are begun or whether discussions are discontinued.

Following conversation with Samir I received substantially same account latest Jordan–Israel meeting from British Minister Kirk-bride who has generally refrained from expressing his view re what Jordan should get out of peace settlement.

Sent Department 431; Department pass London 117, USUN 29, Tel Aviv 68, Jerusalem 150, Cairo 55; pouched Arab capitals.

Fritzlan

The Consul at Jerusalem (Burdett) to the Secretary of State 767N.901/12–2749: Telegram

[Document 1089]

The Consul at Jerusalem (Burdett) to the Secretary of State

confidential Jerusalem, December 27, 1949—4 p. m.

703. After stating he is following Israel–Jordan discussions closely, Colonel Dayan on twenty-fifth commented: (1) Although agreement in principle obtained on all points raised, negotiations now reached impasse. King ready conclude peace on basis present position two parties but not able find Prime Minister willing sign agreement. Difficulty not any specific issue but fundamental question of willingness conclude treaty with Jews. No Jordanian leader except King willing incur public odium involved such action.

(2) If present opportunity to conclude agreement missed, considerable period may elapse before chance arises again. Current unstable situation Syria likely revive greater Syria and Fertile Crescent plans and cause King postpone any action re Israel. King’s sudden visit Baghdad indicates his preoccupation Syrian problem. Syrian internal troubles may spread to other Arab states leading to wide area and long period turmoil. Israel–Jordan agreement now would contribute to stability whole area. Also negotiations will prove more difficult after election new Jordan parliament with large percentage Palestinians.

(3) Inquired (Dayan spoke entirely personally and informally) whether US prepared urge both sides conclude peace. I replied basic US objective is area peace and stability and US thinks direct negotitions best approach to settlement but not willing specify conditions to either party. Dayan stated was not suggesting US supporting specific terms but fundamental question concluding peace with Israel. I inquired whether he thought conclusion peace would cause internal difficulties in Jordan. He reiterated peace will produce stability not contrary.

(4) I stressed importance to Israel of peace with Arab state and asked if Israel not able advance proposals more favorable to Jordan and strengthen King’s position. Dayan claimed Israel now made maximum possible concessions; gone much further than first anticipated; terms especially Jordan sovereignty over corridor certain to shape country.

(5) Made following incidental statements: Samir Pasha Rifai expected become next Jordan Prime Minister. Corridor to Mediterranean Sea as envisaged by Israel limited to road and narrow stretch on either side. Israel considered corridor exchange for Jewish quarter old city. If Jordan preferred territory other than corridor and willing accept free zone in Haifa, Israel prepared negotiate this basis. Because pressure orthodox opinion Israel must have Jewish quarter old city and corridor linking it to Jewish sections appears only possible arrangement.

Sent Department 703, repeated Tel Aviv 140, Baghdad 76, Beirut 36, Damascus 97, Jidda 19, London 71; Department pass Amman 80, Cairo 53.

Burdett

The Ambassador in Israel (McDonald) to the Secretary of State 867N.01/12–2949: Telegram

[Document 1090]

The Ambassador in Israel (McDonald) to the Secretary of State

secret Tel Aviv, December 29, 1949—1 p. m.

918. At my request, Shiloah was at residence an hour December 28. Ford and Herlitz present.

Shiloah said last Israel–Jordan meeting December 23 had been “sticky” because Samir had reverted to “completely unacceptable demands for cession Negev or of corridor so wide as to divide Israel.”

Shiloah guesses Samir’s earlier lesser demands may have been maneuver with intention finally demand Negev. If this be explanation, Shiloah “favors suspending negotiations.” He asked [suggested?] that Jordan’s stiffening might be result Samir’s desire wait on developments in Syria.

Again Shiloah discerned “no UK adverse” influence in talks unless perhaps before beginning of series talks UK had insisted on “secure land bridge from sea to Persian Gulf.”

Re Syria, Shiloah reiterated with great emphasis his conviction Abdullah and Iraq are studying union moves which would “upset whole Middle East precarious balance. Egypt and Saudi Arabia would react strongly and Israel could not be expected remain quiescent.” In answer my question whether Israel’s objections would be less if union were won “peacefully and through will of peoples,” Shiloah replied, “there is no possibility Syrian-Iraqi and Jordan peoples would be allowed express selves on union. In any case, Israel would regard union as dangerous to Israel’s security and as challege to Middle East peace.”

Comment: Ford and I agree that in above Shiloah is expressing firm views of his government based on sincere concern lest union jeopardize Israel’s hopes move gradually towards peace through bilateral negotiations. End comment.

Sent Department 918, repeated Baghdad 62, Beirut 92, Damascus 67, Jerusalem 109, Jidda 42, London 156; Department pass Amman 73, Cairo 84.

McDonald

The Chargé in Jordan (Fritzlan) to the Secretary of State 867N.01/12–2949: Telegram

[Document 1091]

The Chargé in Jordan (Fritzlan) to the Secretary of State

secret Amman, December 29, 1949—1 p. m.

434. Following are Legation’s comments Jerusalem telegram 703 December 27 to Department: 1. King Abdullah’s role re Jordan Israel talks has shown him extremely conciliatory, but firm in belief Jordan must obtain substantial territorial concessions before he could justify agreement his people and Arab world. Has been especially insistent over access sea. Legation’s information does not indicate King willing sign agreement basis present position two parties. However desirous he was reach agreement before last meeting December 23, Sassoon’s blunder (Legtel 431 December 27) seems have stiffened his attitude. Undoubtedly Samir more exacting in attitude than King and Prime Minister even more than Samir. However, case of Samir, and probably Prime Minister as well, there is little difficulty re principle concluding peace with Israelis but rather over specific content of any peace settlement and there is no reason believe Samir has modified position outlined recent Legtels. King, of course, is well aware reluctance Samir and Prime Minister conclude treaty except on favorable terms and will be guided by this knowledge.

2. Legation agrees Dayan recent events Syria serving divert King’s attention to some extent from settlement with Israel and if present opportunity conclude peace not grasped chance may not soon recur. Also negotiations would undoubtedly prove more difficult after Jordan Parliament elections.

3. For some time Samir Pasha has been only serious contender for Prime Minister job and it is widely held he will be offered post before long. This possibility would be much greater if he instrumental obtaining satisfactory agreement with Israel. However, privately Samir has intimated preference retain his comfortable post as Minister of Court which gives him strong position with King and enables him engage in and keep au courant of Palace intrigue, rather than assume heavy responsibilities Prime Ministership.

Sent Department 434, pouched Arab capitals. Department pass London 119, Jerusalem 151, USUN 30, Tel Aviv 69.

Fritzlan

The Chargé in the United Kingdom (Holmes) to the Secretary of State 501.BB Palestine/12–2949: Telegram

[Document 1092]

The Chargé in the United Kingdom (Holmes) to the Secretary of State

confidential London, December 29, 1949—7 p. m.

5149. At Wright’s request, Evans, head NE Secretariat Foreign Office, today gave us following information re UK contribution to NERWA. Figures mentioned have been approved by Chancellor Exchequer.

1. UK prepared contribute 2,250,000 pounds, of which 1,000,000 pounds would be comprised of UK loan to Jordan.

2. Remaining 1,250,000 pounds would be subject following conditions: (a) up to maximum of 1,250,000 pounds, UK would match one-quarter of total contributions of other governments than US. (In other words, governments other than US would have contribute 5,000,000 pounds for UK to make maximum contribution.) (b) 750,000 pounds would be earmarked for expenditure on projects which will provide for resettlement.

3. Foreign Office hopes condition (a) will spur other governments to make maximum contributions.

4. Foreign Office feels condition (b) will strengthen hand of NERWA so that funds will not be wasted on hopeless areas such as Gaza.

5. Evans stated foregoing, when figured on percentage basis, compares favorably with UK contribution to UNRPR.

6. Bevin will take opportunity at Colombo conference to urge other dominion governments to make maximum possible contributions to NERWA.

We recalled that while in Wright conversations Washington, it had been recognized that either government authorized discuss specific figures, nevertheless proportions of 50 percent US, 25 percent UK and 15 percent France had been mentioned. Evans confirmed this but said he would also recall that at same time Wright had mentioned Chancellor had authorized only 500,000 pounds as UK contribution. Present figure represents increase of 750,000 over that figure and while UK wishes it could be more, he agreed that was not possible.

Holmes

Editorial Note [Document 1093]

Editorial Note

The White House, on December 30, released a statement by President Truman concerning the completion by Gordon R. Clapp of his task as Chairman of the Economic Survey Mission to the Middle East. At one point the President stated: “In accord with my previously expressed intention to give careful consideration to such assistance as we might appropriately render in carrying out the recommendations of the survey mission, legislation is now in preparation for presentation to the Congress requesting authorization for this government to assume its share in the cost of the program proposed by the United Nations for the Near East.”

The full text of the President’s statement is printed in Department of State Bulletin, January 9, 1950, page 55.

President Truman to King Abdullah Ibn el Hussein of the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan 867N.01/12–3049: Telegram

[Document 1094]

President Truman to King Abdullah Ibn el Hussein of the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan 1

secret Washington, December 30, 1949—6 p. m.

Your Majesty: I have received the letter2 which Your Majesty was good enough to send me through His Excellency Fawzi Pasha el Mulki. I very much appreciate this expression of Your Majesty’s views on a problem with which the United States Government has so long been concerned.

Your Majesty may be sure that this Government will continue to give the closest attention to the Palestine question, in the constant hope that an equitable settlement may be achieved.

It is my belief that the cause of peace in the Near East would be greatly furthered if the states most directly concerned in the Palestine dispute should find it possible to agree among themselves upon the bask elements for a just settlement.

I send to Your Majesty the warm expression of my personal esteem and my best and most cordial wishes for the continued prosperity of Your Majesty and of the Hashemite Kingdom of the Jordan in the forthcoming year.

Harry S. Truman

1 Sent to Amman in telegram 216, which instructed that the message be transmitted to the King. The message was drafted in the Department of State and sent to Presisdent Truman by Secretary Acheson, with his memorandum of December 29. The memorandum stated, in part, that “I believe that it is desirable to avoid any commitment in replying to King Abdullah, but that in the interests of a Palestine settlement it would be helpful to give indirect encouragement to the King to continue the secret talks now going on between Jordan and Israel. The attached reply has been drafted with these points in mind.” President Truman, in a marginal notation on December 30, approved the proposed reply (867N.01/12–3049).

2 Dated November 5; see editorial note, p. 1470 [Pg. 1470 includes portions of Doc. 1021 and Doc. 1022].

The Ambassador in Israel (McDonald) to the Secretary of State 867N.01/12–3149: Telegram

[Document 1095]

The Ambassador in Israel (McDonald) to the Secretary of State

secret   priority Tel Aviv, December 31, 1949—1 p. m.

922. At his request Foreign Minister talked to me his office 45 minutes December 30 with Eytan and Shiloah present.

Summarizing his recent conversations with Secretary Acheson,1 Sharett said he wished give Department formal statement on Jordan–Israel talks as follows:

Despite promising beginning of earlier talks impasse reached December 23 over “width of corridor.” Israel prepared grant under Jordan jurisdiction or possible sovereignty width sufficient for auto and railroads but will not cede width of 40 to 50 kilometers2 because such demand suggests purpose different from securing free access to sea. Wider corridor could be used for “intensive settlement and as possible base for military operations.” Israel “went as far as it dares politically and perhaps farther than is safe strategically in offering Jordan jurisdiction or sovereignty over narrower corridor.”

Sharett expressed hope that King would revert to earlier conciliatory attitude and that USG would find it possible to indicate to King its hope that “prospects of agreement not be ruined by demand beyond guaranteed freedom of access, and that meantime adventures in Syria not be permitted to inflame ME.”

Comment: Sharett obviously desires conclude peace Jordan but I am sure cabinet dare not yield on wider corridor. End comment.

Sent Department 922, repeated Baghdad 63, Beirut 93, Damascus 68, Jerusalem 110, Jidda 43, London 157, Department pass Amman 74, Cairo 85.

McDonald

1 See memorandum of December 7 by Secretary Acheson, p. 1524 [Pg. 1524 includes portions of Doc. 1059 and Doc. 1060].

2 At 10 p. m. on December 31, Tel Aviv telegraphed a correction of its telegram 922, as follows: “Jordan in December 23 talks with Israel did insist corridor be ‘kilometers wide’ but did not specify number of kilometers. Sharett my house December 31 said ‘Jordan might have meant 10 or 15 kilometers but did not name figure’.” (telegram 923, 867N.01/12–3149)

KuwaitKuwait

Contents

Proposal of the United States to establish a consulate at Kuwait (Documents 1096-1098)

Proposal of the United States to establish a consulate at KuwaitProposal of the United States to establish a consulate at Kuwait

[1096] The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom

Washington, April 21, 1949.

125.0090B/4–2149

[1097] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State

London, August 19, 1949.

125.0090B/8–1949: Airgram

[1098] Editorial Note

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom 125.0090B/4–2149

[Document 1096]

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom

confidental Washington, April 21, 1949.

No. 192

The Secretary of State refers to the Department’s telegram No. 797 dated March 8, 1948,1 informing the Embassy that the Department had under consideration establishing a Consulate in the Shaikhdom of Kuwait and requesting the Embassy to ascertain whether the British Government, which enjoys a special treaty relationship with the Shaikhdom, would be agreeable to the establishment of such an office.

In its responsive telegram No. 1581 of April 16, 1948,1 the Embassy quoted the following text of a letter dated April 15, 1948, addressed to the Embassy by the Eastern Department of the Foreign Office:

“We fully appreciate the desire of State Department to provide routine consular services for US citizens in Kuwait and are anxious to meet their wishes. We feel that most practical way of providing facilities which State Department requires would be to arrange, on analogy of arrangements existing at Bahrein, the US consular representative in Basra should perform consular functions in Kuwait on an informal basis and without exequatur. This would mean that he would not be officially appointed or described as US Consul in Kuwait but we hope that you would not regard this as serious disadvantage. In view of our special treaty relationship with the Sheikh, the channel through which US consular representative would conduct relations with the Sheikh and other authorities of Kuwait State would be our political agent. Latter would, of course, do everything possible to help your consular representative and to ensure that interests of US citizens are fully cared for.

If these arrangements are acceptable to the State Department and you will let us know, we will at once send necessary instructions to our authorities in Persian Gulf to put them into effect and to give every possible help to US consular representative at Basra in carrying out his functions in Kuwait.”

The Embassy explained that the British Government was unwilling to weaken the special treaty relationship which it enjoys with Kuwait and feared that should an American Consulate be established in Kuwait demands for similar facilities would be made by Saudi Arabia, Iran, Iraq, and possibly Soviet Russia. The Foreign Office believed that a fair trial should be given the procedure suggested in its letter of April 15, whereby the American Consul at Basra would undertake informal consular representation in Kuwait though remaining resident at Basra.

The Consul at Basra has for a considerable period been endeavoring to perform consular services for the, large American community in Kuwait by correspondence and by visits to Kuwait on a monthly basis. Notwithstanding the sincerity and extent of the Consul’s endeavors, his experience has shown that the arrangement is unsatisfactory, and that it is inherently incapable of working satisfactorily. The needs for having a Consul resident in Kuwait are real, urgent and immediate. They have been brought repeatedly to the attention of the Department during the past year by the Gulf Oil Company which has a fifty-percent interest in the Kuwait Oil Company’s concession in Kuwait, covering the largest proven petroleum reserves of any field in the Near East. More recently the American Independent Oil Company, a wholly American concern which has obtained an oil concession for the Shaikh of Kuwait’s undivided half interest in the so-called Kuwait-Saudi Arabian Neutral Zone, has also urgently requested the Department to establish a Consulate in Kuwait so that routine consular services will be available to the large number of American employees and their families it will soon be sending to Kuwait.

The fundamental fact is that in Kuwait, as in every other area where such needs for consular services exist they must be handled by a resident consular officer personally and on a day-to-day basis. The following are examples of these needs: A. Citizenship Work: With hundreds of Americans already resident in the Kuwait district and additional large numbers expected to proceed there in connection with oil enterprises and construction programs, there is a constant demand for consular services of one sort or another in connection with passport matters. American passports are made valid for periods of two years or less and must be renewed or replaced thereafter. When an American community is first established overseas in connection with large-scale development projects as those in the Persian Gulf oil fields, experience has shown that at the outset most Americans are in possession of valid passports and during the first year or two their needs for passport services are relatively small. As time goes by, however, the demand for such services increases at a rate out of proportion to the number of people involved. Not only must passports be renewed and replaced, but amendments must be made to show the inclusion or exclusion of members of families of the bearer arriving in or departing from the area, as well as to show births and deaths in such families. Consuls must document births and marriages on standard forms and on request be present as witness at marriage ceremonies. Each American citizen and the members of his family are likewise registered at the Consulate and card files are maintained showing their whereabouts. To endeavor to perform the paper work on such documentation by mail from a distant post is cumbersome, inefficient and, where the volume is large, almost wholly impracticable.

B. Protection of American Citizens: The United States Government has the obligation to afford suitable protection to its citizens wherever they may reside, and it is often in this phase of consular work that physical presence of the consular officer is most urgently necessary. Cases have already arisen in Kuwait where American citizens have become involved in litigation or criminal processes, and it is logical to assume that with the steady increase in the number of Americans resident in Kuwait such cases will likewise tend to increase. This Government has acquiesced for the time being in the trial of American citizens before the Agency Court in Kuwait under the legal system established by British Orders in Council. However, regardless of the type of enforcement agency and court procedures which apply to such cases, it is the right of the accused to have ready access to such protection as a representative of the United States may appropriately extend to him. It seems self-evident that if such protection is to be available to the American citizens involved from the earliest moment of their need, such protection can only be afforded by an officer resident nearby. It is thought that the Government of the United Kingdom will recognize both the validity of this statement and the fact that it may be to the advantage of the local authorities, especially the Political Agent, to have close contact with the United States representative charged with such rights and obligations of protection.

In cases of wider emergency such as have engulfed the Near East many times in the past century and twice within a relatively recent period of years, the weighty responsibilities of this Government’s representative in the area can only be carried out if he is in close proximity to those whom he is charged with protecting. Here again it is believed that the British Government will recognize the mutual interest of our two governments in having effective American consular representation in Kuwait.

C. Shipping and Seamen: At present more than a hundred American tankers are loaded with petroleum products in the harbor of Kuwait annually, and with the steadily increasing rate of production of oil in Kuwait it is anticipated that the number of tankers serving the port will also grow. Likewise, many merchant cargo vessels of American registry call at Kuwait each year. At present shipping services are performed by the Consul in Basra but, owing to the distance which separates him from the harbor of Kuwait, when absent from Kuwait he is unable to perform all the services required of him by law. Included in the list of services which he is precluded from performing are those with respect to the deposit of ship’s papers, which in some cases may seriously prejudice the fulfillment of other duties incumbent upon the officer. He is likewise unable to examine the ship’s papers and to issue crew list visas. He is unable to sign discharged seamen off the articles and pay them the wages deposited by the master, as required by law. Other duties with respect to handling and affording relief to American seamen are made difficult, if not impossible, by virtue of the fact of his absence from the port. In so far as he endeavors to handle the documentation in connection with shipping and seamen by mail or by signing forms in blank he is deprived of the opportunity to examine each case personally to determine its bona fides, and may in fact by so doing be contravening the Foreign Service Regulations or Statutes of Congress. The special duties of consuls with respect to seamen were among the first imposed by Congress in providing for consular representation abroad, and the very nature of such duties in a port served by American ships requires the presence of the Consul.

D. Documentation of Merchandise: A limited but growing volume of work is involved in documenting merchandise for shipment to the United States of goods produced in or transiting through the Shaikhdom. The issuance of consular invoices has hitherto been handled by mail but a resident consul would be in a much better position to insure that shipments are being prepared in conformity with United States customs and import regulations.

E. Consular Reporting: Consuls are charged by law with submission of reports on the above-mentioned matters and on other equally important subjects affecting our economic and commercial relations with the area. The importance of the American economic interest in Kuwait has already been mentioned and is of such magnitude as to require no further emphasis. The Department of State and other interested agencies of the United States Government require reports from Consuls. These reports cover a wide variety of subjects, such as financial conditions, crop conditions, basic economic trends, character of commercial activity, recommended types of trading practices and agency connections, and many other related matters. The volume and extent of consular reporting on Kuwait has thus far been necessarily limited by the inability of the Consul to maintain constant touch with local conditions arising from the fact of his residence in Basra instead of Kuwait. The increasing scope of American business activity in Kuwait makes it imperative that the volume and quality of consular reporting on the Kuwait district be improved.

F. Relations with American Companies and with Local Officials: The present practice of assigning to the Consul in Basra the duty of maintaining contact with the representatives of American companies in Kuwait and with local officials has prevented the development of that intimate working relationship so essential to the American interests involved as well as to the Governments of the United States and the United Kingdom. A case in point is that of the dispute which has arisen over the islands off the coast of Kuwait and the Kuwait Neutral Zone, involving two American companies, the American Independent Oil Company and the Gulf Oil Company which owns half interest in the Kuwait Oil Company. The Department believes that it would have greatly facilitated the satisfactory settlement of this dispute had an American consular representative been resident in Kuwait and working in close cooperation with the parties in dispute as well as with the Political Agent. However, it is also on matters of a more routine nature which when added together form an even greater justification for the establishment of a Consulate in Kuwait. The day-to-day problems are many and growing and in the spirit of the Anglo-American conversations on economic and cultural cooperation in the Near East held in Washington in October 1947 it is believed that an American consular officer will be of great value in helping to work out the harmonious development of our commercial relations in Kuwait. In the course of executing his duties, the Consul will, of course, have regard for the special treaty relationship existing between the United Kingdom and the Shaikh of Kuwait.

In view of the foregoing, you should renew the Embassy’s previous request to the British Government for its acquiescence in the establishment of an American consular office in Kuwait. In discussing the subject with the Foreign Office, the Embassy should convey the Department’s view that the establishment of an American Consulate in Kuwait would not adversely affect the existing British relations with Kuwait but on the contrary would work to the long-range mutual advantage of the United States and the United Kingdom. You may also point out that requests from other states for the establishment of consulates in Kuwait could still be refused on the just ground that they lack tangible interests in Kuwait comparable to those of the United States.

With reference to the Foreign Office’s analogy between the provision of consular facilities at Kuwait and Bahrein, the Embassy should point out that the handling of our consular needs at Bahrein by the Consulate in Dhahran is an inconvenient and unsatisfactory arrangement and one which we would not wish to duplicate in Kuwait where the demand for American consular services is greater and more pressing.

In view of the constantly growing American interests in Kuwait, it is hoped that the Government of the United Kingdom will agree that the request of the United States for consular representation there arises from normal and legitimate needs, and will accord this request its full approval.

1 Not printed.

1 Not printed.

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State 125.0090B/8–1949: Airgram

[Document 1097]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State

confidential London, August 19, 1949.

Subject: US Consulate at Kuwait, Arabia.

A–1555. With reference to the Department’s Instruction No. 192 of April 21, 1949, and this Embassy’s interim reports, there is quoted below a letter dated August 16, 1949 (ref E 7746/1902/91) which was addressed to this Embassy by Mr. B. A. B. Burrows, Head of the Eastern Department of the British Foreign Office, replying to our representations carried out in accordance with the reference instruction.

“Will you please refer to Lewis Jones’1 letter of the 29th April2 to me forwarding a request from the State Department for our agreement to the opening of a United States Consulate in Kuwait.

As I have already made clear in conversation with Lewis Jones, we have fully accepted the strength of the arguments in favour of the establishment of a consular representative of the United States Government in Kuwait and appreciated that the increase in the volume of work has caused difficulties in the administration of consular business from Basra; but while we have been most anxious to meet the practical requirements of the United States Government, we have also been seriously concerned at the political repercussions which are likely to arise. The Iraqis have already asked for the appointment of a Consul and if an Iraqi Consul were to be appointed the Egyptians might be expected to follow up with a similar demand. At present the United States is the only country with which the United Kingdom has a Consular Convention, but we expect to negotiate such conventions with a number of other countries soon and are at present negotiating one with Egypt. These conventions are likely to include a provision similar to that in the UK–US Convention providing that a Consulate may be opened at any place where a Consulate of a third country is established. If there were a U.S. Consulate in Kuwait, we should be unable on the conclusion of our Convention with Egypt to refuse the opening of an Egyptian Consulate there. For this reason we fear that it cannot be argued that the establishment of a U.S. Consulate would not constitute a precedent.

If the way were thus opened to Egyptian and Iraqi penetration there would be a real danger that Kuwait would be rapidly infected with all the ultra-nationalist maladies from which those two countries are at present suffering. Kuwait would become involved in Arab League affairs and in all the rivalries and intrigues which now divide the Arab States. This involvement of Kuwait in Middle East politics would be to the advantage neither of the United States nor ourselves. I might add that if Consuls were appointed from outside countries at Kuwait there would be a similar demand for representation at Bahrein where similar considerations apply.

This desire to exclude the hurly-burly of Arab politics does not of course mean that we wish to keep Kuwait or Bahrein in permanent tutelage; but our hope was that they would develop in their own time on a steadier and more stable basis than most of the Arab States have done. In this connexion, we are well aware of the need for strengthening our own political representation in Kuwait and steps to this end have already been taken.

We thought it desirable to set out fully the above consideration which would explain to you the difficult situation in which the U.S. Government’s request put us and the reason why we have taken some time to consider the matter. We are sure that the State Department will wish to weigh these considerations carefully before coming to a final decision. If they finally decided that they wished to go on with the idea of appointing a U.S. Consul at Kuwait in spite of the difficulties to which we call attention we should not wish to object. In order however to reduce so far as possible the dangers and difficulties to which we think this appointment might give rise, we should like to have your agreement to the following three points in relation to the status of the U.S. Consular Officer at Kuwait:— “The first is that his exequatur should be issued by H.M. Government and not by the Sheikh of Kuwait. We are informed that in view of the international status of Kuwait, for whose foreign relations H.M. Government are responsible, this is the only correct procedure. This would imply that foreign consuls established in Kuwait would deal with the Kuwait authorities through the British Political Agent on all except purely routine matters.

The second is that the appointment would not alter the present jurisdictional arrangements at Kuwait under which the British Political Agent is responsible for dealing with legal cases involving non-Arab foreigners.

The third is that the appointment would not affect the existing arrangements embodied in political agreements with the Kuwait Oil Company and the American Independent Oil Company (and which would be similarly embodied in a political agreement with any company which obtained a concession for exploiting oil in the seabed under Kuwait’s control and jurisdiction) according to which the relations between the company and the Sheikh except on routine matters are handled through the Political Agent.

If on further consideration the State Department felt able to suggest some method of dealing with their practical requirements which did not involve the political difficulties which we foresee in the present proposal, we should naturally be very glad to consider any such suggestion.

I should make it clear that we have not yet made any approach to the Sheikh of Kuwait on this subject.”

Douglas

1 G. Lewis Jones, First Secretary of Embassy in the United Kingdom.

2 Not printed.

Editorial Note [Document 1098]

Editorial Note

The question of establishing an American Consulate at Kuwait was discussed on November 22 by Department officers with Michael Wright, Superintending Under Secretary of State in the British Foreign Office. For the statement agreed to by the United States and United Kingdom Groups, see page 85 [Pg. 85 is part of Doc. 12].

Saudi ArabiaSaudi Arabia

Contents

Interest of the United States in questions of economic and military assistance to Saudi Arabia; renewal of United States tenancy at the Dhahran airfield; elevation of the United States legation at Jidda to the status of an embassy (Documents 1099-1131)

Interest of the United States in questions of economic and military assistance to Saudi Arabia; renewal of United States tenancy at the Dhahran airfield; elevation of the United States legation at Jidda to the status of an embassyInterest of the United States in questions of economic and military assistance to Saudi Arabia; renewal of United States tenancy at the Dhahran airfield;1 elevation of the United States legation at Jidda to the status of an embassy

1 For previous documentation on these subjects, see Foreign Relations, 1948, vol. v, Part 1, pp. 209 ff.

[1099] Memorandum by the Acting Secretary of State to the President

Washington, January 4, 1949.

124.90F/1–549

[1100] The Minister in Saudi Arabia (Childs) to the Secretary of State

Jidda, January 4, 1949—11 p. m.

867N.01/1–449: Telegram

[1101] The Acting Secretary of State to the Legation in Saudi Arabia

Washington, January 18, 1949—8 p. m.

890F.7962/1–1049: Telegram

[1102] The Minister in Saudi Arabia (Childs) to the Saudi Arabian Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs (Yassin)

Jidda, January 20, 1949.

890F.7962/1–2649

[1103] The Minister in Saudi Arabia (Childs) to the Secretary of State

Jidda, January 24, 1949—10 a. m.

890F.7962/1–2449: Telegram

[1104] The Minister in Saudi Arabia (Childs) to the Secretary of State

Jidda, February 3, 1949—10 a. m.

890D.00/2–349: Telegram

[1105] The Secretary of Defense (Forrestal) to the Secretary of State

[Washington,] 10 February 1949.

Department of Defense Files

[1106] The Secretary of State to the Legation in Saudi Arabia

Washington, February 19, 1949—1 p. m.

890D.00/2–349: Telegram

[1107] The Minister in Saudi Arabia (Childs) to the Secretary of State

Jidda, February 27, 1949—2 p. m.

711.90F/2—2749: Telegram

[1108] The Minister in Saudi Arabia (Childs) to the Secretary of State

Jidda, March 8, 1949—11 a. m.

890F.7962/3–849: Telegram

[1109] The Secretary of State to the Embassy in Saudi Arabia

Washington, April 1, 1949—5 p. m.

890F.7962/3–2649: Telegram

[1110] The Ambassador in Saudi Arabia (Childs) to the Secretary of State

Jidda, April 2, 1949.

711.90F/4–249

[1111] The Ambassador in Saudi Arabia (Childs) to the Secretary of State

Jidda, April 2, 1949.

890F.7962/4–249

[1112] The Ambassador in Saudi Arabia (Childs) to the Secretary of State

Jidda, April 6, 1949—11 a. m.

890F.7962/4–649: Telegram

[1113] The Ambassador in Saudi Arabia (Childs) to the Secretary of State

Dhahran, May 10, 1949—3 p. m.

890F.00/5–1049: Telegram

[1114] The Secretary of State to the Embassy in Saudi Arabia

Washington, May 12, 1949—2 p. m.

890F.7962/5–1249: Telegram

[1115] The Secretary of State to the Embassy in Saudi Arabia

Washington, May 19, 1949—4 p. m.

890F.7962/4–2949: Telegram

[1116] The Ambassador in Saudi Arabia (Childs) to the Secretary of State

Jidda, May 23, 1949.

890F.7962/5–2349

[1117] President Truman to King Ibn Saud of Saudi Arabia

Washington, May 23, 1949.

811.001 Truman, H.S./5–2349

[1118] The Ambassador in Saudi Arabia (Childs) to the King of Saudi Arabia (Ibn Saud)

Riyadh, May 30, 1949.

890F.7962/6–449

[1119] The Chargé in Saudi Arabia (Bergus) to the Secretary of State

Jidda, July 20, 1949.

890F.7962/7–2049

[1120] The Chargé in Saudi Arabia (Hill) to the Secretary of State

Jidda, August 25, 1949—10 a. m.

811.2390F/8–2549: Telegram

[1121] Memorandum of Conversation, by the Ambassador in Saudi Arabia (Childs)

[Washington,] September 28, 1949.

890F.00/9–2849

[1122] The Secretary of State to the Embassy in Saudi Arabia

Washington, October 15, 1949—1 p. m.

890F.20/9–2749: Telegram

[1123] Memorandum by the Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern, South Asian, and African Affairs (McGhee) to the Deputy Under Secretary of State (Rusk)

[Washington,] October 24, 1949.

501.BB Palestine (E)/10–249

[1124] The Ambassador in Saudi Arabia (Childs) to the Secretary of State

Jidda, November 17, 1949—noon.

811.2390F/11–1749: Telegram

[1125] The Ambassador in Saudi Arabia (Childs) to the Secretary of State

Jidda, November 17, 1949—4 p. m.

711.90F/11–1749: Telegram

[1126] The Ambassador in Saudi Arabia (Childs) to the Secretary of State

Jidda, November 18, 1949—noon.

811.2390F/11–1849: Telegram

[1127] The Secretary of State to the Consulate at Istanbul

Washington, November 30, 1949—3 p. m.

120.3 Conferences/11–2949: Telegram

[1128] Editorial Note

[1129] Memorandum of Conversation, by Mr. Frederick H. Awalt of the Office of African and Near Eastern Affairs

[Washington,] December 8, 1949.

890F.00/12–849

[1130] The Ambassador in Saudi Arabia (Childs) to the Secretary of State

Jidda, December 10, 1949.

120.3 Conferences/12–1049

[1131] The Ambassador in Saudi Arabia (Childs) to the Secretary of State

Jidda, December 19, 1949—10 a. m.

890F.20/12–1949: Telegram

Memorandum by the Acting Secretary of State to the President 124.90F/1–549

[Document 1099]

Memorandum by the Acting Secretary of State to the President

secret Washington, January 4, 1949.

In view of our large and rapidly growing economic interests in Saudi Arabia, involving the employment of several thousands of Americans in that country, and the especially cordial attitude which King Ibn Saud2 has long displayed toward the United States Government, the Department gave thought early in 1948 to raising the status of our Legation at Jidda to an Embassy. Although desirous of effecting the change at that time, the Department felt that it would be wise to defer action until the unfavorable atmosphere created by the Palestine problem improved.3 You may recall that we elevated our Legations at Cairo and Baghdad in 1946.4 The British took similar action at Jidda in November 1947.

With the adjournment of the United Nations General Assembly at Paris, and the creation of the Conciliation Commission,5 the Department is of the opinion that it would now be opportune to proceed with the proposed elevation of our Legation to an Embassy. Our Minister at Jidda, Mr. Rives Childs, recently informed the Department6 that this action would be welcomed by the Saudi Arabian Government as evidence of a reciprocal desire on our part for strong and friendly ties; he adds that it would be regarded as recognition of the importance we attach to our interests in Saudi Arabia, and could not but be pleasing to the King. Such a move would, of course, involve reciprocal action on the part of the Saudi Arabian Government.

If you approve, the Department proposes to instruct Minister Childs to approach the Saudi Arabian Government with a view to effecting the elevation of the respective Missions at Jidda and Washington in the near future. In the event the concurrence of the Saudi Arabian Government is obtained to these proposals, it is recommended that Mr. Childs be raised to the rank of Ambassador.7

Robert A. Lovett

2 Abdul Aziz ibn Saud, King of Saudi Arabia.

3 For documentation on the Israeli problem, see pp. 594 [Pg. 594 is part of Doc. 341] ff.

4 See Foreign Relations, 1946, vol. vii, pp. 78–80, concerning Cairo, and ibid., pp. 569–570, concerning Baghdad.

5 For a discussion of the Palestine Conciliation Commission, see pp. 594 [Pg. 594 is part of Doc. 341] ff.

6 Telegram 658, December 22, 1948, from Jidda (124.90F/12–2248); not printed.

7 A marginal note, dated January 5, 1949, indicated President Truman’s approval. The Legation in Saudi Arabia was notified of this approval and directed to inform the Saudi Arabian Government (telegram 9, January 10, to Jidda, 124.90F/12–2248; not printed). Sheikh Asad al-Faqih presented his credentials to President Truman on March 4 (Department of State Bulletin, March 13, p. 328), and J. Rives Childs presented his credentials to King Ibn Saud on March 18 (despatch 86, April 2, from Jidda, 123 Childs/4–249).

The Minister in Saudi Arabia (Childs) to the Secretary of State 867N.01/1–449: Telegram

[Document 1100]

The Minister in Saudi Arabia (Childs) to the Secretary of State

top secret Jidda, January 4, 1949—11 p. m.

11. Dhahran’s 1, January 2 to Department.1 This report believed without foundation.

At my request Deputy Foreign Minister2 outlined viewpoint SAG regarding terms of extension airbase agreement.3 He stated: 1. SAG did not put any term on SAG–US friendship.

2. SAG could not conclude long term agreement at this time without causing repercussions in other Arab states owing to “negative” policy US had pursued so far as Arabs concerned in Palestine question. Despite such negative attitude SAG desired strongly conserve US friendship and as evidence thereof was willing prolong Dhahran agreement on temporary basis. It was for US to decide for itself policy towards Arabs and character friendship US wished with Arab world including Saudi Arabia and US might be sure any evidence given of US desire for properties would be immediately reciprocated.

Sent Department 11, repeated Dhahran 3.

Childs

1 Not printed; it reported a rumor that the Saudi Arabian Government would extend the Dhahran Air Field Agreement for 10 years if the United States would spend $27 million renovating the airfield during the first year of the new agreement (890F.7962/1–249).

2 Shaikh Yusuf Yassin.

3 The airport at Dhahran, which was built by the U.S. armed forces and completed in 1946, was operated by the Air Transport Command in an Agreement with the Government of Saudi Arabia. The Agreement was to last until March 15, 1949.

The Acting Secretary of State to the Legation in Saudi Arabia 890F.7962/1–1049: Telegram

[Document 1101]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Legation in Saudi Arabia

top secret Washington, January 18, 1949—8 p. m.

18. Nat Mil Estab has arrived at following positions re US rights Dhahran:

US would still strongly prefer occupy base on tenure at least twelve years, especially because highly improbable that under shorter tenure NME could secure Congressional approval any appropriations new construction. Even if rights granted for twelve or more years, no estimate could at present be made funds which might be available expansion Dhahran. Developments affecting NME suggest Air Force budget may be cut. This means all-around reduction Air activities and plans for Dhahran may suffer proportionately. Since Air Force not now in position even estimate how much it may be able spend Dhahran no reference figures can be made. Funds minimum maintenance operation and present training assured but any budget for new construction and increase training and other activities would require Congressional approval.

If, as pointed out Legtels 11 Jan 4 and 26 Jan 10,1 longer tenure cannot be obtained without substantial quid pro quo NME will accept tenure on less than 12-year but at least one-year basis from March 15, 1949, subject to extensions of at least twelve months in absence of 12 months’ notice from either Govt to other of intention terminate agreement. It should be clearly understood that under such tenure US would probably not be able to do more than maintain Base in state insure its delivery sound condition SAG upon eventual expiration agreement with expenditure such sums as may be necessary for that purpose and to continue but not expand present training program Dhahran and continue but not increase facilities being afforded in US service schools in connection that training.

You are authorized present to SAG your note proposed Legtel 648, Dec 18,2 with fol changes:

[Here follow the suggested word changes. The note in its revised form is printed infra.]

For your background Dept recognizes US required register agreement with UN pursuant Article 102 Charter within 6 or 8 months after adoption. It is planned, therefore, once renewal has been obtained, remind SAG our mutual obligation under Charter and importance which US attaches meeting this obligation as indicated circ instr Apr 9, 1948.3 If SAG then objects registration renewed agreement it should be possible work out substitute simplified form and publish. You should accordingly avoid making commitments to contrary.

Lovett

1 Latter not printed.

2  Foreign Relations, 1948, vol. v, Part 1, p. 260.

3 Not printed.

The Minister in Saudi Arabia (Childs) to the Saudi Arabian Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs (Yassin) 890F.7962/1–2649

[Document 1102]

The Minister in Saudi Arabia (Childs) to the Saudi Arabian Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs (Yassin)1

top secret Jidda, January 20, 1949.

Excellency: I have the honor, acting under instructions from my Government, to request, in consideration of the friendly ties existing between the United States and Saudi Arabia, renewal of the existing Dhahran Air Base Agreement, embodied in exchanges of notes of August 5, August 6, and December 20, 1945 and January 2, 1946,2 as amended, which expires on March 15, 1949.

Renewal of this agreement will permit the United States Air Force to continue to discharge its existing long range communications commitments and will at the same time afford an opportunity for continuation and possible expansion of the training program for the Saudi Arabian students at Dhahran and in the United States. It is my Government’s view, which it is believed the Saudi Arabian Government will share, that maintenance of the Dhahran Airbase Agreement offers a particularly practical means for continuation of the friendly collaboration already existing between the two Governments. The existing Airbase Agreement provides that the United States Government will turn over these installations in sound condition to the Saudi Arabian Government for operation, control and maintenance upon expiration of the Agreement. My Government interprets such provision as a continuing obligation to maintain the Dhahran Airbase in a state to insure its delivery in sound condition to the Saudi Arabian Government upon expiration of the Agreement with the expenditure of such funds as may be necessary for that purpose. The amounts to be expended will naturally depend upon the use which it may be desired to make of the Base in agreement with the Saudi Arabian Government.

It is understood that renewal of the existing Dhahran Air Base Agreement includes renewal of those provisions of the Agreement which pertain to civil air rights which are set forth in this Legation’s note of December 20, 1945 and the note dated January 2, 1946 of the Saudi Arabian Ministry of Foreign Affairs. It is further understood that if a civil air transport agreement between the United States and Saudi Arabia should come into effect during the existence of the Dhahran Airbase Agreement, as renewed, the provisions of such civil air transport agreement would supplant those provisions of the Dhahran Airbase Agreement which pertain to civil air rights.

My Government requests the existing Air Base Agreement to be extended for a period of at least one year and that its life after March 15, 1950 be subject to annual extensions of twelve months in the absence of notice from either Government to the other of intention to terminate the Agreement upon twelve months notice.

I avail myself of this opportunity to renew to Your Excellency the assurances of my highest consideration.

J. Rives Childs

1 Transmitted to the Department as an enclosure to despatch 19, January 26, from Jidda; not printed.

2 For summary, see bracketed notes, Foreign Relations, 1945, vol. viii, pp. 983, 997.

The Minister in Saudi Arabia (Childs) to the Secretary of State 890F.7962/1–2449: Telegram

[Document 1103]

The Minister in Saudi Arabia (Childs) to the Secretary of State

top secret Jidda, January 24, 1949—10 a. m.

54. Legtel 52, January 22.1 Deputy Foreign Minister called late twenty-second and said he had discussed Dhahran with King and Faisal. From his conciliatory manner I am convinced King has intervened exercise moderating influence on Faisal. Yusuf began by repeating statement he has frequently used recently that HM did not set any term or limits on friendship with US. He expressed strong desire to reach Dhahran agreement without any arguments. “I realize,” he said, “importance Dhahran to us and its defense needs in present international situation. It is our wish however stay US in Dhahran will not have appearance occupying that area. For outward appearance, we propose new agreement on a nominal lease basis.” (He first mentioned rather jocosely “from one dollar to ten million” but later more seriously said compensation for lease would be pro forma and character compensation would be left to conscience US. SAG recognized arms embargo2 precludes military equipment as compensation and are thinking in terms such items as airplane engines of which there is great need.) Yusuf said SAG recognized difficulty would be encountered in obtaining from Congress funds under short term lease. Ability to obtain funds would be measure of US confidence in SAG. He emphasized it was in our mutual interest renewal be in form new agreement to (a), include such provisions of existing agreement which it might be mutually desirable to retain and (b) certain general provisions which he would outline. Yusuf then read memo covering above of which following rough translation:

“With reference previous conversations between US and SAG re DAB and in accordance desire expressed by US Govt to benefit from DAB, in view its urgent needs and in accordance desire SAG maintain uninterrupted friendship US, SAG desires offer as one of several proofs its friendship everything which may assist US Govt at DAB.

“It is known DAB terminates March 15 and entire airport with all its fixed installations will be property SAG in accordance provisions DAB agreement.”

SAG prepared to leave facilities which US Govt can use at DAB at present for period one year under following conditions: (a) agreement upon an annual lease (b) training number of Saudi students at DAB and in US (c) rehabilitation DAB in accordance with agreement between two governments.

SAG has been and still is discussing with US Govt with view reaching agreement which would insure integrity SA and make available to SA military equipment enabling SA defend itself. In view difficulties hindering reaching agreement on this subject SAG does not wish make use requested conditions as condition giving US right use DAB one year and SAG hopes during coming year it may be possible reach an agreement by which SAG hopes help to maintain the integrity of country and obtain what it has requested for defense its country.

Sent Department 54, repeated London 18, Dhahran 12.

Childs

1 Not printed; it reported that Amir Faisal, Saudi Arabian Minister for Foreign Affairs, had returned from a United Nations meeting in Paris annoyed with the United States and intending to influence the Saudi Arabian Government to pursue a more exacting policy towards the United States (890 F.7962/1–2249).

2 For references to documentation on the embargo on shipments of armaments to the Near East, see index entries in this volume under “Palestine, Arms Policy for Palestine and the Near East.”

The Minister in Saudi Arabia (Childs) to the Secretary of State 890D.00/2–349: Telegram

[Document 1104]

The Minister in Saudi Arabia (Childs) to the Secretary of State

top secret Jidda, February 3, 1949—10 a. m.

88. Legtel 48, January 19.1 Deputy Foreign Minister referred our discussion re Greater Syria2 and said he had since discussed this subject with His Majesty.

SAG has received information King Abdullah and Regent Iraq are taking new measures realize Greater Syria, First step would be annexation Arab part Palestine to Transjordan and bringing about revolution or instability Syria and later taking active measures against SA. This is latest information received from His Majesty on subject.3

His Majesty would like to know if USG has such information or more detailed information than above. His Majesty would like to know what USG advises SAG to do in matter. Has USG any objections in stating its views frankly this question: will arms embargo be in effect long time as result which SA may be stopped from equipping itself properly with arms. His Majesty requests foregoing not be discussed with third party.

Childs

1 Not printed; it contained Yusuf Yassin’s views regarding the attitude of King Abdullah of Trans Jordan towards achieving a Greater Syria by first incorporating Palestine into Transjordan. According to Yusuf, the incorporation of Palestine into Transjordan was a decision for the Arab League with which the Saudi Arabian Government would abide (890D.00/1–1949).

2 The problem of a “Greater Syria” refers to Saudi Arabian fears that the Hashemite rulers of Transjordan and Iraq (particularly the former) were planning to establish a Greater Syria to include the two states as well as Syria, part of Palestine, and possibly Lebanon. The Hashemite family of Hussein, Sherifs of Mecca and Medina and rulers of the Hejaz, had been ousted in the middle 1920’s by King Ibn Saud, who had annexed the Hejaz to his domain. The Kings of Transjordan and Iraq were descendants of Hussein and Ibn Saud feared an increase in their power would result in their attempts to regain the Hejaz.

For documentation on the interest of the United States in the problem, see Foreign Relations, 1947, vol. v, pp. 738 ff.

3 King Ibn Saud amplified on his concern regarding the “Greater Syria” problem in a letter to Yusuf Yassin which the latter was instructed to discuss with Minister Childs (telegram 100, February 9, from Jidda, 890b.00/2–949; not printed).

The Secretary of Defense (Forrestal) to the Secretary of State Department of Defense Files

[Document 1105]

The Secretary of Defense (Forrestal) to the Secretary of State

confidential [Washington,] 10 February 1949.

My Dear Mr. Secretary: In your letter of 19 November 19481 you pointed out that the agreement between this Government and the Saudi Arabian Government covering our rights at the Dhahran Air Base expires on 15 March 1949. At the same time, you posed certain questions of a military nature which would have an important bearing on the conduct of negotiations with King Ibn Saud for this extension of this agreement.

In accordance with your suggestion, and as I indicated in my letter of 20 November 1948,2 I asked the Joint Chiefs of Staff to give detailed consideration to the specific questions which you raised. Based upon their views, and after further study of the matter in my own office, the position of the National Military Establishment with reference to these questions may be stated as follows:

Question: “(1) Is the extension sufficiently important to justify the expenditure of additional sums by the Air Force on the development of this base, and if so, how much might those sums be?”

Answer: Yes, the Air Force will support action by which the Congress would be asked to appropriate sums permitting the expenditure of an initial development sum of $19 million on the Dhahran base, and thereafter at the rate of approximately $5 million a year for all expenses required to maintain the base in fully operable condition.

Question: “(2) How long an extension would be required in order to justify such expenditure?”

Answer: Preferably 25 years with the option of renewal, subject to termination by either party on six months’ or one year’s notice, preferably the latter.

Question: “(3) Is the National Military Establishment prepared, provided the embargo against shipment of arms to the Near East is lifted, to supply the Government of Saudi Arabia with arms and other military equipment?”

Answer: In view of uncertainties as to the duration of the current embargo, any definitive answer to this question should be postponed until such embargo has been lifted. At that time, the National Military Establishment will be glad to re-examine the matter in the light of equipment and funds then available, and in the light of priorities which may be established by the Department of State for aid to nations of the Near and Middle East.

Question: “(4) How large an expansion of the Air Force Training Mission …3 might be undertaken at Dhahran?”

Answer: The Air Force considers that an expansion of its Training Mission would be warranted as part of an agreement to retain rights at Dhahran. However, the amount of expansion should not exceed double the strength of the present mission.

Question: “(5) Would the National Military Establishment be prepared to extend the scope of the training provided Saudi Arabia to include instruction in fields other than aviation?”

Answer: Yes, the Joint Chiefs of Staff will be prepared, subject to budgetary limitations, to expand the training mission to Saudi Arabia and its objective to include not only airport operation but also air base defense. The Joint Chiefs of Staff believe that this additional training will go far toward the attainment both of the United States strategic objective and of King Ibn Saud’s desire for trained military personnel as a stabilizing influence in his country.

Should further questions concerning this subject arise, the Chief of Staff of the Air Force or his designated representative will participate with the appropriate representatives of the Department of State in further planning in regard to the extension of the Dhahran Air Base.

Sincerely yours,

James Forrestal

1 For text, see Foreign Relations, 1948, vol. v, Part 1, p. 255.

2 Not printed.

3 Omission appears in the source text.

The Secretary of State to the Legation in Saudi Arabia 890D.00/2–349: Telegram

[Document 1106]

The Secretary of State to the Legation in Saudi Arabia

top secret Washington, February 19, 1949—1 p. m.

62. Legtel 88 Feb. 3. You may inform FonMin in response his approach re Greater Syria problem that although we are of course aware various ideas advanced in this respect we have read no indications of any impending move toward realization. As FonMin mentions annexation Arab part Palestine to TJ would be first step you shld tell him we wld not consider merger this territory as recommended by UN Mediator to be related Greater Syria.

You may wish add that mutuality US and UK interests is such that US wld not hesitate approach Brit Govt again concerning Greater Syria problem if threat affecting peace and security of ME shld materialize. (Legtel 100 Feb 9.)1 In your discretion you may remind SAG however that preservation peaceful cooperation among Arab States is fundamentally and primarily responsibility of Arab statesmen themselves.

Re question arms embargo you may say we propose to give consideration to lifting embargo when peace is restored in Palestine.

Acheson

1 Not printed; but see footnote 3, p. 1579 [Pg. 1579 includes portions of Doc. 1104 and Doc. 1105].

The Minister in Saudi Arabia (Childs) to the Secretary of State 711.90F/2—2749: Telegram

[Document 1107]

The Minister in Saudi Arabia (Childs) to the Secretary of State

top secret Jidda, February 27, 1949—2 p. m.

138. All members SAG have been Riyadh some days where discussion took place SAG–US relations. Following return Prince Faisal and Acting Foreign Minister Jidda, I spent three hours today Foreign Office with latter. Yusuf said HM instructed him discuss SAG–US relations based on latest developments. He said: “International situation is as momentous as it was. Sole problem which US has had in connection Arab states in general, and SAG in particular, is Palestine. This situation is being dealt with through established procedure. HM would like to know view USG re US–SAG relations.

“Is USG still of opinion present situation does not permit any modification previously expressed view time not propitious discussion military and other aid SAG, including tripartite agreement.1 Whenever questions raised with USG, USG always referred SAG to UN. If USG does not favor tripartite [agreement], will it be more disposed bilateral agreement?” As far as SAG concerned, HM said we are ready to do everything which will help in strengthening friendship ties between US and SAG. We are ready to assure USG all their requests based on mutual interest will be met. USG should be certain SAG will cooperate with USG. Period of that cooperation is for as long as Saudi family in power. As HM has requested guarantees and commitments from USG, he is ready to give in return such guarantees and commitments. All facilities required by USG in air, on sea, and on land, will be accorded in a manner which will assure sovereignty of country and not subject SAG to criticism of other foreigners that SA is colony of US.

HM says USG ought to reconsider its attitude re SA, because its common interests with SAG are not as those with any other country, so its attitude toward US should differ from that toward other countries. If USG believes has interests in SA vital and fundamental, and if USG would like to develop and strengthen such interests with SAG, we would be pleased to receive either special US delegation with US Minister Jidda or to send SAG delegation to US to be headed by one of Princes to discuss existing mutual interests between two countries. Such delegation should not be appointed unless we are sure USG prepared reconsider its attitude and is ready to do so. I said HM’s observations would be studied with great care, interest, and attention, by USG. I assured Acting Foreign Minister that purpose and desire of USG was to strengthen our relations with SAG. I added principal difference in my view between points of view USG and SAG was as to time and means of achieving an aim shared by both. I mentioned attention USG now largely concerned conclusion Atlantic Pact and if there was any delay in making known by my government to HM of our comments on his observations, this should not be attributed to any indifference our part or any lack of realization of the importance HM’s remarks.

Yusuf said he felt himself principal difference separating us this question was matter of time and added HM has said, “Time has come”.

Later on, Acting Foreign Minister mentioned HM expressed hope reply might be had within 10 days or so, as apparently SAG has other decisions awaiting reply this telegram.

Childs

1 Between the United States, the United Kingdom, and Saudi Arabia; see Foreign Relations, 1948, vol. v, Part 1, pp. 209 ff.

The Minister in Saudi Arabia (Childs) to the Secretary of State 890F.7962/3–849: Telegram

[Document 1108]

The Minister in Saudi Arabia (Childs) to the Secretary of State

top secret Jidda, March 8, 1949—11 a. m.

168. Dhahran’s unnumbered March 7.1 If new DAB agreement not concluded by March 15 and there seems little prospect as Acting Foreign Minister now Cairo where text proposed new agreement being sent him for comments by Foreign Office, SAG will take initiative in writing Legation on 15th extending present agreement by 15 days. It is Shaikh Yusuf’s view new agreement may be concluded within that time. If it is not SAG will give further extensions until agreement concluded.2

Relayed to Dhahran 40.

Childs

1 Not printed.

2 The Dhahran Air Field Agreement was extended 15 days on March 15 (telegram 197, March 15, from Jidda, 890F.7962/3–1549, not printed), and on subsequent occasions.

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in Saudi Arabia 890F.7962/3–2649: Telegram

[Document 1109]

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in Saudi Arabia

secret Washington, April 1, 1949—5 p. m.

niact

us urgent

132. Fol is part one of two part message.1 Re tentative test revised DAB Agreement as worked out by you, Col O’Keefe2 and SAG, re Dhahran’s 107 Mar 24, 110 Mar 26,3 plus amendments and corrections, you shld approach SAG along fol lines:—4

Depts State and Air have studied tentative text carefully and appreciate care which has gone into drafting, problems involved affecting SAG position Arab world and spirit cooperation shown SAG. USG has made important contribution econ development SA by construction, maintenance and operation Dhahran Airfield which has been open past three years commercial traffic at expense USG. Our actions making these facilities freely available have demonstrated scrupulous respect USG for SA sovereignty. We are sure that SAG appreciates benefits which accrue from operation this SAG owned base.

USG and NME most grateful confidence King evidenced toward US activities Dhahran and toward CO in requesting his appt as SA Rep civil av matters DAF. USG regrets it cannot accept this gesture of friendship goodwill because not possible US mil officer active duty serve such capacity. Assure SAG this shld not be construed meaning CO DAF cannot undertake these duties but he must do so as officer USG and not as SAG Rep. NME has learned by experience that efficient operation major airport which is jointly used civil mil purposes requires single administrator. It is therefore urged King delegate admin airport USG which will in turn authorize its Rep to act in this capacity. US Congress cld not be expected appropriate the substantial funds necessary maintain and operate an airbase over which USG exercises only partial control.

End of part one. Part two fols.

Acheson

1 Part two, sent as telegram 133, is not printed. It contained specific suggested word changes to the text of the tentative Dhahran Air Field Agreement.

2 Col. Richard J. O’Keefe, Commanding Officer of the Dhahran Air Field.

3 Neither printed.

4 Ambassador Childs conveyed these instructions to the Saudi Arabian Foreign Office April 3 (telegram 248, from Jidda, 890F.7962/4–349; not printed). The Ambassador’s note was transmitted to the Department with despatch 89, April 4, from Jidda (890F.7902/4–449); not printed.

The Ambassador in Saudi Arabia (Childs) to the Secretary of State 711.90F/4–249

[Document 1110]

The Ambassador in Saudi Arabia (Childs) to the Secretary of State

top secret Jidda, April 2, 1949.

No. 83

Sir: I have the honor to acknowledge receipt of the Department’s telegram No. 93 of March 23, 1949 to Dhahran1 as well as of the Department’s telegram No. 127 of March 28, 1949 to Jidda2 and to confirm the telegram I sent from Dhahran on March 31, 1949 (Dhahran’s No. 116)2 reporting my audience with His Majesty on March 30th at the Riyadh at which time I set forth the position of the United States Government as authorized by the Department in respect to various questions raised by His Majesty.

I arrived at Riyadh on the morning of March 30th en route to Dhahran with His Royal Highness Prince Mansour, Minister of Defense, and immediately upon my arrival at Riyadh was received by His Majesty and spent more than half an hour with him in the company of Prince Saud3 and Fuad Bey Hamza.4

His Majesty listened to my oral communication most attentively and appeared to receive the assurances with considerable relief and satisfaction. He requested me to express his appreciation to the United States Government for its message and then said that, while the assurances given him did not fulfill all his desires, he felt it was a good beginning. His Majesty added that his government would naturally have to study the question of the proposed treaty of friendship, commerce and navigation but the impression was left with me that the Saudi Arabian Government would probably welcome the conclusion of such an agreement and a public announcement to that effect. I think the significance of the public announcement was not lost upon His Majesty as a means of indicating to the world our close ties with Saudi Arabia.

In accordance with a request by Fuad Bey Hamza, I prepared an aide-mémoire of my conversation, the transmittal of which was delayed until the receipt of a true copy of the Department’s telegram No. 93 as that telegram had been slightly garbled in transmission to Dhahran. The Department will note that there has been substituted for the Department’s paragraph 9 (see paragraph 8 of the aide-mémoire) an appropriate reference to the sending of a Saudi Arabian delegation to the United States for the signing of the proposed treaty as outlined in the Department’s telegram No. 127. The Department will also note that my aide-mémoire contains a reference to the decision of the United States Government to conclude a long term agreement regarding the Dhahran Airfield which I thought it appropriate to introduce in the light of paragraph 7 of the Department’s telegram No. 93.5

Respectfully yours,

J. Rives Childs

Enclosure
The American Ambassador (Childs) to the King of Saudi Arabia (Ibn Saud)

top secret

Aide-Mémoire

The American Ambassador stated that he was in receipt of a telegram from the Department of State in Washington setting forth, as requested by His Majesty, the position of the Government of the United States in respect to various questions raised in the recent past by His Majesty.6

The Ambassador added that he had been authorized to inform His Majesty of the following: 1. His Majesty’s requests have all received the most careful and detailed study, both by the Department of State and the National Military Establishment.7

2. The United States Government has been happy to act favorably on certain of these requests and the fact that this has not been possible in all cases should not give rise to any uncertainty as to the basic friendship which has always characterized the relations between our two countries. The recent decision to raise the level of our diplomatic representation to Saudi Arabia clearly symbolizes an affirmative approach on the part of the United States Government in its relations with the Saudi Arabian Government.

3. The United States has vast commitments all over the world. The National Military Establishment in the allocation of funds, materials, and men has had to give top priority to projects which have immediate urgency in the protection of the national welfare and the preservation of world peace. At the same time, a strenuous effort has had to be made to keep our military expenditures within the limits of the American economy. Consequently, many projects in themselves worthy have had to be held in abeyance.

4. There have also been legal obstacles in the way of offering further tangible assistance to Saudi Arabia. The Government of the United States does not have permanent statutory authority to send military missions to countries outside the Western Hemisphere, except in the cases of the Philippines, Greece, Turkey and China. Legislation is now pending which would permit the sending of military missions to other countries and the retention of those established under emergency powers during the recent war. However, there is no assurance that this legislation will be approved by the Congress. If approved, the dispatch of any military mission would still be subject to the limitations set forth in paragraph 3 above and the existing political situation.

5. His Majesty’s requests must also be considered in the light of the existing political situation. In speaking of the existing political situation, the United States Government refers specifically to the vexing problem of Palestine. This Government is hopeful that the present armistice negotiations will produce an atmosphere which will permit the United Nations Conciliation Commission to reach a speedy and effective settlement while the United States Government is committed to the support of Israel within the framework of the United Nations Resolution of November 29, 19478 and subsequent resolutions, it is equally committed to a policy of friendship with the Arab states. It is therefore keenly interested in the return of peace to the whole area, in order that the countries concerned can proceed with their plans for economic development and the improvement of living conditions.

6. The American Ambassador, in the light of the general policy set forth above, has been authorized to give the following specific assurances to His Majesty:

The United States desires to solidify and amplify the present cordial relations. The United States Government recognizes fully the Saudi Arabian Government and its sovereignty within its present frontiers. Any threat to the sovereignty of Saudi Arabia or its territorial integrity would be regarded most seriously by the United States Government and the United States Government would support before the United Nations the independence and integrity of Saudi Arabia, in case it should be threatened.

7. In line with the general policy outlined in President Truman’s inaugural address,9 this Government desires that the resources of Saudi Arabia be developed to the benefit of the Saudi Arabian people. One of the best defenses against outside aggression is such development and the raising of the standard of living within Saudi Arabia. His Majesty has shown his broad vision in this respect and there are a number of projects under way or envisioned which are designed to promote the development of the country. The United States Government has already demonstrated its interest in such development both in technical advice and financial assistance. Although the Saudi Arabian Government has not found it possible to take advantage to the full extent of American financial assistance, the United States Government stands ready to entertain a request for Export-Import Bank assistance for specific projects. Furthermore, the technical assistance program proposed by the President in his inaugural address may make it possible to give favorable consideration to Saudi Arabia’s request for a Technical Mission to survey the country’s resources and to make recommendations for their development.

8. The possibility of a treaty of alliance has been raised in previous discussions between His Majesty and the American Ambassador. His Majesty will no doubt recognize that the association of the United States with nations outside the Western Hemisphere for defense purposes, as exemplified in the proposed Atlantic Security Pact constituted a radical departure from traditional peacetime policies and a new concept and one with which the United States must proceed slowly. The United States Government has not as yet envisaged the broadening of the defensive security relationship beyond the Atlantic Group. The view of the Department of State is that a basic treaty of friendship, commerce, and navigation should be the primary objective in solidifying relations with Saudi Arabia. As an immediate measure it is suggested that a public announcement be made of the intention to negotiate such a treaty to supplement the agreement of November 7, 1933.10 Provided it were agreeable to His Majesty, and that there would be reasonable assurance that the Saudi Arabian Government would be willing to accept the basic principles outlined in the note from the American Minister to the Minister Plenipotentiary in charge of the Saudi Arabian Ministry of Foreign Affairs dated December 21, 1945 (No. 296),11 this announcement could be made at once. This should have the beneficial effect of indicating the growing closeness of the ties between the two countries.

The Ambassador stated that as regarded His Majesty’s proposal that the Saudi Arabian Government send a delegation to the United States or receive a delegation from the United States for the purpose of discussing matters of common interest, the United States considered that the conclusion of the suggested treaty of friendship, commerce and navigation might well offer a suitable occasion for sending a Saudi Arabian delegation to the United States for the signing in Washington of such a treaty. The United States Government would be gratified to receive such a delegation headed by His Royal Highness Prince Saud or by whomever His Majesty might choose to designate for that purpose and the visit would offer a further occasion for the discussion of topics of mutual interest.

The Ambassador stated that he desired to point out that no reference had been made in the foregoing to the subject of the Dhahran Airfield negotiations in view of the fact that these negotiations are current. He added that in the view of the United States Government, however, the Dhahran Airfield provides a symbol of the close cooperation which the United States Government desires to maintain and increase. As one means to that end, the United States Government looks forward during the ensuing twelve months to the conclusion of a long term agreement regarding the Dhahran Airfield.

9. In conclusion, the American Ambassador stated he had been authorized to give special emphasis to the common aims of the United States and Saudi Arabia. The United States is vitally interested in: a. Saudi Arabian independence,

b. The development by Saudi Arabia of her resources,

c. Resistance to the threat of communist doctrine.

The Saudi Arabian Government has an even greater interest in these major points. The United States Government feels that this mutuality of interest forms one of the best possible guarantees of Saudi Arabian independence and increasingly close relations with the United States.12

Jidda, March 30, 1949.

1 Not printed; it provided a general framework of United States policy towards Saudi Arabia which was conveyed orally by Ambassador Childs to King Ibn Sand as reported in the aide-mémoire printed below (711.90F/2–2749).

2 Not printed.

2 Not printed.

3 Crown Prince Saud.

4 Saudi Arabian Minister of State.

5 Paragraph seven pointed out that the Dhahran Airfield had been the subject of separate instructions (possibly telegrams 132 and 133, April 1, to Jidda, 890F.7962/3–2649; latter not printed, but see footnote 1, p. 1583 [Pg. 1583 includes portions of Doc. 1108 and Doc. 1109]), and has not specifically been brought within the scope of this telegram. “It does, however,” the paragraph further stated, “provide symbol of close cooperation which this Government desires to maintain and increase.”

6 Telegram 93, to Dhahran, not printed; but see footnote 1, p. 1584 [Pg. 1584 includes portions of Doc. 1109 and Doc. 1110].

7 These requests are discussed in a memorandum of January 14 by the Assistant Chief, Division of Near Eastern Affairs, Richard H. Sanger, to the Deputy Director of the Office of Near Eastern and African Affairs, Raymond A. Hare (711.90F/2–2749); not printed.

8 See text in Foreign Relations, 1948, vol. v, Part 2, p. 1709.

9 For documentation on the technical assistance program proposed by President Truman in his inaugural address, see vol. i, pp. 757 ff.

10 For documentation concerning this Agreement, see Foreign Relations, 1933, vol. ii, pp. 986 ff.

11 Not printed; it included the supplemental provisions to the 1933 Agreement proposed by the United States.

12 In reply to this aide-mémoire, the Saudi Arabian Foreign Ministry indicated it was disturbed that the United States Government was hesistant in giving a frank reply to Saudi Arabian requests and it felt that the United States “either has no confidence in us or has not yet considered [the] great fundamental mutual interests involved.” Regarding the proposed treaty of friendship, commerce, and navigation, it expressed eagerness to take every action which would lead to the strengthening and confirming of friendly relations between the two governments. However, although agreeing to publishing a statement to that effect, it considered the conditions stated by the United States prior to the announcement would put it in a difficult situation (telegram 272, April 14, from Jidda, 890F.7962/4–1449; not printed).

The Ambassador in Saudi Arabia (Childs) to the Secretary of State 890F.7962/4–249

[Document 1111]

The Ambassador in Saudi Arabia (Childs) to the Secretary of State

secret Jidda, April 2, 1949.

No. 84

Sir: I have the honor to refer to my telegrams sent from Dhahran numbers 100, 101, 102, 103, 104, 105 and 106 of March 23, 1949, 107 of March 24, 1949 and 109, 110, 111 and 112 of March 26, 19491 and to transmit with this despatch the following memoranda of conversations held at Riyadh regarding the Dhahran Airfield negotiations and to give at the same time a brief summary of those negotiations:2

[Here follows a listing of the enclosed memoranda of conversations.]

Due to the pressure of work at the end, no time could be spared for the preparation of extensive records of our extended conversations with Fuad Bey Hamza on the details of the agreement but Colonel O’Keefe and Captain Elkins are preparing an annotated text of the agreement which will include all relevant observations on the details.

No opportunity was had either for an extended account of our final audience with His Majesty on March 25, 1949 but an account of this final audience was reported in my telegram No. 229 of March 26, 1949.3

I shall, in this despatch, endeavor to outline as succinctly but as inclusively as possible some of the principal highlights in our negotiations.

The Department will recall from my telegram No. 190 of March 14, 19494 that I was somewhat disturbed by the Saudi Arabian Government’s decision to take the negotiations out of the hands of Shaikh Yusuf Yassin, Acting Foreign Minister who had, for reasons unknown to me, been sent to Cairo, and to transfer the negotiations to Riyadh for their termination by Fuad Bey Hamza, a principal rival of Shaikh Yusuf. I have no means of knowing what was behind the Saudi Arabian Government’s decision in this regard and whether it had any significance. I do know that in 1946 Fuad Bey had criticized Shaikh Yusuf for what he regarded as undue concessions in the Dhahran Airfield Agreement concluded in the exchange of notes of 1945 and 1946 and it is reasonable to suppose that Fuad Bey was determined to prove to the King that he was capable of driving with us a harder bargain than his rival.

It was immediately apparent upon my arrival in Riyadh on March 18, 1949 that the Saudi Arabian Government was not disposed to accept our text of the proposed agreement in its actual form as a basis for negotiations. Fuad Bey Hamza was, at first, most conciliatory and sought to give the impression that whatever form the agreement might take there would be no essential change in the administration of the airfield. However, during my conversations with him on the evening of March 21st, I was much disturbed by his hardened attitude and the inferences left that there might be fundamental changes introduced. It was on that date that Colonel Richard J. O’Keefe, Commanding Officer at Dhahran, and his legal adviser, Captain Elkins, arrived from Dhahran at my request to assist me in the negotiations.

The Department will no doubt appreciate that our policy with regard to Palestine was a heavy handicap in obtaining the continuance of the privileges which we had previously enjoyed at Dhahran. Moreover, the difficulties which we had experienced in formulating replies to the several requests and inquiries made by His Majesty of us regarding our position and attitude toward Saudi Arabia were a further considerable handicap. Fuad Bey pertinently expressed what was in the mind of His Majesty when he said Saudi Arabia was in the position of a woman waiting vainly for the United States to consummate its marriage with Saudi Arabia.

In view of our previous Palestine policy, the King found it particularly difficult to renew to us openly privileges at Dhahran which might have been interpreted by other Arab states as an indifference on the part of His Majesty to the Arab cause. The position of the Saudi Arabian Government was represented to us that they were desirous of continuing to grant us in effect the same privileges but of making it appear to the world in the written instrument that Saudi Arabia was in fact the master at Dhahran.

The Department will doubtless appreciate that we were confronted with some very difficult decisions. First of all, time was running short; secondly, it would have been awkward to have hesitated and to have asked time for consultation with the Department. After deep reflection, it appeared to me that the most desirable course was to trust the sincerity of the Saudi Arabian position by endeavoring to work out the terms of an agreement with them which would give us the privileges which we desire while preserving the amour propre of the Saudi Arabian Government of which it is justifiably jealous. I sought Colonel O’Keefe’s counsel and he concurred wholeheartedly in this proposal. We therefore threw ourselves into the task of reformulating the Saudi Arabian counter proposals in a manner which would be acceptable to us as affording a practical working basis for our air forces at Dhahran while preserving the necessary appearances to the world for the Saudi Arabian Government. I cannot omit at this time to record the invaluable services rendered by Colonel O’Keefe and Captain Elkins in the extremely difficult and delicate task which we set ourselves. It was Colonel O’Keefe and Captain Elkins, assisted from time to time by me, who were principally responsible for the skillful manner in which the Saudi Arabian counter proposals were transformed and made into an instrument which would give Colonel O’Keefe and the United States Airforce the necessary operative working control at Dhahran. I cannot speak too highly in praise of the work in this regard of Colonel O’Keefe and Captain Elkins. I know the Department will be gratified, as well as the Department of Air, that we worked together as a closely knit team with such results as I believe may be described as successful in our common view.

I have already reported to the Department the fact that the evening of March 21st was a crisis point in our negotiations. I find it difficult to determine the purpose of Fuad Bey’s obduracy and lack of helpfulness as evidenced in our discussions with him that evening. I was, in fact, so confused by his change of attitude that at one time I even entertained what I regarded as a reasonable suspicion that the Saudi Arabian Government was endeavoring to compel us to take the initiative in retiring from the negotiations by raising impossible demands. I am still at a loss to account for Fuad Bey’s attitude in view of the completely changed and completely conciliatory position which he subsequently assumed when I threatened to take my difficulties directly to the King. I can only assume that he had overstepped himself in his personal jockeying for position.

I may add that I was so deeply concerned with the turn the negotiations took on the evening of March 21st that I drafted a proposed communication to the King which I contemplated getting into the hands of Prince Saud. This communication, after draft, read in part as follows:

“As Your Majesty is aware, I have striven, during the two and one-half years in which I have been privileged to be the representative of my Government in Saudi Arabia, to develop an appreciation on the part of those interested officials of the United States Government in meeting Your Majesty’s wishes for more extended and closer ties between our two countries. It is my opinion that the Dhahran Air Operation has afforded a striking testimonial to what our two countries can accomplish as partners. I believe all signs point to a growing interest on the part of our National Military Establishment in meeting as far as may be practical the wishes of the Saudi Arabian Government in respect of binding closer our mutual defense. It was, therefore, because of my feeling that harm might be done the work which we have so patiently endeavored to accomplish in fostering increasing interest in Saudi Arabia on the part of the National Military Establishment that I have been reluctant to forward to my Government the counter proposals made to our proposed Dhahran Agreement until Colonel O’Keefe and I had sought by all possible means to convince the Saudi Arabian Government of the desirability in our common interests of drafting an agreement which we considered to offer a basis of agreement.

Your Majesty has always invited the utmost candor on my part and it is responsive to the convictions that Your Majesty has inculcated in me of the desirability of such frankness that I am constrained to express my observations thus frankly to Your Majesty on this occasion.

It has been said that the privileges exercised by us at Dhahran under the present agreement are contrary in times of peace to Saudi Arabian sovereignty and honor. May I be permitted to remark to Your Majesty that the United States enjoys privileges in British and Portuguese sovereign territory which do not go beyond those which we are seeking in a new agreement.

I am decidedly concerned at not only the maintenance of the strong ties which we have already so happily and constructively formed through the wisdom of Your Majesty but my concern extends to also the fear that the absence in the agreement on which we have been working of the minimum privileges we are seeking might conceivably prejudice the view of the National Military Establishment as to the consummation of the more extended forms of mutual aid and might force the Department of Air to turn to the development of bases where the conditions of operation were more favorable.

As it may take some days to obtain an answer from Washington, I would request of Your Majesty permission for me to inform my Government that the existing agreement which now expires on March 31, 1949 has been graciously extended for 15 days in order that a sufficient period may be allowed for a decision to be reached without possible disruption of the present airport administration.”

I discussed this with my extremely helpful Arab Secretary, Mohamed Masoud, in the thought that the contents would undoubtedly be conveyed by him to the King or Prince Saud whatever the decision I might take with regard to its presentation. Mohamed suggested that I hold it in suspense. In the meantime, he must have seen Prince Saud as he informed me the next day Prince Saud had inquired how the negotiations were going in order to assure me that if he could be of help he would be glad to throw his weight with the King in behalf of an agreement mutually satisfactory to us both. I feel that it was undoubtedly due to the deep apprehensions expressed by me concerning the progress of the negotiations and to the intervention of Prince Saud that a turn was taken the next day for the better and from that time forward the most conciliatory disposition was shown by Fuad Bey Hamza.

In consideration of all that I have reported, I hope the Department will agree that no other course was left open to us than to endeavor to deal with the problem as was done. An important factor in the decision taken was the goodwill we had opened to us in our endeavor to meet the Saudi Arabian desires halfway. I felt very strongly that hesitation on our part might well have produced suspicion as to our motives and I feel that the results achieved by our own spirit of accommodation exceeded even the most optimistic hopes of Colonel O’Keefe and me when we entered the negotiations at Riyadh.

It is hoped that the Department and the National Military Establishment will give immediate consideration to the character of the long term agreement which is desired for the future which must be negotiated before April 1, 1950. A good deal of experience will be gained by Colonel O’Keefe, of course, from the practical operation of the new agreement. I think one of the first considerations should be the determination of what we are probably prepared to offer Saudi Arabia for a long term agreement and when I speak of a long term agreement, I mean one from ten to twenty-five years. It might be helpful for us to have as soon as possible from the National Military Establishment an indication of what might be offered in a ten year agreement, in a fifteen year agreement and in a twenty-five year agreement. I believe the presence of Prince Saud in Washington in the course of the next six months will offer an excellent opportunity to work out the final details of a long term agreement and I strongly urge that the fullest advantage be taken of his presence in Washington by the National Military Establishment to that end. It is entirely possible that my statutory leave may co-incide with his visit and I think this would be useful. At the same time, I would suggest that if there is such a coincidence in our visits, Colonel O’Keefe be brought back to Washington at the same time for consultation to assist in the negotiations. I expect to be in Washington beginning about August 15th. It is wholly possible that our negotiations for a treaty of friendship, commerce and navigation may be so far advanced by that time that signature will be possible by the end of summer or the beginning of autumn (see despatch No. 83, April 2, 1949).

Respectfully yours,

J. Rives Childs

1 None printed.

2 Negotiations on the extension of the Dhahran Air Field Agreement were held at Riyadh from March 18 to 25. A tentative revised agreement was reached on March 25, with some points remaining to be worked out, particularly concerning the operational authority at the field (Article 5). The annotated text of the tentative agreement was transmitted to the Department under cover of despatch 110, April 20, from Jidda (890F.7962/4–2049); not printed. Notes regarding Civil Air Rights were exchanged April 20, and April 23, renewing the January 2, 1946, note until March 31, 1950. The notes were transmitted to the Department under cover of despatch 115, April 23, from Jidda (711.90F27/4–2349); not printed.

3 Not printed.

4 Not printed.

The Ambassador in Saudi Arabia (Childs) to the Secretary of State 890F.7962/4–649: Telegram

[Document 1112]

The Ambassador in Saudi Arabia (Childs) to the Secretary of State

secret Jidda, April 6, 1949—11 a. m.

254. FonOff yesterday read me letter His Majesty to President being mailed to Shaikh Asad of which following summary.1 Intention cooperate with US in cementing US–SAG relations. Original DAB agreement made wartime when SAG allied US. Conditions now changed and facilities granted then cannot be granted now same form because trouble and gossip which would arise SA and neighboring countries. As evidence His Majesty’s intention cooperate USG proposal made appointment O’Keefe as SAG official. Duration new agreement only one year which is short time. This because situation ME has not permitted USG discuss. As these reasons now ended, situation should be studied on basis international developments not only for defense DAF but also other matters in connection our relations. Cannot express our views until we know reaction our suggestions. If USG feels time has come review whole subject delegates can be appointed to meet and study problem and draft text agreement. Hopes President will give subject deepest and most careful consideration. End summary.

When Fuad mentioned message to me again Riyadh March 30,2 I suggested in view communication made King that date under Department’s instruction 93, March 23,3 Dhahran, letter of which contents not then disclosed but known to be based on earlier discussions be modified taking into account latest developments. He stated he thought message should go forward as written.

Reply President will presumably take account new developments including my communication King March 30 and Embassy note April 3 based on Deptels 132, 133.4

Sent Department 254, repeated Dhahran 70.

Childs

1 A translation of the letter, dated March 31 (2 Jumada II 1368), is in the Department of State files (890F.7962/3–3149); not printed.

2 Telegram 245, April 2, from Jidda (890F.7962/4–249); not printed.

3 Not printed; but see footnote 1, p. 1584 [Pg. 1584 includes portions of Doc. 1109 and Doc. 1110].

4 Latter not printed; but see footnote 2 to telegram 168 from Jidda, p. 1583 [Pg. 1583 includes portions of Doc. 1108 and Doc. 1109].

The Ambassador in Saudi Arabia (Childs) to the Secretary of State 890F.00/5–1049: Telegram

[Document 1113]

The Ambassador in Saudi Arabia (Childs) to the Secretary of State

top secret Dhahran, May 10, 1949—3 p. m.

159. At principal audience King today at which I received alone and interpreter dismissed, Fuad serving as such who said: General international situation and that in which Saudi Arabia involved serious both of which causing him serious concern. Because he did not wish his concern become known he had restricted audience.

There was first of all Communism. He had nothing to fear from his own people. They respected him as father and he treated them as such. Communists had been successful in gaining foothold other neighboring countries. He cites Egypt where although Moslem brotherhood banned Communists members still alive.

There was secondly innate Shereefian hostility. Yemen flirting with Transjordan and Iraq and SA might be encircled. From letter read to me previous evening by Fuad (Dhahran telegram 1541 ) Abdullah would never give up idea greater Syria. His Majesty said he had reliable information Abdullah had stated to Jews he would make concessions to them in Palestine if they would support him to regain Hejaz.

Thirdly, there had been cooling off in British attitude towards him. As US interests had increased in SA interest of UK had been deflected to Iraq and Transjordan. He had not heard so from high responsible UK officials but SA Ambassador in London had gained impression UK did not favor tripartite arrangements between UK, US and Arab States but wished bilateral pacts and US excluded.

There was time when SA could rely on splendid fighting qualities Saudi soldiers to defend itself. New modern weapons now meant SA defenseless against tanks and military aircraft. These in possession of/or available to his enemies while he possessed none.

He had in past approached US Government repeatedly for assistance but he had obtained no satisfaction. He was now coming to US for the last time to ask our help, adequate armaments and our advice. He did not wish US to treat this present approach casually but to give it the great importance he attached to it. He was very seriously concerned. He could send Crown Prince Saud or Prince Feisal to US to make known his views but their visit would advertise unduly his concern and he wished to avoid the disastrous consequences of failure of their mission.

He proposed I advance date my departure on leave in order proceed Washington at once to expedite action.

I assured him as I had previously USG by no means indifferent to security SAG and I reemphasized this. It was easy for decisions to be reached in SA but USG was immensely complicated machine, which moved slowly. I added I had anticipated King’s request previous evening when I had dictated letter to Colonel O’Keefe my only military adviser in SA asking him to formulate recommendations which I might take back with me to Washington in connection with standing long term DAF agreement which would take into account SA security requirements. I suggested careful preparation of ground most important and with all due respect to His Majesty’s suggestion I thought more might be accomplished in long run through study contemplated than by taking subject up precipitately.

King said he had fullest confidence in me and for me to follow course I thought best but time was pressing. British had not responded to his overtures for tripartite pact after he had refused to give them air base facilities prior Ambassador visiting Riyadh next week but he would make no commitments to British until he had heard from US.

Strongly urge Department authorize interim reply to King stating my visit to US will be taken advantage of to examine whole field of USG–SAG relations. We cannot continue to give King brush off indefinitely. Believe long term DAF agreement offers excellent opportunity obtain rights we desire in exchange for training 10,000 mobile airborne Saudi troops for defense DAF.

Sent Department 159, repeated London, pouched Jidda, Cairo, Damascus, Beirut, Baghdad.

[Childs]

1 Not printed.

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in Saudi Arabia 890F.7962/5–1249: Telegram

[Document 1114]

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in Saudi Arabia

top secret Washington, May 12, 1949—2 p. m.

182. Eyes only for Childs. Urtel 159, May 10. Dept appreciates difficulties involved in your conversation with King and commends your skill and initiative in handling this difficult subject. For your info only Sec yesterday signed ltr to Sec of Defense requesting NME’s urgent study of certain proposals which it is hoped we can make to SAG relative to study of SA defense needs and expanded DAB training program. Reply to King’s ltr to Pres Truman shld go forward shortly.

Acheson

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in Saudi Arabia 890F.7962/4–2949: Telegram

[Document 1115]

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in Saudi Arabia

top secret
priority Washington, May 19, 1949—4 p. m.

191. Urtels 272, Apr 14 and 307, Apr 29.1 Re proposed new agreement in mentioning basic principles Dept had no intention precluding negots but felt that before announcing intention negotiate it wld be desirable determine whether reasonable chance successful outcome. However, in view feelings expressed by SAG, in proposing text public announcement you shld make clear SAG that US not attempting impose “conditions” prior negot; on contrary US considers both parties free agents who approach conversations without commitment other than that of exploring possibility revising and expanding provisional agreement Nov 7, 1933. While 1933 Agreement has operated successfully, relations between two countries have developed to such extent as wld justify, in Dept’s opinion, a more comprehensive agreement which might serve to solidify further present close relationship to mutual advantage both govts.

Fol is draft proposed announcement re negots between SA and US:

“The govts of SA and US conscious of mutuality of their interests, being desirous of strengthening ties of friendship which already exist between the two countries, and recognizing the great increase in their economic intercourse in recent years, have decided to explore possibilities of revising and expanding their agreement dated Nov 7, 1933 entitled ‘Provisional Agreement between the United States of America and the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia in regard to Diplomatic and Consular Representation, Juridical Protection, Commerce and Navigation.’

This announcement is being released simultaneously by agreement between the two govts concerned at Wash and Jidda (Riyadh).”

It is proposed that US announcement wld be released by SecState at weekly press conference which usually occurs Wed. Cld SAG arrange issuance special communiqué on that day?2 Dept wld propose specific date for release when text announcement agreed to.3

Acheson

1 Neither printed; for a summary of telegram 272, see footnote 12, p. 1589 [Pg. 1589 includes portions of Doc. 1110 and Doc. 1111]; telegram 307 contained Ambassador Childs’ suggestion to take advantage of the public announcement proposed in the March 30 aide-mémoire to give expression of the United States special interest in Saudi Arabia (890F.7962/4–2949).

2 The Saudi Arabian Government indicated that it would prefer that the public announcement be postponed until negotiations had commenced (telegram 369, May 27, from Jidda, 890F.7962/5–2749; not printed).

3 Ambassador Childs conveyed the contents of this telegram orally to the Saudi Arabian Foreign Office on May 21 (telegram 355, from Jidda, 890F.7962/5–2149; not printed).

The Ambassador in Saudi Arabia (Childs) to the Secretary of State 890F.7962/5–2349

[Document 1116]

The Ambassador in Saudi Arabia (Childs) to the Secretary of State

top secret Jidda, May 23, 1949.

No. 137

Sir: I have the honor to refer to my telegram No. 159 (Dhahran) of May 10, 1949 reporting my audience with His Majesty in which he again brought up the question of military aid to Saudi Arabia and to transmit herewith the following enclosures:1

[Here follows a listing of the enclosures.]

The Department will appreciate from Enclosure No. 22 that one of my principal preoccupations over the past 18 months has been conjuring up fresh excuses and explanations as to why we were unable to respond to the King’s overtures for closer political relations. I have reached practically the limit of my resources and the fact that His Majesty emphasized in his audience with me on May 10th that he was approaching us for the last time on this subject indicates that he has just about reached the limit of his patience. To use a colloquial expression, “We must make up our minds to fish or cut bait.”

I, of course, appreciate the many valid factors which have stood in the way of a more positive response from the Department to the King’s repeated overtures. I believe also that there is some recognition on the part of His Majesty and of his Ministers of certain very sound reasons which have mitigated against the giving by us of more satisfactory replies or commitments than we have been able to do.

I would suggest that compliance by us with the King’s request for closer relations may well be in accord with our own strategic interests, not only in view of our important economic interests in this country but likewise in view of what Saudi Arabia has to offer us at Dhahran in the way of military airforce facilities.

The King is prepared to grant us a long term agreement at Dhahran provided we are able and willing to meet his own security requirements in part or in whole. The King has spoken in the past of arms and training for a force of 70,000 men and more recently he has spoken of the need of tanks and airplanes. I am not competent to say what the King needs for the maintenance by him of internal security and security against his most likely enemies. It has occurred to me however that we might well combine the consideration of the King’s own needs with those which we ourselves might need for the defense of the Dhahran Airfield. I believe the King would be inclined to listen to practical considerations which might be presented to him establishing what his actual needs might be in terms of modern warfare and local exigencies.

I note that Colonel O’Keefe has recommended the sending of a survey team to Saudi Arabia to consider Saudi Arabian’s security requirements. He suggests consideration be given to the equipping and training of some 10,000 Saudi troops. It is my understanding and that of Colonel O’Keefe that the armaments for these troops would be made available to Saudi Arabia on a reimbursable basis and that our principal obligation would be the training of these forces.

I concur in these recommendations and hope that the work of such a survey team may be so expedited as to permit its findings to be approved by the National Military Establishment and the Department of State and made known to the Saudi Arabian Government in time for us to initiate negotiations for a long term Dhahran Airfield Agreement long before March 1, 1950.

Respectfully yours,

J. Rives Childs

1 None printed.

2 A memorandum of May 12 by Second Secretary Donald C. Bergus reviewing the overtures made by King Ibn Saud over the past 18 months to the United States for closer political relations including military aid.

President Truman to King Ibn Saud of Saudi Arabia 811.001 Truman, H.S./5–2349

[Document 1117]

President Truman to King Ibn Saud of Saudi Arabia 1

Washington, May 23, 1949.

Your Majesty: I have read with great appreciation and pleasure your letter of March 31, 1949,2 and welcome the renewed expression of friendship contained therein. I am grateful for the frankness with which you have spoken, and will avail myself of the privilege of speaking equally frankly in return.

I have reviewed the negotiations which have taken place with regard to the renewal of the Dhahran Airbase Agreement, and am happy to find that much progress has been made since the despatch of your letter and that through the process of friendly negotiation between equals there is reason to believe complete agreement will be reached in the near future. It is my sincere hope that this agreement for a period of one year may be concluded promptly, in order that we may proceed with plans and negotiations for a long-term agreement which would be to the mutual advantage of our two countries. I am directing the Department of State and the National Military Establishment to make a careful study of the whole subject, in order that negotiations for a long-term agreement can be initiated at an early date to ensure a complete exchange of views and reasonable chance for full understanding.

Your Majesty’s reference to Point Four of the inaugural address is very much appreciated. As Your Majesty is aware, the type of mutual cooperation envisaged in this plan has already been initiated in Saudi Arabia, where American private capital and United States technical assistance have already worked to the benefit of all parties concerned. It is to be hoped that the program being developed under Point Four can be planned so as to bring to complete fruition the mutual economic interests of the United States and Saudi Arabia.

In closing, I wish to extend my sincere personal wishes for the continued health and happiness of Your Majesty and the prosperity of your people.

Very sincerely yours,

Harry S. Truman

1 Transmitted to Jidda as an enclosure to instruction 25, May 24 (890F.7962/5–2349); not printed. The reply was drafted by the Department and sent by Secretary Acheson to the President in a memorandum of May 10, which stated that the reply “avoids any direct mention of the King’s desire for a defense pact” (890F.7962/5–1049).

2 Not printed; for summary, see telegram 254, April 6, from Jidda, p. 1594 [Pg. 1594 includes portions of Doc. 1111 and Doc. 1112].

The Ambassador in Saudi Arabia (Childs) to the King of Saudi Arabia (Ibn Saud) 890F.7962/6–449

[Document 1118]

The Ambassador in Saudi Arabia (Childs) to the King of Saudi Arabia (Ibn Saud)

top secret

Aide-Mémoire 1

The American Ambassador stated to His Majesty the King of Saudi Arabia that he was most happy to give some of the immediate results of the earnest studies made by the United States Government having to do with His Majesty’s proposals put forward over the preceding months.

The Ambassador stated that President Truman has received His Majesty’s letter of March 31st and that a reply to it had been dispatched from Washington on May 24, 1949. The Ambassador had been authorized to inform His Majesty that in this letter the President discusses the Dhahran Airfield Agreement. The President further expresses the hope that the one year agreement may be concluded promptly so that we may proceed with plans and negotiations for a long term agreement. The President states he is directing the Department of State and the United States National Military Establishment to make a careful study in order that negotiations for a long term agreement can be initiated at an early date.

The Ambassador observed that the study directed by the President has already received the urgent attention of the Department and the National Military Establishment and the following reflects the action and thinking of the United States Government with regard to Saudi Arabia: 1. In planning an over-all world-wide military assistance program, Saudi Arabia’s needs have been given the most careful consideration. Under the program as being proposed to the United States Congress, Saudi Arabia would be eligible to obtain United States Government assistance in the procurement of military equipment on a cash reimbursable basis. The Ambassador had been instructed to inform His Majesty of the foregoing in the greatest confidence and to state that Saudi Arabia is the only Arab state scheduled for assistance under this program.

2. Because the outcome of the plan set forth above depends on the enactment of a legislative program not yet presented to the Congress and over which lengthy discussions may well ensue, the Department of State has endeavored to arrive at other ways and means whereby the United States Government can be of help to the Saudi Arabian Government. The Ambassador has accordingly been authorized to inform His Majesty that if His Majesty felt that a useful purpose would thereby be served, the Department of State was willing to request immediately that the National Military Establishment assign a special group of officers on a temporary basis to Dhahran Airfield. These officers would have a dual purpose: a. In concert with Saudi Arabian officials to make an over-all study of Saudi Arabian defense needs and to make specific recommendations for the organization and equipment of Saudi Arabian defense forces.

b. To make a study of United States requirements at Dhahran Airfield for the purpose of a long term agreement and how these requirements could best be linked and correlated with Saudi Arabia’s military needs.2

3. When this planning group has submitted recommendations and these recommendations have been concurred in by the Saudi Arabian Government and the United States Government, and if by that time the United States and United Nations arms embargo is still in effect, the United States Government would be willing to request permission from the United Nations Mediator for shipment to Saudi Arabia of equipment for training such defensive forces as are needed for internal security. Should objections exist, arrangements might be made whereby title to equipment would remain with the United States until permission would be granted. In any event, it is envisaged that training would be conducted as part of an enlarged Dhahran Airfield program under a long term agreement.

4. It is probable that any program would involve the training of a certain number of Saudi Arabian officers in the United States. Hitherto, because of United Nations truce resolutions, the United States Government has refused to permit the training of officers in the United States (except for the limited number of Saudi Arabian students from Dhahran Airfield being instructed in airport operations). Because of the improvement in the Palestine situation, this policy has now been modified, subject to the ability and willingness of the National Military Establishment to receive such trainees.

5. With a program of the type outlined above, it is believed that progress can be made in achieving the security which His Majesty so earnestly desires, and in which the United States Government also has a great interest.

Riyadh, May 30, 1949.

1 The aide-mémoire was based on the Department’s telegram 201, May 27, to Jidda (890F.7962/5–2649); not printed. Ambassador Childs handed the aide-mémoire to King Ibn Saud after orally communicating the substance of the telegram to him. The aide-mémoire was transmitted to the Department in despatch 152, June 4, from Jidda; not printed.

2 King Ibn Saud’s approval for the sending of the United States mission to the Dhahran Airfield was conveyed to Ambassador Childs in an aide-mémoire of May 31; not printed. A copy of the aide-mémoire was transmitted to the Department in despatch 152.

The Chargé in Saudi Arabia (Bergus) to the Secretary of State 890F.7962/7–2049

[Document 1119]

The Chargé in Saudi Arabia (Bergus) to the Secretary of State

secret Jidda, July 20, 1949.

No. 179

Subject: Successful Termination of Dhahran Airfield Negotiations.

Sir: I have the honor, with reference to the Embassy’s telegram No. 419 of June 23, 1949,1 to report that the notes embodying the new Dhahran Airfield Agreement were signed and exchanged at 10:30 a. m. on Thursday, June 23, 1949—just three hours before the departure from Jidda on leave of Ambassador Childs.

There are enclosed, with reference to the Department’s unnumbered circular instruction of June 25, 1947 [1949],1 for the use of the Treaty Section of the Office of the Legal Adviser and of other interested offices of the Government, the following documents: 1. Original signed Arabic text of Note No. 10/4/68/2119 of June 28, 1949 from Shaikh Yusuf Yassin, Acting Minister of Foreign Affairs to Ambassador Childs.1

2. Original signed Arabic text of Note No. 10/4/68/2120 of June 23, 1949 from Shaikh Yusuf Yassin to Ambassador Childs.1

3. Certified copy of Ambassador’s reply dated June 23, 1949 to No. 1 above.

4. Certified copy of Ambassador’s reply dated June 23, 1949 to No. 2 above.

5. Parchment mat copy of No. 3 above.1

6. Parchment mat copy of No. 4 above.1

I worked closely with the Ambassador throughout these long, difficult, and at times irritating negotiations. Before the Ambassador’s departure, a discussion of the history of these negotiations was held with him, and we agreed that the following conclusions could be drawn from these events as of possible interest to, and future use by, the Department: 1. The main source of difficulty would appear to have been the number of negotiators with whom we had to deal. The opening talks on this matter were held with Shaikh Yusuf Yassin, Acting Minister of Foreign Affairs in Jidda. These preliminary discussions appeared to be most successful, and it is felt that Shaikh Yusuf had been made fully aware of our position and was, in general, sympathetic to it. It seemed to us that just exactly the right sort of atmosphere had been prepared for beginning the actual clause-by-clause negotiation of the Agreement. Shortly after our first suggested draft was submitted to the Saudi Arabian Government, however, Shaikh Yusuf was sent off to Cairo on Arab League affairs, and the Ambassador was informed that the negotiations would be held in Riyadh with Fuad Bey Hamza, Royal Councillor.

There is a distinct possibility that Shaikh Yusuf may well have arranged to get out of the country at the time that the final negotiations were due to commence. Shaikh Yusuf negotiated the previous Dhahran Airbase Agreement, and it is understood that he was subjected to much criticism by Fuad Bey and others close to the King in this matter. Shaikh Yusuf’s critics stated that in the original agreement he had compromised Saudi Arabia’s sovereignty. The question of sovereignty is one of those delicate issues that can always provoke a sensitive reaction from the King. Whether or not there was any design in Shaikh Yusuf’s movements, the fact remains that he was not in Saudi Arabia during the actual negotiations nor did he return until complete agreement had been reached, just in time to sign the Saudi Arabian notes on behalf of his Government. Upon his return, Shaikh Yusuf was in the excellent position of being able to sympathize with the Ambassador over the many difficulties which the negotiations had entailed as well as to make the bland statement that if he had been here, the course of the negotiations would have been much smoother.

As reported fully in the Ambassador’s despatch No. 84 of April 2, 1949,2 the Ambassador arrived at Riyadh to find the King very much upset over what the Saudi Arabian Government looked upon as implications in our first suggested draft which would serve to undermine Saudi Arabian sovereignty. It is almost certain that while the King’s first apprehensive reactions may well have been spontaneous on his part, Fuad Bey did not fail to play on the King’s uneasiness with the end in view of proving to Riyadh circles that Fuad Hamza was the most skillful negotiator in the Saudi Arabian Government. After over a week of exhaustive discussions, we finally arrived at the March 25 draft agreement which was to be augmented by the note from the Saudi Arabian Government requesting the appointment of Colonel Richard J. O’Keefe, USAF, to act on its behalf in the administration of certain functions at Dhahran Airfield.

The months of April and May were largely taken up by a series of discussions between the Embassy and the Saudi Arabian Government regarding proposed amendments by the United States Government to the March 25 draft and the Saudi Arabian Government’s comments on these amendments. The Ambassador discussed these questions with Khairadeen Bey Zirickly, then Acting Head of the Foreign Office. Khairadeen was completely unfamiliar with the background of the Rayadh negotiations and thus acted, on the whole, as a mere postbox, transmitting Embassy communications to Riyadh and presenting the Saudi Arabian Government’s replies, which also came from Riyadh to the Ambassador. I am quite sure, however, that despite his ignorance of the background, Khairadeen did not hesitate occasionally to add gratuitous comments to our communications when he transmitted them. This only served to muddy the waters further.

The Ambassador again visited Riyadh on Memorial Day, May 30, 1949 to acquaint the King with regard to the Department’s latest decision respecting military assistance to Saudi Arabia.3 At that time conversations were held regarding the agreement with yet another representative of the Saudi Arabian Government, Khalid Bey Gargani, Royal Councillor. Our sole points of difference at that time were the text of article five of the agreement as well as the exact wording of the note requesting the services of Colonel O’Keefe. When Khalid Bey indicated that the Saudi Arabian Government could not accept the United States proposal for the wording of these two points, the Ambassador, upon his return from Riyadh, telegraphed the Department asking that the Saudi text of article five be accepted and that the text of the note regarding Colonel O’Keefe be reworded in such a way as to meet most of the Saudi Arabian objections.4 The Department did not fail to do this and our new proposals were submitted to the Saudi Arabian Government.5

It was therefore a matter of no little dismay to all of us when on June 14, 1949 the Foreign Office informed us, without explanation, that our latest proposals were unacceptable.6

2. At this point the Ambassador felt that the United States Government had gone as far as it could and did not hesitate so to inform the Saudi Arabian Government. The Foreign Office was informed in the strongest terms that it was our belief that up to now we had done our best to meet Saudi Arabian desires and had conceded point after point.7 The American point of view was also presented to the all-powerful Minister of Finance, Shaikh Abdullah Sulaiman, and to Prince Mansour, Minister of Defence. These two officials quickly realized our positions and promised to lend every assistance. The Department graciously supported the Ambassador in his position and sent a firmly worded telegram to the effect that we could make no more concessions.8 The Ambassador felt that the time had come to take a strong stand. For one thing, the behavior of the Saudi Arabian negotiators had been such as to give the impression that they were no longer willing to make any attempt to appreciate the position of the United States. Furthermore, it was believed that any additional concessions on our part would only give to the Saudis the impression that they could expect a weak acquiescence to any of their demands, regardless of the reasonableness of such demands.

The Ambassador’s determined stand did not fail to have its effect. Fuad Hamza, who had left Saudi Arabia for the Lebanon on sick leave, was hastily summoned back to Riyadh for consultations and then sent to Jidda for further negotiations.9 It might be stated at this point that the illness which led to Fuad Bey’s departure from the Kingdom was not diplomatic. Fuad, who suffers from hypertension and nephritis, was certainly not the picture of health when he appeared in Jidda.

A final session of negotiations was held on June 21. It was obvious that Fuad had received definite instructions to conclude the negotiations and to come to agreement.10 After a few face-saving protestations and a few minor changes in the text of the note regarding Colonel O’Keefe (changes which would appear to be more favorable, rather than otherwise to the United States) agreement was reached. The Department’s approval to the changes was received within less than twenty-four hours and the Saudi Arabian Government was so notified on June 22.11 At this juncture the Saudi negotiators telegraphed the entire text of both notes to Riyadh for the final approval of the King. This was forthcoming on the morning of June 23, 1949 and the notes were signed and exchanged at about 10:00 a. m. that morning; Shaikh Yusuf, who had just returned from Egypt, signing on behalf of the Saudi Arabian Government.12 All sides breathed a sigh of relief after the notes were signed and the Ambassador left within a few hours for his well-deserved leave with a clear conscience. Fuad Bey returned to Beirut on the next day.

3. The Ambassador stated to me before his departure that it was his belief that the Saudi Arabs had indulged in so much sparring because they were fully aware that this one-year agreement was only a stop-gap arrangement. They wished to arrive at an agreed document which could be used, to their advantage, as a basis for the negotiations which presumably will commence this autumn looking toward a long-term agreement. They wanted to give as little as possible in this short-term document in the hope that further concessions can be gained from the United States Government in the long-term arrangement in return for language more to the liking of our Government. In other words, as has so often been expressed by the King, the Saudi Arabian viewpoint is that once we are in a position to make a firm commitment of some kind with respect to assistance to Saudi Arabia in her defense problems, we can count upon receiving every necessary facility in this country. Until that time, we can only expect the Saudi Arabs to exact as hard a bargain as they can.

4. It would therefore seem to follow that the Department should not be too discouraged over what may have appeared to have been quibbling on the part of the Saudi Arabian Government in these negotiations. I have tried to set forth the Embassy’s analysis of the reasons behind this behavior. At the same time, despite the many surface struggles, there was never any indication on the part of the Saudi Arabs of a lessening of their earnest desire to strengthen the ties between our two countries. It is our belief that the Saudis, if anything, are even more eager to establish close relations with us and that if we are able to bring to the forthcoming negotiations for a long-term agreement tangible evidence of a like feeling on our part, we should be able to arrive at an arrangement highly satisfactory to both parties.

Respectfully yours,

Donald C. Bergus

[Enclosure 1]

The American Ambassador (Childs) to the Saudi Arabian Acting Minister for Foreign Affairs (Yassin)

secret Jidda, June 23, 1949.

Excellency: I have the honor to acknowledge receipt of Your Excellency’s note No. 10/4/68/2119 of June 23, 1949 reading as follows: “I have the honor to transmit to Your Excellency herein below the articles upon which our two Governments have agreed concerning the means for the use by military aircraft of the United States Government of the facilities and services at Dhahran Airfield. It is my hope that your Excellency will agree to this and consider this note and Your Excellency’s reply an agreement which will constitute a complete accord in this regard.

“1. The Saudi Arabian Government agrees to grant the transient aircraft of the United States military forces the following privileges: a. Landing rights at the Saudi Arabian Government airport at Dhahran, mentioned throughout this agreement as Dhahran Airfield, for refueling and other technical services such as repair and maintenance;

b. Authority to fly over those air routes of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia which are commonly used by civil aviation aircraft;

c. The authority for aircraft to fly and use landing sites within the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia to perform actual air rescue missions and to give aid to missing aircraft upon notice to the Saudi Arabian Government. In the performance of American and Saudi Arabian training air rescue missions, prior clearance will be obtained from the Saudi Arabian Government and a Saudi Arabian Government representative will accompany the air rescue party.

d. In case land vehicles and crash boats are needed to be used for air rescue missions, authority will be given by the Saudi Arabian Government.

2. The Saudi Arabian Government will permit the United States Government to employ military and technical personnel and supporting aircraft at the Dhahran Airfield for the purpose of performing services for transient aircraft of the United States military forces provided that the number of military and technical personnel will not exceed five hundred (500) persons, and the supporting aircraft will not exceed ten (10) airplanes.

3. The Saudi Arabian Government agrees to grant to the United States Government the right to employ an additional number of civilians on the airfield on condition that such civilian employees shall be the subject of one of them, or the subject of a third state friendly to both, and that the number of such employees shall not be more than double the number of military personnel authorized in article 2; and provided further that such employees will not be personally objectionable to the Saudi Arabian Government. The United States Government will submit a detailed statement to the Saudi Arabian Government concerning such employees.

4. The Saudi Arabian Government agrees to place at the disposal of the military and civilian personnel of the United States Government those installations and buildings existing at Dhahran Airfield as indicated on the attached lists.

5. The United States Government is authorized to administer and supervise only those matters connected with United States military aircraft and United States military and civilian personnel employed at Dhahran Airfield. The American authorities at Dhahran Airfield will not act in other matters except when specifically authorized by the Saudi Arabian Government.

6. The Saudi Arabian Government, in its administration of civil air and related matters, will take necessary action to prevent interference with the operations of the United States Government authorized under this agreement.

7. The Saudi Arabian Government agrees to offer every possible and reasonable aid, within its capabilities which will assist the American operators in performing weather, radio communication, air rescue and aircraft traffic services for aircraft of the armed forces of the United States of America.

8. The United States Government is authorized to construct any installations it deems necessary to be established at Dhahran Airfield provided that the construction of such installations will be at the expense of the United States Government and that such installations after completion become the property of the Saudi Arabian Government. It is agreed that during the period of this agreement such installations shall remain at the disposition of the United States Government.

9. The United States Government is authorized to extend and improve existing runways and taxi strips and to construct new runways and taxi strips at Dhahran Airfield in order to meet technical advances in the field of aviation provided that such improvements will be at the expense of the United States Government. The Saudi Arabian Government will instruct the appropriate authorities to prohibit the construction of buildings or obstacles in the plain west of the present airfield, and it will also issue instructions to prevent the construction of obstacles in the approaches to runways.

10. The United States Government may construct at its own expense a railway spur from the airfield to connect with the railroad to the city of Dhahran in the event it becomes desirable to do so. This spur, with all its facilities and installations, will become the property of the Saudi Arabian Government upon termination of this agreement.

11. The United States Government may expand and improve at its own expense the facilities of weather service, radio communications, navigational aids and other maintenance facilities as may be necessary. The United States Government is authorized to employ radio codes at Dhahran Airfield without any restrictions.

12. The United States Government is authorized to alter and repair fixed installations at Dhahran Airfield and also to replace equipment and supplies which are necessary to the efficient operation and maintenance of the Airfield.

13. The Saudi Arabian Government will accord to the United States Government and its military personnel exemption from customs duties, Government taxes, or any other charges imposed on equipment, items and supplies for the operation and maintenance of the airfield and for the personal use of its military personnel. It is understood that the United States Government will submit to the Saudi Arabian Government the official bills of lading and manifests on the equipment, items and supplies imported for the operation and maintenance of the airfield.

14. The United States Government is granted the privilege of receiving and sending its military mail to and from Dhahran Airfield exempt from customs, taxes, or any other restriction.

15. The United States Government is authorized facilities for the recreation and well being of its military personnel at Dhahran Airfield on condition that such facilities should not violate the customs and laws in effect in Saudi Arabia.

16. The United States Government is authorized to engage in appropriate activities for the training of its personnel in military and technical proficiency.

17. The United States Government may withdraw, upon the expiration of this agreement, all equipment and supplies which it has brought to Dhahran Airfield for its operation and maintenance. It is agreed that the United States Government will not withdraw equipment which has been installed and has become the property of the Saudi Arabian Government. If the United States Government replaces any semi-fixed installations or equipment which have become the property of the Saudi Arabian Government, the replacements will then become the property of the Saudi Arabian Government and the replaced items will become the property of the United States Government.

18. All United States military personnel, civilian employees and dependents are bound to obey all applicable laws and regulations of the Saudi Arabian Government. Offenses which may be committed by military members of the United States military forces at Dhahran Airfield will be subject to United States military law. In the cases of offenses committed outside the Airfield, the Saudi Arabian authorities will arrest the offenders and deliver them to the American authorities at the Airfield for their repatriation and punishment. The United States Government will set up a claims commission to consider all claims for compensation for injuries presented against military personnel and civilian employees acting in their official capacities by residents of Saudi Arabia.

19. Personnel of the United States Government, both military and civilian, will be in the possession of valid identification papers or passports upon arrival at Dhahran Airfield. In lieu of Saudi Arabian visas, however, if such are not available at the point of departure, the Saudi Arabian Government will honor competent United States Government travel orders.

20. In consideration of the rights and privileges granted by the Saudi Arabian Government to the United States Government in this lease, the United States Government agrees to provide to the Saudi Arabian Government the services as enumerated in articles 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, and 26.

21. The United States will offer training in the maintenance and operation of the Airfield to a maximum at one time of one hundred Saudi Arabian students selected by the Saudi Arabian Government.

The Saudi Arabian Government will select from these students in consultation with the United States authorities twenty Saudi Arabian students to pursue at United States Air Force Schools in the United States advanced technical training in the operation and maintenance of an airfield, under the following conditions:

a. Transportation from Dhahran to the United States and return will be furnished by the United States Air Force via military aircraft at no cost to the Saudi Arabian Government. Travel within the United States will be at the expense of the Saudi Arabian Government although the United States Air Force will render all advice and assistance to trainees.

b. Saudi students will mess at their own expense on a cost basis at Officers’ Messes at the established local rates.

c. Where quarters are available, they will be furnished on a scale equivalent to that authorized officers of the United States Air Force. No reimbursement will be made to the United States for this service. Where quarters are not available, the officer trainees of the Saudi Arabian Government will make their own arrangements at no cost to the United States Government.

d. All training will be at the expense of the United States Government. Special clothing and equipment required for the prescribed training courses will be furnished for use during the training course upon a temporary loan basis at no cost to the Saudi Arabian Government.

e. Commissary, post exchange and similar privileges which are ordinarily available to officers of the United States Air Force will be extended to these trainees.

f. Medical care will be furnished when available on the same basis as furnished United States Air Force personnel, at no cost to the Saudi Arabian Government other than for subsistence.

22. During the period of this lease the United States Government will make available at cost price to the Saudi Arabian Government for its state-owned aircraft, in cases of emergency in operation, aircraft parts including engines, from its supply stocks at Dhahran Airfield when such aircraft parts are available. In the event that these aircraft parts are not available to Dhahran Airfield, the United States Government will assist the Saudi Arabian Government to procure them from commercial sources.

23. The United States Government agrees to return to the Saudi Arabian Government upon termination of the lease, the airfield with all its fixed installations and other property used in operation and maintenance of the Airfield which are the property of the Saudi Arabian Government. The Saudi Arabian Government will have the option at that time of purchasing all semi-fixed installation, equipment and supplies which are not critical to the needs of the United States Government, at a price to be determined by negotiations.

24. The United States will make available to the Saudi Arabian Government, within the capabilities of its facilities in operation at Dhahran Airfield, its weather, radio communication, air rescue and aircraft operation services for the use of those civilian aircraft which are authorized by the Saudi Arabian Government to use Dhahran Airfield.

25. During the period of this agreement the United States Government will provide at the Dhahran Airfield hospital, within the capacity of personnel and equipment, dispensary service, medical treatment, and dental work for all Saudi Arabian nationals employed by the United States Government at Dhahran Airfield. Moreover, the United States will, in the event of emergency, assist the Saudi Arabian Government to the extent of its available facilities to combat epidemics and infectious diseases in the area.

26. The United States Government agrees to maintain in sound operating condition at its expense all fixed installations at Dhahran Airfield of which it makes use or which are at its disposition.

27. The period of this agreement is one complete year and terminates on June 23, 1950, unless before the date of termination another agreement between the two Governments is concluded, provided, however, if this agreement is not extended or replaced the United States Air Force shall have at least ninety days after termination of the agreement to withdraw from Dhahran Airfield.”

I have the honor to inform Your Excellency that I have been authorized to convey my Government’s agreement with the foregoing.

I avail [etc.]

J. Rives Childs

[Subenclosure]

The Saudi Arabian Government agrees to put at the disposal of the United States Government for the duration of this lease all the installations and buildings existing at Dhahran Airfield with the exception of the following: The Saudi Arabian Customs Building

The Saudi Arabian Post Office

Family Quarters Number 371

Family Quarters Number 369

Family Quarters Number 367

Family Quarters Number 365

Family Quarters Number 363

Family Quarters Number 356

Barracks Building Number 127

Barracks Building Number 128

Barracks Building Number 131

Barracks Building Number 132

Latrine Building Number 130

Buildings and installations now occupied and used exclusively by International Bechtel Corporation

Buildings and installations now occupied and used exclusively by the Arabian American Oil Company

Buildings and installations now occupied and used exclusively by Trans World Airways Corporation

[Enclosure 2]

The American Ambassador (Childs) to the Saudi Arabian Acting Minister for Foreign Affairs (Yassin)

secret Jidda, June 23, 1949.

Excellency: I have the honor to acknowledge receipt of Your Excellency’s note no. 10/4/68/2120 of June 23, 1949 reading as follows: “1. During discussions looking to the conclusion of an agreement authorizing certain facilities to the United States Government for transient aircraft of its armed forces for landing and maintenance operations the question was raised of distribution of responsibility and that of the installations and services referred to in paragraphs four, five, and certain others, between the Saudi Arabian and American authorities at Dhahran Airfield, with a view to avoiding conflict, interference, and confusion in the operation.

2. The Saudi Arabian Government has studied this problem very carefully and has given to it the consideration it merits and came finally to the conclusion that a way must be found to coordinate the civil and military activities conducted at Dhahran Airfield in order to achieve unity and efficiency of operation. To this end the Saudi Arabian Government perceives that the most satisfactory solution would be for Colonel Richard J. O’Keefe to be entrusted to operate in its name for the duration of the Dhahran Airfield Agreement all problems pertaining to civil aviation which the Saudi Arabian Government would ordinarily administer itself. Colonel O’Keefe in consequence will be responsible for and authorized to conduct on behalf of the Saudi Arabian Government all necessary civil aviation operations and activities including the following: a. Safe and efficient operation of aircraft.

b. Operation of fire and crash equipment.

c. Operation and control of technical equipment.

d. Reception and distribution of weather services.

e. Airway traffic control.

f. Traffic control within the twenty-five mile zone.

g. Tower control.

h. Air-to-ground airways communications services, including the use of Arabic.

i. Ground control of aircraft.

j. Clearance of aircraft.

3. It is understood that in accordance with the laws of the United States, Colonel O’Keefe will not hold any rank or title or receive any financial remuneration or emolument from the Saudi Arabian Government.

4. The Saudi Arabian Government hopes that the United States Government will find this agreeable and will notify the Saudi Arabian Government of its agreement.”

I have the honor to inform Your Excellency that I have been authorized to convey my Government’s agreement with the foregoing.

I avail [etc.]

J. Rives Childs

1 Not printed.

1 Not printed.

1 Not printed.

1 Not printed.

1 Not printed.

1 Not printed.

2  Ante, p. 1589 [Pg. 1589 includes portions of Doc. 1110 and Doc. 1111].

3  Aide-mémoire, May 30, supra.

4 Telegram 377, May 31, from Jidda (890F.7962/5–3149); not printed. The Department had already instructed Ambassador Childs that as a last resort the Department and the National Military Establishment were prepared to accede to the Saudi Arabian Government’s request that Colonel, O’Keefe be delegated to act in a joint capacity for the United States and Saudi Arabia provided he did not accept any rank, title, office, pay, or emolument from the Saudi Arabian Government (telegram 201, May 27, to Jidda, 890F.7962/5–2649; not printed).

5 The proposals were presented in the form of a suggested letter prepared by the Department of the Air Force so that it would read from the Saudi Arabian Government to the United States Government (telegram 209, June 3, to Jidda, 890F.7962/6–349; not printed).

6 Telegram 400, June 14, from Jidda (890F.7962/6–1449); not printed.

7 Telegram 402, June 15, from Jidda (890F.7962/6–1549): not printed.

8 Telegram 215, June 15, to Jidda (890F.7962/6–1449): not printed.

9 Telegram 409, June 18, from Jidda (890F.7962/6–1849); not printed.

10 Telegram 412, June 20, from Jidda (890F.7962/6–2049); not printed.

11 Telegram 217, June 20, to Jidda (890F.7962/6–2049); not printed.

12 Telegram 419, June 23, from Jidda (890F.7962/6–2349); not printed.

The Chargé in Saudi Arabia (Hill) to the Secretary of State 811.2390F/8–2549: Telegram

[Document 1120]

The Chargé in Saudi Arabia (Hill) to the Secretary of State

secret Jidda, August 25, 1949—10 a. m.

502. Presented survey group1 to King 4 p. m., August 22, in brief courtesy call.

7 p. m. Yusuf Yassin and Fuad Bey Hamza called on us at Badia Palace and Brigadier General O’Keefe explained his instructions and objectives survey group. Hamza asked for brief summary for King and this was prepared following morning August 23 in form aide-mémoire. 2

King received O’Keefe, Colonel Sherbourne, Captain Hensel3 and myself, 4 p. m., August 23. Seemed in excellent spirits in contrast quiet tenseness previous day.

After O’Keefe briefly summarized again his instructions and plans, King said he wished make statement. Said he wanted relations between his country and US to be more than just friendly, wanted them to be as one country, one government, one soil, all SA economic life now in hands Americans, his country’s welfare our welfare, therefore we are as one.

Hashemites, King continued, are his traditional enemies as we know. Therefore he desired work of survey group lead towards giving him military forces equal to or greater than forces Jordan and Iraq. He also asked that we draw on our intelligence sources and inform him re military strength of these two countries, said he would place at our disposal all data he has on this subject. In conclusion he authorized O’Keefe to communicate directly with him on any phase of survey group work.

Abundantly evident that King placing greatest hopes and faith on real success and visible results from survey group to be accomplished in simple, honest, and straight forward fashion and that if this is not achieved it will be a terrible blow to him. No doubt King recalls his statement to Ambassador Childs last May “I am asking you for help for last time,” (Dhahran telegram 159, May 10).4 King invited entire group for dinner that night. During dinner, he authorized us depart following morning August 24.

Further details by despatch.5

Hill

1 The Joint United States Survey Group to Saudi Arabia (JUSSGSA), with Brig. Gen. Richard J. O’Keefe, U.S.A.F., as its Chief. The group’s mission was outlined by Ambassador Childs to King Ibn Saud in the May 30 aide-mémoire, p. 1600.

2 Not printed; transmitted under cover of despatch 197, August 29, from Jidda (811.2390F/8–2949).

3 Col. Thomas L. Sherbourne, Jr., U.S.A.F.; Capt. Karl G. Hensel, U.S. Navy.

4  Ante, p. 1595 [Pg. 1595 is part of Doc. 1113].

5 No. 197, August 29, not printed.

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Ambassador in Saudi Arabia (Childs) 890F.00/9–2849

[Document 1121]

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Ambassador in Saudi Arabia (Childs)

top secret [Washington,] September 28, 1949.

I had 15 minutes with the President today, and upon being received by him asked if he preferred to ask questions of me or he preferred for me to give him a thumb nail sketch of the situation in Saudi Arabia and he replied that he was on the point of saying that I do the latter. I recalled that three years previously he had received me when I went out to Saudi Arabia and he had stated that he did not know anything about my diplomatic talents but that I would need a full measure of these in the difficult days ahead. I added that if my mission had been successful in keeping the boat from being rocked it had been due less to my own talents than to the great statesmanship of King Ibn Saud.

The President interrupted to state that he was himself greatly impressed by the King and that he had gathered the King was the greatest of all the heads of state in the Middle East area.

I replied that the President’s impression in my opinion was entirely correct.

I went on to say that the King, of course, had been greatly disturbed by our Palestine policy. The President nodded his head in agreement. I said that despite his great dissatisfaction with our policy in respect to Palestine he had been enough of a statesman to recognize that there was too great a community of interest between the United States and Saudi Arabia for him to be deflected from his course of friendship with us by what he regarded as a merely temporary development.

The President commented that the King had been absolutely correct.

I said that I had myself expressed this conviction to the King, believing that it was expressive of the President’s own ideas, and the President remarked that I had been correct in so doing. I said that we had great economic and strategic interests which were too obvious to elaborate on in my survey. I did mention that we had concluded a new Dhahran Air Base agreement and that there was a secret survey mission now in Saudi Arabia which would make recommendations on its return looking to the possible fulfillment of our mutual interests in the way of some mutual assistance agreement. I said that our thought was that we could work out a long term air base agreement which would provide for the training of Saudis and their military equipment on a cash reimbursable basis in a way which might serve our own interests in the defense of the base. I said that it was to be regretted, in my opinion, that there had been stricken out in the Military Arms bill a provision for making it possible for Saudi Arabia to purchase arms in this country.

The President said he felt that it had been regrettable and that a way must be found for working out an agreement with Saudi Arabia which would serve our common interests. He said he was aware of the survey mission’s presence in Saudi Arabia.

I referred briefly to my visit to the West and the inspiration it had been to view the work of the Bureau of Reclamation. I was recommending as a first step in the application of the President’s Fourth Point to Saudi Arabia that arrangements be made for the sending of a reclamation engineer and possibly for a United States geological engineer to Saudi Arabia to make a water survey as the problem was one of finding water, rather than one of harnessing existing supplies of water. The President expressed complete agreement with this suggestion, and, arising, went over to a map and inquired as to the possibility of harnessing some of the water of the Euphrates Valley for Saudi Arabia, but upon considering the map said he did not feel this was as practical as he had supposed, owing to the distance involved.

Before leaving I touched on the vital necessity to Saudi Arabia to maintain its present production of its 400,000 to 500,000 barrels of oil per day as its whole economy was based on the receipt of royalties on this basis of production. I said there had been talk of cutting production to as low as 200,000 barrels a day which would be catastrophic.

The President said that, this purpose was very much to the fore, that production had been cut in Texas, and that a study was being made looking to the adjusting of national production and that of imports. He intimated that he was glad to have the views that I had expressed.

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in Saudi Arabia 890F.20/9–2749: Telegram

[Document 1122]

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in Saudi Arabia

secret
priority Washington, October 15, 1949—1 p. m.

407. MAP Legis as signed Oct 6 does not contain provision Admin originally presented Cong authorizing extension mil procurement assistance on reimbursable basis to nations whose increased ability to defend themselves against aggression important to US natl interests. This provision if enacted wld have authorized Pres consider extension reimbursable assistance to SA and several other countries (Embtel 573, Sep 27).1 Childs who is thoroughly familiar with background thru conversations here plans discuss with SAG fol return Jidda. Accordingly, suggest you await Childs’ arrival before informing SAG recent development.

However, in event you are questioned by SAG re omission above provision you shld say that 1) Provision omitted only after indication enactment Legis not otherwise possible present session Cong. MAP Legis now authorizes extension mil aid to a) North Atlantic Treaty countries, which heretofore requested assistance, b) Greece, Turkey, Iran, Korea, Phil and gen area of China, and c) aid in form procurement assistance in advance cash purchases by any nation with which we are associated in collective defense and regional arrangement (thus including Rio Pact countries);

2) Mil aid to SAG continues to be objective of US policy. USG hopes to be able to carry this out by requesting at next session Cong supplementary legis providing reimbursable aid to SAG and other countries. You may assure SAG that USA is exploring every possible means providing mil aid outside MAP legis and pending outcome exploration can at least offer SAG informal guidance in contacts for commercial procurement and generally favorable export license consideration.

3) If SAG shld attempt relate MAP to extension DAB you shld emphasize that continued SAG–US cooperation at DAB represents real evidence our mutual mil interests and meanwhile will make possible further training Saudis,

Acheson

1 Not printed; it pointed out the difficulties that would ensue with King Ibn Saud if this provision as communicated to the King in the May 30 aide-mémoire, p. 1600, were not included in the legislation (890F.20/9–2749).

Memorandum by the Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern, South Asian, and African Affairs (McGhee) to the Deputy Under Secretary of State (Rusk) 501.BB Palestine (E)/10–249

[Document 1123]

Memorandum by the Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern, South Asian, and African Affairs (McGhee) to the Deputy Under Secretary of State (Rusk)1

restricted [Washington,] October 24, 1949.

Subject: Assistance to Saudi Arabia in Developing its Water Resources

As you know, the most pressing single problem in the economy of Saudi Arabia is the more scientific use of its limited water resources. In this connection the Government of Saudi Arabia has repeatedly turned to the United States for assistance. With this in mind, through the cooperation of the U.S. Air Force and the Bureau of Reclamation of the Department of Interior, I arranged to have Ambassador J. Rives Childs visit certain reclamation projects in the south western part of the United States.

Attached is a memorandum dated September 27, 1949 written by Ambassador Childs following his western trip.2 In this memorandum he states “As a first step in assisting Saudi Arabia I recommend that the Department, under Public Law No. 402, endeavor to arrange with the Bureau of Reclamation for the services of a qualified Bureau engineer who either by himself or in cooperation with a representative of the United States Geological Survey, should undertake a preliminary study and report looking to the development of a plan for the proper utilization of surface and ground waters for the purpose of increasing agricultural production in Saudi Arabia.”

Before passing this memorandum on to you I have arranged to hold a series of talks with interested officials of the Government in regard to this recommendation. Arrangements have been completed whereby Smith–Mundt Act funds (Public Law No. 402) have been approved to provide visits by two ground water geologists to Saudi Arabia to initiate surveys there in the spring of 1950, and the Government of Saudi Arabia has been so notified. (See attached copy of Deptel 405, October 12 to Jidda).3 This is a first important step in ascertaining the extent of ground water supplies and assisting the Saudi Arabians to make better use of their water supplies. It is one which not only should lead to a higher standard of living in that country, but may make it possible for Saudi Arabia eventually to accept a certain number of refugees from Israel.

Ambassador Childs also recommended that “the Department give consideration in cooperation with the Bureau of Reclamation, to the appointment of a suitable Bureau engineer as Attaché to one of the Missions in the Near East, charged with reporting upon and encouraging the application by the countries of the Near East of those methods we have successfully applied in the field of water conservation and irrigation which might have pertinent application in those countries.” Ambassador Childs suggested that such an Attaché might be attached to the Embassies either in Cairo or Baghdad, or to the Legation at Beirut, and I agree with his suggestion. I am, therefore, requesting the Administrative Officers of the Department and the Bureau of Reclamation to review this question.

1 Drafted by the Assistant Chief, Division of Near Eastern Affairs, Richard H. Sanger.

2 Memorandum not found attached to source text.

3 Not printed.

The Ambassador in Saudi Arabia (Childs) to the Secretary of State 811.2390F/11–1749: Telegram

[Document 1124]

The Ambassador in Saudi Arabia (Childs) to the Secretary of State

top secret Jidda, November 17, 1949—noon.

668. 1. His Majesty came from Mecca to Hadda to receive me 15th. Audience lasted hour and a half.

2. After giving him highlights my visit US, HM inquired regarding plans military mission. I replied O’Keefe and officers in Jidda awaiting HM’s pleasure. Emphasized findings they had submitted mostly tentative. They wished have HM’s views in order these might be considered when report delivered NME. Would be considered by NME and State and decision would have to be reached how USG might assist SAG in implementing it.

3. His Majesty said he had not had time consider whole report but found general principles satisfactory. Program was long-range one not to be completed for five years. This very long time and while it might suit situation vis-à-vis Russia it did not take into account his immediate pressing problem.

4. HM then discussed at great length latter. He said in effect British had begun cold war against him endeavoring to put Syria under Hashemite jurisdiction in order to put pressure on Ruwali and Anaza tribes connected with him by blood. British purpose to sever those relations and use those tribes against HM. British had stirred up his traditional tribal friends and were inciting Jordan, Iraq and Syria against him as well as Shaikhdoms under British control Persian Gulf. In south they were doing likewise in Yemen. They were constantly alleging they had nothing to do with policies these states and principalities, but fact was these policies controlled by British. British had recently sent note to SAG stating if aggression committed against Jordan or Iraq British in treaty obligations assist those countries but implying if those countries attack another country British could do nothing about it. HM said he had been bringing this situation our attention long time, and it was now such he had to have some security.

5. I informed HM we fully alive this question, and said on recent visit US I had set it forth in almost words he had used. I reminded him assurances we had given Saud on his visit US1 that USG vitally interested in territorial integrity SA, and I had repeated these assurances in writing under instructions my government and had informed HM USG ready at any time he might request take up with British Government any situation causing apprehension to him. We had fulfilled this agreement on more than one occasion, and I did not know any instance in which HM had appealed to us when we had not taken immediate action. When Greater Syrian question came up in recent months we had acted in Baghdad and Amman. While in US I was in Department when question Syrian-Iraq federation2 arose and I could assure HM this had given us deep concern and we had examined problem particularly in light HM’s reaction in connection general problem maintenance peace and security ME.

6. HM said this all very well, but these words. What he wanted, if USG interested in security this country, is they take some action will guarantee this. If USG not interested it should inform HM so he may take care of himself.

7. I endeavored at great length convince HM we were far from indifferent status SA, and I had been much gratified by great interest expressed to me at home by officials in this regard.

8. HM said he believed interests his country, US and world peace all connected together and any threat security his country prejudicial all these interests. HM therefore wished invite attention USG these facts and to fact that secret movements now being put in motion re federation S and I in which it is alleged such federation in accordance wishes these countries is directed against safety his country. HM therefore requested USG present to him its readiness extend assistance which will guarantee him against any serious threatening integrity his country and to notify its ally, Britain, in light of what is mentioned above USG will never approve any alteration present status Arab states and that every state should maintain its boundaries and integrity as is.

9. HM pointed out mere assurances such as we had given him, including readiness take up with GB matters affecting his security, of no avail if S and I permitted federate on grounds in accordance wishes people those countries. He was certain federation part British plan encirclement, and he knew from British sources it was ultimate aim Hashemites attack SA to recover Hejaz.

10. HM said USG might either authorize me give him assurances he desired, or if preferred, he could send someone Washington to discuss and obtain there.

11. HM said Prince Mansour promised in Britain certain arms, but with arrival O’Keefe British had done nothing fulfill this promise and it evident British endeavoring every way put pressure on SA account closer contacts developing between SAG and USG.

12. To sum up, HM wishes some concrete evidence our willingness and ability persuade British he holds as main culprits to cease policy encirclement SA.

13. Upon conclusion audience, HM asked if I would stay to lunch and whether military mission would join us. This arranged and upon arrival O’Keefe and Clarty, HM expressed very warm thanks their accomplishments.

14. It was agreed foregoing, in view importance, would be reviewed by Prince Feisal and HM. When text submitted, paragraphs 6 and 8 read as follows:

“6. HM said this all very well but these words. What he wanted was, if possible, public declaration by US expressive interest territorial integrity SA which I stated we were so interested in.

8. HM said if we were so interested, he must have either (1) public declaration, or (2) some explicit assurances our readiness aid him.”

15. Reference to public declaration excised by Feisal on grounds this might arouse criticism other Arab states SA under USG tutelage. I sent word later Faisal request we guarantee status quo Arab world entirely impracticable. More to follow.

Sent Department 668, Department pass London 96. Pouched Dhahran.

Childs

1 For documentation on Crown Prince Saud’s visit to the United States in 1947, see Foreign Relations, 1947, vol. v, pp. 738 ff.

2 For documentation concerning the proposed Syrian-Iraqi union, see pp. 180 [Pg. 180 is part of Doc. 76] ff.

The Ambassador in Saudi Arabia (Childs) to the Secretary of State 711.90F/11–1749: Telegram

[Document 1125]

The Ambassador in Saudi Arabia (Childs) to the Secretary of State

top secret Jidda, November 17, 1949—4 p. m.

669. Re Embtel 668 November 17, noon. HM sent for me again today and I was with him for hour and a half.

HM said he had decided in view great importance question send for Fuad Hamza to draft written request SAG which would contain in most precise terms possible what he desired from U.S. for his immediate security. He said he had spoken to me at Hadda out of fullness of his heart and not hiding his feeling or thoughts. He wished Fuad frame them in appropriate language.

HM then entered into extended account his relations with British. He said recent British survey mission1 had complained SAG had given everything to USG and nothing left for British. Complaint had also been made that even on Red Sea side SA Americans had been allowed by King and Foreign Minister to consolidate themselves at expense British so that whole country given over to U.S. HM recalled his reception British Ambassador and me together while I was still Minister, and said British Government had reproached him and had asked if SAG desired have witness present to check on SAG–British relations. British alleged procedure such as had never been followed by any ruler previously in ME.

King said he wished me convey particularly my government his desire USG and SAG should be as one. He reviewed again at great length policy encirclement of him by Great Britain through Jordan, Iraq and Yemen and Persian Gulf Shaikhdoms. He read me from British note asserting British had no intention allow any diminution its influence in Persian Gulf and its retirement from India not to be construed as presaging any retirement from Gulf.

I endeavored again marshal every possible argument allay King’s insistent concern re his security position, pointing out presence US military survey mission SA evidence our interest and concern his security position. To all my arguments his answer was any action which may be taken against S–I federation will be in vain. When I am invaded in Hejaz, USG will refer matter to UN and they will be no more able to dislodge the attacker than UN has been able to obtain compliance by the Jews with UN decisions re Palestine.

HM said he had not been able to sleep after our audience at Hadda as he had been so worked up in discussing the precariousness of his position. He added “I am talking to you as I have not talked even with my own sons, Saud and Feisal. I consider you not only the US Ambassador but a member of my own family. I want you to act in that capacity for me. I will give you a plane to take you to US to present to USG the perilous state of affairs as I see them. I must have some protection or some assurance that USG will not stand idly by and allow British to encircle me. If Hejaz is attacked I will move with my family to west coast, leaving if necessary the eastern part of SA with its oil undefended in order to withstand with my resources and to die if need be in defense of Hejaz”.

In course audience remarked jocularly “I will be utterly frank with you. US does not care for Ibn Saud but only for oil in SA”. I said I obliged to take issue with HM. I could assure him we vitally interested house of Saud and he could be sure he enjoyed esteem of President and USG as one of world’s great statesmen. (Note this remark to me of King when I commented Jidda pier great monument to him: “Ruler who does not put interests his people above his own personal interest unworthy to rule.”)

I have never found the King under such deep emotion. I assured him that if I felt I could do any good by asking USG to call me home I would do so, but I had already made known his point of view to all officials whom I had seen in Washington and I was proceeding next week Istanbul for meeting ME chiefs of mission2 where I would see Assistant Secretary McGhee and other responsible officials Department most directly concerned and interested in problem he was discussing, and would present his point there as effectively as I could.

HM said he had fullest confidence in me and in any course of action which I might take to meet the situation as he had described it. He was, he repeated, faced by a situation which called for action on our part and not mere words.3

Sent Department 669, pouched Dhahran. Department pass London 97.

Childs

1 On June 16, London had been advised by the British Foreign Office that a three-man British reconnaissance party would be sent to Saudi Arabia to study Saudi Arabian defense needs (telegram 2379, June 20, from London, 890F.20/6–2049; not printed). The Department later informed Jidda that the mission would survey for the location of three tactical air force strips and necessary communication facilities (telegram 255, July 22, to Jidda, 890F.7962/7–2249; not printed).

2 For documentation on the meeting, see pp. 165 [Pg. 165 is part of Doc. 71] ff.

3 The Department agreed with Ambassador Childs’ approach in telegrams 668 and 669, and indicated that the problems he raised in the telegrams would be discussed with him at the Istanbul Conference (telegram 446, November 21, to Jidda, 711.90F/11–1749; not printed).

The Ambassador in Saudi Arabia (Childs) to the Secretary of State 811.2390F/11–1849: Telegram

[Document 1126]

The Ambassador in Saudi Arabia (Childs) to the Secretary of State

secret Jidda, November 18, 1949—noon.

672. Military Survey Group received with me in final audience by King yesterday and left early this a. m. for Dhahran. Group plans emplane Dhahran for US twentieth.

King informed me in private audience yesterday he was pleased with. Mission’s work but felt it better to withhold any specific comments on Mission findings until they had been considered in Washington. Mission has made excellent impression and I consider O’Keefe and members his group deserve greatest praise for thoroughness their survey and excellent working relations they established with Saudi group officers accompanying them.

I felt it extremely impolitic for me to press SAG for any other comment on Survey’s findings than those made to me by King that he found principles in general satisfactory. To have pressed for more, might have carried an implication of our readiness to implement findings which I thought it most wise to avoid.

No one has raised with me any question of implementation findings and I find, as I had assumed in Washington, SAG apparently unaware developments MAP legislation referred to Deptel 407, October 15 and both Hill and I have carefully avoided any reference to this situation.

I do not need to emphasize to Department deplorable effect on our political relations with SAG which would ensue if any eventual impasse reached as regards extension some form military aid to SAG in connection long-term lease DAF.1

Sent Department, repeated London 98, Dhahran 206.

Childs

1 Fuad Hamza presented Ambassador Childs with a memorandum on November 21 which included a request for immediate action on the part of the United States to strengthen the position of Saudi Arabia, either by the conclusion of a political treaty or by facilitating military aid. Highlights of the memorandum were transmitted to the Department in telegram 684, November 22, from Jidda (711.90F/11–2249); the full text was transmitted to the Department in despatch No. 232, November 23, from Jidda (890F.00/11–2349).

The Secretary of State to the Consulate at Istanbul 120.3 Conferences/11–2949: Telegram

[Document 1127]

The Secretary of State to the Consulate at Istanbul

secret
priority Washington, November 30, 1949—3 p. m.

niact

351. Contel 272 Nov 29—last para slightly garbled.1 For McGhee from Hare. Fol your departure Ibn Saud’s most recent conversations with Childs re SA security discussed with Wright2 for purpose ascertaining whether it might not be possible for UK in framework its present discussions and negots with SAG to take opportunity reassure SAG that UK was deeply concerned with peace and stability in area and wld not countenance any action by any country which might disturb peaceful conditions.

Wright said UK had also received similar expressions of SA apprehension on several occasions and that several years ago UK had offered negotiate treaty similar to treaties with Jordan and Iraq which, though Ibn Saud might not wish to conclude, might calm fears. Wright did not believe UK would be inclined offer treaty now and had hoped current milit missions wld be steadying influence. Wright added UK was constantly endeavoring allay fears of Ibn Saud and Brit reps Amman and Baghdad had frequently discussed situation with Jordan and Iraq. Wright said he wld have no objection if USG wished inform Ibn Saud UK was exerting restraining influence on Jordan and Iraq and had no desire disturb existing conditions.

Meanwhile we are today discussing text paras 2 and 3 draft statement with Brit Emb reps Wash and will communicate further with you and Childs soonest.

Acheson

1 Not printed; but see editorial note, infra.

2 Michael Wright, Superintending Under-Secretary of State in the British Foreign Office.

Editorial Note [Document 1128]

Editorial Note

Ambassador Childs presented a statement of three paragraphs to Yusuf Yassin on December 5, for transmittal to King Ibn Saud. The editors have been unable to find a document in Department of State files which gives the entire statement. The statement, as given below, is a composite of: telegram 272, November 29, from Istanbul (120.3 Conferences/11–2949); telegram 451, December 2, to Jidda (120.3 Conferences/11–2949); and telegram 702, December 5, from Jidda (890F.20/12–549). The composite follows:

“(1) We are pleased with the O’Keefe report: It will receive most careful study and attention by both the Departments of State and Defense with a view to ascertaining how we may help Saudi Arabia to implement it, as evidence of our concern for Saudi Arabia and our desire to insure its territorial integrity and political independence.

(2) Problems of Saudi Arabia extensively discussed at Istanbul conference. It was agreed our Ambassadors in neighboring states will work to prevent any situation which might arise which would threaten Saudi Arabian integrity, and would report immediately to Washington any such situation which might arise. They did not at present find any situation existing which would cause Saudi Arabia concern in immediate or foreseeable future. They were all agreed it should be continuing aim US to develop particularly close relations with Saudi Arabia.

(3) With respect to His Majesty’s concern re ‘encirclement’ of Saudi Arabia, we have informed British Government one of subjects discussed at Istanbul was question our special relations with Saudi Arabia. It was brought out that Saudi Arabian Government over a considerable period of time, had expressed concern to US Government over possibility of aggression against it by one or more of its neighbors. Brit Govt has informed USG it gave an assurance to SAG in Aug to effect it wld use its influence to prevent use of force by one ME country against another. USG has been further informed Brit Govt policy remains exactly same as at that time. On its part, USG desires to give assurance that it will continue to make clear to Arab states concerned that it wld be contrary to policy of USG and to stability of area, as well as inconsistent with principles and purposes of UN, for any state to take aggressive measures against another.”

Yusuf Yassin conveyed the following message orally to Ambassador Childs from King Ibn Saud in reply to the above statement: “We are very thankful to you and to United States Government for assurances given us. We are ready to await action by United States Government on O’Keefe’s report” (telegram 707, December 6, from Jidda, 890F.20/12–649; not printed).

Memorandum of Conversation, by Mr. Frederick H. Awalt of the Office of African and Near Eastern Affairs 890F.00/12–849

[Document 1129]

Memorandum of Conversation, by Mr. Frederick H. Awalt of the Office of African and Near Eastern Affairs

top secret [Washington,] December 8, 1949.

Participants: Brig. Gen. O’Keefe, USAF

NEA—Mr. D. A. Robertson

ANE—Mr. G. H. Mattison

ANE—Mr. F. H. Awalt

Problem: To consider means of implementing the O’Keefe recommendations.

Action Taken: Telegram despatched to Ambassador Childs requesting his political paper as soon as possible. (Desp. 231, Nov. 22, 1949,1 citing political reasons supporting O’Keefe report, received Dec. 9)

Action Required: 1. To cooperate with USAF and the Department of Defense toward obtaining the legislative authority necessary to implement the O’Keefe report.

2. Expedite receipt of Childs’ paper on the political implications of military assistance to Saudi Arabia.

Action Assigned to: NEA, ANE

Summary: General O’Keefe called this morning to discuss in general terms his recently completed survey in Saudi Arabia. He stated that between September 1 and October 22 he and his party travelled 44,000 miles throughout Arabia and collected a fund of strategic information which has never before been available. He made recommendations which embrace the training and equipping of a Saudi Arabian defensive force totalling 43,000 officers and men, composed of 28,000 combat troops and 15,000 Air Force support and logistics personnel. The equipment contemplated for these forces is strictly defensive in character such as rifles, mortars and anti-tank guns. No offensive mechanized equipment such as tanks or fighter planes is envisaged, although 28 planes of the super DC–3 type, which should be commercially available, are being recommended, as well as 5 C–54’s. The program is estimated to cost the Saudi Arabian Government a total of $107,000,000 spread over a five year period. The project includes plans for some naval facilities which will cost the Saudi Arabian Government $8,000,000. The Saudi Arabian Government’s expenditures for air equipment will be $19,000,000, and the remainder is Army costs. General O’Keefe emphasized that all equipment must be new owing to the very unsatisfactory experience the Saudi Arabian Government has had with used materials purchased from the British which have in many instances proved unusable. He also stated that the program will call for 320 Saudi Arabian air trainees, 67 naval trainees, and 488 army trainees to be trained in the United States during the 5 year period, and that an auxiliary field is projected for the Hail area after two years.

King Ibn Saud has expressed general satisfaction for the plan outlined to him by General O’Keefe, but he has reserved full approbation. The General expressed the opinion that the King’s fears for the safety of his country from invasion by his neighbors was sincere but ill-founded in fact, owing to the long and vulnerable line of communications an invader would have to maintain. He stressed the need for the force recommended, however, as a steadying influence upon Emir Saud’s succession, as well as a means of strengthening Ibn Saud’s hand among the other Arab countries, a development which could exert a valuable influence toward moderation in Near Eastern affairs. He also pointed out that it would be a useful force for our purposes in the event of war with Russia.

Emir Saud told General O’Keefe confidentially that he was heartily in favor of the report’s findings and hoped that prompt action could be taken to implement them, adding that the program would serve his own interests and security when he succeeded to the throne. General O’Keefe is very doubtful that Emir Feisal views United States military assistance with similar favor.

The General stated that the Air Force was in the past convinced that it was essential that we maintain an air base in Arabia and it is willing to go before Budget to support a request for $19,000,000 of United States expenditure for improvement of the air base and its training facilities, followed by an additional $8,000,000 per year for each year we wish to maintain it thereafter. Three alternative plans for improving the air base will be discussed in the report: (1) Rehabilitation and expansion of the air base to include new barracks to accommodate 1700 people, a railway spur, and extension of air strips to accommodate larger planes. This would have an estimated cost of $28,000,000;

(2) Construction of an entirely new air base on a nearby plain which would accommodate any size plane, 6600 personnel, and would cost $50,000,000;

(3) Construction of an entirely new air base completely underground in the Abu Bahr plain 450 miles in the interior to the south and west. This project would have an estimated cost of $70,000,000.

General O’Keefe hoped his report could be done Christmas week and ready for transmittal through the Air Chief of Staff to the Joint Chiefs of Staff for consideration. He inquired if Ambassador Childs’ paper on the political implications of military assistance to Saudi Arabia had arrived. He asked that the Department urge Embassy Jidda to submit it as soon as possible so that it could be incorporated into his final report. General O’Keefe, at Mr. Robertson’s request, offered to show him all the data he has compiled in order that Mr. Robertson might prepare advance information for submission to Mr. Bruce,2 S/MDA. In conclusion he expressed his confidence that the Air Force would approve his report.

The preliminary data was released under the authority of Major General S. E. Anderson3 with the understanding that it was not a commitment of the views of the Air Force, but only for information purposes.

1 Not printed.

2 James Bruce, Director of the Mutual Defense Assistance Program.

3 Director of Plans and Operations, U.S. Air Force Headquarters.

The Ambassador in Saudi Arabia (Childs) to the Secretary of State 120.3 Conferences/12–1049

[Document 1130]

The Ambassador in Saudi Arabia (Childs) to the Secretary of State

secret Jidda, December 10, 1949.

No. 249

Sir: I have the honor to refer to my telegram 702 of December 5, 1949,1 noon, and to report that I called on the Acting Minister for Foreign Affairs, Shaikh Yusuf Yassin on December 5, 1949, at which time I communicated to him not only the special assurances which I had been authorized to make to His Majesty but gave him at the same time an account of the conclusions which the Istanbul Conference had reached.2

Shaikh Yusuf made no comments himself as he obviously preferred to discuss them with His Majesty. I have already reported in my two telegrams 707, December 6, 1949, 2 p. m. and 717, December 10, 2 p. m.,3 the gratification with which His Majesty received the special assurances. In a call at the Foreign Office this morning Shaikh Yusuf stated he had two questions to raise with me regarding the Istanbul Conference based on the account which I had given him of it. He said he was not quite clear in his own mind concerning the viewpoint expressed that it would be premature for the United States to consider associating itself with any possible regional grouping in this area. The other inquiry he made was concerned with our attitude toward the proposed Iraq-Syrian union.

I sketched at some length the historical position of the United States toward foreign entangling alliances and recalled that this attitude had been responsible for the fact that in the first World War we were not an allied nation but an associated power with the other allies. I then pointed out how great a departure it had been for us to adhere to the Atlantic Pact and that in the light of our history our reluctance should be readily understood not to involve ourselves in formal commitments too extensively at this time.

As regards the attitude of the Conference toward the union of Arab states, I said that it was quite understandable that we could not oppose such a merger if it should be in accordance with the fully expressed wishes of the people concerned and not as a result of force or outside intervention. Shaikh Yusuf said that our formula appeared to open the way wide open for a union of two or more Arab states but the qualifying clause had the effect of leaving the door not so wide open. I said I did not see how any possible objection could be raised by any Arab state to the formula which we had agreed upon at the Conference. He seemed to be entirely satisfied by my explanation.

Respectfully yours,

J. Rives Childs

1 Not printed; but see editorial note, p. 1624 [Pg. 1624 includes portions of Doc. 1127 and Doc. 1128].

2 For conclusion No. 6, which dealt with Saudi Arabia, see p. 169 [Pg. 169 is part of Doc. 73].

3 Neither printed; but see last paragraph of editorial note, p. 1624 [Pg. 1624 includes portions of Doc. 1127 and Doc. 1128].

The Ambassador in Saudi Arabia (Childs) to the Secretary of State 890F.20/12–1949: Telegram

[Document 1131]

The Ambassador in Saudi Arabia (Childs) to the Secretary of State

secret Jidda, December 19, 1949—10 a. m.

730. Shaikh Yusuf, Deputy Foreign Minister, called me Foreign Office yesterday following audience by him with King at Mecca. HM asked if assurances I had given (Deptel 451 December 2 and Embtel 702 December 5)1 was final answer HM’s message (Embtel 691 November 23 and despatch 232 November 23)2 or if further reply might be expected.

I said it was my assumption assurances given were intended to serve as reply, but I would raise question with Department if desired. Yusef Yassin asked if I would do so.

Yusef Yassin stated he had informed HM there were several questions pending with USG and some of them still under discussion, including question military aid and long term agreement DAF. Yusef Yassin recalled DAF agreement concluded for one year with understanding that during such period USG would initiate negotiations long term agreement. He pointed out six months had already elapsed and raised question when we contemplated beginning negotiations particularly in light reserved attitude Istanbul conference toward regional security arrangements ME.

I emphasized Istanbul conference view had no bearing on DAF negotiations as at Istanbul we were thinking of multilateral regional security arrangements and we did not have reference to such unilateral arrangements as DAF agreement. I added it was our understanding SAG desired military aid in some form to tie in with long term DAF agreement and that until we could determine to what extent former might be practical and how far we might go it was our thinking it would be premature to enter into long term negotiations. When in Washington I found thinking to be that after O’Keefe’s report had been studied and decision made we would then be in position to enter into long term negotiations beginning about March 1. Once general principles were agreed upon it was not expected on our part to encounter any difficulties in drafting long term agreement.

Yusef Yassin appeared to accept this explanation as reasonable and stated SAG would await replies to two questions he would like to raise with me: 1. Are assurances given to be considered as final reply to HM’s message;

2. Is USG prepared to enter into negotiations for general settlement of all outstanding questions which had been raised in recent months.

I stated I would transmit questions to Department and asked if in general settlement he had reference to questions (a) treaty friendship, commerce and navigation which we had proposed and (b) civil air agreement. He replied in affirmative.3

Sent Department 730, repeated London 113. Pouched Arab capitals and Dhahran.

Childs

1 Neither printed; but see editorial note, p. 1624 [Pg. 1624 includes portions of Doc. 1127 and Doc. 1128].

2 Latter not printed; but see footnote 1 to telegram 672, November 18, p. 1623 [Pg. 1623 includes portions of Doc. 1126 and Doc. 1127].

3 The Department indicated that the message (see editorial note, p. 1624 [Pg. 1624 includes portions of Doc. 1127 and Doc. 1128]) should be considered as the final word, and that the United States would have no objection to entering upon further negotiations through regular channels (telegram 475, December 30, to Jidda, 890F.20/12–1949; not printed).

SyriaSyria

Contents

Attitude of the United States toward recognition of governments in Syria following a succession of coups d’etat (Documents 1132-1138)

Attitude of the United States toward recognition of governments in Syria following a succession of coups d’etatAttitude of the United States toward recognition of governments in Syria following a succession of coups d’etat

[1132] Memorandum by the Secretary of State to the President

Washington, April 25, 1949.

890D.01/4–2549

[1133] The Secretary of State to the Legation in Syria

Washington, April 25, 1949—3 p. m.

890D.00/4–849: Telegram

[1134] Editorial Note

[1135] The Secretary of State to the Legation in Syria

Washington, September 17, 1949—5 p. m.

890D.01/9–1749: Telegram

[1136] The Secretary of State to the Legation in Syria

Washington, September 17, 1949—5 p. m.

890D.01/9–1749: Telegram

[1137] Memorandum by the Secretary of State to the President

Washington, September 19, 1949.

890D.01/9–1949

[1138] The Secretary of State to the Legation in Syria

Washington, December 27, 1949—7 p. m.

890D.00/12–2749: Telegram

Memorandum by the Secretary of State to the President 890D.01/4–2549

[Document 1132]

Memorandum by the Secretary of State to the President

confidential Washington, April 25, 1949.

Subject: Request for Authority to Recognize New Syrian Government.

On March 30, 1949, the Syrian Government was overthrown without bloodshed in a military coup d’état by units of the Syrian Army led by the Chief of Staff, Colonel Husni Zaim.1 As the situation now stands President Quwatly, Prime Minister Azm, and the former Syrian cabinet have resigned. Colonel Zaim has issued a decree dissolving the Syrian Parliament, has announced the formation of a constitutional committee to draft a new Syrian constitution and electoral law and has stated his intention to hold new elections shortly. He has recently announced the formation of a cabinet composed of reasonably prominent and responsible leaders.

Colonel Zaim has furthermore affirmed in public declarations and in a message to Secretary General Lie of the United Nations his intention to honor Syria’s international obligations. He has given at least one tangible evidence of his sincerity in this respect in undertaking armistice negotiations with Israel.

Since the coup d’état the Department has exchanged information with the Governments of Great Britain and France2 with regard to the question of recognition. The British, French, and American Ministers have indicated their belief that Colonel Zaim is in complete control of Syria and that there is no likelihood of his regime being displaced in the near future. They also believe that Colonel Zaim will honor Syria’s international obligations and that recognition by the western democracies will enable us to keep better informed as to his thinking and to counsel the adoption of constructive policies. Great Britain and France have indicated their desire to recognize the new regime by Tuesday, April 26, but are waiting to ascertain the course of action the United States intends to follow, in the belief that recognition by all three governments should be coordinated.

Of the Arab states, Saudi Arabia and Egypt have stated they would recognize the Zaim government on April 23. Moreover, despite the coup d’état, Turkey has not purported to interrupt diplomatic relations with Syria.

The Department, while not implying approval of Colonel Zaim’s method of coming to power, believes that his government fulfills our normal criteria for recognition, and that withholding recognition beyond the period of time which has already elapsed (now nearly one month) would not be in the best interests of the United States. The Department is also in accord with the view that recognition by the United States, the United Kingdom and France should be coordinated and should be extended by April 26 or as soon thereafter as is practicable.

Accordingly, it is requested that the Department be given authority to inform Great Britain and France that the United States has decided to recognize the new Syrian Government, and to take appropriate steps toward extending recognition after coordinating its arrangements in this regard with those governments.3

Dean Acheson

1 Colonel Zaim was Chief of State, Prime Minister, Minister for Foreign Affairs, and Minister of Interior in the new regime.

2 The Department of State, on April 15, had informed the Embassy in Paris that “eventual recognition Zaim probably inevitable. Dept felt, however, this shld not be hurried for fol reasons: “a) We had had experience of recent unfortunate mil dictatorships in Latin Amer. We do not wish by too speedy recognition of Zaim inspire or encourage similar movements in other Arab armies.

“b) We thought neighboring Arab states might well take lead in granting recognition and understood this connection that Leb Govt on point doing so.

“c) Dept thought it desirable that Zaim shld form some type of constituted Govt other than his purely personal rule as at present existing before US shld extend recognition.” (Telegram 1221, 890D.01/4–1549)

3 The Department, on April 20, had informed Damascus that it was “considering recommending to President recognizing Zaim Govt near future. This decision based on assumption Zaim will continue maintain and consolidate effective control as well as that one or more Arab States will probably extend prior recognition. Dept considers delay beyond period perhaps totalling one month might be regarded as use of non-recognition as form of political pressure which … has in past proven ineffective as instrument of policy.” (Telegram 166, 890D.01/4–2049) President Truman approved this recommendation in an undated marginal notation.

The Secretary of State to the Legation in Syria 890D.00/4–849: Telegram

[Document 1133]

The Secretary of State to the Legation in Syria

confidential Washington, April 25, 1949—3 p. m.

us urgent

niact

174. Pursuant to authority reed from Pres. you are instructed after coordinating arrangements with Brit and Fr colleagues send to Syrian FonOff on Tues Apr 26 or soonest thereafter a note ack[nowledging] those recd by Leg urtels 215 Apr 8 and 234 Apr 19.1 Fol is suggested draft:

“The Amer Leg presents its compliments to the Syrian Ministry for FonAff and, pursuant to instrs from the United States Government, has the honor to acknowledge the receipt of the Ministry’s note no. S–4 dated April 7, 1949, transmitting a copy of the communiqué issued by the General Command of the Army and Armed Forces in regard to the factors that led to the recent coup d’état in Syria, as well as of the Ministry’s note no. M–6 dated April 18, 1949, informing the Leg that a new Cabinet had been formed and giving the names of the members of the Cabinet.

The Leg has been instructed to inform the Ministry that the United States Govt has noted with satisfaction the public assurances which His Excellency the PriMin, Colonel Husni Zaim, has made affirming the intention of the new Syrian Govt to discharge Syria’s obligations arising out of all treaties and internatl agreements entered into by previous Syrian govts, as well as its attachment to democratic principles and its intention to hold new elections at an early date.

The Leg avails itself of this opportunity to renew to the Ministry the assurances of its highest consideration.”

Tel urgently date note delivered.2

Acheson

1 Neither printed.

2 This telegram was repeated to London and Paris; copies were sent by air to other Arab capitals, Jerusalem, and Tel Aviv. Damascus reported, on April 27, that after coordinating with British and French diplomatic representatives, a note “comprising verbatim text suggested in Deptel 174, April 25, delivered Foreign Office 11 o’clock this morning” (telegram 246, 890D.01/4–2749).

Editorial Note [Document 1134]

Editorial Note

A second military coup in Syria took place on August 14 (see Secretary Acheson’s memorandum of September 19 to the President, page 1635 [Pg. 1635 includes portions of Doc. 1136 and Doc. 1137]).

Faiz el-Khouri, the Syrian Minister, called on Mr. McGhee on August 15. Harlan B. Clark’s memorandum of their conversation expressed the Minister’s hope that “the United States and other great powers would not move as quickly to recognize the new government as it had with respect to the Zaim Government, and specifically that recognition would not be extended until democratic institutions were clearly functioning again in Syria. He said that the fact that the United States Government, which professed to be a leading exponent of the principles of democratic freedom, had unhesitatingly recognized the dictatorial Zaim Government had greatly surprised people in the Near East. In the same way they wondered when they saw the United States giving unqualified support to the King of Saudi Arabia whose autocratic regime had no semblance to western democratic systems. Mr. McGhee said we appreciated Faiz Bey’s frank comments in this regard but pointed out that we had given very careful consideration to all factors involved before extending recognition to the Zaim Government. It was certainly true that the United States wished to support the development of democratic liberties in the Near East but that we had found from long experience that the withholding of recognition did not always achieve the desired objective and in fact it sometimes appeared to have the opposite effect. It was also true that in giving support to King Ibn Saud we by no means failed to be mindful of the needs of the Saudi people and were assisting him and indeed even influencing him in ways which would bring benefit to the whole nation.” (890D.00/8–1549)

Mr. Clark was an officer of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs.

The Secretary of State to the Legation in Syria 890D.01/9–1749: Telegram

[Document 1135]

The Secretary of State to the Legation in Syria 1

confidential
priority Washington, September 17, 1949—5 p. m.

420. While deploring summary executions Pres Zaim and PriMin Barazi2 and cognizant other factors mentioned urtels 540, Sept 133 and 541 Sept 14,4 Dept has no evidence present civ[ilian] govt implicated in coup or executions, with possible exception alleged prior knowledge Hawrani (Legtel 480).5 On contrary, Leg reports have indicated coup planned and carried out by Army (see for example Joint Weeka 38 CL 329 Aug 19)6 and corroboratory info this effect received from Brit and other sources. As stated Deptel 141 Apr 56 de facto control, public acquiescence and respect internatl obligations are criteria US recognition policy. Legitimacy no longer determinant factor and wld be inappropriate refer in recognition note to tragic circumstances in which govt formed or express regret over resort to bloodshed. Such action might also lend itself propaganda thesis US favored dictatorial regime for Syria.

In view Syria’s polit unrest, Dept realizes recognition any Syrian Govt involves risk regime may not be permanent. However, it feels continued non-recognition wld hamper Syrian Govt in its expressed desire stabilize itself along democratic and constitutional lines. Lack official contact with Syrian Govt also prevents adequate diplomatic prep and assistance to ESM, and non-recognition wld be potential source embarrassment USUN in its dealings with Syrian Del at forthcoming GA Session.

Since reports from Leg and assurances from Syrian Min Washington indicate criteria for recognition have been reasonably fulfilled insofar as Syrian situation can presently be judged, Dept preparing request President’s auth recognize Syrian Govt within few days. Dept has already given advance notice SAG, Egypt and appropriate western countries US actively considering early recognition.

If Pres approves Dept’s recommendation you will be informed immed and you shld then consult with appropriate diplomatic colleagues concerning timing recognition notes. Suggested text US note being sent separate tel.

Acheson

1 This telegram was repeated to London, Paris, Cairo, and Jidda and sent by pouch to Baghdad, Amman, Ankara, Beirut, Jerusalem, and Tel Aviv.

2 Regarding the coup of August 14, see Secretary Acheson’s memorandum of September 19, p. 1635 [Pg. 1635 includes portions of Doc. 1136 and Doc. 1137].

3 Not printed; it expressed Minister Keeley’s concern that “in Department’s exchange of views with British and French Governments no evidence that consideration has been given to possibility of expressing to Atassi Government regret at brutal means by which former regime was liquidated.… While it would be desirable to have British and French Governments join us in condemning violence, I feel that whatever may be British and French attitudes we shall have to reckon with our own consciences and consequences if by our silence we tacitly condone such barbarity which unless checked may well serve as pattern for further bloodletting in Syria and other Middle Eastern states to detriment of peace and stability for which our interests call.” (890D.00/9–1349)

4 Not printed; it reported information from French and British diplomatic officials at Damascus that their governments had “decided time now propitious for recognition Atassi Government and have instructed their Embassies Washington to seek US agreement that France, Britain and US missions Damascus make coordinated communications this sense sometime during current week.” It advised further that these officials favored a “simple statement that ‘change in government will in no way alter friendly relations that have heretofore subsisted’.” Minister Keeley concluded that he was unable to share their views as to the timing or manner of recognition and expressed his preference for a “communication which takes note of formation of cabinet in tragic circumstances, expresses regret over resort to bloodshed and gives assurances of friendly support if cabinet is able to realize its announced intention of guiding nation back into democratic constitutional channel.” (890D.01/9–1449)

5 Dated August 16, not printed; Akram Hawrani was Minister of Justice and of Health.

6 Not printed.

6 Not printed.

The Secretary of State to the Legation in Syria 890D.01/9–1749: Telegram

[Document 1136]

The Secretary of State to the Legation in Syria

confidential
priority Washington, September 17, 1949—5 p. m.

421. Deptel 413.1 Fol is suggested text note you will be instructed to deliver when Pres auth received recognize Syrian Govt:

“Pursuant to instructions from the United States Government, the Legation of the United States of America has the honor to acknowledge the note from the Syrian Ministry of Foreign Affairs dated August 16, 1949, informing it of the establishment of a new Syrian Government under the Premiership of His Excellency Hashim al-Atassi.

The United States Government relies upon the assurances given to it by the Syrian Govt that Syria intends to honor its internatl obligations, and trusts that the friendly relations between our two nations will be continued. The promulgation on Sept 11, 1949 of a new electoral law reflecting the Syrian Govt’s intention to hold elections and form a constitutional govt has also been noted.

The Leg takes this occasion to assure the Ministry of its highest consideration.”

If you wish recommend changes tele Dept immed. Full text will be issued as press release on date recognition.

Acheson

1 Dated September 15, not printed.

Memorandum by the Secretary of State to the President 890D.01/9–1949

[Document 1137]

Memorandum by the Secretary of State to the President

confidential Washington, September 19, 1949.

Subject: Recognition of the Syrian Government.

The Government of President Husni Zaim in Syria was overthrown on August 14, 1949, by a group of disgruntled military officers who had participated with him in the coup d’état of March 30, 1949. These officers, under the leadership of Colonel Sami Hinnawi, executed both President Zaim and Prime Minister Muhsin Barazi but there was no further bloodshed during the coup. There is no evidence to indicate that any outside power participated in the coup in any way, and it seems clear that the officers seizing control were motivated by personal grudges against Zaim, dissatisfaction with his alleged failure to fulfill promises for army reform, and also by a desire to end the personalized authoritarian rule which President Zaim had established.

The Officers conducting the coup immediately turned the Government over to a Cabinet composed of civilians under the premiership of Hashim Bey al Atassi, distinguished Syrian elder statesman, and including the most prominent leaders of the Syrian Populist Party which had constituted the only effective opposition group in Parliament prior to the coup d’état of March 30.

The new Syrian Government has stressed its democratic and civilian character in contrast to the “military dictatorship” of the Zaim Government, and on September 11, 1949, published an electoral law providing for free elections which it has announced will be held in the near future. The Government has given oral assurances to American officials that it will respect all of Syria’s international obligations and has stated that Syria is firmly aligned with the western democracies against Communism.

The governments of Turkey, Lebanon, Czechoslovakia, Spain, Argentina, Afghanistan and Venezuela are reported to have recognized the new Syrian Government, and Iraq and Hashemite Jordan have resumed relations with it. Saudi Arabia and Egypt have not yet recognized the new government, but the Saudi Arabian Government has stated that its attitude towards Syria is one of friendship.

In view of the unrest which has recently characterized Syrian internal politics, a decision to extend recognition to any Syrian Government involves some risk that the regime may not be permanent. However, the normal criteria for recognition of reasonable stability, public acquiescence and respect for international obligations seem to have been fulfilled in so far as the Syrian situation can presently be judged.

The Governments of Great Britain and France have stated they are ready to recognize the new government and desire to coordinate the timing of their recognition with the United States. Several other governments wish to take parallel action.

Continued suspension of diplomatic relations renders more difficult the accomplishment of projects in which the western countries are interested. Diplomatic preparation to facilitate the work of the Palestine Conciliation Commission’s Economic Survey Mission, for example, cannot be adequately undertaken by our Legation in Damascus in the absence of official contact with the new government.

Moreover, I consider it to be in our interest, as well as that of the Syrian people, that the present civilian government maintain control and carry out peaceful elections providing for a return to constitutional government, and recognition by the great powers will undoubtedly have a stabilizing effect on the new government’s position. In addition, early recognition will preclude the possibility of embarrassment to our representatives in their dealings with the Syrian Delegation at the forthcoming session of the United Nations General Assembly in New York.

After carefully weighing all factors involved, I therefore recommend that the United States recognize the Government of Syria within the next few days, and request that you authorize the Department to instruct the Legation at Damascus to take appropriate steps to that end.1

Dean Acheson

1 President Truman approved this recommendation in an undated marginal notation. The Department, on September 19, instructed Damascus to “take appropriate action [and?] coordinate with Fr and Brit colleagues in accordance with procedure outlined Deptels 420 and 421 Sept 17.” (telegram 422, 890D.01/9–1949)

The Secretary of State to the Legation in Syria 890D.00/12–2749: Telegram

[Document 1138]

The Secretary of State to the Legation in Syria

secret Washington, December 27, 1949—7 p. m.

536. Reurtel 735 Dec 23.1 It is Dept’s view that since Aug 14 regime vested authority in Constituent Assembly, continued functioning Assembly with reasonable ability carry out its mandate and particularly with ability establish executive agency capable exercising de facto administrative control and discharging internatl obligations is essential element continuity Aug 14 regime. If above conditions fulfilled Dept perceives no reason consider diplomatic relations interrupted.

If you concur and are aware no other objective criteria which shld be applied you are authorized continue normal relations Syrian Govt officials unless it becomes apparent break in continuity has in fact occurred. If on basis subsequent events you shld become convinced latter is case you shld request Dept’s instructions re future relations.

Whenever warranted you are authorized emphasize that USG decision re continuance or interruption diplomatic relations will be based on objective criteria re continuity Aug 14 Govt and will not necessarily connote either approval or disapproval Syrian Govt aims, policies, or manner formation.2

Acheson

1 Not printed. Damascus, on December 19, bad reported that in a third coup d’état “At 6 a. m. today army group under Colonel Adib Shishakli arrested Chief of Staff General Hinnawi and now in control city.” (telegram 717, 890D.00/12–1949)

2 This telegram was repeated to London and Paris for information. Damascus replied, on December 29, stating that the continuing functioning of the Constituent Assembly and the fact that the Cabinet, except for Khalid Azm who was both Prime Minister and Foreign Minister, represented various political elements in the Assembly, seemed to meet the criteria set forth in the Department’s telegram 536 (telegram 749, 890D.00/12–2949).

TurkeyTurkey

Contents

Principal problems and policies in United States relations with Turkey (Documents 1139-1164)

Principal problems and policies in United States relations with TurkeyPrincipal problems and policies in United States relations with Turkey1

1 For previous documentation on relations with Turkey, see Foreign Relations, 1948, vol. iv, pp. 1 ff.

[1139] Editorial Note

[1140] The United States Special Representative in Europe for the Economic Cooperation Administration (Harriman) to the Administrator for the Economic Cooperation Administration (Hoffman)

Paris, January 6, 1949—3 p. m.

ECA Telegram Files, FRC Acc. No. 53 A 278, Paris Repto–Torep Telegrams: Telegram

[1141] The Ambassador in Turkey (Wadsworth) to the Secretary of State

Ankara, February 3, 1949—10 a. m.

867.00/2–349: Telegram

[1142] Memorandum of Conversation, by the Director of the Office of Near Eastern and African Affairs (Satterthwaite)

[Washington,] February 16, 1949.

767.91/2–1649

[1143] The United States Special Representative in Europe for the Economic Cooperation Administration (Harriman) to the Economic Cooperation Administration

[Paris,] February 22, 1949.

ECA Telegram Piles, FRC Acc. No. 53 A 278, Paris Repto–Torep Airgrams: Airgram

[1144] Editorial Note

[1145] The President of Turkey (Inönü) to President Truman

Ankara, March 31, 1949.

711.67/4–2649

[1146] Memorandum of Conversation, by the Secretary of State

[Washington,] April 12, 1949.

Secretary’s Memoranda, Lot 53 D 444

[1147] The Secretary of State to the Embassy in Turkey

Washington, April 14, 1949—6 p. m.

840.50 Recovery/4–1449: Telegram

[1148] Report by the Secretary of State to the National Security Council

Washington, April 15, 1949.

S/S–NSC Files, Lot 63 D 351, NSC 36 Series

[1149] President Truman to the President of Turkey (Inönü)

[Washington,] April 26, 1949.

711.67/4–2649

[1150] The Assistant Secretary of State for Economic Affairs (Thorp) to the Turkish Ambassador (Erkin)

[Washington,] April 26, 1949.

867.20/4–2649

[1151] The Secretary of State to the Embassy in Turkey

Washington, April 29, 1949—6 p. m.

840.50 Recovery/4–2949: Telegram

[1152] Department of State Policy Statement

[Washington,] May 5, 1949.

711.67/5–549

[1153] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State

London, May 11, 1949—5 p. m.

867.20/5–1149: Telegram

[1154] The Acting Secretary of State to the Secretary of Defense (Johnson)

[Washington,] May 19, 1949.

867.014/5–1949

[1155] The Ambassador in Turkey (Wadsworth) to the Secretary of State

Ankara, June 7, 1949—3 p. m.

867.51/6–749: Telegram

[1156] The Secretary of State to the Embassy in Turkey

Washington, June 30, 1949—6 p. m.

867.00/6–2849: Telegram

[1157] The Secretary of State to the Embassy in Turkey

Washington, July 1, 1949—2 p. m.

840.50 Recovery/6–749: Telegram

[1158] The Ambassador in Turkey (Wadsworth) to the Secretary of State

Ankara, July 25, 1949.

867.51/7–2549

[1159] Memorandum of Conversation, by the Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern and African Affairs (McGhee)

[Washington,] September 15, 1949.

867.00/9–1549

[1160] Memorandum of Conversation, by the Director of the Office of Greek, Turkish, and Iranian Affairs (Jernegan)

[Washington,] October 7, 1949.

867.014/10–749

[1161] Memorandum of Conversation, by the Director of the Office of Greek, Turkish, and Iranian Affairs (Jernegan)

[Washington,] October 13, 1949.

711.67/10–1349

[1162] Memorandum of Conversation, by the Director of the Office of Greek, Turkish, and Iranian Affairs (Jernegan)

[Washington,] November 15, 1949.

767.9111/11–1549

[1163] Editorial Note

[1164] Editorial Note

Editorial Note [Document 1139]

Editorial Note

In an informal action taken on February 4, 1949, the State–Army–Navy–Air Force Coordinating Committee (SANACC) concurred in the redefinition by the Joint Chiefs of Staff of United States long-range strategic interests in the military establishments of Greece and Turkey as a basis for planning on the extent and type of future United States military aid to Greece and Turkey. As set forth in their memorandum designated document SANACC 358/8, November 24, 1948 ( Foreign Relations, 1948, volume IV, page 191), the Joint Chiefs of Staff defined United States strategic interest in Turkey as follows:

“A Turkish military establishment of sufficient size and effectiveness to insure Turkey’s continued resistance to Soviet pressure; the development of combat effectiveness to the extent that any overt Soviet aggression can be delayed long enough to permit the commitment of U.S. and allied forces in Turkey in order to deny certain portions of Turkey to the USSR.”

The Committee’s action was recorded in document SANACC 358/9, February 4, 1949.

The United States Special Representative in Europe for the Economic Cooperation Administration (Harriman) to the Administrator for the Economic Cooperation Administration (Hoffman) ECA Telegram Files, FRC Acc. No. 53 A 278, Paris Repto–Torep Telegrams: Telegram

1 [Document 1140]

The United States Special Representative in Europe for the Economic Cooperation Administration (Harriman) to the Administrator for the Economic Cooperation Administration (Hoffman)

secret Paris, January 6, 1949—3 p. m.

Repto 2173. Eyes only for Hoffman and Lovett2 from Harriman. In my brief 24 hours in Ankara3 I talked with President Inönü,4 most of the members of the cabinet, and a number of the senior government departmental administrators, as well as our people. I have renewed confidence in determination of the Turks and in their effective use of American aid under our direction. They realize that they must expand their economy to support their army principally in agriculture and mining and therefore they have reversed their prewar attitude toward foreigners, at least as far as we are concerned. They recognize they need, not only our physical aid, but even more essentially, our technical assistance in developing programs and training their backward people.

Ministers are largely energetic, occidentally trained, young men, who understand not only the opportunities of Turkey’s undeveloped resources, but the lack of training of their people. We should accept their request for guidance in the development of their program which they are now incapable of doing alone, in the engineering of specific projects and in the development of a training system for the workmen and farmers. Our people explained that from their experience the Turks learn quickly, have an enthusiasm and determination, spurred on by fear of Russian aggression. The Turks feel their security lies primarily in what they do for themselves and in their hope for American assistance and support.

President Inönü stated he believed that war could be avoided if the United States could develop unity among the free countries of Europe, which required determination and maximum effort by each country, and that Turkey would do her part. He emphasized that firm American moral support is of even greater value than material aid.

I left with the feeling that any aid we can afford to give to Turkey would be well used. The situation calls for materially strengthening our ECA mission on the technical side first to help the Turks develop a program. There are many phases which need to be thoroughly analyzed and welded into a balanced program. There are enormous opportunities in the expansion of agriculture requiring machinery for and training of the farmers and need for construction of primary and secondary roads to bring out the products. The mineral and oil potentialities require critical analysis for exploitation. The Turks earnestly plead for our advice. I urge that we supply it as a matter of urgency on the recommendations of Dorr5 in consultation with the Ambassador6 and General McBride.

No country of Europe has the will to resist so determinedly nor such an ambition to exploit its resources. With our assistance, and only with our assistance, can Turkey become an increasingly effective deterrent to Soviet aggression and a contributor to economic developments in Eastern Mediterranean and Europe.

Sent Washington Repto 2173, repeated Ankara Repto 81. Eyes only Ambassador and Dorr.

Harriman

1 These are the serial telegram files of incoming and outgoing Economic Cooperation Administration (ECA) cables for the years 1948–1951, as maintained by the Administrative Services Division of the ECA and subsequently retired by the Mutual Security Agency. These files, which are presently administered by the Agency for International Development, are a part of Federal Records Center accession number 53 A 278.

2 Under Secretary of State Robert A. Lovett served as Acting Secretary of State until January 21, 1949, when Dean Acheson was sworn into office.

3 In early January 1949, Ambassador Harriman made brief visits to Greece and Turkey. Regarding his visit to Athens, see p. 237 [Pg. 237 is part of Doc. 111].

4 Ismet Inönü, President of Turkey.

5 Russell H. Dorr, Chief of the Economic Cooperation Administration Mission in Turkey.

6 George Wadsworth, Ambassador in Turkey.

The Ambassador in Turkey (Wadsworth) to the Secretary of State 867.00/2–349: Telegram

[Document 1141]

The Ambassador in Turkey (Wadsworth) to the Secretary of State

top secret Ankara, February 3, 1949—10 a. m.

57. Following are highlights Admiral Conolly’s discussions Ankara January 31–February 2 re subject listed Deptel 32, January 19:1

1. North Atlantic Pact. Only mention was by President Inönü. Referring to Soviet pressure on Norway2 as “a warning to all small nations that for their own good they had best not accept any invitation to join”, he commented “it seems significant to us, no great conflagration develops as planned”. It seemed he said “of vital mutual interest” that we study together the implications of such events.

2. Royall–Radford conversations.3 President, Foreign Minister and Turkish General Staff officers stressed importance they attached there to US opening way to Turkish-American General Staff talks designed evolve common (#) initiate with you joint military operational planning”.4

Admiral Conolly’s position was that, while he had directive from American Joint Chiefs of Staff to conduct American military planning in this as in other parts area his command, he had “no authority open formal Turkish-American General Staff talks” but that he desired explore field through exchanges of ideas between Turkish General Staff and General McBride who would act as his intermediary. He could not go further without top-level political clearance.

President was obviously disappointed but accepted Admiral’s formula as important forward step. Admiral will work out details of new directive to COMAT5 when in Washington next three weeks.

3. Black Sea naval equilibrium. This was considered in discussions between members Admiral Conolly’s and AMAT6 Naval Groups. It was mentioned but not stressed by Turks. Admiral will report thereon when in Washington.

4. Reorganization AMAT command. Admiral went carefully into this matter and will pursue it when in Washington. I suggest Department obtain directly from his comment and views on mytel 15 January 8.7

5. There was no discussion with Turks re VOA relay facilities (Deptel 33, January 188 ) or British-American aerial mapping project (Deptel 27 January 17).9

6. In general, fleet visit Istanbul and Admiral’s visit Ankara have been eminently successful. In terminating conversation with Admiral, President said “your visit has been precious. We had given subject (joint General Staff planning) careful thought before your arrival. I will find it right to pursue it with appropriate authorities”.

Admiral’s comments: “President, probably more than anyone else, senses deficiency in strategic direction present Turkish military effort but does not realize limited planning abilities his General Staff. He clearly wants formal commitment either through political defense pact or by formal association of Military Staffs on higher level than AMAT contact”.

7. Will air pouch record conversation with President and Admiral’s memo on “Turkish strategic planning”.8

Sent Department 57; repeated London 9 for Admiral Conolly.

Wadsworth

1 Adm. Richard L. Conolly, Commander in Chief of U.S. Naval Forces in the Eastern Atlantic and Mediterranean, visited Ankara from January 31 to February 2, 1949. Admiral Conolly, accompanied by Ambassador George Wadsworth; Vice Adm. Robert B. Carney, Deputy Chief of Naval Operations (Logistics); and members of Admiral Conolly’s staff (Maj. Gen. Arthur McK. Harper, Brig. Gen. William L. Ritchie, and Rear Adm. Joseph F. Bolger) called on Turkish President Ismet Inönü on January 31. Foreign Minister Necmettin Sadak, Minister of National Defense Hüsnü Çakir, Foreign Ministry Secretary General Fuad Carim, and several high-ranking Turkish General Staff officers were also present with the President. Ambassador Wadsworth’s detailed memorandum of the conversation together with a memorandum by Admiral Conolly entitled “Turkish Strategic Planning,” dated February 2, were transmitted to the Department of State as enclosures to despatch 38, February 3, from Ankara, none printed (811.3367/2–349). Earlier information on the proposed visit of Admiral Conolly to Ankara is presented in an editorial note, Foreign Relations, 1948, vol. iv, p. 217.

2 The reference here is presumably to the Soviet declaration of January 29, 1949, regarding Norway’s relationship with the prospective North Atlantic Treaty Organization. For documentation on the North Atlantic Treaty, including the specific incident under reference here, see vol. iv, pp. 1 ff.

3 Regarding the visits to Turkey in December 1948 by Secretary of the Army Royall and Vice Admiral Radford, see the editorial note, Foreign Relations, 1948, vol. iv, p. 217.

4 A portion of the paragraph printed here was obviously omitted in transmission. According to Ambassador Wadsworth’s memorandum of this conversation (see footnote 1, above), President Inönü recapitulated the most significant portion of the conversation as follows: “You and your Fleet have honored my country by your visit. We had been expecting this, and we welcome it highly. At the same time, with you personally we (and his gesture included the galaxy of Turkish ministers and officers present) had expected another type of interview. We had hoped to initiate joint military planning. You, however, answer that we must settle for consultations through General McBride.”

5 Coordinator of the Armed Forces Groups, American Mission for Aid to Turkey, Maj. Gen. Horace L. McBride.

6 The American Mission for Aid to Turkey.

7 Not printed. In it Ambassador Wadsworth commented favorably on a proposal, made earlier by Secretary of the Army Royall, that the coordinated U.S. Army, Navy, and Air Force Groups within AMAT be reorganized as sections of a joint military mission with a single head. (867.20 Mission/1–849). In October 1949, the Joint Chiefs of Staff issued a directive establishing the Joint American Military Mission for Aid to Turkey (JAMMAT). Major General McBride, as senior army officer on duty, became Chief of JAMMAT.

8 Not printed.

9 Not printed. Regarding the aerial mapping project under reference here, see the Acting Secretary of State’s letter of May 19 to the Secretary of Defense, p. 1671 [Pg. 1671 includes portions of Doc. 1153 and Doc. 1154].

8 Not printed.

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Director of the Office of Near Eastern and African Affairs (Satterthwaite) 767.91/2–1649

[Document 1142]

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Director of the Office of Near Eastern and African Affairs (Satterthwaite)

secret [Washington,] February 16, 1949.

Participants: The Turkish Ambassador1

NEA—Mr. Satterthwaite

Douglas Bryan2 —GTI

The Turkish Ambassador, during his call this morning, remarked that the question of Turkish-Iranian relations had been raised recently in Washington by American officials and in Ankara by the new Iranian Ambassador, Dr. Ghani,3 in the following instances: 1) “An American colonel”, recently returned to Washington from Turkey, had called on the Ambassador and inquired, during the course of the conversation, why it was that Turkey had not undertaken to improve its relations with its neighbor, Iran.

2) Mr. Ala,4 the Iranian Ambassador, had informed the Turkish Ambassador of a conversation with Ambassador Wiley5 in which Mr. Wiley had expressed the hope that there would be some improvement in Turkish-Iranian relations.

3) The new Iranian Ambassador to Turkey, Dr. Ghani, had proposed to the Turkish Foreign Office that a pact of mutual assistance be negotiated between Turkey and Iran.

Mr. Erkin stated that he wished to assure the Department that Turkish-Iranian relations were cordial and that there was no reason for anyone to be concerned that these relations were wearing thin or would not continue cordial. He continued that his Government had been noncommittal to Dr. Ghani’s approach in regard to the mutual assistance pact and preferred, before replying to the Iranians, to first ascertain the views of the U.S. Government on the formation of such a pact.

I commented that the Department was well aware of the correct and friendly relations presently extant between Iran and Turkey and that, strictly in confidence, the Department’s principal concern was that Iranian jealousy of Turkey, engendered because of the greater U.S. military assistance being furnished Turkey, might, in the future, be manifested in less cordial relations between the two countries. I remarked that I believed Ambassador Wiley had this in mind when he spoke to Ambassador Ala.

With reference to the proposed mutual assistance pact raised by the Iranians in Ankara, and speaking for myself, I informed Mr. Erkin that such a pact seemed unrealistic when considered in the light of the present day situation, especially since the really effective security pacts now in existence and in the process of negotiation were based on a more extensive regional concept. I undertook, however, to ascertain the official views of my Government and promised to communicate them to the Turkish Ambassador at the appropriate time.

J[oseph] C. S[atterthwaite]

1 Feridun C. Erkin.

2 Officer in the Division of Greek, Turkish, and Iranian Affairs.

3 Dr. Ghassem Ghani, the Iranian Ambassador in Turkey.

4 Hussein Ala, the Iranian Ambassador in the United States.

5 John C. Wiley, the U.S. Ambassador to Iran.

The United States Special Representative in Europe for the Economic Cooperation Administration (Harriman) to the Economic Cooperation Administration ECA Telegram Piles, FRC Acc. No. 53 A 278, Paris Repto–Torep Airgrams: Airgram

[Document 1143]

The United States Special Representative in Europe for the Economic Cooperation Administration (Harriman) to the Economic Cooperation Administration

secret [Paris,] February 22, 1949.

A–55. On February 19 at lunch, I had a general discussion with Foreign Minister Sadak of Turkey1 regarding ECA problems in that country. The Foreign Minister expressed the disappointment of his Government at the reduction which had been made in the figure of aid for Turkey in ECA’s recent submissions to Congress. I explained to him that these submissions have been purely of an illustrative nature and that they were in no sense designed by ECA to prejudge the recommendations which might be made by OEEC in connection with the division of whatever American aid might be available.

I expressed to the Foreign Minister ECA’s interest in the program of development upon which Turkey has embarked. I said that parts of this program, which had been included in Turkey’s estimates of requirements from ECA, were probably beyond the scope of ECA financing. I said that I thought it was most important, therefore, that Turkey push the negotiation for obtaining funds from World Bank for the purpose of financing certain of these projects. I told the Foreign Minister that when I was in Washington recently, I discussed this matter with officials of both of these institutions and I stated that Mr. Robert Garner, Vice President of the World Bank, is shortly coming to Europe and plans to visit Turkey.

The Foreign Minister appeared much interested in the above. He said that not only did Turkey need funds to finance purchases and services from abroad in connection with development programs, but that there was also a serious problem involved in securing local funds for local investment purposes. He recalled that forty-eight percent of the Turkish budget is devoted to defense purposes and he contrasted this amount with the eight percent of the total budget similarly allocated in Belgium. He stressed the determination of Turkey, as long as present circumstances persist, to maintain herself in a posture of defense, but he said that, obviously, the burden involved limited the Government’s possibilities for constructive action in other directions and, therefore, emphasized the need for foreign assistance. I expressed full appreciation of the importance and extent of Turkey’s sacrifices.

Harriman

1 During late February and March, Turkish Minister for Foreign Affairs Necmettin Sadak visited Western Europe.

Editorial Note [Document 1144]

Editorial Note

On March 22 the National Security Council adopted a report to President Truman designated NSC 42/1 and entitled “U.S. Objectives with Respect to Greece and Turkey to Counter Soviet Threats to U.S. Security.” President Truman approved the report the following day. For the text of NSC 42/1, March 22, see page 269 [Pg. 269 is part of Doc. 133]. The circumstances attending the preparation and approval of this report are reviewed in footnote 2 to NSC 42/1.

In its original version (NSC 42, March 4, 1949), this report included several paragraphs recommending negotiations with the Turkish Government on the building of airfields in Turkey. These recommendations had originally been advanced in NSC 36, December 1, 1948, a report by the Secretary of the Air Force to the National Security Council entitled “The U.S. Position with Respect to Turkey in the Light of U.S. Security Interests in the Middle East, Particularly as Respects Air Power and the Greek and Turkish Aid Programs,” not printed (S/S–NSC Files, Lot 63 D 351 NSC 36 Series). The National Security Council Staff, acting in accordance with the instructions of the Council, had taken NSC 36 into consideration in the preparation of the report presented in NSC 42. According to the NSC Action 196, March 22, the National Security Council adopted the report subject to the deletions of those paragraphs dealing with the construction of airfields in Turkey. The Council further agreed that the Department of State should submit for Council consideration its latest views on the desirability of seeking such an arrangement. (S/S–NSC (Miscellaneous) Files, Lot 66 D 95, NSC Records of Action)

An early draft of the requested report, prepared by the Policy Planning Staff and concurred in by the principal interested officers of the Department of State, was ready on April 1 (S/S–NSC Files, Lot 63 D 351, NSC 42 Series). That early draft was largely the same as the Report by the Department of State to the National Security Council, NSC 36/1, April 15, page 1654 [Pg. 1654 includes portions of Doc. 1147 and Doc. 1148].

In a memorandum of April 2 to the National Security Council, not printed, Secretary of Defense Louis A. Johnson suggested that the Council consider in conjunction with the question of United States airfield construction a project to stockpile aviation gasoline in Turkey. The Joint Chiefs of Staff had recommended that CINCNELM be authorized to proceed with negotiations on the stockpiling project, subject to Department of State clearance in view of the political considerations involved. (S/S–NSC Files, Lot 63 D 351, NSC 42 Series)

The Department of State’s draft report of April 1 on airfield construction in Turkey was slightly revised to deal also with the question of gasoline stockpiling and was circulated to the Under Secretary’s Meeting (regarding the Under Secretary’s Meeting, see footnote 2 to NSC 42/1, March 22, Page 269 [Pg. 269 is part of Doc. 133]) as document UM D–15/1, April 7. UM D–15/1 was identical with NSC 36/1, April 15, page 1654 [Pg. 1654 includes portions of Doc. 1147 and Doc. 1148]. The Under Secretary’s Meeting of April 11 approved UM D–15/1 (Under Secretary’s Meetings, Lot 53 D 250). The Department of State’s revised report was submitted to the National Security Council by the Secretary of State under cover of a brief transmittal memorandum of April 14 and was subsequently circulated to the Council as document NSC 36/1, April 15, page 1654 [Pg. 1654 includes portions of Doc. 1147 and Doc. 1148]. According to NSC Action 205, the Council at its meeting on April 21 concurred in the conclusions set forth in the report (S/S–NSC (Miscellaneous) Files, Lot 66 D 95, NSC Records of Action). The President approved the report the same day.

The lot files referred to above are described as follows: Lot 63 D 351 is a serial master file of the National Security Council documents and correspondence and related Department of State memoranda for the years 1947–1961, as maintained by the Executive Secretariat of the Department of State. Lot 66 D 95 is a collection of administrative and miscellaneous National Security Council documentation for the years 1947–1963, also maintained by the Executive Secretariat. Lot 53 D 250 is a master file of records of meetings, documents, summaries, and agenda of the Under Secretary’s meetings for the years 1949–1952, also maintained by the Executive Secretariat.

The President of Turkey (Inönü) to President Truman 711.67/4–2649

[Document 1145]

The President of Turkey (Inönü) to President Truman 1

Ankara, March 31, 1949.

Mr. President: Availing myself of the opportunity of the departure of Mr. Necmeddin Sadak, Minister of Foreign Affairs, to the United States of America where he will preside over the Turkish delegation at the General Assembly of the United Nations and get in touch with leading American personalities in Washington, may I reaffirm to Your Excellency through this message the sincere friendship and deep admiration which the Turkish people and myself feel for the Great American nation and its eminent President.

I have no doubt that in his contacts and conversations our Minister of Foreign Affairs will always receive the most favourable welcome and that the close friendship which binds our two countries and the sincere collaboration which characterizes their mutual relations shall be further promoted and strengthened. I am all the more convinced in this belief, as your wise and farsighted policy has never failed to manifest itself towards Turkey with all the interest she inspires. In this connection, I should like to lay particular stress on the precious military aid which has been given to us by the United States in one of the most critical periods which the world is going through, and for which the entire Turkish nation is imbued with the most profound gratitude.

With the expression of my best wishes for your personal health and happiness as well as the prosperity of the American nation, please accept [etc.]

Ismet Inönü

1 This letter was delivered to President Truman by the Turkish Foreign Minister during a brief courtesy call at the White House on April 13. No record has been found of the substance of discussion between the President and the Foreign Minister. At his news conference on April 14, President Truman commented on the brief, courtesy nature of the call; see Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: Harry, S. Truman, 1949 (Washington, Government Printing Office, 1964), p. 214.

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Secretary of State Secretary’s Memoranda, Lot 53 D 444

1 [Document 1146]

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Secretary of State 2

secret [Washington,] April 12, 1949.

Participants: The Secretary—Mr. Acheson

The Turkish Foreign Minister—Necmeddin Sadak3

Feridun Erkin, Turkish Ambassador

Ambassador Edwin C. Wilson, S/P 4

J. C. Satterthwaite, Director, NEA

After an exchange of amenities during the course of which Mr. Sadak said that he had been instructed by President Ismet Inönü to transmit to the President and me the latter’s warmest greetings, the Minister said that with my permission he would review the position in which Turkey found itself as a result of the recent signature of the North Atlantic Treaty.5 In March 1947 the United States Government had announced its program in support of the independence and security of Turkey.6 Subsequent to that time, this support was confirmed through the very effective military assistance which Turkey, has received from the U.S.

Later the formation of the Western Union took place, and then came reports that negotiations would begin looking to a security arrangement with the United States for the North Atlantic area. In the autumn of 1948 conversations took place at Ankara with the U.S. and U.K. Ambassadors in which the Turkish Government raised the question of Turkey’s position in the contemplated security arrangement. The Turkish Government was informed in reply by written memoranda received from the U.S. and U.K. Ambassadors, that while details of the proposed arrangement had not yet been formulated, the conception was clearly a geographical one, restricted geographically in scope to countries of the North Atlantic region. Specifically the Turkish Government was informed that Italy would not be included. Subsequently, however, it was learned that Italy and the territory in North Africa comprising the Algerian departments of France would in fact be brought within the scope of the North Atlantic Pact.7

This new situation created serious problems for the Turkish Government and caused confusion and perturbation in Turkish public opinion. The Turkish Government having been previously informed that the contemplated pact would be limited geographically in scope and that Italy would not be included, had so informed the Turkish National Assembly. The Turkish Government and Turkish opinion were satisfied with this situation, since the geographical conception of a North Atlantic Pact was readily understandable, and this, of course, left the door open for later consideration of a Mediterranean security arrangement within which Turkey might hope to find an appropriate place together with other Mediterranean countries.

The announcement that the geographical basis of the pact had been completely altered and that Italy, a Mediterranean country, was being brought into the pact, completely upset the situation so far as the views and plans of the Turkish Government were concerned and, as stated, caused deep uneasiness on the part of Turkish public opinion. It was difficult to avoid the impression that Turkey, in the most exposed position of all European countries as regards pressure and possible attack from Soviet Russia, was being abandoned and left outside the thinking of the Western powers as regards security arrangements.

This seemed all the more incomprehensible to the Turkish Government and people inasmuch as Turkey had been undergoing constant Soviet pressure and threats since the spring of 1945 when Soviet Russia denounced its nonaggression pact with Turkey and made demands affecting Turkish territory and bases in the Straits. Since that time Turkey has been supporting heavy sacrifices by maintaining a large armed force to withstand Soviet threats, at the cost of what is becoming an unbearable burden upon Turkey’s economy and finances. The fear began to creep into Turkish minds that with the negotiation of the Atlantic Pact the United States had altered its position regarding Turkey and that it no longer maintained the powerful interest in the maintenance of Turkey’s independence and integrity which had characterized the attitude of the United States Government since 1946. Soviet propaganda, it might be added, had not been slow to make the most of this situation.

Mr. Sadak said that he was frankly at a loss to know what explanation he could give to the Turkish Parliament and public. He would greatly appreciate any help that I might be able to give him.

In reply I said that I thought it might be of assistance in explaining the position of my government to review the recent history of Turkish-American relations. The security of the Middle East was one of the most important problems with which the Department was confronted soon after I became Under Secretary in 1945. In 1946 the Soviet demands on the Turkish Straits were made. The Department and the President took such a serious view of these demands that for a large part of a week it was necessary for me, as Acting Secretary of State, to devote almost all my time to the consideration of this problem. Under the instructions of the President, daily meetings were held with the Secretaries of War and the Navy and with the Army, Navy, and Air Force Chiefs of Staff. The conclusion was reached that the real purpose of the Soviet demands was the domination of Turkey and that this would be contrary to the vital interests of the U.S. As a result a strong position was taken by the U.S. Government in support of Turkish independence with the full knowledge of the possible consequences. The President considered this the most important decision he had made subsequent to the bombing of Hiroshima.8

In March 1947 the British Ambassador informed General Marshall that the British Government on economic grounds would have to withdraw its support of Greece and Turkey. Again the President and the Department attached the highest importance to this development. This time consultations were held not only with the Secretaries of War and the Navy and the Service Chiefs of Staff but also with 20 leaders of the Congress. The latter were informed of the significance of the situation and the vital interest of the U.S. in preserving the integrity and independence of Greece and Turkey. They fully agreed, legislation was prepared and Congress approved the Greek-Turkish Aid Program.

Subsequently it became apparent that in spite of some recovery in Western Europe the situation was deteriorating there to such an extent that all our hopes and plans for world peace and security would be of no avail unless we came to the assistance of Western Europe. As a result the European Recovery Program, the formation of the Western Union, and now the North Atlantic Treaty had come to pass.

I assured Mr. Sadak that in the President’s thinking and in mine the vital importance to the U.S. of the independence and integrity of Turkey was in no way diminished as a result of these developments. The President’s speech of March 1947,9 his subsequent statement on the occasion of Turkish Independence Day in October 194810 and my two statements11 in which Turkey was specifically mentioned in connection with the signing of the North Atlantic Pact should assist him to explain to the Turkish public that such was the case. I had discussed this problem a dozen to twenty times with the President and knew that in his thinking the importance to the U.S. of the independence and integrity of Turkey was in no wise diminished as a result of these developments in Western Europe.

Mr. Sadak thanked me for these assurances. He said he was keenly aware of the very heavy burdens I was carrying and did not wish to add to them. He still, however, was troubled as to what explanation he could give to the Turkish Assembly and the Turkish public. Two years ago Turkey had stood in the very forefront of U.S. preoccupations as regards security questions. Recently, however, the U.S. had transferred its interests to the West European countries, and had now gone further in guaranteeing their security than it had in the case of Turkey. As regards the West European countries, the U.S. was pledged to come immediately to their aid if they were attacked; no such pledge existed as regards Turkey. If there were any consistency or logic in international relations, then it would seem that Turkey, the first object of U.S. solicitude in security matters, would have been the first to be given the protective cover of a guarantee. But this had not proved to be the case. If, as I had stated, the U.S. position toward Turkey had not changed, why had it been impossible for this Government to extend the Atlantic Pact to include Turkey, or for my government at least to consider the extension of a similar guarantee to an Eastern Mediterranean Pact?12 Could he have the assurance that in the event of aggression against his country Turkey would not be abandoned by this Government?

I told the Minister that there were in my opinion three factors which should help him to assure the Turkish people that the U.S. Government had not lost interest in them or changed its position toward Turkey. First, there was the series of statements by the President and myself already referred to beginning in 1946 at the time of the Soviet demands on the Turkish Straits up to those made in connection with the signing of the Atlantic Pact. Secondly, there was the important military assistance rendered the Turkish Government by the U.S. In a few days a new military assistance bill would be presented to Congress. From the hearings in Congress on this bill it would be made clear that a substantial amount of this assistance was intended for Turkey. This would give evidence of continuing U.S. interest in Turkey. Thirdly, in the President’s thinking the economic development of the Middle East, particularly of Greece, Turkey, Iran and the Arab States, complemented the European Recovery Program. U.S. assistance in this respect also would make evident U.S. interest in that region.

As for the invitation extended to Italy to become one of the North Atlantic Treaty countries, I pointed out that this had been done not merely to please that country or France, but was a logical development. France had argued that Italy has been the back door into France through which throughout history attacks had been made upon it. It was only after this back door had been closed through the decision to include Italy that France’s attitude had changed with reference to her own security problems and that it had been found possible to reach a settlement in Western Germany.

For the first three days of next week, I continued, I would probably be on the witness stand before the Congressional Committees as a witness on the North Atlantic Treaty. The attitude of the Committees toward witnesses on an important foreign policy matter of this kind was often not unlike that a prosecutor to a witness in a jury trial in a moral turpitude case. I would face cameras, microphones and the bright lights of television. It was very important in the cross-examination to which I would be subjected that I should be completely frank in explaining whether in fact any further commitments were in contemplation by the U.S. Government at this time. It was important to avoid delays or difficulties which might arise in the consideration by the Senate of the Pact.

Moreover, it was not the President’s feeling that with the ratification of the Atlantic Pact the implementation of our policy toward Europe and the Near East would be completed. Rather the U.S. would continue to study with close attention such further steps which might be taken to strengthen international security. I hoped, therefore, that the explanation which I had given him would make it possible for Mr. Sadak to assure the Turkish Parliament and public of the fact that the U.S. had not changed its position toward Turkey.

Mr. Sadak thanked me again but asked for his own private information if he was correct in assuming first, that the U.S. had not changed its position with regard to the importance of supporting the integrity and independence of Turkey, and that if Turkey were the subject of aggression the U.S. would be by its side. Secondly, he asked, would the U.S. continue its study of further steps on behalf of international security, such as the extension of the Atlantic Pact, or alternatively the possibility of supporting an Eastern Mediterranean group, and was there therefore a possibility that Turkey might be brought in some such way into a contractual security arrangement with the U.S. in the near future?

To Mr. Sadak’s first question I said that to the best of my belief, and having in mind the background of relations between the two countries, he had accurately stated the situation. Obviously, however, I could not undertake any commitment on behalf of the U.S. Government. I was sure that Mr. Sadak appreciated the constitutional processes of this country. With reference to his second question I said that developments would presumably depend on events. If Soviet pressure on Germany, for instance, should be redirected in some other direction, then it would be quite possible that the U.S. might find it necessary to review the possibility of taking some steps in that direction. On the other hand, it was not impossible that the Soviet Government might turn to strengthening its position in the satellite countries, and this might lead us to examine other possible steps.

Mr. Sadak asked if I could say, simply to guide him in his own thinking, whether I thought that a further step might be taken in a relatively short time, say within a year, which might lead to bringing Turkey into some contractual security arrangement with the U.S. I said that in all frankness I thought there was little likelihood of this. We must make progress slowly and prudently in this field of international security arrangements. In any case, however, the whole situation would be under constant study and review by the Department.

Furthermore I felt that it was unwise and dangerous, and I was sure Mr. Sadak would agree with me, to attempt to give unduly optimistic or encouraging indications to others merely out of a desire to be polite. One of the most marked characteristics of President Truman was that once his word was given there was no going back on it; it was therefore doubly important to be prudent and sure of our ground before undertaking to give assurances.

Mr. Sadak thanked me for this frank explanation of our position. He felt that our exchange of views had been most helpful, and ventured the opinion that on his return to Turkey he “might” be able to render a “fairly optimistic” report.13

Before parting Mr. Sadak said that he would also like to discuss certain economic problems of importance to Turkey, but that he did not feel that he should burden me with them. He asked to whom I could recommend him. I suggested that he discuss these problems with Assistant Secretary Thorp14 and Mr. Satterthwaite and assured him that the necessary arrangements would be made.

During this interview, which lasted one hour and a half, Mr. Sadak spoke in French and Ambassador Wilson served as interpreter.

1 This lot is a comprehensive chronological collection of the Secretary of State’s memoranda and memoranda of conversation for the years 1947–1953, as maintained by the Executive Secretariat of the Department of State.

2 The full text of this memorandum of conversation was transmitted in a circular airgram of April 21 to 21 missions in Europe and the Middle East (711.67/4–2149). The source text is not signed. The memorandum was drafted by Joseph C. Satterthwaite, Director of the Office of Near Eastern and African Affairs, and Edwin C. Wilson, member of the Policy Planning Staff.

3 Foreign Minister Sadak, who was the first Turkish Foreign Minister to visit the United States, traveled to New York in early April for the opening of the Second Part of the Third Session of the United Nations General Assembly (April 5–May 18). He visited Washington from April 12 to 15. Regarding his subsequent call on President Truman on April 13, see footnote 1 to the letter from Inönü to Truman, March 31, p. 1646 [Pg. 1646 includes portions of Doc. 1144 and Doc. 1145].

4 Edwin C. Wilson, member of the Policy Planning Staff, previously served as Ambassador in Turkey from 1945 to 1948.

5 For documentation on the negotiation of the North Atlantic Treaty, signed in Washington on April 4, see vol. iv, pp. 1 ff. This documentation includes many discussions and exchanges during February, March, and April regarding the possible inclusion of Turkey in the alliance.

6 For documentation on the initiation of United States military and economic assistance to Greece and Turkey in 1947 (the Truman Doctrine), see Foreign Relations, 1947, vol. v, pp. 1 ff.

7 Regarding the conversations and memoranda under reference in this paragraph, see telegram 839, November 26, 1948, and despatch 483, December 23, 1948, both from Ankara, Foreign Relations, 1948, vol. iii, pp. 294 and 332.

8 For documentation on the attitude of the United States towards the demands of the Soviet Union for the revision of the Turkish Straits regime and other matters affecting Turkish-Soviet relations in 1946, see Foreign Relations, 1946, vol. vii, pp. 801 ff. The final reference in this paragraph is, of course, to the dropping of an atomic bomb on Hiroshima, Japan, on August 6, 1945.

9 The reference here is to the address of President Truman before Congress on March 12, 1947, regarding recommendations on military and economic assistance to Greece and Turkey. For the text, see Department of State Bulletin, Supplement of May 4, 1947, p. 829, or Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: Harry S. Truman, 1947 (Washington, Government Printing Office, 1963), p. 176.

10 For the text of President Truman’s statement on the National Holiday of Turkey, October 29, 1948, see ibid., 1948 (Washington, Government Printing Office, 1964), pp. 915–916.

11 The references here are presumably to the Secretary of State’s radio address of March 18 on the meaning of the North Atlantic Pact (Department of State Bulletin, March 27, 1949, pp. 384–388) and his statement to the press regarding U.S. interest in the security of areas outside the North Atlantic Community, issued to the press on March 23 (ibid., April 3, 1949, p. 428).

12 During a conversation with Ambassador Erkin on February 17, regarding Turkish interest in a proposed American declaration on security interests in Greece, Turkey, and Iran and the eventual creation of a Mediterranean Pact, Secretary of State Acheson explained that the United States could not currently give consideration to such regional security groupings. For text of the memorandum of this conversation, see vol. iv, p. 117.

13 A memorandum of conversation by Carlisle H. Humelsine, Director of the Executive Secretariat, April 15, 1949, summarizing the Secretary of State’s daily staff meeting of that date, includes the following item on the Secretary’s meeting with Foreign Minister Sadak: “In connection with the above discussion [on budget requests], the Secretary reported on his meeting with the Foreign Minister of Turkey. He told how discouraged the Foreign Minister was at the beginning of their conversation and of the various matters that he covered with the Foreign Minister. The Secretary made the point that at the end of the conversation he felt that the Turkish Foreign Minister was relieved and satisfied that the United States was deeply interested in Turkey and was not using the country merely as a means to an end. He said that one of the most difficult questions that the Turkish Minister had put to him was the obvious one to the effect, ‘Will the United States fight if the Russians attack Turkey?’ In answering this, the Secretary made the point that this was a decision that was largely in the hands of the President and that he must realize that it was very difficult to give a direct answer to this type of inquiry but that he, the Secretary, wanted to point out two of the most important characteristics of President Truman: (1) that he never went back on a friend, and (2) that Mr. Truman never overpromised. The Secretary said he thought that this made quite an impression on the Turkish Foreign Minister. It was decided that very careful attention would have to be paid to the problem of Turkey in all our discussions.” (Secretary’s Daily Meetings, Lot 58 D 609, Secretary’s Staff Meetings) This lot is a chronological collection of the records of the Secretary of State’s daily meetings with top Department of State officials for the years 1949–1952, as maintained by the Special Assistant to the Secretary of State.

14 Willard L. Thorp, Assistant Secretary of State for Economic Affairs. Regarding Foreign Minister Sadak’s meeting with Thorp on April 13, see telegram 132 to Ankara, infra.

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in Turkey 840.50 Recovery/4–1449: Telegram

[Document 1147]

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in Turkey

confidential Washington, April 14, 1949—6 p. m.

132. In requested meeting with Thorp yesterday Sadak requested increased US financial aid citing serious financial position Turk Govt result continuing defense burden making most difficult internal financing ECA and anticipated IBRD projects. Requested US grant additional $30 million under military aid program to finance current consumption items including POL which otherwise payable from defense budget thus facilitating internal financing development projects. Sadak emphasized $30 million additional to regular military aid. Emb comments necessity such additional assistance requested.

Sadak further requested US support in anticipated approach by Turk Govt to US private money market for loan probably less than $70 million with principal objective provide dollar exchange for imports by Turk private enterprise. Dept offered endeavour create favorable atmosphere in banking circles for Turk discussions this subject but not hopeful outcome.1

Acheson

1 A more detailed memorandum of conversation concerning the meeting described in this telegram is included in file 867.51/4–1349. Also present for this meeting were Paul H. Nitze, Deputy to Assistant Secretary of State Thorp; Joseph C. Satterthwaite, Director of the Office of Near Eastern and African Affairs; Wilfred Malenbaum, Chief of the Division of Investment and Economic Development; and Charles Robert Moore, of the Division of Commercial Policy Foreign Minister Sadak was accompanied by Bulent Yazici, Financial Counselor of the Turkish Embassy, and Necdet Kent, Private Secretary to Foreign Minister Sadak. In New York on April 15, Foreign Minister Sadak, Financial Counselor Yazici, and Mr. Kent, accompanied by Mr. Moore, had conversations with Allen Sproul, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, and with senior officers of the National City Bank of New York, the Bankers Trust Company, the Guaranty Trust Company, and the Chase National Bank. The Foreign Minister explored the possibilities for a $50 million bank loan to Turkey. The bank officials indicated that a loan would be possible only if it were guaranteed by gold or by the Export-Import Bank or the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development. Mr. Moore’s memorandum, dated April 20, reviewing these conversations, is included in file 967.51/4–2049. A brief report on the conversations was also transmitted in telegram 138, April 20, to Ankara, not printed (867.51/4–2049).

Report by the Secretary of State to the National Security Council S/S–NSC Files, Lot 63 D 351, NSC 36 Series

[Document 1148]

Report by the Secretary of State to the National Security Council 1

top secret Washington, April 15, 1949.

NSC 36/1

Construction of Airfields and Stockpiling of Aviation Gasoline in Turkey

problem

1. Should the U.S. seek arrangements with the Turkish Government for the construction of airfields or for the stockpiling of aviation gasoline in Turkey?

discussion

2. The question of seeking an arrangement with the Turkish Government for the construction of airfields in Turkey adequate for the operations envisaged in U.S. strategic plans and for the stockpiling of aviation gasoline in Turkey must be considered in the light of the fact that it has not been possible to include Turkey in the North Atlantic Treaty. Moreover, we have not been willing at this time, as desired by Turkey, to encourage or support a Mediterranean pact. In the face of our unwillingness, so far, to give a guarantee or other formal assurance that the U.S. will safeguard Turkey’s territorial integrity, and having regard to Turkish disappointment in this respect, it would be unwise for the U.S. Government to urge upon Turkey any action which would expose it to increased pressure from the Soviet Union.

3. The construction of these airfields and the stockpiling of aviation gasoline would be regarded by the Soviet government as a threat to the security of the U.S.S.R., and would stimulate further Soviet pressure on Turkey and perhaps Iran. Furthermore, it is clear that the Soviet Union is watching carefully for any developments which could be exploited to support the Soviet thesis that the Forth Atlantic Treaty is aggressive in intent and operation. The construction at this time of forward air bases in Turkish territory might be an important factor in leading the Soviet Government to the erroneous conclusion that the Treaty is not solely defensive in character. It would also cause doubts among a considerable number of persons in other countries as to whether the Treaty has a truly defensive character.

conclusions

4. It would be unwise at this time to seek an arrangement with the Turkish Government for the construction of the airfields envisaged in NSC–36, or for the stockpiling of aviation gasoline referred to in the communication of April 2, 1949 from the Secretary of Defense to the Executive Secretary of the NSC.*

5. The Joint Chiefs of Staff consider that the construction of these airfields and the stockpiling of aviation gasoline in Turkey would be in accordance with U.S. strategic requirements. Therefore, the Department of State should keep the matter under continuous review, with a view to reconsideration by the National Security Council when more favorable circumstances justify.

1 The conclusions set forth in this report were concurred in by the National Security Council at its meeting on April 21. The President approved the report the same day. For a review of the circumstances attending the preparation of this report, see the editorial note, p. 1644 [Pg. 1644 includes portions of Doc. 1143 and Doc. 1144].

* Memorandum for the National Security Council from the Executive Secretary, April 4, 1949, subject: “Stockpiling of Aviation Gasoline in Turkey”. [Footnote in the source text. Regarding the memorandum under reference here, see the editorial note, p. 1644 [Pg. 1644 includes portions of Doc. 1143 and Doc. 1144].]

President Truman to the President of Turkey (Inönü) 711.67/4–2649

[Document 1149]

President Truman to the President of Turkey (Inönü)1

[Washington,] April 26, 1949.

Excellency: I have received with deep appreciation the cordial letter which Your Excellency was kind enough to send me through the intermediary of your distinguished Minister of Foreign Affairs, Mr. Necmeddin Sadak.

Your Excellency’s gracious reference to the friendship and admiration which the Turkish people feel for the people of the United States gave me particular pleasure. As you are no doubt aware, these sentiments are fully reciprocated by me and by my fellow Americans.

It was likewise a source of satisfaction to learn from Your Excellency of the Turkish nation’s gratitude for the military assistance rendered by the United States during this critical period in history. The enactment of the Turkish Aid Program in 1947 marked a new departure in Turco-American relations. No longer physically remote from each other, thanks to the advances of modern science, and animated by the common ideals of the United Nations Charter, the two republics then and there showed their determination to stand together, to the end that the forces which have exterminated human rights and liberties in such large sections of the globe might be halted, and their further aggressive expansion checked. In my address to Congress on March twelfth of that year, I said:

“I believe that it must be the policy of the United States to support free peoples who are resisting attempted subjugation by armed minorities or by outside pressures.

“I believe that we must assist free peoples to work out their own destinies in their own way.”2

I repeat these words because they reflect my feelings and the policy of my government today as accurately as they did then.

Mr. Sadak’s intelligence, broad experience and constructive approach to world problems have been greatly appreciated by the Secretary of State and myself, as well as by other American officials with whom he came in contact during his recent visit. I am sure, Mr. President, that he is leaving this country with a true understanding of the policies and problems of the United States Government in this troubled time.

I am confident too that Mr. Sadak leaves with the realization that the signing of the North Atlantic Treaty in no wise diminishes the concern felt in the United States for the maintenance of the independence and integrity of Turkey and other free nations outside the Atlantic area; but rather, by strengthening the collective security of the Atlantic Treaty countries, the creation of this pact serves to enhance Turkey’s security as well. Through it, the principles first enunciated with respect to Greece and Turkey are further implemented with respect to other freedom-loving peoples of the community of nations.

With assurances of my warmest wishes for your personal health and happiness, as well as for the continued welfare of the Turkish people,

I remain, with great respect,

Very sincerely yours,

Harry S. Truman

1 This letter was a reply to President Inönü’s letter of March 31, p. 1646 [Pg. 1646 includes portions of Doc. 1144 and Doc. 1145]. At the time he delivered President Inönü’s letter to President Truman, Turkish Foreign Minister Sadak indicated that he would be happy to take back with him to Turkey any reply which President Truman might wish to make. Sadak also indicated that the exchange of letters might be released to the press in Turkey. This letter was delivered to Sadak on April 26, the day before his departure for Turkey. Airgram A–120, April 29, to Ankara, not printed, which informed the Embassy of the texts of letters exchanged, stated that the Department of State had no objection to the release of the letters for publication (711.67/4–2949). Foreign Minister Sadak subsequently released the texts of the letters to the Turkish press on May 11. In his telegram 220, May 14, from Ankara, not printed, Ambassador Wadsworth reported having been asked by Foreign Minister Sadak to inform Secretary Acheson that President Inonu was very pleased with the letter from President Truman. Wadsworth further reported that the Turkish Grand National Assembly and a caucus of the Turkish Republican People’s Party had enthusiastically received news of the letter. Wadsworth observed further that he noticed a strongly developing spirit of optimism on U.S.-Turkish relations in his talks with Turkish political leaders and in his reading of the Turkish press. (867.00/5–1449)

2 Regarding the address quoted here, see footnote 9 to the Secretary of State’s memorandum of conversation of April 12, p. 1650 [Pg. 1650 is part of Doc. 1146].

The Assistant Secretary of State for Economic Affairs (Thorp) to the Turkish Ambassador (Erkin) 867.20/4–2649

[Document 1150]

The Assistant Secretary of State for Economic Affairs (Thorp) to the Turkish Ambassador (Erkin)

[Washington,] April 26, 1949.

Excellency: I have the honor to refer to my recent conversation with His Excellency the Foreign Minister of Turkey, Mr. Necmeddin Sadak,1 during the course of which Mr. Sadak requested that the United States Government assist the Government of Turkey in bearing the burden of its national defense establishment by increasing the funds proposed for allocation under the Military Assistance Program by thirty million dollars, this amount to be utilized for items of current military consumption otherwise payable from the Turkish national budget.

As you and Mr. Sadak are aware, the President will soon propose formally to the Congress that the United States Government extend military assistance to certain countries, including Turkey, during the coming Fiscal Year. The policy governing the extension of this aid, which has been developed along the lines of the existing Aid to Turkey Program, is that it should provide to the recipients capital items of military equipment which they could not otherwise purchase or produce for themselves.

The United States Government considers that the cost of consumable military goods such as those mentioned by Mr. Sadak in our conversation should be considered as part of the regular charges against the general resources of the state concerned and that any foreign assistance which may be needed in meeting those costs should be provided as part of a program for strengthening the economic position of the country as a whole rather than through a special military aid program. With the single temporary exception of Greece, this is the policy which the United States has been following and will continue to follow with respect to all other countries participating in the European Recovery Program. Where current expenditures for the maintenance and subsistence of the armed forces of these European nations have adversely affected their general economic and balance of payments position, this has been taken into account in calculating their economic assistance requirements under the European Recovery Program. It is believed that this basic policy is sound and that the needs presented by Mr. Sadak should be studied from this point of view.

Exclusive of the policy considerations outlined above, the Military Assistance Program presently under consideration by the Congress has reached a stage where it is impracticable for many reasons to incorporate in it any new items.

The established policy governing the Military Assistance Program and the impracticability of adding to the size of the program at this time should not be interpreted as meaning that the United States Government is unsympathetic to any real needs of the Turkish Government. The problem facing the Turkish Government, as set forth by Mr. Sadak, has been discussed with officials of the Economic Cooperation Administration, with the view to determining what assistance, if any, could be given by that Administration. While no commitment can be made, officials of that Administration have indicated their willingness to consider any new factors regarding Turkey’s economic situation which Turkey may desire to submit to the Organization for European Economic Cooperation, and through the OEEC to the Economic Cooperation Administration in Washington, which may make it possible for them to support an increase in the ECA allocation to Turkey.

It is, therefore, suggested that Mr. Sadak may wish to arrange for the competent Turkish authorities to discuss the matter with the ECA representative in Turkey with a view to preparing a complete statement of facts which meets the necessarily exacting standards set by the OEEC and the ECA, to serve as a basis for a re-appraisal of Turkey’s economic situation by these agencies.

Accept [etc.]

[ Willard L. Thorp ]

1 Regarding the conversation under reference here, see telegram 132, April 14, to Ankara, p. 1653 [Pg. 1653 includes portions of Doc. 1146 and Doc. 1147].

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in Turkey 840.50 Recovery/4–2949: Telegram

[Document 1151]

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in Turkey

confidential Washington, April 29, 1949—6 p. m.

156. Next fol tel contains text note handed Erkin by Thorp Apr 261 in reply Sadak request additional mil aid reported Deptel 132 Apr 14. Erkin expressed fear OEEC countries would be unsympathetic to additional Turk request for ECA aid since acceptance such request would reduce their own shares. He appealed for reconsideration our position and asked that Turkey be placed same basis as Greece “for political reasons”.

Dept and ECA officials present said always glad consider Turk views but cld not hold out hope our position this question might be changed. We believed OEEC would not be unsympathetic revised Turk request provided it carefully worked out and justified. Emphasized importance of Turks establishing adequate staff Ankara to assemble and present thoroughly documented case. Urged close consultation with Dorr. Said we believed Turkey had good grounds for requesting increased aid but ECA had hitherto been unable accord it because Turks had failed present sufficient facts in proper form.

Turk Financial Counselor2 pointed out some of consumable mil items for which Sadak requested additional aid would not affect balance of payments since they would be produced in Turkey. Argued this would mean OEEC wld reduce aid by corresponding amounts and Turkey would thus fail obtain relief for budget, which was part of purpose Sadak’s request. We replied revised request ECA aid shld not contain items to be produced in Turkey but shld reflect overall import needs Turkish economy in turn reflecting impact on Turkey’s economy of necessarily large domestic mil expenditures. In answer to specific question we said request for ECA assistance need not be restricted to import items going into development projects but might contain industrial raw materials etc or even consumer goods definitely not of luxury classification if assistance on these items justifiably required.

Foregoing for your background use. Pls show to Dorr.

Acheson

1 The text of the note under reference here is printed supra.

2 Biilent ¥azici.

Department of State Policy Statement 711.67/5–549

[Document 1152]

Department of State Policy Statement 1

secret [Washington,] May 5, 1949.

Turkey

a. objectives

Our fundamental objective in the eastern Mediterranean and Middle East is to promote peace and stability. This requires that we endeavor to prevent rivalries and conflicts of interest in that area from developing into open hostilities which might eventually lead to a third world war. In the case of Turkey, we are committed to a peacetime policy of military and economic assistance with the object of preserving that nation’s independence and maintaining it in its present role of bulwark against Soviet expansion in the Near and Middle East. As a corollary, any effect which US aid may have in building up Turkey’s military strength will to that extent tend to make available to the US and to our allies the Use of this vitally strategic area as a base of operations in the event of war, and conversely to deny the Soviet Union and its satellites access to its land and resources.

A second US objective toward Turkey is to assist, by appropriate means, that government’s determined and successful efforts to achieve a fuller democracy and a more productive economy, and thus to counteract the infiltration of Communism and Soviet influence not only in Turkey but in adjacent countries to the south and east.

b. policies

The cornerstone of Turkish foreign policy in recent years has been traditional and unflinching resistance to Russia. Since the war, the USSR has caused deep apprehension in Turkey by intermittent pressure for a dominant role in the control of the Turkish Straits, by its claims to Kars and Ardahan, and by carefully contrived border incidents and troop movements on Turkey’s Bulgarian and Caucasian frontiers, to the accompaniment of press and propaganda diatribes from Moscow. Although there have been no new demands in recent months, none of the demands made by Moscow has been retracted. In the circumstances, the Turks feel that they are obliged to keep more men under arms and out of productive labor than their present economy can well support.

1. Political

The present US policy of active assistance to Turkey had its inception when the British, on February 24, 1947, informed the Secretary of State that as of March 31, 1947, the UK would be obliged to discontinue the military, economic and advisory assistance which it had been giving to Greece and Turkey. The latter government had on various occasions applied to the US for financial aid, but until the enactment of Public Law 75 (the Greek-Turkish Aid Act) we lacked the facilities for acceding to these requests. During the first year after the passage of this legislation (May 22, 1947), we instituted a military, naval and air force modernization and training program, as well as a limited public roads program, making available to Turkey by outright grant equipment and services of a value of $100,000,000.2 The Aid Program is now well into its second year, under the legislative authority of Title III, Public Law 472, with an additional allotment, under present estimates, of between $50,000,000 and $75,000,000. Of the total for the two years, $106,864,476 had been encumbered as of January 31, 1949. It is hoped that the US military assistance will result in the formation of a more compact and effective national defense structure of decreased manpower but with greater mobility and firepower, and thus make an effective contribution to Turkey’s determination to resist Soviet pressure as well as releasing manpower badly needed for economic development.

There are no serious outstanding political issues between the US and Turkey. Despite certain misunderstandings, our relations are currently sound and based upon mutual awareness of our common cause. Prior to the inauguration of the US-Turkish Aid Program, We gave Turkey our active diplomatic support in rejecting Soviet demands for joint control of the Straits, and our moral support in resisting the Kars-Ardahan and Georgian claims put forward quasi-officially by Moscow.

We have encouraged Turkey’s policies of active participation in the affairs of the United Nations, the maintenance of its 1939 alliances with the UK and France, and its desire to seek in so far as possible the friendship of all nations, including the USSR. Turkey feels itself to be in an exposed and precarious situation, however, and is constantly seeking reassurances regarding its security. The Turkish Ambassador early sought US support for Turkey’s adherence to the North Atlantic pact, but, as the situation developed, Turkey was deemed ineligible for membership because of the complications that would ensue if the alliance were extended beyond the Western European-North Atlantic area. Both the US and the UK recognized, however, that the conclusion of the pact might have undesirable repercussions on Turkey as well as other nations such as Greece and Iran necessarily excluded from its scope. Not only these nations but the USSR might construe such an omission as an indication that aggression against those states would not cause any serious reaction on the part of the major Western powers. The US and UK, therefore, considered an attempt to counteract this dangerous possibility by the issuance of special declarations which, in the case of Turkey, would serve to supplement and reemphasize President Truman’s statement of October 29, 1948.3 When we intimated this possibility to the Turks, they took the position that only the US, the UK and possibly France should be parties to a declaration since nothing was to be gained by a statement regarding Turkey’s security emanating from the smaller European nations. Since the announcement of the North Atlantic Treaty, the Secretary of State has twice referred publicly to our continuing interest in Turkey,4 and the President again adverted to it in his speech at the Treaty signing ceremonies.5 No further formal declarations are planned at the present time.

Meanwhile, Foreign Minister Sadak has been actively exploring the possibilities of establishing a Mediterranean pact, similar in principle to the North Atlantic alliance. During February 1949, he journeyed to London, Paris and Brussels, but his conversations with Bevin, Schuman and Spaak6 were largely inconclusive. We informed the Turkish Ambassador that we were not prepared, at this time, to take a position either for or against such a regional grouping. Sadak has publicly reiterated Turkey’s willingness to join a Mediterranean pact as a supplementary means of safeguarding peace in the Middle East. Despite Turkey’s exclusion, he hailed the North Atlantic Treaty as a measure “that will bring confidence to European nations and thus help to prevent war.”

We have welcomed Turkey’s participation in the European Recovery Program and are making available ECA funds in limited amounts on a credit basis. Entering the war late, the Turks escaped destruction of their productive facilities, and hence no problem of reconstruction is involved. As a contributor, however, Turkey is in a position to play a significant part in European recovery by increasing production and export of certain commodities.

American educational and philanthropic institutions, such as Robert College, missionary hospitals and schools in the provinces, the American College for Women and the Admiral Bristol Hospital at Istanbul, have for many years made significant contributions to Turkish-American understanding. Through them, and thanks to the general awareness of our consistently non-imperialistic foreign policy, a growing number of young Turks, some of whom now occupy influential positions in the government, have become enthusiastic disciples of the American liberal tradition and are determined that the political institutions of their Republic shall evolve along democratic western lines. It is partly for this reason that Turkey is the only country in this area in which Communism has made no headway. As soon as the Smith-Mundt and Fulbright Acts7 are fully implemented, we will be in a position to pursue these and similar activities on an inter-governmental basis. In particular, the established American educational institutions should receive our full support, including financial aid if needed.

2. Economic

Our economic policy in Turkey is to promote economic progress without domination, a general increase in production, and the expansion of multilateral world trade consistent with the principles of the Charter for an International Trade Organization. Primary US sponsorship and financing of cooperative international economic measures, and the increasingly close political and economic ties between the two countries in the face of a common threat should favor US efforts to obtain Turkish cooperation. One obstacle to obtaining such cooperation, aside from those created by general world economic and political conditions, lies in the intensely nationalistic spirit of the Turks, now slowly receding. Furthermore, many Turks fear and distrust the consequences of active foreign participation in the economic life of their country, a reaction undoubtedly traceable to the humiliating period of the Ottoman Capitulations. Their extreme sensitivity to any suggestion of an encroachment on their sovereignty must also be borne in mind.

We should encourage Turkey to keep to the fore the objectives sponsored by the US in the ITO Charter and in the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT)8 and to adopt measures consistent with these objectives as Turkish and world conditions permit. We should urge it to ratify the Charter, which it has signed, and we believe it will do so after ratification by the US, in view of its demonstrated desire to participate in international cooperative measures supported by the leading western powers, particularly the US. We should also encourage the Turks to accede to the GATT.

While the granting of licenses for imports from the US has been drastically limited due to the dollar shortage, imports from other countries in many cases have been maintained or increased as a result of bilateral agreements and compensation or barter deals. We recognize that present world conditions make discrimination of this kind virtually inevitable and are not protesting it unless in specific cases the discrimination appears avoidable. We are hopeful that it will disappear as conditions permit the Turkish Government to adopt more liberal trade policies which we believe that it desires to do.

We should seek to avoid the recurrence of situations such as developed last year in connection with Turkey’s efforts to regain its major pre-war export market for tobacco in Germany. JEIA’s9 intention to meet German requirements through purchases of US surplus tobacco, to the virtual exclusion of Turkish tobacco, raised serious doubts in the minds of the Turks as to the sincerity of our avowed aims in promoting ERP, as well as to our desire to strengthen the Turkish economy. Recent arrangements through the ECA provide for the purchase by the German Trizone of $11.5 million of Turkish tobacco during the period January 1, 1949 through June 20, 1949, and other ERP countries have programmed large quantities of Turkish tobacco for import so that we believe Turkey’s fears have now been allayed. Situations such as the above tend to strengthen the hand of the element in Turkey which shrinks from increased involvement of Turkey in the international cooperative measures of the western powers.

We would like to negotiate a treaty of friendship, commerce and navigation with Turkey as a modern comprehensive successor to our present treaties of Commerce and Navigation (1929) and Establishment and Sojourn (1931). However, until there is a likelihood that Turkey will accept the provisions relating to national treatment which we have incorporated in other recent treaties there appears to be little to be gained by a new treaty.

In contrast to other countries in the Middle East, Turkey has been able to acquire and maintain substantial gold resources and to manage its exchange and fiscal affairs in a conservative manner. Since any economic and financial deterioration would weaken Turkey’s strategic position in the Middle East, it is our policy to help maintain its financial stability, and to provide maximum technical assistance to the Turkish Government on financial matters. In determining the extent to which Turkey should utilize its own resources before requesting assistance from the International Bank and the US Government, including ECA, we have accepted Turkey’s contention that substantial reserves of gold must be available in case of a military emergency.

The Central Bank of Turkey is understood to hold about $3.4 million worth of gold bars, identifiable as looted from Belgium and apparently acquired from Germany (perhaps unknowingly through substitution in a shipment sent from Switzerland via Germany). Our policy with respect to Turkey in this matter is the same as our policy vis-à-vis other countries similarly situated. We, in concert with the UK and France, had proposed that the Government of Turkey deliver to the Gold Pool the equivalent of the looted gold held by the Central Bank. The action proposed by the Turkish Government in answer to that note was not regarded as adequate and conclusive. Therefore, in association with the UK and France in October 1948, we proposed to the Turks a meeting of experts of the four countries to consider the restitution of looted gold and the liquidation of German assets in Turkey. A formal reply to this note has not yet been received. We will continue to press for such a meeting with the view to reaching an over-all settlement with the Turkish Government on these long outstanding interrelated problems. In the meantime, Turkey remains subject to the Treasury Department’s restrictions on the purchase of gold under the Gold Declaration of 1944.10

We believe that Turkey possesses the potentialities for economic development which, if carried out along sound lines, will raise the low standard of living of the Turkish people and improve the country’s international economic position, thus contributing to the maintenance of Turkey’s stability and making the country better able to support the military burdens which the US at present is helping to carry. We also believe that Turkey can contribute to European recovery through increased production and export of foodstuffs and minerals. Increased production of chrome is of especial interest to the US. It is our policy to lend our support, through ECA, the International Bank, and the Export-Import Bank,11 to the financing of development projects which we find to be realistically related to the potentialities and requirements of the Turkish economy. We attach particular importance to Turkey’s participation in the European Recovery Program, and we should continue to urge that Turkey’s ECA programs be given sympathetic consideration.

We should encourage the Turkish Government to take measures to attract private investment, both domestic and foreign, recognizing that continued movement away from “étatism” will be slow and will be conditioned by the ability of private capital to demonstrate that it can contribute to Turkey’s development.

We should discourage the Turkish Government from further ostentatious adventures in production for which the country is not ready, and should emphasize the importance of better agricultural methods, improved transportation, and the training of Turkish technicians at home and abroad, through apprenticeship as well as by formal schooling. As funds become available for the execution of the program envisaged in “Point Four” of the President’s Inaugural address,12 we should provide assistance to facilitate and supplement such training programs.

We have received numerous requests from various Turkish Government departments for American experts to make surveys preliminary to the execution of economic projects and reforms in governmental organization. We should do our best to meet these requests, with “Point Four” funds or otherwise, when their objectives, terms, and conditions appear sound. The Turks, however, have all too frequently lost the benefits of the expert advice provided by US and other technicians in the past by delay or inaction on the recommendations that have been made. We should, therefore, encourage them to seek assistance in the execution as well as in the formulation of programs. The work of the US Public Roads Administration in administrative guidance and on-the-spot training, within the Turkish Department of Roads and Bridges and in the field, is an example of the kind of technical assistance we think is most effective.

Turkey and Greece, are strategically located across normal air routes between eastern Europe and the Middle East. US aviation policy calls for coordinated US and UK diplomatic encouragement of Turkish efforts to halt by legal means commercial air operations of satellite aircraft into and through Turkish territory.13

c. relations with other states

Since the war Turkey has been under severe though intermittent pressure from the USSR, which seeks as one of its primary objectives the establishment in Ankara of a “friendly” government on the Polish or Rumanian model. Thanks to the almost total absence of native Communist elements, the determined will to resist of the homogeneous Turkish people, and above, all, to active Anglo-American support, Turkey today is one of the few countries on the Soviet periphery that have been able effectively to withstand Soviet pressures. The tensions thus created dominate Turkey’s relations with the great powers and with its neighbors, both within and without the Soviet orbit.

Although relations with the US are of paramount importance in Turkey’s foreign affairs, we have nevertheless encouraged the Turks to maintain close and cordial relations with the UK and France on the basis of the 1939 treaties with those countries. As regards Greece and Iran, its neighbors to the west and east, Turkey has shown a sympathetic attitude in their efforts to cope with Communist aggression but has avoided any firm commitments to them or any gestures which might furnish the USSR with the propaganda theme of provocation. Relations with Iran are generally good, although the Iranian Government has occasionally shown sensitiveness over the extent of US aid to Turkey. Soviet propaganda has played tip Turkey’s alleged desire to acquire Persian Azerbaijan.

The Turkish Government has sought to strengthen its relations with the several Arab States, and has entered into treaty relations with Iraq, Lebanon and Transjordan. On the explosive Palestine issue, Turkey expressed sympathy with its Moslem brothers of the Arab League to the extent of voting against partition in the General Assembly, but has made it plain that it will not allow that issue to jeopardize its close collaboration with the US. When partition became a fact, Turkey adhered to its UN obligations by accepting membership in the Palestine Conciliation Commission, created by resolution of the General Assembly on December 11, 1948. Turkey has decided to recognize Israel de facto, deferring de jure recognition until the work of the Commission is terminated, and bars which previously hindered Jewish emigration from Turkey have been lifted. If the trend of the current exodus continues, Turkey’s Jewish minority of approximately 75,000 may eventually be reduced to insignificant proportions.14

A minor problem which may in time assume larger proportions is Syria’s claim to the Alexandretta region, known in Turkey as the Hatay. The transfer of this area to Turkey by the French mandatory in 1939 has never been recognized by Syria. Intermittent attempts to negotiate the Hatay question have thus far proved fruitless, owing to the intransigence of both sides.

A slight improvement is discernible in the relations between Bulgaria and Turkey. During the course of 1948 a series of incidents and reprisals raised the political tension almost to the breaking point. Diplomatic Chiefs of Mission and service attachés of both countries were recalled and Turkish-Bulgarian relations came to a virtual standstill. In late February, however, a new Bulgarian minister presented his credentials to President Inönü.

Relations with other Communist-dominated Balkan states have followed a similar though less spectacular trend. Hungary, Yugoslavia and Rumania at one time recalled their Chiefs of Mission from Ankara in what appeared to be a concerted anti-Turk campaign, but new representatives from these three countries have now been accredited and diplomatic relations are currently correct but cool.

d. policy evaluation

US support, both moral and material, has been an indispensable factor in the stiffening of Turkey’s resistance. If the Turkish Government had had to rely solely on its own limited resources, it would in all likelihood long since have been obliged to make concessions to the USSR. Our policy with regard to Turkey up to the present can therefore be regarded as successful in helping to achieve our broad objectives. Turkey is oriented toward the western democracies, and fully alive to the necessity of continued US support if its political independence and territorial integrity are to be preserved. Moreover, since the survival of Turkey as an independent, stabilizing element in the Middle East is of prime importance to us, it is imperative that such westward orientation be maintained. We should therefore be especially vigilant not to allow any situation to arise which might weaken Turkey’s intention to resist because of doubts of our determination to continue our assistance. We should avoid any action, through public declarations or otherwise, which might give the USSR and Turkey the impression that we are more immediately concerned with the security of other countries or groups of countries than we are with that of Turkey. This should not be lost sight of now that the North Atlantic Treaty has been negotiated. While the Secretary’s press statement of March 2315 reassured the Turks that US interest in their security had in no wise been lessened by the North Atlantic Treaty negotiations, they obviously regard a declaration as far less of a guarantee than a pact would be.

It is clear that Turkey views with grave concern its nonparticipation in the North Atlantic Treaty. The Turkish Government feels that the inclusion of Italy in the Treaty has destroyed the argument that Turkey’s exclusion is based on purely geographic reasons, and underlines the position of Greece and Turkey as the only free European nations wishing to join the pact not admitted. The Turks have expressed fears that this situation will encourage the Russians to increase pressure on Turkey in the belief that they can do so without, serious reaction on the part of the US or the western European powers, and will weaken the unified determination of the Turkish people to resist Russian pressure.

In carrying out our economic policy we have received encouraging cooperation from the Turks. Such cooperation is based not only on recognition of the increasing importance of the US to Turkey’s independence and economic development but on recognition of the fact that our economic policy seeks to create conditions which are also in the interests of Turkey. So long as the US exerts constructive leadership in the field of international economic cooperation, we believe that we can count on Turkey’s support. While there has been some criticism in American business circles of apparent Turkish ineptitude in business relations, and improvement in such methods is to be desired, this problem is not of sufficient importance to justify a reconsideration of the fundamental premises upon which American aid to Turkey is based.

In order to strengthen our present effective policy with respect to Turkey, consideration should be given to further support along the following broad lines: (1) resistance, by action in the UN or by other appropriate means, to all diplomatic offensives of the Soviet Union directed against the territorial integrity of Turkey or toward any change in the status of the Straits which would adversely affect Turkey’s position; (2) continuation of military assistance to Turkey, under legislative provisions; (3) consideration of Turkey’s desire to join the Atlantic Pact, or of creating some other defensive regional arrangement including Turkey; (4) active support of Turkey in obtaining necessary economic assistance, primarily from international and private sources but including ECA credits consonant with the general policies and purposes of ERP; (5) intensive assistance under “Point Four” of the President’s Inaugural speech; and (6) keeping the American public informed concerning the current situation in Turkey and its implications with respect to our national security, so that US public opinion will be receptive to further positive action in support of Turkey, should such action be necessary and desirable.

1 The Department of State Policy Statements were concise documents summarizing the current U.S. policy toward a country or region, the relations of that country or region with the principal powers, and the issues and trends in that country or region. The Statements provided information and guidance for officers in missions abroad. The Statements were generally prepared by ad hoc working groups in the responsible geographic offices of the Department of State and were referred to appropriate diplomatic missions abroad for comment and criticism. The Statements were periodically revised.

2 For documentation on the origin of United States military and economic aid to Greece and Turkey in 1947 (Truman Doctrine), including the events and measures referred to here, see Foreign Relations, 1947, vol. v, pp. 1 ff. On November 28, 1949, President Truman transmitted to Congress the eighth quarterly report on United States military assistance to Greece and Turkey. The report, which covered the period from April 1 to June 30, 1949, and included cumulative statistics on the program, reviewed military assistance to Turkey and the organization of the American Mission for Aid to Turkey. The report indicated that military assistance valued at over $28 million had been delivered to Turkey from January 1 to June 30, 1949. For the text of the report, see Eighth Report to Congress on Assistance to Greece and Turkey for the Period Ended June 30, 1949, Department of State Publication 3674, Economic Cooperation Series 22 (Washington, Government Printing Office, 1949).

3 Regarding the statement under reference here, see footnote 10 to the Secretary of State’s memorandum of conversation of April 12, p. 1650 [Pg. 1650 is part of Doc. 1146].

4 See footnote 11 to the Secretary of State’s memorandum of conversation of April 12, ibid. [Pg. 1650 is part of Doc. 1146]

5 For the text of President Truman’s address on the occasion of the signing of the North Atlantic Treaty, April 4, 1949, see Department of State Bulletin, April 17, 1949, pp. 481–482, or Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: Harry S. Truman, 1949, pp. 196–198.

6 British Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs Ernest Bevin, French Minister for Foreign Affairs Robert Schuman, and Belgian Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs Paul-Henri Spaak.

7 The references here are to the United States Information and Educational Act of January 27, 1948, Public Law 402, 80th Congress, 2d Session, popularly known as the Smith-Mundt bill, and the Act of August 1, 1946 to amend the Surplus Property Act of 1944, Public Law 584, 79th Congress, 2d Session, known as the Fulbright Act, which authorized the Secretary of State to use currencies acquired abroad from the sale of surplus property for educational purposes. For the texts of the two laws, see Senate Document No. 123, 81st Cong., 1st Sess., A Decade of American Foreign Policy: Basic Documents, 1941–49 (Washington, Government Printing Office, 1950), pp. 1224–1236.

8 For documentation on United States policy with respect to international trade and investment, the International Trade Organization, the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade, and the conference at Annecy in 1949, see vol. i, pp. 657 ff.

9 The Joint Export-Import Agency of the U.S.–U.K. Zones of Occupation of Germany.

10 For documentation on the measures taken during 1948 for the disposition of gold looted by Germany during World War II, see Foreign Relations, 1948, vol. ii, pp. 853 ff.

11 On May 25, 1949, the Export-Import Bank of Washington approved two credits to Turkey totaling $8 million: one credit to the Turkish State Railways and Ports Administration for $3,750,000 to finance the purchase of rails, accessories, structural steel, and railroad ties in the United States, and another credit of $4,250,000 to the Turkish State Seaways and Harbors Administration to cover the design, construction in the United States, and towing to Turkey of a floating drydock and a floating crane. Four smaller Export-Import Bank credits amounting to more than $2 million were also approved during 1949. Details of these credits were reported upon in the Eighth and Ninth Semiannual Reports to Congress of the Export-Import Bank, covering the periods January–June and July–December 1949.

12 For documentation on the genesis of the Point Four (technical assistance) program, see vol. i., pp. 757 ff.

13 For documentation on United States civil aviation policy toward Eastern Europe and the Soviet Union, see vol. v, pp. 184 ff.

14 For documentation on United Stages policy with respect to the new state of Israel, see pp. 594 [Pg. 594 is part of Doc. 341] ff.

15 Department of State Bulletin, April 3, 1949, p. 428.

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State 867.20/5–1149: Telegram

[Document 1153]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Douglas) to the Secretary of State

secret London, May 11, 1949—5 p. m.

1831. Rumbold1 gave us today following information concerning conversation Bevin had with Turkish Foreign Minister Sadak here May 6:

Sadak enquired whether Bevin had anything to say regarding Turkish position in security system which Western Powers in process creating. Sadak said, in view Turkish disappointment, on return Turkey he would have to make some statement regarding results his visits US and Britain. In reply Bevin said US and UK had gone as far as they could at moment in safeguarding interests of Turkey. Bevin went on say Sadak could be sure that declarations regarding Turkey made by Secretary Acheson and himself in connection Atlantic Pact signing had prior approval of respective Chiefs of Staff. Bevin told Sadak Turkey better off under Truman Doctrine with substantial flow supplies than under pact where Turkey would have to await Congressional approval before obtaining equipment. Bevin said important point is ratification of pact by Congress and nothing should be done or said to make Secretary Acheson’s task more difficult. Bevin added that care must be taken as to public statements so as not to overstrain good will of Congress. Sadak stated he was aware of this and would bear it in mind; that Secretary Acheson had spoken to him in same sense.

Sadak asked assurance that Turk’s position so far as security concerned would be reexamined as soon as Atlantic Pact ratified. Bevin replied he would make no promise but had every hope Turkey would find satisfaction in due course.

Bevin agreed with Sadak European situation improved over year ago, particularly France. Bevin said we must continue firm and cautious policy towards Russia. He thought Greek guerrilla “peace oilers” probably part of peace offensive. Finally Bevin, in reply to enquiry by Sadak, indicated Turkey would be included in Council of Europe possibly before August session Strasbourg. Rumbold said full text above conversation being airmailed British Embassy Washington with instructions to inform Department.

Sent Department, repeated Ankara 27.

Douglas

1 Sir Horace Rumbold, Head of the Southern Department, British Foreign Office.

The Acting Secretary of State to the Secretary of Defense (Johnson) 867.014/5–1949

[Document 1154]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Secretary of Defense (Johnson)

top secret [Washington,] May 19, 1949.

My Dear Mr. Secretary: In a letter to the Secretary of Defense, dated January 3, 1949,1 this Department concurred in a proposal for an aerial mapping survey of Turkey to be carried out under an arrangement by which the British would proceed with the photographic program, and the United States would undertake the radar control, subject to the approval of the Turkish Government.

In a memorandum from General Loper,2 dated April 12, 1949,1 this Department was informed that the British Chiefs of Staff have proposed that the USAF provide both control and photography of a section or sections of Turkey. They also pointed out that it would not be possible for the RAF to begin work over Turkey until the late spring of 1950, but that, meanwhile, RAF facilities at Cyprus could be placed at USAF disposal at an earlier date. General Loper’s memorandum stated that this change was not considered as a substantial modification of the original proposal of the Secretary of Defense, and suggested that a proposal be presented to the Turkish Government with a view to the USAF beginning operations during the calendar year 1949.

It appears to the Department of State that the proposal of the British Chiefs of Staff does, in fact, constitute a substantial modification of the original proposal, since it would presumably involve extended flights by USAF planes in survey flights over Turkey. Mr. Forrestal’s letter,3 upon which the agreement of this Department was based, was not understood to mean that the use of United States aircraft was involved in that proposal. From the point of view of this Department, the use of both American and British air force planes in this project is more disadvantageous than a survey by only one of the two air forces.

Since the agreement by this Department to the original proposal was given in January, the National Security Council has considered the strategic requirements of the United States in Turkey. NSC 36/14 concluded that it would be unwise at this time to seek an arrangement with Turkey for the construction of airfields and the stockpiling of aviation gasoline and gave the reasons therefor. In the opinion of this Department, the policy set forth in NSC 36/1 is applicable to this project.

In addition, the Department believes that such action at this time would provide Soviet propaganda with a dangerous weapon and might enable them to convince a considerable section of world opinion that this country was planning aggressive action against the Soviet Union. The possible effect of this step upon the Soviet estimate of our intentions can also not be ignored.

For the above reasons, but without prejudice to future consideration at a more opportune time, this department does not believe that it would be advisable to proceed at present with the project for an aerial mapping survey of Turkey.5

Sincerely yours,

James E. Webb

1 Not printed.

2 Brig. Gen. Herbert B. Loper, Photographic and Survey Section, Joint Chiefs of Staff.

1 Not printed.

3 The letter of December 18, 1948, from then Secretary of Defense James V. Forrestal to the Secretary of State, not printed.

4 Dated April 15, p. 1654 [Pg. 1654 includes portions of Doc. 1147 and Doc. 1148].

5 In a letter of October 25, 1949, to the Secretary of State, not printed, Secretary of Defense Johnson expressed concurrence in the Department of State’s view that the proposed photographic mapping project for Turkey to be carried out by the United States and British aircraft be held in abeyance for the time being (867.014/10–2549).

The Ambassador in Turkey (Wadsworth) to the Secretary of State 867.51/6–749: Telegram

[Document 1155]

The Ambassador in Turkey (Wadsworth) to the Secretary of State

secret Ankara, June 7, 1949—3 p. m.

256. Following message (supplementing mytel 194, April 301 ) is based on Polk’s2 preliminary review Turk finances. He received ready cooperation Ministers Finance, National Defense, Foreign Affairs, Economics and others. 1. Turk budget difficulties serious and likely continue so at least three years due combination high expenditures on defense and development programs (under archaic revenue system only now amended for progressive revision beginning 1941 [1949?]).

2. Probable that government will cut defense budget in 1950 below inadequate 1949 level. Minister National Defense stated his ministry slated bear major part projected total budget reduction circa LT 200 million. This might mean cutting defense budget by some 20 percent present total or almost LT 100 million. Note: Of LT 461 million present budget, 39 percent is needed to maintain 337,000 enlisted men at strikingly low figure of LT 527 per man per year. An additional 35 percent is required for 23,000 officers, 9,000 noncoms and 1,700 civilians. We find little possibility materially reduce expenditures covered by remaining 26 percent.

3. Current budget, which seems maximum possible present Turk effort, fails provide funds for following vital military needs (round figure estimates based on detailed figures given Polk): a. Nonrecurrent expenditure at [LT?] 200 million for new construction (notably airports, ammunition depots, POL storage, training schools and repair shops for transport).

b. Nonrecurrent expenditure LT 350 million for stocks of food, clothing and oil to support an expanded army in event of war. (Note: this figure is calculated on basis total mobilization of 1,500,000 men.)

c. Recurrent annual expenditure of additional LT 50 million for maintenance military equipment.

4. Investigation details of defense budget reveals no significant projected expenditure for non-military matériel imports (unless some $4 million POL can be so considered). Consequently we assume ECA could not under present policy (see Repto circular 190 April 203 ) afford any substantial relief. (Note: budget provision for lira expenditures on locally procured consumption goods include food LT 125 million, clothing 49 million and fuel 13 million.)

5. In general, we see present budgetary difficulties threatening essential progress strategic program and recommend serious consideration; early implementation following suggested relief measures: (a) Direct grant in aid in minimum amount $20 million (see mytel 194 April 30, paragraph 13).

(b) General authorization for AMAT to defray, within limits of such grant, cost of imports now authorized in present defense budget and also cost of such nonbudgeted items (including building materials and labor) as it deems essential to orderly progress MAP.

(c) Placing Turkey on grant basis for ECA aid, to avoid excessive foreign exchange and budgetary burden when service begins, as well as to provide counterpart funds. Latter would facilitate implementing projects and encouragement sound fiscal policy. (Note: Dorr concurs in this recommendation.)

Polk will prepare preliminary supporting report in Cairo, mailing copies directly to Department and Treasury. I strongly recommend his early return to continue survey (unfortunately cut short by Treasury instruction in Deptel 186 May 184 ). He has received fullest cooperation from Turk Ministers and fiscal authorities who have urged and expect his return. We are persuaded this is unique opportunity establish true financial picture. Dorr strongly concurs on basis prospective major contribution ECA objectives.

Sent Department 256; repeated Cairo 23 for Polk.

Wadsworth

1 Not printed. In it Ambassador Wadsworth reviewed the current financial and budgetary problems in Turkey in some detail and concluded by recommending a minimum of $20 million in additional direct military aid on the understanding that the Turkish defense budget be not simply maintained but increased to ensure prompt realization of special projects of mutual interest to the Turkish Ministry of Defense and the American Mission for Aid to Turkey. Major General McBride concurred in the recommendation. (840.50 Recovery/4–3049) Telegram 195, April 30, from Ankara, not printed, reported that ECA Chief of Mission Dorr recommended additional economic aid of perhaps $30 million to increase the supply of consumer goods and to ease the current budget deficit (840.50 Recovery/4–3049).

2 Judd Polk, Treasury Representative in the Middle East.

3 Not printed.

4 Not printed.

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in Turkey 867.00/6–2849: Telegram

[Document 1156]

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in Turkey

confidential Washington, June 30, 1949—6 p. m.

247. Ur 2921 read with interest in view sensational AP despatch June 27 announcing “major political crisis punctuated by hints of revolution over Govt’s internal policies broke suddenly in Turkey tonight” and peppered with such phrases as “inciting people to revolt”, “terroristic atmosphere”, “emergency GNA session to cope with revolutionary movement”, etc. Ur further evaluation of potential danger in present situation requested.

If you think desirable at this juncture you may seek audience Inonu and stress in friendly manner USA’s interest in orderly development democratic processes.2

Acheson

1 Telegram 292, June 28, from Ankara, not printed, reported that the Turkish Democratic Party, the major opposition party in Turkey, had adopted a convention resolution urging that electoral irregularities in the forthcoming 1950 national elections he met with “legitimate self-defense.” The Turkish Government had subsequently issued a communiqué promising free and unfettered elections but warning against the efforts of the Democratic Party to create an atmosphere of “disquiet.” (867.00/6–2849)

2 In his telegram 296, July 1, from Ankara, not printed, Ambassador Wadsworth observed that the “alarmist language” of the Associated Press despatch was entirely unwarranted and that there was no “revolutionary movement.” He did not believe an audience with the President was desirable. (867.00/7–149)

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in Turkey 840.50 Recovery/6–749: Telegram

[Document 1157]

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in Turkey

secret Washington, July 1, 1949—2 p. m.

250. 1. Despite your appraisal budgetary and defense problem outlined Embtel 256, June 7, present situation re possibility additional grant-in-aid for Turkey same as indicated Deptels 156 and 157 Apr 29.1 Polk’s report not yet received, but do not anticipate it cld change matters.

2. Cannot say whether Turks will be given ECA grants rather than loans for fiscal 1950; however, from informal conversation with ECA prospects not bright. In any case estab of grant basis wld not alleviate current local currency problem or provide counterpart funds not available under loan system or “facilitate implementing projects” unless latter means that ECA wld have more effective voice in allocating funds for development. To extent goods obtained with ECA loan funds are sold in Turkey and not used for govt acct, Turk Govt receives counterpart in liras which it can freely spend for any purpose. Moreover, Turk Govt does not have to obtain lira counterpart by taxation or borrowing to cover ECA imports for own acct. If Turkey put on grant basis counterpart for all imports, including those on govt acct, would have to be deposited. Five percent wld be reserved for US Govt expenditures and remainder cld not be spent without US approval. This involves review in Washington, including establishment of policy by NAC.

3. You can discuss Polk’s return with Glendinning who is accompanying Sec Treas to Ankara via Cairo.2

Acheson

1 Telegram 156 is printed, p. 1659 [Pg. 1659 includes portions of Doc. 1150 and Doc. 1151]. Telegram 157, not printed, transmitted the text of the note of April 26 from Assistant Secretary Thorp to Ambassador Erkin, p. 1657 [Pg. 1657 includes portions of Doc. 1149 and Doc. 1150] (867.20/4–2649).

2 C. Dillon Glendinning, Acting Secretary of the National Advisory Council on International Monetary and Financial Problems (NAC). Regarding the visit of Secretary of the Treasury John W. Snyder to Ankara in July, see despatch 239, July 25, from Ankara, infra.

The Ambassador in Turkey (Wadsworth) to the Secretary of State 867.51/7–2549

[Document 1158]

The Ambassador in Turkey (Wadsworth) to the Secretary of State

confidential Ankara, July 25, 1949.

No. 239

Subject: Secretary Snyder’s Ankara Visit, July 18–20; Turkey’s need for Financial Assistance; Transmitting Memorandum of Conversation with President Inönü and Other Papers.

Sir: Key-note of the official discussions held during this warmly welcomed visit of the Secretary of the Treasury, I have the honor to report, was struck by President Inönü, He said inter alia:

Our two countries’ common problem is defense against Soviet Russia.…1

In a struggle such as this, for common cause, it is not sufficient that Turkey be armed with military weapons only. Financial weapons are’ also needed.…

For the next two to three years we shall be in great financial difficulties. It is doubtful that we shall find a remedy within our own means....

Every day our deficit is growing. Once financial equilibrium is upset, the national economy, without which the armed forces cannot subsist, must go from bad to worse.

These quotations are excerpts from the Secretary’s conversation with the Turkish President, A full memorandum thereof, prepared from notes taken by me at the time, is enclosed.2 It has Mr. Snyder’s approval. Its full text will, we feel sure, be read with interest in the Department.

Currently Turkish-proposed remedies for the situation there described are: 1) continuance of the Truman-Doctrine-inspired Turkish Aid Program, and 2) a stepping-up of ERP assistance to the end that Turkey’s military establishment be assured an adequate sustaining economy.

Last year (FY 48–49) Turkey received ECA allocations totaling $44.6 millions: 50 percent for agricultural equipment; 44 percent for coal, power and road development; nothing for “consumables”. For FY 49–50 it programmed, for submission to OEEC, $85.8 millions (54 percent thereof for continuance of these projects) and $25.5 for “consumables” (70 percent for oil products).

Since submission of this 1949–50 program, reports of serious crop failure have been confirmed. Consequently, a supplementary submission has been filed. It requests $20 millions for necessary wheat imports from hard-currency countries (i.e. 200,000 tons plus freight).

It is the granting of the total of these two figures for “consumables”, i.e. $45.5 millions, which the Turkish authorities now stress as being essential to sound sustaining of the country’s economy.

This latter was the burden of the Prime Minister’s remarks during the brief half-hour’s courtesy call which Mr. Snyder paid him on arrival in Ankara July 18. To specific queries the Prime Minister replied:

Latest estimates put Turkey’s crop-year need for wheat imports at 400,000 tons, i.e. twice the figure cited above. It was believed that 100,000 tons could be obtained from Syria.

Preliminary budget estimates for 1950 had established that estimated 1949 expenditures must be cut by some Ltqs. 200 millions (15 percent) if balanced budget is to be achieved.

Unless help were forthcoming, he failed to see how the current rate of military expenditure could be maintained. Ministry of National Defense appropriations alone now represented 33 percent of the total budget. It was only there that substantial saving could be made; and that would necessitate substantial reduction in the size of the armed forces.

Mr. Snyder and I sensed that these remarks, interspersed among the compliments of a formal courtesy call, were but an opening gambit for fuller presentation of the Turkish case.

Such presentation, from the angle of the Government’s financial position, was given the following morning in an hour-and-a-half conversation with the Minister of Finance. It was concluded at noon by President Inönü in the conversation highlighted above.

Relative to the conversation with the Minister of Finance, I enclose copies of two papers prepared by Mr. Judd Polk, Treasury Representative for the Near East: 1) a Memorandum of the conversation itself; and 2) a “Brief Statement of Turkey’s Financial Problem” prepared by Mr. Polk for Mr. Snyder’s confidential information.3

Highlights of the latter, in addition to an interesting exposition of budget, taxation and debt figures, were the following:

Of TL 9 billions of Government expenditures in the last ten years, half have been directly or indirectly for military purposes. The budget is still a war budget....

Possibilities of sales of bonds to the public are very limited....

In the circumstances, it looks as though the TL 200 million deficit can be eliminated only if the military budget is cut.

Similarly, Mr. Polk’s “Statement” stresses that “The planned modernized military establishment probably cannot be achieved unless the Government’s internal revenues can be increased.” Other pertinent highlights were:

The credit position of the Government has been seriously impaired. (Note: Four chief contributing factors are cited.)

It is very doubtful that the budget deficit 1949 can be covered by non-inflationary finance.

Considerable internal financial relief may be forthcoming in the next year if ECA assistance includes grants or loans to cover increased consumption-goods imports.

Following these three official conversations and certain informal briefing by members of the Embassy and Aid Mission, Mr. Snyder held a short press conference of which an approved transcript is enclosed.4 It was of a general nature, Mr. Snyder declining to reveal any details of his Ankara conversations and avoiding direct reply to such questions as: “Do you believe there are any plans for the readjustment of currencies in Europe?”

He left Ankara for Cairo early the following morning, July 20, in his official airplane. The Minister of Finance was among those present at the airport to bid him farewell.

Official Turkish reaction to the visit was excellent. Mr. Snyder, while emphasizing that he could make no commitments, had shown keen interest in and sympathetic understanding of Turkey’s problem of interrelated finance, economy and national defense. To President Inönü he had given an undertaking that he would “be happy to present it personally to President Truman”.

Press reaction, to paraphrase a careful memorandum on the subject prepared by the Embassy’s Public Affairs Officer, was one of close and constant interest, reflected in daily front-page headlines and a spate of editorial comment necessarily chiefly of speculative character. While his few public remarks were accurately quoted, there was considerable interlineation suggesting that Mr. Snyder’s discussions had dealt with matters of highest moment to the country’s future welfare—from loans and capital investment to currency depreciation and direct financial support.

Personally, I enjoyed and profited much from the visit. In particular, I was able to discuss at some length with Mr. Snyder and Assistant Secretary Martin the subject matter of my telegrams no. 194 of April 305 and no. 256 of June 7, last, and the Department’s reply, no. 250 of July 1. This despatch may be considered as a supplementary presentation of the recommendation considered therein that Turkey’s need for financial assistance continue to receive the Department’s careful consideration.

I am glad to report in this latter connection that Secretary Snyder before leaving Ankara directed Mr. Polk to complete his current study of Turkey’s finances and authorized him to visit the country at least twice a year to keep abreast of current developments.

Respectfully yours,

George Wadsworth

1 Omissions in this document are indicated in the source text.

2 The memorandum is not printed. During this conversation, Secretary Snyder was accompanied by Assistant Secretary of the Treasury William McChesney Martin, Jr., and Ambassador Wadsworth. President Inönü had with him Finance Minister Ismail Rustu Aksal and Foreign Ministry Secretary General Faik Zihni Akdur’.

3 Neither of the documents under reference here is printed.

4 Not printed.

5 Not printed, but see footnote 1 to telegram 256, June 7, from Ankara, p. 1673 [Pg. 1673 is part of Doc. 1155].

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern and African Affairs (McGhee) 867.00/9–1549

[Document 1159]

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern and African Affairs (McGhee)

confidential [Washington,] September 15, 1949.

Participants: Satvet Lufti Tozan, Turkish businessman

Mr. McGhee—Assistant Secretary

Mr. Hare—Deputy Assistant Secretary1

Mr. Moore—GTI 2

General Hoag, former Chief of the United States Air Force Group in Turkey, telephoned me several days ago to ask if someone in NEA could receive Mr. Tozan. As Mr. Tozan was calling on Mr. Hare this morning, I arranged to see him for a few moments.

After discussing in general terms some of the problems facing Turkey, Mr. Tozan mentioned that the Patriarch Athenagoras3 had given him a letter to Mr. Acheson and had also given him a verbal message to the Secretary in the event that the latter could receive him. It was explained that the Secretary was extremely busy at this particular time and I stated that if Mr. Tozan would give me the letter, I would be glad to see that it reached the Secretary, and pass on as well any message which the Patriarch had for the Secretary. This seemed satisfactory to Mr. Tozan, who stated that he would send me the letter4 and that the message he had been asked to give the Secretary was that the Patriarch was working along the lines he had agreed upon,5 and that he was very satisfied with the results.

Mr. Tozan further stated that he also brought to the Secretary the good wishes of the Turkish Prime Minister, Mr. Gunaltay, who asked that he likewise acquaint the Secretary with Turkey’s serious financial problems. The Prime Minister felt that Turkey required a loan of $200,000,000 for its army, in addition to the aid which it was already receiving from the United States. The Prime Minister recognized our problem in acceding to such a request, but hoped that perhaps a private loan in this country could be arranged as Turkey had many resources, such as minerals and petroleum, to back up a loan. I said that I would refer the Prime Minister’s statements to the Secretary, but that Mr. Gunaltay could be sure that we were giving much thought to Turkey’s financial problems. I added that the doors of the International Bank and the Export-Import Bank were undoubtedly open for consideration of any specific projects the Turks might want to propose.

Mr. Tozan stated that the Prime Minister wished also to refer to the omission of Turkey from the Atlantic Pact and to express the hope that some means could be found to meet Turkey’s desires on this score, perhaps through adherence by the United States to the Treaty of Alliance existing between the United Kingdom, France and Turkey.6 I indicated that we were mindful of Turkey’s views on the subject of a pact and were, of course, taking them into consideration in our general consideration of the problem.

Mr. Tozan stated that he also had a message from the Prime Minister for Mr. Garner7 of the International Bank to the effect that the Turkish Government agreed to the conditions imposed by the Bank and wished it to send a Mission to Turkey. It was suggested that Mr. Tozan get in touch directly with Mr. Garner.

Mr. Tozan emphasized that he had no official connection with the Turkish Government, but that he was well acquainted with many of the leading governmental officials and, because of his known services to the Allied cause during World War II and his own position, he had been asked as “homme de confiance” to transmit the messages referred to above.

1 Raymond A. Hare, Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern and African Affairs.

2 Charles R. Moore, of the Division of Greek, Turkish, and Iranian Affairs; from October 3, Officer in Charge of Turkish Affairs in the Office of Greek, Turkish, and Iranian Affairs.

3 Athenagoras I, Archbishop of Constantinople and Ecumenical Patriarch.

4 Patriarch Athenagoras’ brief letter, dated July 29, 1949, which was delivered at the Department of State by Mr. Tozan on September 16, contained an introduction for Mr. Tozan and the following personal message to the Secretary of State: “We feel most thankful for the most valuable help which the great and beloved American Nation is granting to Turkey in these trying times and while she is by her special position and will the bulwark of democracy and peace in the Near East. May our Lord allow your noble Nation to continue the dispensation of the aid to this Country and its worthy people not only for military purposes but also for its economical and agricultural requirements.

“We pray the Almighty to keep you under His grace and guidance and to Mess your endeavours in favour of beloved America and Mankind,” (867.00/9–1649)

5 In the source text at this point the additional words “with the Secretary when he last saw him” have been crossed out. A memorandum of October 3 from Assistant Secretary of State McGhee to the Secretary of State, not printed, explaining the nature of the Patriarch’s oral message, bears the following handwritten marginal notation by Lucius D. Battle, the Special Assistant to the Secretary of State: “Mr. Secretary[:] This may refer to an ‘agreement’ with Gen Marshall. No one is sure what is meant.” (867.00/9–1649)

6 The British-French-Turkish Treaty of Mutual Assistance, signed at Ankara on October 19, 1939; for text, see League of Nations Treaty Series, vol. cc, p. 167.

7 Robert L. Garner, Vice President of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development.

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Director of the Office of Greek, Turkish, and Iranian Affairs (Jernegan) 867.014/10–749

[Document 1160]

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Director of the Office of Greek, Turkish, and Iranian Affairs (Jernegan)

top secret [Washington,] October 7, 1949.

Lord Jellicoe1 said that the Embassy had received an instruction from London to inquire regarding our attitude toward the British request for our support of their projected request to the Turkish Government for permission to carry out certain photo reconnaissance flights in Turkey, I explained that we had received this request some time ago through military channels and had recently gotten off a reply to the Secretary of Defense.2 I anticipated that the British military authorities in London would soon receive a formal reply from Admiral Conolly. However, to enable the British Embassy to answer the Foreign Office inquiry I said that Lord Jellicoe could report that the Department of State agreed to support the British request when made to the Turkish Government and that we would send an appropriate instruction by air mail to Ambassador Wadsworth. The Ambassador would be instructed to consult his British colleague and make such representations to the Turks as might seem appropriate. The only condition which we imposed was that this action on our part should not in any way commit us to participation in the photo reconnaissance operation nor to any future joint consultation or planning with the Turkish authorities. I said I assumed our military people would be glad to discuss the results of the reconnaissance with the British military authorities but would not wish to be involved in any discussions or staff talks with the Turks.

As a matter of possible interest, Lord Jellicoe told me that the areas which it was proposed to include in the photo reconnaissance were (1) the principal Turkish ports (2) the coastline from the Straits to the Syrian frontier, and (3) the road and rail communications leading to the Syrian frontier. He said that he deduced from this that the principal purpose of the reconnaissance was to prepare for eventual denial operations, through aerial bombing and otherwise, in the event of a Soviet occupation of Turkey and, possibly, to prepare for defense against Soviet landings or to facilitate possible eventual allied landings along the Turkish coast. I agreed that these seemed reasonable deductions but added that I had not previously inquired into the details of the proposed operation since it was to be a purely British affair and since I had been assured that it would be on a relatively limited scale and would not involve the widespread use of ground personnel such as would be required by the earlier proposal for a complete Anglo-American aerial mapping job on Turkey. I reminded Lord Jellicoe that we had objected to the proposed mapping enterprise.

1 Second Secretary of the British Embassy in the United States.

2 The communications under reference here, the memorandum of August 23 by Brigadier General Loper and the letter of October 4 from Deputy Under Secretary of State Dean Rusk to Secretary of Defense Johnson, are not printed (867.014/8–2349).

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Director of the Office of Greek, Turkish, and Iranian Affairs (Jernegan) 711.67/10–1349

[Document 1161]

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Director of the Office of Greek, Turkish, and Iranian Affairs (Jernegan)

secret [Washington,] October 13, 1949.

At lunch at the Turkish Embassy today, Ambassador Erkin took me aside to ask whether we were ready to give him any reaction to the question he had recently posed to Assistant Secretary McGhee and Under Secretary Webb regarding the inter-relationships which might be created between the United States and Turkey as a result of the Anglo-French-Turkish treaty of alliance and the new defense arrangements between the United States and Britain and France under the North Atlantic Treaty.1 I replied that we had referred this matter for preliminary consideration by the Office of the Legal Adviser, but the initial reaction of that Office had been so inconclusive that I did not feel we were yet in a position to give the Ambassador even an informal expression of our views. Furthermore, his inquiry and other recent developments had inspired the Department to review the whole question of possible interlocking defense arrangements, with special attention to the area of the Eastern Mediterranean and the Near East. I pointed out that in addition to the Anglo-French treaty with Turkey, there were also British treaties with Iraq, Egypt and Jordan, and possibly other similar treaties elsewhere. We had decided it was desirable to get the whole picture.

With reference to my last remark, the Ambassador hastened to point out that his inquiry had related only to the Turkish position and that he considered Turkey to be on a very different basis, in its relationship with the United States, from Iraq or other Arab states. I assured him that we did consider Turkey as a rather special case and that I did not mean to imply that we would approach Turkey in exactly the same way as we might approach our relations with Iraq. I added, however, that Greece was in virtually the same position as Turkey and I mentioned that Mr. Tsaldaris had recently raised again with me the question of the inclusion of Greece in some more formal treaty arrangement with the United States.2 Ambassador Erkin agreed that Greece was in substantially the same position as Turkey.

He asked me if we had spoken to the British or French in connection with the question he had raised. I said that we had not, since we wanted to consider the matter very carefully just among ourselves before posing any questions to other members of the Atlantic Pact. The Ambassador hurriedly agreed that this question should not be raised on an Atlantic Treaty basis, since, he said, such countries as Belgium and the Netherlands would certainly not wish to be involved in additional responsibilities outside of the western European region. He believed that any conversations on the subject should be confined to direct communication between the United States on the one hand and Britain and France on the other and should not be introduced into the machinery of the North Atlantic treaty. He went on to say that in reporting his conversations at the Department he had suggested to his Foreign Office that the Turkish Ambassadors in London and Paris should be informed so that they might be prepared for any discussions with the British and French Governments. He implied that the Turkish Government had not as yet discussed the question with the British or French but from his manner I was inclined to suspect that some sort of informal approach may have been made.

1 During a courtesy call on Assistant Secretary of State McGhee on September 26, Ambassador Erkin commented on the fact that the British-French-Turkish Treaty of Mutual Assistance of 1939 had recently been reaffirmed to Turkey by the other two countries. He asked what the position of the United States would be under the North Atlantic Treaty in the event that Britain and France, by virtue of an attack on Turkey, were brought into war in the carrying out of their treaty obligations to Turkey. Assistant Secretary McGhee promised to get the views of others in the Department and inform the Ambassador. (Memorandum of conversation by McGhee, September 26, 1949: 840.20/9–2649) Ambassador Erkin raised the same question during a conversation with Acting Secretary of State James E. Webb on September 30. The Acting Secretary explained that the question would have to be given very careful consideration in the Department. (Memorandum of conversation by Webb, September 30, Secretary’s Memoranda, Lot 53 D 344)

2 Regarding the views of Greek Foreign Minister Constantine Tsaldaris on the desirability of an eastern regional defense alignment embracing Greece, Turkey, and perhaps Yugoslavia and the comments thereon by the Secretary of State, see the latter’s memorandum of conversation, October 28, p. 447 [Pg. 447 includes portions of Doc. 244, Doc. 245, and Doc. 246]. See also telegram 2027, November 21, to Athens, repeated to Ankara and Belgrade, p. 460 [Pg. 460 includes portions of Doc. 253 and Doc. 254], reporting upon a conversation between Deputy Assistant Secretary of State Hare and Greek Ambassador Vassili Dendramis on the same subject.

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Director of the Office of Greek, Turkish, and Iranian Affairs (Jernegan) 767.9111/11–1549

[Document 1162]

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Director of the Office of Greek, Turkish, and Iranian Affairs (Jernegan)

top secret [Washington,] November 15, 1949.

During a long conversation last night1 the Turkish Ambassador remarked that some time ago the Iranian Ambassador in Washington had suggested to him the desirability of a mutual defense pact between Iran and Turkey. At about the same time, the Iranian Ambassador in Ankara had raised the question with the Turkish Foreign Office. The substance of the Turkish reply in both cases had been that such an alliance would seem to have no real advantage unless it were coupled with a similar relationship with the United States or had an American guarantee. Lacking such a guarantee, the pact would merely provoke the USSR without gaining any tangible benefit for the participants.

Ambassador Erkin said that he had thought this settled the matter, but quite recently, when the new Turkish Ambassador presented his credentials in Tehran, the Iranian authorities had again made the same proposal. Mr. Erkin intimated that the Turkish answer would be the same, and he expressed some surprise that the Iranians should renew their suggestion in the light of the previous Turkish attitude. I remarked, humorously, that this was far from the only instance in which a government had made repeated suggestions or requests in the face of repeated rejections.

I went on to say that the Iranian Government at one time mentioned to us its idea of a Turkish-Iranian pact. We had replied that we could neither encourage nor discourage any such arrangement. We considered it was a matter for the two governments themselves to decide in the light of their own judgment as to their own best interests. So far as any American association might be concerned, however, we could take no position at all except for the present we did not feel able to enter into any new special arrangement with foreign countries. I said this was still our position at the moment.

1 In another portion of this same conversation, reported upon in a separate memorandum of conversation, not printed, Ambassador Erkin renewed his inquiry regarding the possible effect of the North Atlantic Treaty on American-Turkish relations in the light of the existing British-French-Turkish Alliance. Jernegan explained that the question was still under study. Erkin observed that the Turkish Foreign Ministry had become intensely interested in the question and kept bombarding him with instructions to press for action. (711.67/11–1549)

Editorial Note [Document 1163]

Editorial Note

On December 5, 1949, Turkish Ambassador Feridun Erkin called on Deputy Under Secretary of State Dean Rusk to inquire once again regarding the interrelationships which might obtain between the United States and Turkey as a result of the British-French-Turkish Treaty of Mutual Assistance of 1939 and the new defense arrangements between the United States, Britain, and France under the North Atlantic Treaty. Regarding the Ambassador’s earlier inquiries, see the memorandum of conversation by Jernegan, October 13, page 1682 [Pg. 1682 includes portions of Doc. 1160 and Doc. 1161]. Deputy Under Secretary Rusk explained the difficulties of the Department of State in arriving at a clear-cut juridical picture of the interlocking relationships of the United States around the world. Rusk could say no more than that the Department was continuing its studies of the question. For the moment it appeared to him that the adherence of Britain to the North Atlantic Treaty, taken in conjunction with the existing Anglo-French-Turkish Alliance, had a positive effect on Turkey’s security position. For the full text of Rusk’s memorandum of this conversation, see volume IV, page 359.

Editorial Note [Document 1164]

Editorial Note

The United States Chiefs of Mission in the Near East met in conference in Istanbul, Turkey, November 26–29, 1949, under the chairmanship of Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern, South Asian, and African Affairs George C. McGhee. The conference considered internal political trends, economic and, social problems, regional trendy, United States strategic planning, and the future role of the United States in the Near East. For documentation on the conference, see pages 165 [Pg. 165 is part of Doc. 71] ff.

While in Istanbul, Assistant Secretary McGhee exchanged visits with Governor Fehrettin Kerim Gokay of Istanbul on November 28 and 29 and with Patriarch Athenagoras on November 29 and 30. Memoranda of conversation on the visits were transmitted to the Department of State as enclosures to despatches 293, December 5, and 300, December 12, from Ankara, neither printed (867.404/12–549 and 867.00/12–1249).

Following the Istanbul conference, Assistant Secretary McGhee visited Ankara on December 1 and 2. He had a long conversation with Foreign Minister Sadak, was received by President Inönü, and talked informally with a number of Turkish cabinet members. Records of the substance of these conversations have not been found.

South Asia:South Asia:

Contents

Efforts to resolve the dispute between India and Pakistan over Kashmir; visit of Indian Prime Minister Nehru to the United States (Documents 1165-1231)

Discussion with Afghanistan concerning Afghan requests for financial and military assistance (Documents 1232-1234)

Multilateral Relations:Multilateral Relations:

Contents

Efforts to resolve the dispute between India and Pakistan over Kashmir; visit of Indian Prime Minister Nehru to the United States (Documents 1165-1231)

Efforts to resolve the dispute between India and Pakistan over Kashmir; visit of Indian Prime Minister Nehru to the United StatesEfforts to resolve the dispute between India and Pakistan over Kashmir;1 visit of Indian Prime Minister Nehru to the United States

1 Continued from Foreign Relations, 1948, vol. v, Part 1, pp. 265 ff.

[1165] The Acting Secretary of State to the Secretary of Defense (Forrestal)

Washington, January 4, 1949.

501.BC Kashmir/1–449

[1166] Memorandum of Conversation, by the Acting Secretary of State

[Washington,] January 4, 1949.

845.00/1–449

[1167] Editorial Note

[1168] The Chargé in the United Kingdom (Holmes) to the Secretary of State

London, January 19, 1949—7 p. m.

501.BC Kashmir/1–1949: Telegram

[1169] The Ambassador in India (Henderson) to the Secretary of State

New Delhi, January 24, 1949—2 p. m.

745.45F/1–2449: Telegram

[1170] The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom

Washington, March 11, 1949—noon.

501.BC Kashmir/3–1149: Telegram

[1171] The Secretary of State to the Embassy in India

Washington, March 26, 1949—3 p. m.

501.BC Kashmir/3–2449: Telegram

[1172] The Ambassador in India (Henderson) to the Secretary of State

New Delhi, March 28, 1949—9 p. m.

501.BC Kashmir/3–2849: Telegram

[1173] The Ambassador in India (Henderson) to the Secretary of State

New Delhi, March 30, 1949—5 p. m.

501.BC Kashmir/3–3049: Telegram

[1174] The Secretary of State to the Embassy in India

Washington, March 31, 1949—6 p. m.

501.BC Kashmir/3–3149: Telegram

[1175] The British Ambassador (Franks) to the Secretary of State

Washington, 1st April 1949.

845.24/4–149

[1176] Editorial Note

[1177] The Ambassador in India (Henderson) to the Secretary of State

New Delhi, April 16, 1949—noon.

501.BC Kashmir/4–1649: Telegram

[1178] The Ambassador in India (Henderson) to the Secretary of State

New Delhi, April 20, 1949—1 p. m.

501.BC Kashmir/4–2049: Telegram

[1179] The Ambassador in India (Henderson) to the Secretary of State

New Delhi, April 22, 1949—8 p. m.

501.BC Kashmir/4–2249: Telegram

[1180] The Ambassador in India (Henderson) to the Secretary of State

New Delhi, April 29, 1949—10 p. m.

501.BC Kashmir/4–2949: Telegram

[1181] The Ambassador in India (Henderson) to the Secretary of State

New Delhi, April 29, 1949—7 p. m.

501.BC Kashmir/4–2949: Telegram

[1182] The Chargé in Pakistan (Doolittle) to the Secretary of State

Karachi, April 30, 1949—4 p. m.

501.BC Kashmir/4–3049: Telegram

[1183] The Secretary of State to the Embassy in India

Washington, May 2, 1949—6 p. m.

501.BC Kashmir/5–249: Telegram

[1184] The Secretary of State to the Embassy in India

New Delhi, May 7, 1949—3 p. m.

501.BC Kashmir/5–349: Telegram

[1185] The Ambassador in India (Henderson) to the Secretary of State

New Delhi, May 7, 1949—3 p. m.

501.BC Kashmir/5–749: Telegram

[1186] The Ambassador in India (Henderson) to the Secretary of State

New Delhi, May 7, 1949—2 p. m.

501.BC Kashmir/5–749: Telegram

[1187] Memorandum of Conversation, by Mr. F. D. Collins of the Division of South Asian Affairs

[Washington,] May 10, 1949.

501.BC Kashmir/5–1049

[1188] Memorandum of Conversation, by the Chief of the Division of South Asian Affairs (Mathews)

[Washington,] May 22, 1949.

501.BC Kashmir/5–2249

[1189] The Acting Secretary of State to the Embassy in India

Washington, May 29, 1949.

501.BC Kashmir/5–2849: Telegram

[1190] The Chargé in Pakistan (Doolittle) to the Secretary of State

Karachi, June 1, 1949—5 p. m.

501.BC Kashmir/6–149: Telegram

[1191] The Acting Secretary of State to the Embassy in India

Washington, June 3, 1949—noon.

501.BC Kashmir/6–349: Telegram

[1192] The Ambassador in India (Henderson) to the Secretary, of State

New Delhi, June 5, 1949—3 p. m.

501.BC Kashmir/6–549: Telegram

[1193] The Ambassador in India (Henderson) to the Secretary of State

New Delhi, June 9, 1949—10 p. m.

501.BC Kashmir/6–949: Telegram

[1194] The Ambassador in India (Henderson) to the Secretary of State

New Delhi, June 11, 1949—noon.

501.BC Kashmir/6–1149: Telegram

[1195] The Ambassador in India (Henderson) to the Secretary of State

New Delhi, June 18, 1949—11 a. m.

501.BC Kashmir/6–1849: Telegram

[1196] The Secretary of State to the Embassy in India

Washington, June 18, 1949—11 a. m.

501.BC Kashmir/6–1849: Telegram

[1197] The Secretary of State to the Embassy in India

Washington, June 25, 1949—2 p. m.

501.BC Kashmir/6–2549: Telegram

[1198] The Chargé in Pakistan (Doolittle) to the Secretary of State

Karachi, June 29, 1949—10 a. m.

501.BC Kashmir/6–2949: Telegram

[1199] The Ambassador in India (Henderson) to the Secretary of State

New Delhi, July 5, 1949—9 a. m.

501.BC kashmir/7–549: Telegram

[1200] The Secretary of State to the Embassy in India

Washington, July 8, 1949—6 p. m.

501.BC Kashmir/7–849: Telegram

[1201] The Chargé in Pakistan (Doolittle) to the Secretary of State

Karachi, July 27, 1949—1 p. m.

501.BC Kashmir/7–2749: Telegram

[1202] The Ambassador in India (Henderson) to the Secretary of State

New Delhi, July 29, 1949—10 a. m.

501.BC Kashmir/7–2949: Telegram

[1203] The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom

Washington, July 30, 1949—3 p. m.

501.BC Kashmir/7–3049: Telegram

[1204] The Secretary of State to the Embassy in India

Washington, August 5, 1949—7 p. m.

501.BC Kashmir/7–2949: Telegram

[1205] The Ambassador in India (Henderson) to the Secretary of State

New Delhi, August 15, 1949—3 p. m.

845.00/8–1549: Telegram

[1206] The Secretary of State to the Embassy in India

Washington, August 25, 1949—8 p. m.

501.BC Kashmir/8–2549: Telegram

[1207] Memorandum of Conversation, by the Secretary of State

[Washington,] August 30, 1949.

501.BC Kashmir/8–2949

[1208] The Ambassador in India (Henderson) to the Secretary of State

New Delhi, September 8, 1949—5 p. m.

501.BC Kashmir/9–849: Telegram

[1209] The Ambassador in India (Henderson) to the Secretary of State

New Delhi, September 8, 1949—9 p. m.

501.BC Kashmir/9–849: Telegram

[1210] The Chargé in Pakistan (Wolf) to the Secretary of State

Karachi, September 8, 1949.

501.BC Kashmir/9–849: Telegram

[1211] Memorandum of Conversation, by Mr. F. D. Collins of the Division of South Asian Affairs

[Washington,] September 14, 1949.

501.BC Kashmir/9–1449

[1212] Memorandum of Conversation, by the Secretary of State

[Washington,] September 15, 1949.

Secretary’s Memoranda, Lot 53 D 444

[1213] Memorandum of Conversation, by Mr. F. D. Collins of the Division of South Asian Affairs

[Washington,] September 19, 1949.

501.BC Kashmir/9–1949

[1214] The Acting Secretary of State to the Embassy in India

Washington, September 21, 1949—7 p. m.

501.BC Kashmir/9–2149: Telegram

[1215] The Chargé in India (Donovan) to the Secretary of State

New Delhi, October 12, 1949—9 a. m.

501.BC Kashmir/10–1249: Telegram

[1216] Memorandum of Conversation, by the Secretary of State

[Washington,] October 13, 1949.

845.002/10–1349

[1217] Memorandum of Conversation, by Mr. Joseph S. Sparks, Adviser to the United States Delegation at the United Nations

[New York,] October 19, 1949.

845.002/10–1949

[1218] The Secretary of State to the Consulate at Geneva

Washington, October 20, 1949—8 p. m.

501.BC Kashmir/10–2049: Telegram

[1219] The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom

Washington, October 31, 1949—7 p. m.

501.BC Kashmir/10–3149: Telegram

[1220] The United States Representative at the United Nations (Austin) to the Secretary of State

New York, December 16, 1949—1 p. m.

501.BC Kashmir/12–1649: Telegram

[1221] The United States Representative at the United Nations (Austin) to the Secretary of State

New York, December 19, 1949—10:05 p. m.

501.BC Kashmir/12–1949: Telegram

[1222] The United States Representative at the United Nations (Austin) to the Secretary of State

New York, December 20, 1949—12: 52 p. m.

501.BC Kashmir/12–2049: Telegram

[1223] The United States Representative at the United Nations (Austin) to the Secretary of State

New York, December 22, 1949—7:12 p. m.

501.BC Kashmir/12–2249: Telegram

[1224] The Ambassador in India (Henderson) to the Secretary of State

New Delhi, December 26, 1949—6 p. m.

845.00/12–2649: Telegram

[1225] The United States Deputy Representative at the United Nations (Gross) to the Secretary of State

New York, December 27, 1949—1:29 p. m.

501.BC Kashmir/12–2749: Telegram

[1226] The Ambassador in India (Henderson) to the Secretary of State

New Delhi, December 28, 1949—1 p. m.

845.00/12–2849: Telegram

[1227] The United States Deputy Representative at the United Nations (Gross) to the Secretary of State

New York, December 28, 1949—3:44 p. m.

501.BC Kashmir/12–2849: Telegram

[1228] The United States Deputy Representative at the United Nations (Gross) to the Secretary of State

New York, December 29, 1949—2:30 a. m.

501.BC Kashmir/12–2949: Telegram

[1229] The United States Deputy Representative at the United Nations (Gross) to the Secretary of State

New York, December 29, 1949—2:24 p. m.

501.BC Kashmir/12–2949: Telegram

[1230] Editorial Note

[1231] The United States Representative at the United Nations (Austin) to the Secretary of State

New York, December 31, 1949—1:20 p. m.

501.BC Kashmir/12–3149: Telegram

The Acting Secretary of State to the Secretary of Defense (Forrestal) 501.BC Kashmir/1–449

[Document 1165]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Secretary of Defense (Forrestal)

secret Washington, January 4, 1949.

My Dear Mr. Secretary: The problem of supplying military personnel for observing the cease fire and truce between India and Pakistan which I raised in my letter of December 29, 19482 has now become an urgent one.

Although a number of details remain to be worked out, the Governments of both countries have accepted the proposals of the UNCIP for a cease fire, truce and the principles to govern the conduct of a plebiscite, and have already voluntarily put the cease fire agreement into effect as of 12 o’clock midnight January 1, 1949. It is of course, important that there be no serious violations or alleged violations of the cease fire and that the synchronized withdrawal of the armed forces of both countries proceed as rapidly as possible. For this it is essential that the machinery for observing the cease fire and truce, under the supervision of the Commission be placed in operation with the least possible delay.

We are therefore called upon to make an immediate reply to the request of the Secretary-General of the United Nations that the United States furnish twenty officers under the conditions set forth in my previous letter.

The Commission itself intends to return to the Indian subcontinent some time before January 20th to begin its task of general supervision of the agreements.

It is our understanding that the Commission’s Military Adviser, General Delvoie, and the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,3 who are now in India, are proceeding with plans for the employment of observers and have requested that they be made available at the earliest possible moment. We have reason to believe that the Commission at its January 5th meeting may call upon the Governments previously approached to supply a small advance corps of observers, which would include from two to four United States officers, to report for duty in New Delhi by January 15th if possible and to request that the balance be supplied by January 25th or as soon thereafter as possible.

I would therefore appreciate your advising me whether it will be possible for the NME to furnish the officers and if so whether they can be made available by the dates indicated.4

Sincerely yours,

Robert A. Lovett

2 Not printed.

3 Erik Colban, Personal Representative of the Secretary-General of the United Nations (Lie) and Principal Secretary of the United Nations Commission for India and Pakistan (UNCIP).

4 On January 13 Secretary of Defense Forrestal informed the Department of State that he had instructed the Departments of the Army and of the Air Force to collaborate in acceding to the request of the United Nations and that every effort would be made to send immediately a small advance group of U.S. military observers to assist the UNCIP.

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Acting Secretary of State 845.00/1–449

[Document 1166]

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Acting Secretary of State

secret [Washington,] January 4, 1949.

Participants: The Acting Secretary of State. Mr. Lovett

Ambassador Huddle, the US Representative on the United Nations Commission for India and Pakistan

Mr. Thurston—SOA

Ambassador Huddle stated that he was leaving for New York on January 5 to resume his duties with UNCIP and asked whether I had any instructions for him or any questions to ask in respect to the work which he had done in connection with the Kashmir dispute. I stated that I was familiar with the problem through the various memoranda which I had seen on the subject and that I had no particular questions to ask or instructions to give. I then added that I was concerned with the way in which we were constantly being pressured from all directions to take leading parts in virtually all spheres of UN activity and made reference in this connection to Palestine, Indonesia and Kashmir, as well as our having a number one position in such UN organisations as FAO. We have found by experience, I stated, that when we comply with what seems to be a simple request we find that it is a facade behind which a hundred other demands are made upon us—for personnel, equipment, jeeps etc. We don’t want to spread ourselves too thinly and we would prefer to keep our commitments down.

Ambassador Huddle stated that he was sympathetic with this point of view tad that lie was aware that in all probability about 60% of the expenditures of UNCIP had had to be borne both directly and indirectly by the US, and he mentioned the US Air Force plane which had been loaned to him, when the Commission was in India, but stressed that he did not think that the work would have succeeded if the airplane had not been available. He referred to the question of a Military Adviser to UNCIP and the fact that Belgium had recently made available to the Commission a high ranking Lt. General1 for this position. He expressed the hope that the Department would do everything within its power to indicate to the governments of India and Pakistan, now that they have agreed to the establishment of peace machinery, that we were willing to make our contribution to the successful operation of this machinery and that in particular we should call upon the National Defense establishment to provide twenty military observers for the Kashmir cease-fire and traced Ambassador Huddle said that he hoped that the military would be able to make available four officers almost immedately to go out to the subcontinent. He added that in view of the cooperative spirit [in] which India and Pakistan had implemented the cease-fire arrangements it may not be necessary for these military observers to remain there very long. One reason why we are called upon to take the responsibility is that British observers are not desired by India, he added. He pointed out that Canada, Belgium, and perhaps some of the Scandinavian countries would also contribute observers.

I told Ambassador Huddle that I had just signed a letter to Secretary Forrestal2 stressing the urgency of the Military Observer question in respect of Kashmir. Ambassador Huddle went on to discuss the question of a selection of a Plebiscite Administrator for Kashmir and said that there was a likelihood that some prominent American might be approached by the UN to take this job. I stated that while we should prefer not to see an American chosen, if the parties concerned want one, we shall go along. Ambassador Huddle stated that both India and Pakistan had expressed a definite desire for an American for the Plebiscite Administrator.

We discussed for a few minutes which American might be suitable as Plebiscite Administrator. We agree that General Eisenhower could not be considered and in regard to Senator La Follette3 and General Wainwright4 I mentioned that neither was in good health. I stated that there may be some prominent Americans available this year who would not have been available last year and mentioned Senator Hatch5 in this context. Paul McNutt6 was mentioned by Ambassador Huddle, and I indicated that he may be worth consideration. I expressed my understanding that should an American be chosen, the Department’s recommendation would be prerequisite. I indicated concurrence with Ambassador Huddle’s view that it was probably better not to have an active military officer as Plebiscite Administrator.

Mr. Thurston stated that congratulatory messages to the Indian and Pakistan Prime Ministers with respect to the Kashmir settlement had been prepared for my signature, and that it was believed desirable to give these governments a pat on the back for their constructive action in cooperation with the UN. I concurred with this and asked that the messages be sent to me by the regular channels.

In conclusion I commended Ambassador Huddle for his labors of that last few months in connection with the Kashmir problem.

1 Lt Gen. Maurice Delvoie.

2  Supra

3 Former Senator Robert M. La Follette, Jr., of Wisconsin.

4 Gen. Jonathan M. Wainright, U.S. Army (Ret.).

5 Former Senator Carl A. Hatch, of Kansas.

6 Paul V. McNutt, Ambassador to the Philippines, 1946–1947.

Editorial Note [Document 1167]

Editorial Note

On January 5 the United Nations Commission for India and Pakistan adopted a resolution setting forth the principles to govern a plebiscite in which the inhabitants of the state of Jammu and Kashmir would decide whether to accede to India or to Pakistan. For text of the resolution and related documentation, see United Nations, Official Records of the Security Council, Fourth Year, Supplement for January 1949, pages 23–26, and Special Supplement No. 7, the latter cited hereafter as SC, 4th yr., Special Suppl. No. 7. For additional information, see United States Participation in the United Nations: Report by the President to the Congress for the Year 1949 (Department of State publication 3765), pages 45–48.

The Chargé in the United Kingdom (Holmes) to the Secretary of State 501.BC Kashmir/1–1949: Telegram

[Document 1168]

The Chargé in the United Kingdom (Holmes) to the Secretary of State

secret London, January 19, 1949—7 p. m.

238. Department cirtel January 18, 7 p. m.1 When Embassy mentioned casually to Patrick2 today fact Department considering discontinuance informal arms embargo to GOI and GOP, Patrick opined on strictly personal basis that in his view best psychological moment for discontinuance might be signature truce agreement. Patrick believes truce agreement and all other phases Kashmir problem should be pressed forward unremittingly and if this done he thought that with luck agreement might be signed by end February. Patrick explained that UK had never actually imposed arms embargo but instead has been telling each dominion what it gave other. He thought this practice would be continued but total arms released to GOI and GOP by UK have been only “trickle” and in apportioning arms UK has taken into account “only to very limited extent” fact GOP has not received its full share of old GOI arms.

2. Patrick mentioned that he was “worried” by communication (A–110,3 January 19) circulated by Pakistan High Commissioner here giving conditions under which GOP accepted UNCIP proposal. He thought this statement, which insists that Azad4 forces will not be disbanded and that Azad Kashmir Government would continue to administer territory now under control Pakistan Army, contains considerable “explosive material.” GOI obviously expects Azad forces to be disarmed and Patrick thought that if forces not disbanded they can not be disarmed. Hope situation, as Patrick sees problem is that right kind PA can issue orders and get them obeyed. What is essential now is to avoid either public or private discussions in theory between GOI and GOP and in this connection Patrick said he thought that UK High Commissioner both Delhi and Karachi would be instructed today to express this view in connection with Pakistan communication, Delhi making clear British hope that GOI will let Pakistan communication pass without comment.

Sent Department 238, repeated Karachi 3, New Delhi 7.

Holmes

1 Not printed.

2 Sir Paul Joseph Patrick, Assistant Under-Secretary of State, India Office.

3 Not printed.

4 Irregular Pakistani and tribal forces in the Pakistan-controlled areas of Jammu and Kashmir state.

The Ambassador in India (Henderson) to the Secretary of State 745.45F/1–2449: Telegram

[Document 1169]

The Ambassador in India (Henderson) to the Secretary of State

secret New Delhi, January 24, 1949—2 p. m.

119. Deptel 35, January 14.1 We believe arms embargo should now be dropped as soon as possible and in same quiet way it was imposed. In our view this action need not be linked with any specific development such as appointment of PA or signing of truce agreement. On contrary we would hope that Department would advise GOI and GOP representatives that action is being taken because we have confidence In good faith and desire of both parties to reach peaceful settlement Kashmir dispute. At same time it might be made clear that if for any reason fighting should again break out embargo would probably be reinstituted. We assume also Department would give both parties to understand that US does not have large quantities arms available.

Sent Department 119, pouched Karachi.

Henderson

1 Not printed.

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom 501.BC Kashmir/3–1149: Telegram

[Document 1170]

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom

secret Washington, March 11, 1949—noon.

811. Embtel 765 Mar 2.1 FYI repeal embargo now being prepared Pres’s consideration having been cleared Secys State and Defense. Dept anticipates early favorable action Pres. Due limitations availability arms this country, however, repeal will have little effect our supply to GOI and GOP.

Dept currently being pressed for arms procurement assistance and supply from Govt sources by GOI, GOP and Afghanistan. In order better appraise their needs Dept would appreciate such info as Emb can obtain informally re UK arms deliveries these countries.

Dept also interested knowing whether CRO decision to no longer inform each Dominion of UK arms deliveries to other signifies any basic change UK policy re supply arms to GOI and GOP.

Rptd to New Delhi, Karachi, Kabul as agam.

Acheson

1 Not printed.

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in India 501.BC Kashmir/3–2449: Telegram

[Document 1171]

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in India 1

secret Washington, March 26, 1949—3 p. m.

us urgent

niact

248. Kascom 63.

1. Para one Comkas 26.2 We agree Nimitz consultations with UNCIP 3 and parties re plebiscite details can begin only after signature truce agreement and satisfactory progress in implementation thereof as set forth relevant document UNCIP second interim report. It is also clear Nimitz can enter formally upon his duties as PA in Kashmir only after truce arrangements have been carried out.

2. In initial conversations with Dept officials Nimitz indicated strong desire to leave almost at once for subcontinent with party of principal assistants and to make effort hold plebiscite before Nov 1. Upon being informed of relationship his schedule to current progress truce negotiations and implementation thereof as well as of report just received through SYG that UNCIP estimate earliest possible plebiscite date is summer 1950, he expressed disappointment at prospective delay but also determination to see job through to end. Though somewhat concerned with possibility truce might be broken should interval before plebiscite be too long, he fully appreciates that UNCIP estimate based on more authoritative knowledge than anyone here possesses. He hopes however that speedy action can be taken to resolve present truce impasse.

3. With Nimitz ready for action question has arisen whether he should not proceed forthwith subcontinent to throw his prestige into present truce deadlock. Presumably UNCIP could under para eight UNCIP res Jan 5 call upon PA for such assistance.

4. Dept view is that while possibility envisaged para three above should not be entirely excluded it would be preferable for UNCIP on its own to take speedy and decisive action on truce agreement utilizing psychological impact Nimitz nomination and his readiness to appear on scene as strong new factor in situation. For Nimitz to get involved in truce negotiations now would involve risk of debasing the coinage of his prestige in a field of activity other than: his central task of organizing and conducting the plebiscite.

5. With foregoing in mind you are requested take initiative in UNCIP to end that UNCIP press GOI and GOP to acceptance reasonable compromise along following lines: 1) GOP to abandon proposals for retention its troops Kashmir for training Azad elements and to comply with clear intention that its troops begin withdrawal immediately; 2) GOI desist its demand for immediate disbandment and disarmament Azad troops; 3) GOI to put into effect immediately upon beginning of Pak troop withdrawal a program of withdrawal by stages bulk of its troops; 4) GOP to abandon insistence that Pak GHQ maintain operational control over Azad troops; 5) GOI to accept with respect to Azad territory clearly intended meaning “local authorities” to mean local Azad, elements and not reps Abdullah Govt; 6) to give these substantive issues priority ahead of such technical questions as cease-fire line and to consider agreement on them and implementation thereof as sufficient basis for going ahead with plebiscite.

Our view here is that positions both GOI and GOP are extreme and in contravention terms Aug 13 Res. It should be impressed on GOP that if they wish early plebiscite they should agree begin immediate withdrawal their troops. As for GOI it could be pointed out that formal appointment PA will enable him undertake arrangements for large scale disarmament and disbandment Azad troops.

6. When GOI and GOP Chargés d’Affaires called on Nimitz March 25 he made clear to them that he was anxious to get on with job and that delays in truce agreement were holding him up.

7. Nimitz has asked for time-table estimate from US Rep UNCIP on following points: 1) signature truce agreement; 2) date on which PA can assume duties in Kashmir; 3) plebiscite date. He would also like to know whether UNCIP has prepared studies on electoral procedures in India with particular ref to such referenda as those held in NWFP and Sylhet in 1947.

8. On March 24–25 Nimitz conferred President SecState and other officials.4 He plans confer SYG three days beginning March 28 and to return Washington for visit thereafter.

9. Nimitz has requested that his designation for cable purposes be PlebAd.

Acheson

1 Repeated to Karachi as 79, London as 1054, and the United States Mission to the United Nations as 191.

2 Dated March 24, 1949. not printed.

3 Fleet Adm. Chester W. Nimitz, U.S.N., had been nominated on March 21 by the Secretary-General of the United Nations to be United Nations Administrator of the projected plebiscite.

4 Memorandum of conversation, March 25, 1949, not printed (501.BC Kashmir).

The Ambassador in India (Henderson) to the Secretary of State 501.BC Kashmir/3–2849: Telegram

[Document 1172]

The Ambassador in India (Henderson) to the Secretary of State

secret New Delhi, March 28, 1949—9 p. m.

377. Comkas 29. USDel agrees Department’s view paragraph 4 Kascom 63.1 Department will realize ability UNCIP take “speedy and decisive action on truce agreement” has hitherto been circumscribed by recognition truce essentially matter for two governments and that moment had not come for UNCIP take any action in nature ultimatum. It was hoped pace would be accelerated from moment PA nominated and there are indications Nimitz appointment having desired effect. UNCIP does not regard present truce delay as “deadlock” or “impasse” but regards present phase one of bargaining while simultaneously Indian political circles which loath to loose [lose?] hold of Kashmir will have be reconciled with more practical minded military elements which are actually desirous prompt truce agreement.

2. Reference numbered subsections paragraph 5 Kascom 63: (1) and (4): USDel has taken position and UNCIP agrees that GOP must abandon these proposals if India insists in favor some compromise. However, here abandonment proposals would not meet difficulty since UNCIP and both governments would still be concerned about maintenance law and order territory to be evacuated by Pakistan and possible difficulties arising from presence Azad area uncontrolled and uncoordinated Azad Army.

(2) GOI is not demanding immediate disbanding and disarming Azad troops having agreed that this will not occur during truce period but only after plebiscite period.

(3) Stages withdrawal Indian troops not yet discussed in detail between UNCIP and GOI as dependent upon initial Pakistan withdrawal.

(5) GOI originally acquiesced in UNCIP interpretation of “local authorities” meaning local Azad elements, GOI has never proposed that representatives Abdullah Government be included in administration Azad area recognizing that this not envisaged by UNCIP.

(6) Establishment cease-fire line is basic issue. Discussions have gone ahead while awaiting GOI’s views other above substantive issues on theory that implementation any part truce would hardly be possible until cease-fire line fixed because of increased danger of incidents if line remained undefined and because line would seem necessary point of departure in arrangements for troop evacuations. Cease-fire line has ever [never?] been purely technical question and parts it are now in dispute and have acquired political aspects.

3. Re paragraph 7 Kascom 63: (1) We intend press for signature truce agreement by April 15 (see also Comkas 28 March 282 ).

(2) Believe PA who must be formally appointed to office by government Jammu-Kashmir can assume duties in states shortly following date truce agreement. Timing and publicized purposes arrival important for reasons discussed Comkas 28.

(3) Date plebiscite while initially depending upon decision by commission that conditions for a free and impartial plebiscite have been achieved will also have, to be considered in connection Kashmir climate which precludes plebiscite in winter. Therefore except in unlikely event plebiscite could be held before winter this year April or May 1950 would be good target date.

(4) UNCIP Secretariat has been engaged some time preparation various studies electoral procedures, power PA, special plebiscite problems. Is endeavoring obtain documents relating referenda NWFP and [garble]. UNCIP subcommittee has obtained information electoral conditions Azad area.

Sent Department 377, pouched Karachi.

Henderson

1  Supra.

2 Not printed.

The Ambassador in India (Henderson) to the Secretary of State 501.BC Kashmir/3–3049: Telegram

[Document 1173]

The Ambassador in India (Henderson) to the Secretary of State

secret New Delhi, March 30, 1949—5 p. m.

381. Comkas 30. Following are principal points formal GOI truce proposals: 1. Reestablishment J and K administration over northern Kashmir, including Kargil, Skardu Astor and maintenance Indian Army garrisons these areas;

2. Disbandment and disarmament Azad forces as “essential both to fulfilment by GOI of their obligations under B1 and 2 of Part II and creation of conditions which would ensure free impartial plebiscite;”

3. Creation civil armed force of 2500 with one-half armed; one-half of force to be composed of Muslim and non-Muslim residents of area “who do not follow political creed of A[zad] K[ashmir]”; force to be commanded by neutrals appointed by Commission.

4. Program for withdrawal bulk GOI forces over 3–month period, leaving “one line communications area HQ” and one infantry division fulfilment this program to be “contingent upon” points 2, 3.

Following USDel’s preliminary comments seriatim: 1. These are as now administered by GOP through political agent Gilgit and garrisoned by 1000 Baltistan scouts under command Gilgit scouts, and small Pakistan forces in Bunji. Population 100% Muslim. Doubtful whether they or GOP would accept Indian rule.

2. This is first time GOI has proposed disbandment Azad forces during truce period as condition withdrawal GOI troops. This not contemplated August 13 resolution but was timed for consideration after truce carried and we intend urge commission make clear GOI position untenable.

3. There now functions in Azad area civil police with stated strength of 1100, all Muslims. While this might be expanded perhaps even to exceed 2500, believe proportion non-Muslims should approximate proportion total population. Highly doubtful that any Muslim residents, present or former, are not in sympathy with AK aims.

It now appears necessary for Commission to present compromise proposals for truce and we intend propose this course when commission meets today.

Lozano1 and Kerchove2 returned March 29 from satisfactory talks with Zafrullah3 and Gurmani4 in Karachi.

Henderson

1 Alfredo Lozano, Colombian representative on the UNCIP.

2 Robert van De Kerchove d’Hallebast, Belgian representative on the UNCIP.

3 Chaudhri Sir Muhammad Zafrulla Khan, Minister of Foreign Affairs and Commonwealth Relations, Government of Pakistan.

4 Mushtaq Ahmad Gurmani, Minister of Kashmir Affairs, Government of Pakistan.

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in India 501.BC Kashmir/3–3149: Telegram

[Document 1174]

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in India

secret Washington, March 31, 1949—6 p. m.

264. Having obtained Pres’s approval, Dept on Mar 29 orally advised reps India and Pak Embs (and informed Brit Emb) that, in view progress Kashmir negots and improvement India-Pak relations generally, arms embargo has been discontinued. Dept emphasized to India and Pak reps, however, that while Dept not unmindful possible GOI and GOP long-range mil requirements, GOI and GOP should not now entertain hopes early receipt significant quantities war material as result repeal embargo. They were further advised re limitation availability arms this country and present necessity giving priority west Europe and told that principal immediate effect repeal will be to permit licensing export only such material as GOI and GOP can arrange procure private sources this country and from transfer, re-transfer or sale such items as may still remain under control OFLC.

Sent New Delhi, 264, rptd Karachi, 84, London 1117.

Acheson

The British Ambassador (Franks) to the Secretary of State 845.24/4–149

[Document 1175]

The British Ambassador (Franks) to the Secretary of State

secret

No. 164 G4/49/49

Ref: G4/49/49

His Majesty’s Ambassador for the United Kingdom presents his compliments to the Secretary of State and has the honour to invite his attention to the following matter concerning the supply of ammunition to India and Pakistan.

2. The Government of Pakistan wish to purchase from His Majesty’s Government in the United Kingdom 200,000 rounds of 75 mm. ammunition for the Sherman tanks with which their Armoured Brigade is equipped. The United Kingdom has considerable stocks of this ammunition and is in a position to supply Pakistan’s requirements after meeting all United Kingdom needs and the demands of the Western Union defence organisation. These stocks are all of Lend-Lease origin and the consent of the United States Government is therefore necessary for their shipment.

3. In considering this request from the Government of Pakistan, His Majesty’s Government have had in mind the fact that the Pakistan forces are equipped with weapons of British or American types and at present have to rely entirely on the same sources for all ammunition.

4. At the time of partition, it was agreed that the stocks of 75 mm. ammunition held in the subcontinent should be divided between India and Pakistan in the proportion of two-thirds to India and one-third to Pakistan. However, the depots in which this ammunition was held were practically all located in India and political, labour and transport difficulties have made the delivery of Pakistan’s share impossible.

5. In these circumstances, Pakistan finds herself with a dangerous deficiency in her defence organisation. Pakistan has considerable military commitments in the defence of the north-west frontier and the control of the tribes in that area. Her requirement of 200,000 rounds is considered to be reasonable in that context alone.

6. His Majesty’s Government have in the past been concerned lest any ammunition supplied to Governments of Pakistan or India might be used in hostilities in Kashmir, a concern which the United States Government have no doubt shared. So far as is known, however, heavy tanks have not been used in Kashmir by Pakistan and, in any case, a cease-fire has now been established there.

7. There is the further consideration that the existing disparity in military strength between the two Dominions has its own dangers. In particular, His Majesty’s Government are concerned that Pakistan should not have cause to turn to Soviet sources of supply for her military requirements. There have already been unconfirmed reports that she is buying in Czechoslovakia, but His Majesty’s Government do not in fact consider that she is likely to apply to Soviet sources except as a last resort in the event of a refusal on the part of the United Kingdom or the United States to meet what she considers to be her legitimate requirements.

8. For the reasons which have been stated above His Majesty’s Government have come to the conclusion that the Pakistan Government’s request is a reasonable one which ought to be met. His Majesty’s Government would therefore be grateful for the agreement of the United States Government to the transfer to Pakistan of up to 200,000 rounds of 75 mm. ammunition of Lend-Lease origin.

9. There is also an outstanding demand on His Majesty’s Government from the Government of India for 50,000 rounds of the same ammunition. This demand has hitherto been refused on the ground that the calculation of the requirements of Western Union countries had not been completed. While, in general, India is in a better position in this matter than Pakistan, having larger stocks of ammunition and facilities for the manufacture of some natures of ammunition, it is felt that it would be extremely difficult to deny to her this small supply if the demands of Pakistan were to be met. It is hoped, therefore, that the United States Government will be prepared to agree that the Indian request should now be met as well.1

Washington, 1st April 1949.

1 In a note of June 3, 1949, not printed, the Acting Secretary of State replied to the British Ambassador that the United States agreed to the proposed retransfer (845.24/4–149)

Editorial Note [Document 1176]

Editorial Note

For the text of proposals presented on April 15 by the United Nations Commission for India and Pakistan to the Governments of India and Pakistan for implementation of the Commission’s resolution of August 13, 1948, and for related documentation, see SC, 4th yr. Special Suppl, No. 7, pages 102 ff.

The Ambassador in India (Henderson) to the Secretary of State 501.BC Kashmir/4–1649: Telegram

[Document 1177]

The Ambassador in India (Henderson) to the Secretary of State

secret New Delhi, April 16, 1949—noon.

431. Comkas 37. Commission is submitting simultaneously to both governments April 15 following formal proposals for truce agreement requesting acceptance within three days. Lozano and Leguizamón1 returning briefly Delhi this purpose: 1. Pakistan Army withdraws within seven weeks accordance schedule established by military adviser and included in document.

2. Indian Army withdraws within three months accordance schedule proposed to GOI and to be released to GOP and public upon its approval by GOI.

3. Commission has fixed cease-fire line based on actual positions at time cease-fire and excluding Indian occupation northern area. Military adviser authorized decide local adjustments without appeal. Commission will have observers northern area and if Commission believes necessary for defense this territory it may agree that GOI post garrisons at specified points.

4. Minor provisions re lifting land mines, roads, release POW’s, repeal emergency laws, et cetera.

Over opposition and negative vote USUN [U.S., U.N.] Commission decided not link with above agreement any provisions for progressive reduction Azad forces. USDel also favored shorter interval between completion withdrawal all Pakistan Army and bulk Indian Army.

Sent Department 431, Rangoon 16, London. Pouched Karachi.

Henderson

1 Carlos A. Leguizamón, Argentine representative on the UNCIP.

The Ambassador in India (Henderson) to the Secretary of State 501.BC Kashmir/4–2049: Telegram

[Document 1178]

The Ambassador in India (Henderson) to the Secretary of State

secret New Delhi, April 20, 1949—1 p. m.

449. British High Commissioner1 yesterday told me that Bajpai2 in conversation on April 18 had been quite critical of UNCIP because it showed weakness, vacillation and hesitancy, grapple firmly with problems facing it. I consider Bajpai’s criticism really unfair since GOI, by its delaying tactics shares responsibility for UNCIP’s failure thus far in producing truce agreement. I saw Bajpai briefly April 18 as he was preparing to depart for London. Lozano of UNCIP was just leaving his office. Bajpai opened our conversation by stating his unhappiness re recent Kashmir developments. Pakistan was displaying extreme stubbornness and determination stick to the letter existing agreements, rather than cooperative spirit displayed by both sides at time of cease-fire. For instance Pakistan Avas insisting truce agreement not mention disposition Azad forces. Technically they could probably defend this attitude. Nevertheless elimination this thorny problem in truce agreement would have been helpful over long term. India’s decisions regarding withdrawal must be based to extent on disposition Azad forces.

Bajpai also referred to situation Northern Kashmir where he said apparently Pakistanis, in withdrawing from certain territory had left arms with groups friendly to Pakistan. These groups could therefore dominate this territory unless India permitted introduce at several points forces for maintaining local law and order. UNCIP did not wish Indian forces to enter this territory, on ground that their entry might be resisted by the Pakistan organized groups. India regarded organization by Pakistan of such groups as contrary to spirit of standing agreements.

Bajpai showed me copy of India’s reply to UNCIP which was long and involved and which I hesitate to outline since it can be described more precisely by American member of UNCIP. Reply was, for most part, of negative character. Bajpai indicated during our conversation, without saying so categorically, that it would be impossible sign truce agreement before return Nehru3 about May 7. I made no comments to Bajpai’s complaints other than to express regret at slowness of negotiations since I feel that we should not enter into discussions which fail in UNCIP’s field.

Henderson

1 Lt. Gen. Sir Archibald Nye.

2 Sir Girja Shankar Bajpai, Secretary-General, Ministry of External Affairs, Government of India.

3 Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru, Prime Minister of India.

The Ambassador in India (Henderson) to the Secretary of State 501.BC Kashmir/4–2249: Telegram

[Document 1179]

The Ambassador in India (Henderson) to the Secretary of State

secret New Delhi, April 22, 1949—8 p. m.

456. Comkas 38. Following principal points replies both governments April 15 proposals for truce agreement (see Comkas 37,1 April 16):

GOI objects (1) Absences references disarming, disbanding Azad forces; (2) Plan of Indian withdrawal which GOI alleges does not sufficiently take into account Indian responsibility for security of State. GOI seeks to condition withdrawals on reduction Azad forces; (3) Commission formula re sparsely-populated areas of north renewing request to post garrisons throughout area now; (4) Proposals re free use roads and waterways in State and release political prisoners, both of which GOI argues, are not contemplated by Part II of August 13 resolution.

GOP objects (1) 7-week period for Pakistan Army withdrawal which they argue precludes “synchronization” with bulk Indian withdrawal which is to be completed in 3 months; (2) Commission formula re northern area which GOP argues is contrary provisions Part II, August 13 resolution.

Thus, neither response acceptable but GOP representative states it “accepts” proposals with stated exceptions whereas GOI reply makes no reference either acceptance or rejection.

Commission now making some revisions these proposals both governments end week with urgent request immediate unconditional acceptance and refusal engage in further discussions or clarifications. In revisions, Commission not departing from essential points previous proposals nor framework August 13 resolution. Indian schedule withdrawal modified and provision made to permit revision withdrawals both sides if both governments agree plans for reduction forces referred to point 4 of January 5 resolution. Discussions these matters to begin immediately upon conclusion truce.

ReEmbtel 457,2 USDel believes Nimitz best able decide his movements basis situation prevailing time his planned departure and purpose his visit. Notwithstanding Commission feeling reftel reluctant suggest he postpone departure assuming he clearly understands difficulty his position in Subcontinent if truce agreement not concluded before or soon after his arrival.3

Entire Commission plans remain Rawalpindi till conclusion truce agreement. Hence prompt communications between USDel and Department difficult.

Sent Department 456, Rangoon 17; pouched Karachi, repeated London.

Henderson

1 Telegram 431, p. 1698 [Pg. 1698 includes portions of Doc. 1175, Doc. 1176, and Doc. 1177].

2 Dated April 16, not printed.

3 Telegram 108, Kascom 72, April 25, to Karachi read as follows: “Nimitz has requested Dept inform Embs Karachi, Delhi date his departure now uncertain and is dependent upon status truce agreement … PlebAd will indicate when he is able to set firm date departure.…” (501.BC Kashmir/4–2549)

The Ambassador in India (Henderson) to the Secretary of State 501.BC Kashmir/4–2949: Telegram

[Document 1180]

The Ambassador in India (Henderson) to the Secretary of State

secret New Delhi, April 29, 1949—10 p. m.

476. Comkas 39. Commission presenting simultaneously both governments April 28 its “truce terms” requesting “unreserved acceptance” with no further discussions and with one week time limit for reply.1 Lozano will present to GOI in Delhi and Macatee2 to GOP in Rawalpindi.

As anticipated Comkas 38,3 terms consist of April 15 proposals revised and clarified to take into account previous replies both governments, together with revised schedule withdrawal Indian forces worked out by DelGOI [Delvoie] and addition of provision that seven week time limit withdrawal Pakistan troops may be extended to three months if decisions reached in seven weeks on reduction Azad forces.

Principal difficulty has been created by provision April 15 proposals, which USDel opposed, that if defense of northern area of state necessary, Commission may agree to GOI posting garrisons there. In last few days GOP has made several oral and written protests that any Commission agreement permit stationing Indian garrisons this area would contravene II B 2 of August 13 Resolution.4 Latest letter from GOP virtually states that if the provision retained in new proposals, GOP will not accept them. These communications have had unfortunate counterproductive effects on rest of Commission which USDel had found hard to combat and have made more difficult any modification previous proposals this point.

However, USDel received information that only reason GOP objection was complete lack faith in Lozano and Leguizamon and fear that they would force Commission to agree stationing troops this area near future. USDel therefore successful in persuading Commission modify truce terms to provide that without prejudice to Commission delegating its powers to PA, if the Commission and/or PA should conclude that it was necessary for defense of northern area, Commission and/or PA may agree stationing Indian garrisons specified points. USDel believes that truce terms represent fair compromise which either government would be ill-advised reject.

Different but consistent letters will accompany terms to replace necessity oral discussions by explaining briefly certain points about which governments had expressed concern in replies April 15 proposals.

Re Kascom 725 USDel convinced unwise introduce PA into truce negotiations this point until replies received both governments truce terms. If replies negative we will advise further. Present trend thought Latin American members is that if replies negative next step would be refer problem to SC. USDel believes this premature. If this developed as firm view of other members USDel would favor as alternative introduce PA into truce negotiations.

Inform Nimitz.

Sent Department 476, Rangoon 18, repeated London. Pouched Karachi.

Henderson

1 For the text of the truce terms, and for related documentation, see SC, 4th yr., Special Suppl. No. 7, pp. 111 ff.

2 Robert B. Macatee, of the United States Delegation, Vice Chairman of the UNCIP.

3 Telegram 456, supra.

4 For documentation relating to the UNCIP resolution of August 13, 1948, see Foreign Relations, 1948, vol. v, Part 1, pp. 265 ff.

5 Not printed.

The Ambassador in India (Henderson) to the Secretary of State 501.BC Kashmir/4–2949: Telegram

[Document 1181]

The Ambassador in India (Henderson) to the Secretary of State

secret New Delhi, April 29, 1949—7 p. m.

us urgent

niact

481. In absence Nehru and Bajpai I fear there is little which Embassy can do effectively and by endeavoring bring pressure on Indian officials as suggested Comkas 40,1 April 29 shall be uselessly abandoning advantageous position we have hitherto held of non-interference in negotiations between UNCIP and GOI. This position once abandoned cannot be regained. We would not like abandon it unless we felt sacrifice would yield worthwhile results.

Only two officials are here with whom we could appropriately talk—Ayyanger. Minister Communications acting temporarily as Minister External Affairs and KPS Menon who is actually in charge Ministry. Neither official has any powers his own re Kashmir and transmission by them to Nehru and Bajpai of representations on my part would not it is believed affect final decision. US is already bearing more than its share responsibility with American member on UNCIP and with American plebiscite administration.

After listening Lozano’s oral explanations today we inclined agree that latest truce terms are as fair as any which can be evolved and that if they are rejected there is little more UNCIP can do in this regard.

We wondering whether in view atmosphere generated London during recent commonwealth conference, UK which has not been compelled share any great responsibility of late this matter might not well be in best position point out to Nehru and Bajpai, weekending with Mountbatteris,2 importance acceptance. We do not believe detailed knowledge of truce proposals necessary for British in making representations although they should of course be in possession of essential facts as set forth in Comkas 39.3

If Department feels regardless consideration advanced above we should approach GOI we shall do all we can upon receipt appropriate instructions.

Sent Department, repeated London. Repeat to Karachi if desired.

Henderson

1 Not printed.

2 Earl Mountbatten of Burma, former Viceroy and former Governor General of India.

3 Telegram 476, supra.

The Chargé in Pakistan (Doolittle) to the Secretary of State 501.BC Kashmir/4–3049: Telegram

[Document 1182]

The Chargé in Pakistan (Doolittle) to the Secretary of State

secret Karachi, April 30, 1949—4 p. m.

137. UNCIP proposals April 28 still contain three features which GOP was unable accept in April 15 proposals viz (a) suggestion that India may certain circumstances post troops northern Kashmir (b) lack assurance withdrawal troops would be so ordered that at no time would either side have such preponderance as to tempt aggression or cause tension concern on other side truce line (c) reference sovereignty Jammu and Kashmir state. Regarding position trust in PA, GOP would reluctantly accept (b) and (c) but agreement principle station GOI troops beyond cease-fire line would vitiate Pakistan case. Further to view GOP to which Embassy agrees GOP surrender this point would enrage Azad Kashmiris Pathan tribes and Pakistan people themselves and even compromise stability Pakistan Government.

Thompson,1 who arrived India April 27 (mytel 129, April 252 ) persuaded USDel proposals about to be released bound fail above reasons and contravened UNCIP’s own earlier proposals. He suggested formula “command [Commission?] or PA event threat safety sterritorial integrity these areas might take such measures necessary provide adequate defense security” would meet legitimate Indian interest and not prejudice Pakistan. USDel presented this formula but Commission refused not on basis unfair inadequate, but merely as unlikely win acceptance GOI so decided present proposals which every reason expect surely fail.

GOP April 29 made counter proposal that in view certain failure present proposals Commission arrange urgent meeting Geneva Nehru Nimitz Liaquat3 object conclude truce agreement without requiring either Pakistan India record negative vote present proposals. Understand Zafrullah being asked contact USGADel and Department win support this end. Embassy favors any move likely break present deadlock. We regard present proposals as unrealistic extremely unfortunate. Embassy understands, however. Commission will first insist receiving replies by which time probably too late arrange Geneva meeting.

Reference Comkas message Embassy 136, April 304 suggestion Nimitz throw weight behind Commission’s present formula regarding possible posting India troops northern areas. Embassy convinced such action Nimitz part would gravely prejudice his position would damage American prestige.

Embassy reluctantly records impression UNCIP status as objective arbitral body weakened due seeming readiness accept extraneous GOI claims tended forfeit India respect Pakistan confidence. Only USDel still regarded by GOP as objective and as having more than superficial grasp Pakistan position. Loss Huddle as Commission’s strongest most objective member regretted. Under circumstances if present proposals unacceptable, which Embassy believes case so far as GOP concerned, and if Geneva meeting impossible arrange, we suggest UNCIP delegate arbitral functions to Nimitz who would meet GOI-GOP representatives at conference table neutral place such as Kandy, Ceylon and hammer out truce agreement based on broad principles which would not tie hands PA. In our opinion UNCIP predilection appease India rather than produce formula based on knowledge justice fair play mainly responsible for inability achieve truce agreement before now. Further great delay would increase difficulty maintain cease-fire endanger prospects ultimate plebiscite.

Sent Department 137. Pouched USDel New Delhi, London.

Doolittle

1 Charles Oliver Thompson, second secretary and consul at Karachi, Pakistan.

2 Not printed.

3 Liaquat Ali Khan, Prime Minister of Pakistan.

4 Not printed.

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in India 501.BC Kashmir/5–249: Telegram

[Document 1183]

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in India 1

secret
niact
urgent Washington, May 2, 1949—6 p. m.

325. Following reflects Dept thinking re current UNCIP efforts negotiate truce. Since Comm feels its final proposals reasonable and equitable as possible, personnel Embs Delhi Karachi shld avoid being drawn into discussion merits demerits specific Comm proposals. Important point is that truce agreement be reached so that part III Kashmir settlement can be implemented.

Both Embs shld therefore without formal approach GOI–GOP utilize every suitable opportunity before May 5 deadline impress officials both Govts desirability and even necessity immediate conclusion truce agreement so that Govts may give effect oft-stated desire bring about early solution Kashmir problem. Shld stress truce agreement is but one intermediate step in series of actions under UN auspices directed toward equitable substantive settlement Kashmir dispute and acceptance proposals even though not completely satis either party will allow PlebAd begin work toward final settlement.

Possible unfavorable consequences rejection truce proposals one or both parties shld be stressed. Confronted rejection its proposals UNCIP may conclude reference matter SC only remaining alternative. Such action wld further delay settlement and largely negate prestige accruing two Govts from Jan 5 agreement. Moreover, further protracted delay might place Admiral Nimitz untenable position.

Believe possibility Nimitz acting as arbitrator or otherwise entering truce negotiations shld for present be minimized and even were Nimitz agreeable his services this capacity shld be reserved as possible last resort shld UNCIP negotiations finally collapse.2

Dept considers approach Embs Wash ineffective this time (Karachi’s 136 Apr 30; rptd Delhi as 193 ).

Be Delhi’s 481 Apr 29 and Dept’s Kascom 73 Dept believes informal approach suggested above will complement approach suggested to UK (Dept’s 1478 Apr 30 to London and London’s 1680 May 1 rptd Delhi 45 Karachi 21)4 and is not subject objections to formal approach Govts Delhi, Karachi outlined Delhi’s 481. Shld UK not approach two PriMins as suggested Dept believes still desirable Embs point out to officials both Govts above possible consequences failure accept truce proposals.

Delhi pass Macatee.

Acheson

1 Repeated to Karachi as 118 and to London as 1486.

2 Notation on the file copy: “Portions this message relating to Adm. Nimitz discussed with him and approved by him.”

3 Not printed.

4 Telegrams Kascom 73, 1478, and 1680 not printed.

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in India 501.BC Kashmir/5–349: Telegram

[Document 1184]

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in India 1

secret New Delhi, May 7, 1949—3 p. m.

us urgent

327. Kascom 75, for Macatee. In event truce proposals rejected by one or both parties Dept strongly of opinion negots slid not be broken off and requests that you bend every effort forestall such action. From here only feasible alternatives to continued negots by Comm would appear to be (1) reference deadlock to SC or (2) requesting intervention Admiral Nimitz. Although reference to SC not excluded Dept believes such action would involve extensive delay detrimental both to settlement of case and to Nimitz’ position and might not break deadlock. As for intervention by Nimitz both he and Dept increasingly convinced he shld not dissipate reservoir of good will through such negots. Even when truce agreement completed Nimitz faces difficult negots re Part III Comm res.

In view difficult position in which Comm wld be placed in event rejection truce proposals which Comm announced represented “final” proposals Dept believe injection new element required permit Comm gracefully continue negots. This connection it occurs Dept that return of Huddle who not committed present proposals might provide this new element. Dept aware return Huddle might present delicate situation vis-à-vis other members Comm but believes situation of sufficient gravity to disregard personal feelings this respect.

Accordingly Dept communicating Huddle to be prepared if he agreeable return to Comm immed upon notice that effect to assist Comm in continuing negots.

Your reaction this proposal appreciated. Meanwhile request you do all possible prevent precipitate action by Comm.

Delhi please make every effort transmit this msg Macatee soonest.

Acheson

1 Repeated to Karachi as 121, London as 1500, and Rangoon as 93. The following paragraph was added to the message to Rangoon: “For Ambassador Huddle: Dept considers most essential Comm not break off negots in event rejection truce proposals. Hopes that if necessary you will find it possible return Comm in effort continue negots along new channels.”

The Ambassador in India (Henderson) to the Secretary of State 501.BC Kashmir/5–749: Telegram

[Document 1185]

The Ambassador in India (Henderson) to the Secretary of State

secret New Delhi, May 7, 1949—3 p. m.

us urgent

521. 1. I saw Bajpai noon today. He told me answer re Kashmir truce proposals would almost certainly be no. He meeting Nehru this afternoon to submit his recommendations which are in accord those of Ayyangar.

2. Rejection on two counts: (a) India cannot agree to schedule of withdrawals without more definite assurances re disarming and disbanding bulk Azad forces; (b) India cannot accept what appears be UNCIP position that northern areas continue remain under control local authorities established by and loyal to Pakistan unless UNCIP or administrator find Indian forces necessary ward off threat from without. It was GOI’s understanding that UNCIP last year had taken position northern areas quite different from Azad territory but in practice difference seemed slight since proposal is apparently that both territories are to be governed by Pakistan puppets.

3. Bajpai expressed deep regret at inability recommend acceptance proposals particularly since UNCIP seemed feel it had nothing left offer in case rejection. He supposed matter would go back SC and there would be again acrimonious discussions which would serve no useful purpose.

4. I expressed regret pointing out disadvantages to all parties in case deadlock. I was unable discuss merits and convinced UNCIP had looked at matter from all angles and it had made what it considered be fairest proposals possible in complex situation.

5. Bajpai said India would undoubtedly be charged again desire sabotage plebiscite. Such charges ridiculous since India would not have agreed in first place to plebiscite if it had not been willing have one. Plebiscite must however be under conditions which, would give GOP Kashmir1 full opportunity express their will.

6. Answer will probably be given within 24 hours.

Sent Department 521, repeated London, pouched Karachi.

Henderson

1 This is presumably a reference to the Pakistan-controlled sectors of Kashmir state. These sectors were generally spoken of as “Azad Kashmir.”

The Ambassador in India (Henderson) to the Secretary of State 501.BC Kashmir/5–749: Telegram

[Document 1186]

The Ambassador in India (Henderson) to the Secretary of State

secret New Delhi, May 7, 1949—2 p. m.

us urgent

520. At conclusion my talk with Bajpai today (mytel 5211 ) he said he would like again express to me on purely personal basis his own opinion that although he feels India should go ahead with plebiscite if Pakistan insists, plebiscite will not solve Kashmir problem. If either side wins, all Kashmir difficulties arising from refugees disgruntled minorities and so forth will plague Southern Asia for years. Partition would be soundest solution. Unfortunately Pakistan continues blindly and emotionally to insist on plebiscite and all of Kashmir. He is not in position suggest partition since Pakistan would construe such suggestion as fear that India would lose plebiscite. It was unfortunate that more attention was not being paid to events sure follow allocation of whole territory to either Pakistan or India following plebiscite.

Henderson

1  Supra.

Memorandum of Conversation, by Mr. F. D. Collins of the Division of South Asian Affairs 501.BC Kashmir/5–1049

[Document 1187]

Memorandum of Conversation, by Mr. F. D. Collins of the Division of South Asian Affairs

secret [Washington,] May 10, 1949.

Participants: Mr. Michael Walker, First Secretary, British Embassy

Mr. E. G. Mathews, Chief, Division of South Asian Affairs

Mr. F. D. Collins, India Section

Mr. Walker, at the request of his government, visited the Department and presented a telegram containing the following views of the Commonwealth Relations Office regarding the current status of Kashmir truce negotiations: 1) We believe that UNCIP have adopted correct course in presenting their truce proposals to Governments of India and Pakistan for acceptance as they stand with a time limit and in declining to engage in further discussions. We judge from our contacts with Indian and Pakistan Ministers and officials in London that both Governments will find it difficult to reject proposals provided that Commission maintain their position firmly. It is unlikely that either Government is prepared to take risk of being reported to Security Council by Commission as responsible for breakdown. Indeed we doubt whether it will be possible to get agreement on this as on other points without implied use of this threat.

2) In the event of one or both Governments rejecting Commission’s proposals we do not see what more Commission can do. They are now themselves deeply committed on all points which arise on Truce Agreement. They would have obvious difficulty in obtaining acceptance of any departures from their present proposals which either Government consider to be to their detriment. Moreover, if they now withdraw from position that further discussion would not be fruitful, neither Government would believe that they mean business if they take up any fresh stand.

3) We agree that we should like to avoid reference of matter by Commission to Security Council. This is however course which might have to be adopted in last resort. In any case there is tactical value in its possibility being kept before both parties.

4) In the circumstances we suggest for State Department’s consideration that in event of one or both parties failing to accept present proposals and Commission proving unable to shake them, least objectionable course would be for Commission to invite Admiral Nimitz under paragraph 8 of their Resolution of 5th January to take over their functions in respect of negotiations of Truce Agreement. We appreciate State Department’s doubts about this, but feel that in accepting this invitation Admiral Nimitz could make it clear that he is uncommitted to various suggestions and proposals made by the Commission for implementation of their Resolution of 13th August or to the various clarifications given by Commission of their Resolutions of 13th August and 5th January. He could then start with clean slate. Problems which will confront him in organising plebiscite are just as likely as deadlock on Truce Agreement to involve him in difficulties with one or both parties and we would see little advantage in his services being kept in reserve. It is in any case difficult to separate questions which arise on Truce Agreement from those arising in creation of conditions for fair plebiscite e.g. withdrawal of Indian troops and policing of Azad Territory. Admiral Nimitz might find his task as Plebiscite Administrator less difficult if he has had handling of these two questions from outset.

5) Moreover, if Admiral Nimitz undertook this task and by his firmness succeeded in getting a settlement that would in our view enhance his prestige from the start.

Mr. Walker was informed that the Department hopes that both parties will agree to the Commission’s truce proposals but in the event of a rejection by one or both it might be possible that such rejections would contain provisions whereby the Commission would be in a position to continue their efforts at negotiation (subsequent information as of this date would indicate that both countries may accept the Commission’s truce proposals with certain reservations). We were hopeful that it would not be necessary for the Commission to refer the issue to the Security Council. With respect to Admiral Nimitz being called by the Commission to take over their functions in respect of negotiations for a truce agreement (re point 4 above) the Department still held to the view that his services should be reserved for the difficult job of organizing and conducting the plebiscite. We were inclined to feel that in the event that Admiral Nimitz were to take over as truce negotiator he would be committed to a certain extent by the previous proposals made by the Commission, as the January 5 resolution formed the basis of agreement on principles between the two parties.

Although we realize that the Commission may be finally confronted with a choice between reference to the SC and calling upon Admiral Nimitz we did not feel at this stage we could recommend one step in preference to the other, particularly since so much would depend upon the contents of the replies from the GOI and the GOP. Mr. Walker was told that the Department would be glad to keep the British informed as to our subsequent thinking on this issue.

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Chief of the Division of South Asian Affairs (Mathews) 501.BC Kashmir/5–2249

[Document 1188]

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Chief of the Division of South Asian Affairs (Mathews)

secret [Washington,] May 22, 1949.

Participants: Mr. B. B. Sen, Minister-Counselor, Indian Embassy

Mr. J. C. Satterthwaite, Director for Near Eastern and African Affairs

Mr. E. G. Mathews, Chief, Division of South Asian Affairs

Mr. Sen, Minister-Counselor of the Indian Embassy, called at noon today at his request to explain to Mr. Satterthwaite his Government’s reaction to the latest truce proposals of UNCIP. His Government found these proposals unsatisfactory in that they contain no provision for the disarming and disbanding of Azad Kashmir forces and no definite authorization for the stationing of Indian troops in the mountainous northern areas of Kashmir. Mr. Sen pointed out that the GOI had attached great importance to these two matters even before the UNCIP Resolution of August 13, 1948. Unless appropriate provisions were made on these points, India could not discharge its responsibility to prevent internal disorder in and external aggression against Kashmir. He mentioned also that the stationing of Indian troops in northern Kashmir was necessary to prevent infiltration from the north.

As there was no provision for the disbanding of Azad troops, the GOI feels that the residual thirty battalions with supporting units to be left in Kashmir under the terms of the proposal are inadequate. The GOI considered that the withdrawal of Indian troops and the disbanding and disarming of Azad forces should be concurrent. Mr. Sen was unable to state whether his Government had rejected the proposals for the foregoing reasons or had accepted the proposals with qualifications along the foregoing lines. However, he had been instructed to inform the Department of his Government’s views as it appears that UNCIP would refer the Kashmir dispute back to the SC.

Mr. Satterthwaite stated that he was not in a position to discuss the specific points of the UNCIP proposals but that he could say that it was the impression of the Department’s experts that the proposals as a whole seem equitable and reasonable. Mr. Mathews added that the proposals were not perfect and they did not make every concession desired by either the Indians or the Pakistanis but that they did seem to reach a good compromise. Mr. Satterthwaite then said that the Department was very much disappointed to learn that the GOI had not accepted the proposals as we had hoped that it would be possible to proceed expeditiously toward a settlement of the Kashmir dispute.

Mr. Sen replied that he was aware of the Department’s interest in an early settlement of the Kashmir dispute and that he understood our feeling of disappointment. He did, however, want to explain to us the reasons which had impelled India to object to certain provisions of the UNCIP proposals. He again stressed the military aspects of the situation, pointing out inter alia that Pakistan could move troops into Kashmir very quickly from its territory whereas India’s lines of communication into the state were much more lengthy and difficult.

Mr. Mathews commented that there was a feeling among those officers of the Department working most closely on the Kashmir matter that there had been a change of attitude and atmosphere since last December and January when the cease fire in Kashmir was effected. At that time there had seemed to be a determination on the part of both India and Pakistan to proceed quickly toward a settlement of dispute and mutual confidence that this settlement could be arrived at by peaceful means. It now appeared that the confidence of the GOI in a peaceful settlement had diminished. Mr. Sen demurred emphasizing once again that the GOI was not now taking a new position but was merely restating points which it had raised as long ago as last August. He went on to say that the attitude of the GOP toward the disarming and disbanding of Azad forces was very uncooperative and that the GOI felt strongly that provisions relating to this problem should be included in the truce agreement lest the GOP subsequently take the position that it could not or would not assist in the reduction of Azad forces. If India was to have only thirty battalions in Kashmir, the Azad forces must be reduced.

Mr. Satterthwaite remarked that thirty battalions seemed a rather substantial number of troops and that this force should be able to maintain order. Mr. Sen replied that the difficult terrain of Kashmir required that troops be widely dispersed and that consequently a sizable force was essential. Referring to the fears expressed by Mr. Sen to the fact that the Azad forces might not be disarmed and disbanded, Mr. Mathews gave as his offhand opinion, subject to later confirmation, that the resolutions of the SC and UNCIP contained adequate safeguards to insure a reduction in the number of Azad troops. He went on to say that the Department was fully aware of this problem, which was only one of many which would have to be solved before conditions permitting the holding of a plebiscite could be established. It was obvious that not all of these problems could be solved at the same time and the truce agreement, in the Department’s view, was simply one of a series of steps which had to be taken in moving toward a peaceful solution of the Kashmir problem. We had hoped, therefore, that there would be a disposition on the part of both India and Pakistan to regard the truce agreement in that light.

Mr. Mathews then recalled Mr. Sen’s earlier statement that it appeared that UNCIP would refer the Kashmir dispute back to the SC. He said that the Department hoped that this would not be necessary and that it would be possible for UNCIP to continue its negotiations on the subcontinent. Mr. Sen replied that his Government was not pressing for the return of the matter to the SC but that he had assumed this would be the next step since UNCIP had indicated that its latest proposals were final. Mr. Satterthwaite stressed the desirability of avoiding a referral to the SC pointing out that this would give increased prominence to the fact that India and Pakistan had failed to agree upon truce arrangements. This could only have an unsatisfactory effect upon the wider interest of the two countries. Mr. Mathews mentioned that the International Bank and the International Monetary Fund would be very much concerned by any indication that progress toward the settlement of the Kashmir dispute had been impeded and that this would certainly have a bearing upon the two institutions’ attitude toward India’s approaches for loans and further drawings. Mr. Sen replied that he realized that there would be unfortunate repercussions to the failure to agree upon truce terms, but he did not think that these would seriously affect the attitude toward India’s credit needs of the International Bank or the Fund.

Mr. Satterthwaite then commented that it would be unfortunate if the impression were created that the GOI was turning away from peaceful procedures for the settlement of the Kashmir dispute. Mr. Sen responded in the sense that Prime Minister Nehru’s devotion to peace and the general character and objectives of the GOI would make such a development impossible.

Mr. Satterthwaite expressed appreciation for the very helpful information which Mr. Sen had given.

The Acting Secretary of State to the Embassy in India 501.BC Kashmir/5–2849: Telegram

[Document 1189]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Embassy in India

secret Washington, May 29, 1949.

390. Urtel 593, May 26.1 In your discretion seek early opportunity discuss US position re Kashmir along fol lines:

Dept shares Bajpai’s apprehension that possible results of inescapable relationship between Kashmir dispute and Ind Pak credit standing may be misinterpreted in certain Ind quarters as US attempt use its credit-granting power to bring pressure on GOI. As Bajpai aware US has scrupulously avoided attempts bring pressure on GOI by this means or any other. Hard fact remains that shld Kashmir situation deteriorate to point at which resumption hostilities becomes strong possibility, Dept will be faced with difficult decision re degree its support of assistance to both Ind Pak from Point Four and Smith-Mundt programs, Ex-Im Bank, IBRD and IMF. Resources all these small in relation global demands and must be put to most productive use. In face strong possibility that Ind Pak might resume fighting in Kashmir or on broader scale, Dept cld hardly give assurances subcontinent wld be suitable area for effective use these resources.

From beginning Dept has been deeply concerned re two aspects Kashmir dispute: its threat to stability and progress in South Asia and its effect upon US–Ind relations. Throughout 1948 Kashmir dispute was serious obstacle to development US–Ind coop in various fields. After cease fire effected and until quite recently Dept able take position within US Govt that dispute proceeding to peaceful settlement and no longer constituted obstacle. As consequence considerable progress has been made in preparing way for tangible US cooperation with Ind. This progress now jeopardized.

Important factor this connection is attitude US press and public. At time cease fire effected and subsequently US Govt officials and press have frequently cited Ind Pak as peace loving nations which have effectively utilized UN machinery toward solution difficult problem. Shld efforts achieve truce agreement fail, US press reaction will almost certainly be adverse to both Ind Pak and questions may be raised re future stability of subcontinent.

While Dept believes latest UNCIP proposals equitable reasonable compromise, it less concerned with Ind rejection these specific proposals than with loss momentum toward settlement which was so hearteningly evident last Dec Jan. Ind Pak attitudes then seemed reflect confidence peaceful solution whereas now GOI emphasis on military position in its comments on UNCIP proposals may be construed as indication GOI expects resumption hostilities. Although Dept remains convinced neither Ind nor Pak desires renewed hostilities, it must face fact that current lack of progress toward peaceful settlement prolongs precarious situation.

Bajpai restatement GOI continued anxiety contribute peaceful settlement encourages Dept to hope that way out present impasse will be found near future.

Webb

1 Not printed. It reported on Ambassador Henderson’s conversation with Bajpai the previous morning. Bajpai stated that India appreciated everything that the United States had done and was trying to do in helping to solve the Kashmir problem. He emphasized India’s eagerness to contribute to a peaceful settlement of the dispute. (501.BC Kashmir/5–2649)

The Chargé in Pakistan (Doolittle) to the Secretary of State 501.BC Kashmir/6–149: Telegram

[Document 1190]

The Chargé in Pakistan (Doolittle) to the Secretary of State

secret Karachi, June 1, 1949—5 p. m.

190. Following principal points GOP reply UNCI[P] proposals April 28: 1. Accept cease-fire line etc. as proposed.

2. Proposal ID [Ind?] re northern areas is not in accord UNCI[P] resolution August 13, is unnecessary and is likely create unrest insecurity.

3. Pakistan has been denied information re schedule troop withdrawal and proposals appear nullify provision for synchronized withdrawal promised by command create disequilibrium after 7 weeks.

4. Plebiscite Administrator should be appointed soonest but with or without appointment, should participate all discussions re disposal Azad, Indian and State forces.

5. Reply concludes as follows: “The Pakistan Government are sincerely desirous of advancing to the plebiscite stage as early as possible and to this end they wish to assure the Commission of their wholehearted cooperation in the tasks devolving upon the Commission and the Plebiscite Administrator. In pursuance of this policy they are anxious that the truce agreement leading to the withdrawal of the armed forces should be concluded at as early a date as possible. Since this is an essential preliminary to the holding of a plebiscite they have, as the Commission is aware, carried out important part of their obligations in effecting the withdrawal of tribesmen and of almost all Pakistan nationals who had entered the State for the purpose of fighting. They are also ready to withdraw all Pakistan troops from the State of Jammu and Kashmir under the terms of the Commission’s resolution of 13 August, 1948, as elucidated to the Pakistan Government. The Commission will, no doubt, appreciate that without knowing the schedule of withdrawal of the Indian forces on the basis of which the synchronized withdrawal of the two armed forces could be arranged, the Pakistan Government are not in a position to take a decision on the Commission’s truce terms, the central feature of which is the withdrawal programme of the two armed forces. They trust that they would soon be put in a position in which they can take such a decision.”

Sent Department 190, repeated Delhi 34; pouched Rangoon; repeated London 17.

Doolittle

The Acting Secretary of State to the Embassy in India 501.BC Kashmir/6–349: Telegram

[Document 1191]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Embassy in India 1

secret
niact Washington, June 3, 1949—noon.

399. Kascom 82. For Macatee. Although Dept has been of view in event rejection truce terms UNCIP shld endeavor continue negots it now feels recent developments may make such UNCIP efforts of no avail. Shld UNCIP share this view Dept suggests you propose in UNCIP consideration be given possibility that truce disagreement be submitted with consent of two parties to arbitration by impartial third party. Dept believes such procedure preferable this stage to reference issue SC. This connection Dept offers fol comments: 1. Basic reason failure truce agreement thus far appears due mutual suspicions and unwillingness both parties voluntarily accept compromise. Submission issue to arbitrator wld provide way out for 2 Govts from positions to which now committed and relieve them responsibility explaining acceptance any politically undesirable conditions.

2. Role arbitrator wld be limited to arbitration of truce only and wld not extend to other issues. Fol arbitration of truce remainder settlement wld be carried forward along previously agreed lines.

3. Essential requisite settlement by arbitration is agreement in advance both parties accept arbitrator’s decision.

4. Arbitrator wld presumably operate within framework Aug 13 Res but wld not be bound by any proposals UNCIP re truce.

5. Dept believes assuming 2 parties agreeable-UNCIP cld arrange arbitration this issue without reference SC.

6. In event UNCIP decides adopt above approach it shld take vigorous stand urging acceptance thereof on GOP–GOI. Probably also desirable UNCIP recommend member Govts they also urge GOI–GOP acceptance.

7. Shld UNCIP agree this proposal Dept wld have no preference as to individual selected as arbitrator, but foresees possibility parties and UNCIP might turn to Nimitz. Dept has not approached Nimitz this subj but has reason believe that while not seeking position of arbitrator this specific issue he wld not refuse serve if formally invited by UNCIP thru SyG. FYI which you use discreetly if necessary Dept is informed Nimitz wld not wish serve as mediator truce issue believing he wld face same difficulties which confronted UNCIP. Dept agrees.

Dept views with increasing concern recent statement and actions both parties, but particularly on part of GOI, which do not contribute atmosphere needed peaceful settlement Kashmir issue and believes appointment arbitrator may contribute creation such atmosphere. Dept awaiting text replies two Govts truce proposals.

Delhi please pass Macatee urgently by courier if necessary.

Webb

1 Repeated to Karachi as 159 and London as 1916.

The Ambassador in India (Henderson) to the Secretary, of State 501.BC Kashmir/6–549: Telegram

[Document 1192]

The Ambassador in India (Henderson) to the Secretary, of State

secret
priority New Delhi, June 5, 1949—3 p. m.

637. Comkas 47. From Macatee. Following summarizes five-page GOI reply truce terms.

1. Azad forces. GOI still insists that previous assurance re disbanding disarming Azad forces be made clear and decision reached within seven weeks. Complains that, if not, presumably plebiscite arrangements would proceed anyway obviously inconsistent with objective free plebiscite. Thus of “utmost importance” that (a) GOP agree now to disbandment Azads;

(b) Discussions re details begin immediately after truce and decisions taken soonest;

(c) Phasing Indian withdrawals should depend on progress made with actual disbandment Azads.

2. Northern areas. Because Pakistani armed locals are danger to internal security of area, are infiltrating valley and can interfere with trade routes, GOI insists acceptance principle Indian troops garrison important points, these to be decided later. Question administration area left over for now.

3. In view above, GOI feels comment unnecessary other terms. Regret cannot accede request unreserved acceptance. Now up to Commission decide whether will revise terms.

Following summarizes eleven-page GOP reply: 1. Accepts provisions cease-fire line with understanding that any adjustments by MA will be local and minor.

2. Provision re northern area: (a) Not in accord August 13 Resolution;

(b) Conflicts with prior Commission assurance that no Indian military would be permitted evacuated territory;

(c) Unnecessary because no real possibility incursion tribesmen or foreign invasion and trade routes run either through Indian or Pakistan-held areas;

(d) Pakistan in better position safeguard security area;

(e) Proposal likely create unrest in security area.

3. Provisions for withdrawal troops do not fulfill Commission pledge for synchronization. In absence information re time stages and bulk Indian troops, GOP cannot be expected make decision on terms. (This is crux Pakistan position.)

4. GOP understands Nimitz will arrive soon and appointed soon as possible and would take part in discussions disposal Azad and state forces. Actual reduction Azads would only occur after Part II implemented.

5. Reference to sovereignty of state should be omitted.

Replies show increasing cleavage between GOI and GOP views; only parallel to be found is that each hopes for revision of terms in light own views thus technically not closing door further negotiations but actually making such negotiations more difficult.

Sent Department 637, pouched Karachi, repeated London. [Macatee.]

Henderson

The Ambassador in India (Henderson) to the Secretary of State 501.BC Kashmir/6–949: Telegram

[Document 1193]

The Ambassador in India (Henderson) to the Secretary of State

secret
priority New Delhi, June 9, 1949—10 p. m.

648. Comkas 48.

1. Re Kascom 82,1 June 3, present thinking USDel is that UNCIP action should be: (1) Fixing cease fire line separable and urgent. Since GOP agrees give authority MA decide disputed points, Commission should seek immediately same agreement GOI without prejudice claims northern area.

(2) Invite both governments send representatives Srinagar or Simla meet together under auspices Commission to seek agreement truce. Without confining discussion Commission would suggest agreement possible on following basis: (a) On northern area positions so diametrically opposed attempt compromise formula useless and both governments agree let Nimitz decide.

(b) Both governments agree that there be large scale reduction Azad forces and JK forces, that discussions this end be started immediately, and decisions taken and implemented soon as possible. Whether implementation could occur during truce would depend decisions reached.

(c) GOI agree schedule withdrawal bulk its forces and in any event agreed or proposed schedule be disclosed GOP.

(d) Both governments accept rest of truce terms.

(3) In event above step fails either by rejection proposal by either government or by lack early results Commission would propose to both governments name arbitrator, who as envisaged reftel, would seek work out truce with authority decide any point governments unable agree. He would use August 13 resolution as basis and his interpretation would be final. He would not be bound by Commission’s truce proposals.

(4) If one or both governments reject arbitrator Commission would immediately place case again before SC with report containing its recommendations.

2. Although Commission would propose only steps one and two, it would at same time inform both governments intention take steps three and four in event rejection or failure. Its invitation to joint meeting would be given to press and subsequent exchange of correspondence would be published.

3. USDel believes proposal re joint meeting GOI–GOP essential before it can consider Commissions’ mediating obligations discharged, and is more in nature attempt get parties together rather than continuance negotiations. Aware acceptance proposal may give both governments, particularly GOI, opportunity procrastinate, USDel would endeavor have UNCIP call halt at first signs bogging down.

4. In view necessity arbitrator having sound knowledge history of dispute, USDel considers that only Nimitz, Colban, personal representatives SyG, would have necessary qualifications. While Nimitz harder to refuse, he would run grave risk his prestige as PA adversely affected should such refusal be forthcoming, which USDel deems strong probability. Should Colban be refused SC could then name Nimitz.

5. UNCIP to consider USDel’s plan June 7.

6. Nehru’s Srinagar speech and recent action Indian Assembly have given rise within UNCIP further doubts bona fides GOI protestations her desire follow through her commitments re plebiscite. All members Commission, however, are convinced further effort should be made and Commission now engaged discussion nature that effort.

7. Czech member UNCIP, Chyle, has had private talks with Sheikh Abdullah2 and other members Kashmir Government during past ten days. UNCIP members have no legitimate reason deal with Kashmir Government and he volunteers no information re nature of talks. Curious onlookers within UNCIP speculate that he may be discussing possibility independence Kashmir with backing Soviet bloc. Significant however, most his proposals seem directed toward procrastination and delaying arrival Nimitz. His conduct at meeting Commission in general correct and cooperative, but there are signs that under his veneer he is conceited, aggressive, imperious, impatient of opposition. Professes his determination, however, UNCIP should exercise patience both governments continue efforts mediation truce.

Sent Department 648, pouched Karachi, Rangoon, London.

Henderson

1 Telegram 399, p. 1715 [Pg. 1715 includes portions of Doc. 1190 and Doc. 1191].

2 Sheikh Mohamad Abdullah, Prime Minister of Jammu and Kashmir.

The Ambassador in India (Henderson) to the Secretary of State 501.BC Kashmir/6–1149: Telegram

[Document 1194]

The Ambassador in India (Henderson) to the Secretary of State

secret New Delhi, June 11, 1949—noon.

662. (1) Recent events as well as our evaluation of Nehru’s character and of influences surrounding him incline us to view that at present he is not sure that he wants an immediate truce agreement. He seems to be hesitating to take any steps just now which might lead towards holding of early plebiscite. We believe that certain advisers such as Bajpai who have special interest in India’s international position are anxious that India should not gain reputation of failing to live up to its commitments and that it should therefore go on towards plebiscite provided holding would be in circumstances which would not make them too vulnerable to attacks from nationalistic critics. Other advisers such as Ayyangar who have consistently opposed any concession are trying persuade Nehru that plebiscite in near future in circumstances likely to prevail might lead to loss all Kashmir and disaster to him and Congress Party. Nehru seems therefore to be veering between desire for world acclaim as great political figure willing to resort to peaceful methods in finding solution international disputes and desire for popularity in India as strong man who will not permit foreign pressure persuade him sacrifice national interests. During recent weeks nationalistic group has been in ascendency and group interested in foreign relations which has no political backing whatsoever has been compelled move with great caution. Nehru’s sense loyalty to old comrade Abdullah strengthens hand nationalistic group. In view Nehru’s character we consider his recent unconciliatory and even provocative utterances as indicative of uncertainties rather than decisiveness.

(2) Minimum goal nationalistic group is partition with India holding areas now occupied by it plus northern territory. Some ultra-nationalists would be quite prepared enter into war with Pakistan in order obtain all Kashmir. They would hardly dare at this stage make suggestion such character to Nehru.

(3) With situation as it appears to be we should exercise caution in endeavoring bring pressure on Nehru and such as we might bring should be from his best source and couched in lofty language which would appeal to Nehru’s amour propre.

(4) If UNCIP should decide make clear-cut formal suggestion to GOI that it submit matter of truce to arbitrator and if it makes public this decision occasion might be found for President to make such an appeal through Embassy. British High Commissioner1 tells me that in response to inquiry from his government as to how UK might best assist in prevailing on Nehru to agree to such an UNCIP suggestion he was recommending an appeal from Attlee2 through him to Nehru. Attlee frequently makes appeals to Nehru through this channel. He is, however, personally acquainted with Nehru. Although President does not know Nehru personally, nevertheless an appeal from him parallel to the Attlee appeal might be helpful. Any appeal sent to India should of course accompany a similar appeal to Pakistan.

Sent Department 662; pouched Karachi 22, Srinagar for USDel; repeated London.

Henderson

1 Lt. Gen. Sir Archibald Nye.

2 Clement R. Attlee, British Prime Minister.

The Ambassador in India (Henderson) to the Secretary of State 501.BC Kashmir/6–1849: Telegram

[Document 1195]

The Ambassador in India (Henderson) to the Secretary of State

secret New Delhi, June 18, 1949—11 a. m.

688. 1. Lozano told me June 17 that he has practically completed discussions with GOI re truce and flies Kashmir June 19 with letter from GOI outlining certain understandings on basis of which it is willing to accept UNCIP’s truce proposals. He feels some possibility that UNCIP will be willing to enter into such understandings and then to endeavor persuade GOP also to accept truce proposals on conditions acceptable to UNCIP.

2. I have not seen GOI’s letter. Following is my understanding its outstanding points gained from my talk with Lozano. (a) Re Azad forces: GOI will be satisfied if UNCIP can assure it that if within seven weeks after beginning truce period Azad forces not disbanded, UNCIP will indicate that arrangements for plebiscite referred to in paragraph 2 UNCIP resolution January 5 have not yet been completed. Lozano said that such understanding between GOI and UNCIP would mean plebiscite could not be held until disbandment Azad forces and would merely have effect of prolonging truce period until such disbanding has taken place.

(b) Re northern territories: GOI must have understanding that it can place small garrisons in three or four specified points along Kunchenjunga River. Lozano said these points were admittedly under control GOI at time cease-fire and apparently were removed from control GOI by General Delvoie when straightening out lines. He believes this request reasonable and one which should be accepted by Pakistan, particularly since Pakistan is insisting that it should control all territory held by it at time cease-fire. GOI also insists that there be understanding that it have right to send forces into northern territories to restore peace and order in case violent disorder should take place. Lozano said it would be extremely difficult to prevail on Pakistan to accept this understanding, particularly since GOI would be in position—although it was not specified [specifically?] so stated—to decide for itself whether any disorders which might take place are sufficiently important to warrant troops. On other hand he thought it could be pointed out to GOP there was little likelihood serious internal disorders would occur since overwhelmingly Muslim population appears to be satisfied with present Pakistan controlled regime, and if GOI should send forces when in opinion UNCIP or plea administrator extent of disorder did not warrant such action, GOI could be charged with violating spirit of truce.

(c) Re disclosure to GOP before acceptance by it truce proposals of scheduled GOI withdrawals. GOI refused to permit disclosure of such military secrets to GOP but Bajpai was recommending to Nehru that GOI would not object if UNCIP should inform GOP, in case full understanding should be reached between GOP and UNCIP with regard all other points of truce proposals, what Indian troops distribution must be at end three months period. Lozano believed Nehru would agree and he felt that such a solution should be satisfactory to Pakistan.

(d) Lozano said that during conversations he had not indicated to GOI points made in Pakistan’s reply to truce proposals. First hurdle now to obtain agreement UNCIP to Indian suggestion, and second to reach understanding with Pakistan. He believed that GOI hoped UNCIP would agree to its present suggestion but would probably be relieved if Pakistan continued to reject truce proposals.

Henderson

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in India 501.BC Kashmir/6–1849: Telegram

[Document 1196]

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in India 1

secret
niact Washington, June 18, 1949—11 a. m.

435. Kascom 88. Fol reflects Dept thinking re GOI “understanding” contained GOI Itr summarized Delhi’s 688, June 18: (1) GOI points do not represent real change GOI position and appear designed to have Comm interpret GOI position as acceptance Comm’s proposals leaving GOP bear onus rejection.

(2) On basis present info provisions GOI ltr Dept recommends you strongly oppose Comm acceptance thereto. If pushed to vote you shld state that you must vote negatively and if US position defeated you would have to reserve US right to explain its position in minority report and in SC.

Dept believes as logical next step Lozano Delhi conversations should be balanced by immediate approach Comm Rep GOP requesting any modification their views Comm’s truce proposals and fol reply from GOP Comm shld consider replies both parties. Approach outlined Point d Delhi’s 688 not believed to be proper approach and cld be interpreted GOP as unequal treatment by Comm.

In event Comm feels replies both parties unacceptable Dept believes US Rep shld propose UNCIP adopt resolution calling upon parties acceptance arbitration truce. Dept views re arbitral approach fol separate communication.

Re (2) above Dept objections directed principally at fol points: (a) Dishandment Azad forces contemplated plebiscite period rather than under Part 2 Aug 13 resolution. If GOI wishes advance disbandment Azad forces to truce period it shld agree likewise advance final disposal Indian and state armed forces as originally provided Para 4a Jan 5 resolution.

(b) Dept believes decision stationing GOI forces northern areas cannot be left in hands GOI and maximum concessions to GOI this respect contained in UNCIP proposals 28 Apr.

(c) Dept cannot agree that in framework peaceful settlement Kashmir dispute withdrawal Indian forces constitutes “military secret.” Dept believes GOP shld be given full disclosure GOI withdrawals.

Rptd to Karachi and London.

Acheson

1 Repeated to Karachi as 188 and London as 2138.

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in India 501.BC Kashmir/6–2549: Telegram

[Document 1197]

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in India 1

secret Washington, June 25, 1949—2 p. m.

449. Kascom. Dept convinced shld UNCIP negots presently contemplated fail arbitration of truce shld be pressed on parties by UNCIP as most practicable solution impasse. Dept strongly believes UNCIP shld propose this solution rather than permit case return SC and is prepared give vigorous diplomatic support UNCIP this proposal. Dept understands UK of similar view and informed Attlee prepared urge such solution personally on Nehru. Support other like-minded Govts including those represented on UNCIP wld of course be helpful.

Dept has explored fully with Nimitz informal basis possibility his acting as truce arbitrator. Nimitz does not wish arbitrate this issue believing in so doing he might prejudice his position as PA. However, he wld reluctantly agree accept job shld both parties select him. Dept therefore suggests in order meet Nimitz views and avoid impression pushing him on parties UNCIP shld it decide urge arbitration of truce shld include Nimitz as one in panel of names from which parties cld select arbitrator. In that event UNCIP and neutral Govts wld feel free shld parties not agree on arbitrator in first instance to urge acceptance compromise candidate on list. If possible all candidates on panel shld be acquainted with issues to avoid undue delay in arbitration and not already prejudiced in eyes either party. Dept suggests Delvoie as acceptable candidate. Also Gen Malony,2 Nimitz’ deputy, well versed on issues and although closely identified with Nimitz his selection wld serve preserve Nimitz solely for plebiscite job.

Acheson

1 Repeated to Karachi as 198 and London as 2199.

2 Maj. Gen. Harry J. Malony, U.S.A. (ret).

The Chargé in Pakistan (Doolittle) to the Secretary of State 501.BC Kashmir/6–2949: Telegram

[Document 1198]

The Chargé in Pakistan (Doolittle) to the Secretary of State

secret Karachi, June 29, 1949—10 a. m.

249. Comkas 59. Following are results meetings UNCIP delegation with GOP officials: 1. GOP maintains position as stated letter May 30,1 reemphasizing impossibility either accepting or rejecting truce terms in absence information re Indian withdrawal plan.

2. GOP unmoved by delegation’s several arguments such as that Pakistan acceptance would improve Pakistan position before world opinion help prevent in SC any solution other than plebiscite, etc.

3. Zafrullah said nothing had happened induce GOP modify earlier position; on contrary much had happened make GOP much more distrustful, fearful of GOI than ever before. Seemed clear from these and corollary remarks that GOP acceptance doubtful even if GOI withdrawal plan given and found satisfactory.

4. Pakistan officials convinced GOI will never accept truce terms, even if GOP did and that GOI will do utmost prevent any plebiscite.

5. General impressions are: GOP seems feel usefulness further mediation nearing end; would appear welcome arbitration (although this mentioned only in passing); not reluctant dispute go again to SC.

Mission returning Srinagar June 29.

USDel will urge UNCIP agree proposed arbitration as next step (reDeptel 4492 to New Delhi, repeated to USDel as Kascom unnumbered). Feel unavoidable [sic] undesirable omit Colban from panel since he aware his name been considered in UNCIP and he more acquainted with issues than Delvoie.

Sent Department 249, pouched Delhi.

Doolittle

1 The reply of the Government of Pakistan was summarized in telegram 190 from Karachi, June 1, p. 1714 [Pg. 1714 includes portions of Doc. 1189 and Doc. 1190].

2  Supra.

The Ambassador in India (Henderson) to the Secretary of State 501.BC kashmir/7–549: Telegram

[Document 1199]

The Ambassador in India (Henderson) to the Secretary of State

secret
priority New Delhi, July 5, 1949—9 a. m.

750. Comkas 60. All members except Czechoslovak now take same view Indian reply USDel (Comkas 54)1 and Department (Kascom 88)2 and convinced useless reopen negotiations.

Argentine, Belgian, Colombia while agreeing desirability arbitration, present strongly inclined vs Commission proposing it. They completely certain GOI would refuse and hence feel a rejected Commission proposal would make difficult if not impossible for SC make same recommendation. Although feels some truth this point USDel may still be able obtain Commission’s agreement proposed arbitration.

As immediate, separate and urgent step, Commission decided today ask governments send military representatives meeting Karachi with Truce Subcommittee try agree cease-fire line. Line accompanying truce terms with gaps filled by MilAd will be proposed as basis. At joint meeting will also propose set up permanent joint military committee with Mil Ad chairman deal matters re cease-fire.

Sent Department 750, repeated London, pouched Rangoon, Karachi.

Henderson

1 Not printed.

2 Telegram 435, p. 1721 [Pg. 1721 includes portions of Doc. 1195 and Doc. 1196].

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in India 501.BC Kashmir/7–849: Telegram

[Document 1200]

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in India 1

secret
us urgent
priority Washington, July 8, 1949—6 p. m.

478. Kascom 93. Dept continues believe UNCIP if at all possible shld avoid reference case SC because such action wld (1) result rehash entire situation (2) provide opportunity Soviet obstruction (Moscow’s 262 to Delhi, 10 to Karachi) (3) further delay solution. Moreover, Dept believes proposal by UNCIP supported by direct appeals from UK, US and possibly other member Govts UNCIP shld prove as effective as SC recommendation and no assurance in view veto and other possibilities SC wld actually adopt such proposal.

If notwithstanding above considerations case reverts SC Dept does not believe (Comkas 60 July 53 ) SC action wld be prejudiced by fact UNCIP proposal for arbitration truce had been rejected.

Suggest in informal talks Arg, Belg and Colom you indicate US prepared give strong support UNCIP proposal arbitration truce. Believe it not advisable you inform these Reps contemplated UK démarche. You might also refer GOI desire election to SC as factor which may favorably influence GOI reply. Dept envisages GOI attempt delay definite reply through discussion terms reference arbitrator and to prevent this Dept believes UNCIP proposal shld include specific terms reference for arbitrator. (Kascom 82, June 3)4 Whole proposal shld be presented for acceptance without modification.

Acheson

1 Repeated to Karachi as 222.

2 Not printed.

3 Telegram 750, supra.

4 Telegram 399, p. 1715 [Pg. 1715 includes portions of Doc. 1190 and Doc. 1191].

The Chargé in Pakistan (Doolittle) to the Secretary of State 501.BC Kashmir/7–2749: Telegram

[Document 1201]

The Chargé in Pakistan (Doolittle) to the Secretary of State

secret Karachi, July 27, 1949—1 p. m.

306. Joint military talks Karachi resulted in full agreement on cease-fire line Kashmir.1 Agreement subject ratification both governments but Williams has been assured by both delegations that ratifications will be immediately forthcoming. Truce subcommittee departing Karachi July 28 for Srinagar via Delhi. Williams feels that success Karachi talks will probably cause members UNCIP wish invite both governments joint political talks, which may leave US arbitration proposal in abeyance pending results such talks. He doubts that if invited either government will decline and considerable delay will ensue with positive results doubtful. We agree fully Delhi’s views in their 840,2 July 25, on this point and feel suggested procedure presentation arbitration appeal could apply equally to Pakistan. Due Ramazan fast have not been able maintain usual close touch Pakistan officials but know internal situation not improved (Delhi 8412 July 26) by Liaquat compromise West Punjab League causing resignation Governor Mudie. Whether next step is arbitration or joint meeting, it should be taken quickly order benefit atmosphere brought about by above accord.

Sent Department, repeated Delhi 55 for Macatee.

Doolittle

1 For the text of the agreement, see SC, 4th yr., Special Suppl. No. 7, pp. 126 ff.

2 Not printed.

2 Not printed.

The Ambassador in India (Henderson) to the Secretary of State 501.BC Kashmir/7–2949: Telegram

[Document 1202]

The Ambassador in India (Henderson) to the Secretary of State

secret
priority New Delhi, July 29, 1949—10 a. m.

851. 1. I called on Bajpai, Director General Foreign Affairs, twenty-eighth at his request. He said he wanted discuss serious matter. Prime Minister and other members government disturbed at reports received from returning Indian representatives and other Indian visitors in US to effect US representatives to UN from Austin down as well as Nimitz and his associates seemed be forming impression GOI was not acting in good faith re Kashmir and through various subterfuges and evasions was endeavoring avoid plebiscite. It seemed likely attitude USDel and other Americans connected with UN was reflection attitude State Department. Furthermore, Birls1 had obtained impression State Department seemed regard India as primarily responsible for failure achieve truce agreement. He hoped that if State Department had feelings this kind it would express them frankly through me to him, pointing out at same time what India had done or failed do to give rise to them. If really friendly understanding was to be maintained between India and US, frankness was essential. He hoped US would not fall into British habit taking evasive attitude when unpleasant or disagreeable matters developed. Frank statement on part State Department of what it considered be India’s shortcoming re Kashmir would not be considered intrusion since they were being invited. He would particularly like know specific actions which US felt India should take to demonstrate good faith. He was fearful that if spirit of suspicion of Indian motives continued be manifested by intimations and hints on part US officials and representatives, hoped for effect of Nehru visit would not be realized and kind relations between our two countries for which he was wholeheartedly striving would not be achieved.

2. I replied I was not aware there had crystallized in State Department belief that India was not acting in good faith. It was only natural, however, that doubt should be raised in minds of various members State Department and perhaps among various US representatives to UN re India’s intentions because (a) India had not shown kind of conciliatory attitude which was likely promote speedy holding of plebiscite; (b) it was well-known that in certain Indian official circles, partition was preferred to plebiscite; (c) since India was in possession most desirable portions Kashmir, postponement of plebiscite seemed more disadvantageous to Pakistan than India. I reminded him that on number occasions I had frankly told him how disturbed India’s friends in Washington were at what seemed be unconciliatory attitude both India and Pakistan. Furthermore, existence Kashmir problem was cause of discouraging frustration to those officials American Government anxious promote relations between US and India and assist in promoting stability and prosperity south Asia. For instance it seemed almost hopeless for US be able lend really effective economic assistance to India so long as running sore of Kashmir problem was eating into India’s financial position and undermining political economic stability of South Asia. I had been somewhat embarrassed by my failure receive from Washington replies Defense Secretary Patel’s questions re possibility receiving certain military equipment, et cetera. I did not know why these questions had not been answered. I was convinced, however, that Department was postponing from day to day making decisions re them in hope breaking of Kashmir deadlock between India and Pakistan would remove certain negative factors which could not be ignored at present. When Pakistan and India were at each others throats, US placed virtual embargo arms to both countries since it did not wish one use American equipment in fight against other. When cease-fire was announced, we lifted embargo but subsequent developments have caused us again hesitate lest military equipment given one country might be used against other. These represent only two illustrations of handicaps imposed by Kashmir deadlock on American officials working on south Asian matters. On other hand, it was difficult for US as I had pointed out in previous conversations to suggest specific conditions under which India might accept truce since US could not by-pass UNCIP with suggestions of its own.

3. Bajpai again insisted it was important that US talk with complete frankness with GOI re this matter. Existence of UNCIP or reference of Kashmir dispute to UN should not be allowed interfere with direct diplomatic conversations. We must also consider relations between US and India. Full understanding between our two countries achieved through direct talks should be of advantage to UN.

4. I told him I would convey substance our conversation to Washington and ask Department furnish me, for transmission to him, frank statement replete with as many details might be considered appropriate and helpful.

5. He said he would be grateful if I would do so. He hoped my request would be couched in language which would not give offense since his approach to me was not to produce argument but promote understanding. He was particularly anxious that matter should be handled between himself and me and not through Madam Pandit since he feared her version of conversation might have effect opposite to that which he was sure we both desired.

6. I realize Department’s difficulties in preparing statement of character desired by Bajpai. An utterly frank statement might mortally offend Nehru who is almost morbidly sensitive to criticism which might reflect on his motives or good faith. On other hand, I feel we should not fail register our disappointment at attitude displayed by India re truce negotiations. Without questioning good faith GOI, it might be possible give instances in which India has assumed what seems to me be a legalistic and technical attitude not likely produce kind of atmosphere in which friendly agreements are made. We should exercise care, however, not to present kind of statement which would invite argumentative reply and might lead us into profitless wrangling. In any event it seems important statement be worded in such manner as prepare way for President’s contemplated message to Nehru on arbitration.

Pouched Srinagar for USDel.

Henderson

1 Possibly Ghanshyam Das Birla, Indian industrialist.

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom 501.BC Kashmir/7–3049: Telegram

[Document 1203]

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom 1

secret
priority Washington, July 30, 1949—3 p. m.

2686. Pls deliver fol personal msg from Sec for Bevin.2 I am sure that you share my gratification at the successful outcome of the IndPak mil mtg at Karachi. Agreement on a definitive cease-fire line is a significant step forward which shld, temporarily at least, reduce the tension in Ind and Pak which was causing you concern at the time your personal msg of July 223 was dispatched. It is, of course, essential that the UNCIP take advantage of this favorable development by submitting to the parties at an early date a concrete proposal for the solution of the remaining truce problems.

Although we wld prefer that the Comm immediately submit our proposal of arbitration, we recognize that the success of the Karachi talks will incline certain members of the Comm to revert to the idea of recommending a high level, Ind–Pak polit mtg. Our view is that it is doubtful that both parties wld agree to polit talks and more doubtful that these talks, if held, wld be productive. Mr. Macatee will press this view in the Comm, but it is quite possible that he will be unable to prevent the formal proposal of a polit mtg to Ind and Pak.

Shld this proposal be rejected by one or both parties or shld the mtg prove unproductive, we are confident that the Comm wld then turn to arbitration. Mr. Macatee reports that all his colleagues now recognize the merit and practicability of the arbitration procedure and are prepared to support our proposal if the polit talks fail.

We have carefully weighed your suggestion (a) in the light of the present position. I doubt that it wld be advisable for us to intervene with direct approaches to the parties just when the Comm has succeeded in bringing them into agreement on the cease-fire line. Moreover, we believe that the risk of rejection wld be greater if arbitration were proposed by our two Govts than if embodied in a recommendation of the Comm which we supported.

The action proposed in your suggestion (b) wld appear unnecessary as the Arg and Belg Reps have already assured Mr. Macatee that they will support arbitration. It is true that this support may become effective only after a proposal of joint polit talks has failed, but our two Govts cld hardly make dipl démarches to prevent the Comm from exploring the possibilities of further direct negots between Ind and Pak. I might say in that connection that Amb Austin has discussed with the Arg Alternate Rep SC, Dr. Muñoz, our proposal of arbitration and our intention to give this proposal, when made by the Comm, pur strong dipl support. He suggested to Dr. Muhoz that his Govt might like to do likewise.

As regards your suggestion (c), Mr. Macatee has standing instructions to obtain adoption of our arbitration proposal by the Comm as soon as possible.

You may also be interested to know that I have discussed with the Pres our interest in the peaceful settlement of the Kashmir dispute. The Pres has agreed to dispatch, immediately after the Comm has submitted the arbitration proposal, a personal appeal to the PriMins of Ind and Pak urging acceptance of the Commas recommendation. The parallel approach planned by PriMin Attlee will be very welcome, and helpful.

Although we may have to acquiesce in further delay, I am still hopeful that the Comm will recommend arbitration to Ind and Pak, and that with the support of our two Govts and possibly that of other Govts, the parties will accept this proposal.

Acheson

1 Repeated to New Delhi as 534, Karachi as 258, and the U.S. Mission to the United Nations as 399.

2 Ernest Bevin, British Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs.

3 Not printed.

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in India 501.BC Kashmir/7–2949: Telegram

[Document 1204]

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in India

secret Washington, August 5, 1949—7 p. m.

554. Urtel 851 July 29. Fol paper prepared in Dept as basis for response to Bajpai. You may make such deletions and changes as you deem advisable. In view informal character Bajpai approach Dept believes preferable reply be made orally but no objection your leaving memo of conversation if you feel it desirable. Pls inform Dept action taken, mentioning any substantial departure from fol text:

“US officials in Wash and NY have on numerous occasions expressed to Indian officials and other responsible Indians concern over the slow progress toward a settlement of the Kashmir dispute. The Dept learns with regret that these expressions of concern have been misinterpreted as indications that this Govt questions the good faith of the GOI in its approach to the Kashmir problem. The Dept remains convinced that both India and Pak desire a peaceful solution of the problem, and US officials have endeavored to emphasize this fundamental conviction in all discussions of the Kashmir question.

“The concern of this Govt stems from its support of the objectives of peace and orderly progress in the Indian subcontinent to which the GOI is dedicated. The principal threat to the attainment of these objectives is the continued existence of the Kashmir dispute. The cease fire on Jan 1, 1949 encouraged the Dept to believe that this threat might be removed at an early date. Subsequent slow progress toward a truce agreement has been disappointing and has inevitably aroused apprehension within this Govt of an indefinite prolongation of the dispute.

“Factors attributable to both parties have accounted for the slow pace of the Kashmir negots. Among these may be included the emphasis placed by the GOI on the legal and mil-security aspects of the problem.

“In referring to the GOI’s emphasis on its legal rights in Kashmir, the Dept wishes to make clear that it is not herein addressing itself to the validity of the Indian interpretation of those rights. It is suggested, however, that greater flexibility on strictly legal points wld facilitate solution of the problem.

“The Dept was struck by the preponderance of security considerations in the GOI’s reply to the Apr 28 truce proposals of the UNCIP. Stress on mil-security factors makes it appear that the GOI lacks confidence in the UN’s ability to implement a peaceful settlement of the dispute. To the extent that India’s preoccupation with mil-security factors may derive from concepts of the strategic importance of Kashmir, the Dept wld observe that strategic considerations in Kashmir become significant only in the event of war between India and Pak or of invasion of the Indian subcontinent. The Dept cannot believe that responsible statesmen in either India or Pak hold the disastrous view that their two countries will resort to war to resolve their differences. Shld there be external aggression against the subcontinent, the strategic value of Kashmir wld depend, not on its polit affiliation, but on the degree of cooperation between India and Pak in resisting the invader.

“The refusal of the GOI, in connection with the Comm’s truce proposals of Apr 28, to permit the UNCIP prior to signature of the truce agreement to inform the GOP of the Indian sched of troop withdrawals reflects emphasis on both security and legal aspects. No major Indian interest seems to have been served by this insistence on its legal position unless the probability of renewed hostilities in Kashmir were assumed. If the GOI did make this assumption, the Dept believes that it was led to do so by its over-emphasis on security factors, as neither the UNCIP, its mil observers nor this Govt considered a resumption of fighting probable.

“The Dept reiterates its conviction that both India and Pak desire a peaceful settlement of the Kashmir dispute. The recent agreement on a definitive cease fire line affords further evidence of the good faith of both parties. The Dept strongly hopes that the GOI and the GOP will take advantage of this advance and press forward to the conclusion of an over-all truce agreement. To that end and in response to the friendly and constructive inquiry of the MEA, the Dept has set forth in the preceding paras its frank views on certain aspects of the GOI’s approach to the Kashmir problem. It is hoped that the MEA will accept these comments in the friendly spirit in which they are offered, and that they will serve to remove any misunderstandings which may have arisen with respect to the Dept’s position.”1

Dept gratified by your prompt and forceful presentation US position in initial reply to Bajpai. Dept paper omits certain points which you properly emphasized in order make Dept presentation more palatable in event brought Nehru’s attention. Paper is necessarily general to avoid compromising US position as member UNCIP.

Shld Bajpai press you for other examples GOI-created difficulties you cld cite position on northern areas as example security emphasis and seating Kashmir Reps in Constituent Assembly as example legal emphasis. Shld he justify security emphasis by pointing to existence Azad forces, you might remind him that GOI agreed to UNCIP Jan 5 Res which deferred this problem to plebiscite period. Moreover, UNCIP has in Dept opinion shown full regard for necessity maintaining balance between Azad forces and GOI and State forces during truce period.2

Dept has not discussed Bajpai’s approach or reply with Brit or with Indian Elmb. Shld you consider desirable inform Brit, advise Dept.

Acheson

1 On August 9 Henderson handed to Bajpai an unheaded memorandum which followed closely the language suggested here, with the addition of this passage following the first sentence of the third paragraph: “It should he recalled at this point that the United States Government has not hesitated to express its concern to both parties and it has done so frequently to Indian and Pakistan officials alike. In this document, however, which results from an informal discussion in regard to the United States attitude towards the Indian approach to the Kashmir problem, only those factors relating to the position taken by the Government of India are mentioned.” (501.BC Kashmir/8–1049)

2 In despatch No. 690, August 10 (in amplification of telegram 911, not printed), Henderson reported that Bajpai “seemed not too pleased with what I had to tell him. He remains of the opinion that the Department has not given his Government full credit for the concessions which he considers that it has made.…” Henderson added that he thought that the exchange of views had been useful in demonstrating “that we do not accept without critical evaluation the Indian Government’s own estimate of its position.” He was uncertain what Nehru’s reaction might be, but even if he should take offense, Henderson was “convinced that we could not in all honesty have made a more disarming or milder reply. …” (501.BC Kashmir/8–1049)

The Ambassador in India (Henderson) to the Secretary of State 845.00/8–1549: Telegram

[Document 1205]

The Ambassador in India (Henderson) to the Secretary of State

secret New Delhi, August 15, 1949—3 p. m.

924. 1. At Nehru’s request, I called on him at noon August 13. It was so arranged that I saw Bajpai, Secretary of External Affaire, before meeting Prime Minister. Bajpai handed me a document1 purporting to set forth reaction Ministry External Affairs with respect to the views of Department regarding India’s attitude towards Kashmir which I had conveyed to him on August 9. He said Prime Minister felt keenly about matter and wanted to discuss it with me privately.

2. Although Nehru greeted me affably his whole attitude changed when be began discussing Kashmir. … He said he was tired of receiving moralistic advice from US. India did not need advice from US or any other country as to its foreign or internal policies. His own record and that of Indian foreign relations was one of integrity and honesty, which did not warrant admonitions. He did not care to receive lectures from other countries. So far as Kashmir was concerned he would not give an inch. He would hold his ground even if Kashmir, India and the whole world would go to pieces. Perhaps he was being emotional but he was justified in feeling deeply about Kashmir. He would not be swayed by talks or persuasion. He was under too deep obligations to Kashmir. He would give state up, only in case Kashmir people should freely express their desire not to remain a part of India. The Kashmir issue affected underlying philosophy of India which was that of a secular progressive state all citizens of which could participate in national life without discrimination because of race, color or religion. This philosophy was opposed to that of Pakistan which was theocratic state. Pakistan was maneuvering with purpose that people of Kashmir should decide their future on basis of Pakistan philosophy rather than that of India. India was determined that any expression of will of people of Kashmir regarding their future should be based on political factors not on religious hatreds. Plebiscite based on political considerations would be moral victory for India even if it should lose. One based on religious passions, no matter who won would arouse hatreds which could injure structure of Indian state.

After about ten minutes of this Prime Minister calmed down and spent another 50 minutes outlining developments of recent years in and relating to Kashmir. Memo describing more detail conversation going forward by air mail.1

3. I was not entirely unprepared for Prime Minister’s tirade; … I said nothing, remained calm and looked him straight in the face. In latter part of his talk, he used conversational tone of voice and turned on his well-known charm. In finishing he said he hoped I would not mind if he had been perhaps “somewhat over-forceful” in his opening remarks. I replied that if his remarks reflected his state of mind it was better that he should have made them; that we were not likely to arrive at an understanding if we entirely concealed our emotions or failed to express frankly our views during conversations on important subjects. It might be just as well, however, if I should regard some of his remarks as made for my personal benefit, not for conveyance as official statement to my government. He said he would leave that to my judgement. He would not like for anything which he had said to injure our relations.

4. I pointed out State Department had expressed its views because it had been asked to do so by Bajpai. For it not to have done so when invited would have been unfair to India, to itself, and to cause of peace. Presentation of one’s views when requested could not be considered as offering of free advice. Furthermore, there was nothing in views as expressed which cast any reflection on honesty and integrity either of Nehru or of GOI. Therefore, I failed to see pertinency of some of his remarks. The Prime Minister admitted the truth of what I had said.

5. I said I would try to transmit to Washington fair summary of what he had said. I was afraid I would not be as eloquent an advocate of the Indian side of the Kashmir problem as he. Even though his coming visit to the US was of nonpolitical character, it might be useful if he could find occasion to explain his position with regard Kashmir just as frankly to responsible members of American Government as he had to me. He said would probably do so.

6. Summary of document given me by Bajpai set forth in another telegram. Copy going forward by pouch.

Henderson

1 Not printed.

1 Not printed.

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in India 501.BC Kashmir/8–2549: Telegram

[Document 1206]

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in India 1

secret
priority Washington, August 25, 1949—8 p. m.

592. Fol is text appeal by Pres Truman which you shld deliver to respective PriMins GOI GOP shortly fol presentation by UNCIP to those Govts of its arbitration proposal, if possible on same day. Shld PriMins be unavailable msg shld be delivered FonOffs not later than 24 hours after Comm’s presentation its proposal.

Begin verbatim text

My dear Mr. Prime Minister:

The UN Comm for India and Pakistan has recommended that your Govt and the Govt of (Pakistan) (India) refer to arbitration the determination of truce terms in the State of Jammu and Kashmir.2 Because of the great importance which my Govt attaches to an early settlement of the Kashmir dispute, I am addressing this message to you in that connection.

Asia is today in the midst of a great social and polit revolution. Unhappily, that revolution has in most areas been attended by widespread violence which has disrupted the lives of tens of millions of peoples and the economies of whole nations. In the Indian subcontinent, by contrast, essential changes have been and are being made with only localized disturbances, quickly brought under control. It is of crucial importance to the subcontinent, to Asia, and to the world as a whole that this peaceful and orderly progress be maintained.

You will, I am sure, agree that peace and cooperation between your country and (Pakistan) (India) are essential to the continuance of social and political progress in the subcontinent. The Kashmir dispute is the greatest threat to such peace and cooperation. My Govt is, therefore, deeply interested in an early peaceful settlement of this dispute.

Progress toward a peaceful settlement has been impeded during the last several months by the inability of your Govt and the Govt of (Pakistan) (India), with the assistance of the UN Comm, to agree through negot on the terms of a truce in Jammu and Kashmir. Without minimizing the issues which have prevented a negotiated truce agreement, I do venture the opinion that these are not so critical that they shld be permitted any longer to impede an advance toward the ultimate goal of an over-all solution of the Kashmir problem. The estab of a truce is in the nature of an intermediate step which will make it possible to give effect to the Commission’s Resolution of January 5, 1949.

In the interest of your own nation and in the interest of the world community, I urge you to accept the recommendation for arbitration of truce terms now placed before your Govt by the UN. I am addressing a similar communication to the Prime Minister of (Pakistan) (India).

Will you please accept my best wishes for your continued health and success, and for the welfare of your great country and people.

Sincerely yours, (signed) Harry S. Truman3

End verbatim text

Acheson

1 Repeated to Karachi as 301, London as 3604, and the U.S. Mission to the United Nations as 439.

2 For the text of the memorandum approved by the Commission on August 26, see SC, 4th yr., Special Suppl. No. 7, p. 141.

3 Notation on file copy: “Text of message personally approved by the President July 11, 1949 on memorandum from the Secretary dated July 7, 1949.”

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Secretary of State 501.BC Kashmir/8–2949

[Document 1207]

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Secretary of State

secret [Washington,] August 30, 1949.

Participants: Madame Vijaya Lakshmi Pandit, Ambassador of India

Mr. Dean Acheson, Secretary of State

Mr. George McGhee, Assistant Secretary of State

Mr. T. N. Kaul, First Secretary, Embassy of India

Mr. Joseph S. Sparks, SOA

In identifying the Note1 which I handed to Madame Pandit I said that in conversations which I had had with the President concerning the situation in China and the Far East it had been apparent to both of us that the Ambassador’s brother, the Prime Minister of India, had emerged as a world figure of great influence and that we looked to him to assume the leadership in the rehabilitation of Asia. I said that in this role the entire world now had a claim upon him as one of its great statesmen and that we deeply hoped that in receiving the President’s personal appeal the Prime Minister would give the most careful consideration to the proposals of the United Nations Commission that the truce agreement should be submitted to arbitration. In particular I pointed out our concern that the great prestige which the Prime Minister enjoys throughout Asia should be even further fortified and in no way impaired by the manner in which he reacted to the Kashmir problem.

Madame Pandit said that she was deeply appreciative of the things I had said about the Prime Minister. She said that whereas she could of course not comment on his reaction to the proposal contained in the Note she did know that her brother more than any man in the world had been concerned by and worked for the solution of the Kashmir problem and that he would give the most serious thought to any proposals which emanated as this one so obviously did (in view of the American record throughout the history of the problem) from a truly friendly source. She said that she did not know about “leadership” but she did know that the Prime Minister and India were extremely anxious to cooperate in every way possible with the rest of Asia and to work in the closest possible relationship with the United States. In her opinion the importance of the Kashmir problem was fully understood in India and she was certain that the United States was aware of the complexity of the problem from an emotional, as well as economic, point of view. She fervently hoped that this situation could be “gotten out of the way” and that true understanding could be developed between India and Pakistan as well as between India and the rest of the world. In particular she mentioned the speech which the President had made last evening in Philadelphia and said that she had been struck by the close similarity between the things being said by the President and by the leaders of India.2

1 A copy of President Truman’s message to Prime Minister Nehru is included in telegram 592, supra.

2 For the text of the President’s address at the American Legion convention in Philadelphia, see Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: Harry S. Truman, 1949 (Washington, Government Printing Office, 1964), p. 446.

The Ambassador in India (Henderson) to the Secretary of State 501.BC Kashmir/9–849: Telegram

[Document 1208]

The Ambassador in India (Henderson) to the Secretary of State

secret
niact
priority New Delhi, September 8, 1949—5 p. m.

1043. Bajpai handed me copy Nehru’s reply to President which he telegraphed today to Indian Embassy for delivery to President. I am sending text since it might be helpful for President and Department know nature reply in advance.

Text follows:

“My dear Mr. President,

I thank you for your letter of the 30th August which your Ambassador presented to me on the 31st August. In view of the importance of its subject matter, I had to consult my colleagues and the Governments of Jammu and Kashmir. This will explain the slight delay in transmitting to you my reply.

2. I greatly appreciate the friendly solicitude which prompted you to write and particularly welcome your frankness because it enables me to write with equal candour. Since India became independent, and the creation of Pakistan was part of the scheme of transfer of power by Great Britain, we, in India, have been conscious of the need for peace and cooperation between ourselves and Pakistan. One striking example of the genuineness of our desire to be friendly to Pakistan was the transfer to its Government of the equivalent of approximately 150 million dollars at a time when we knew that Pakistan was aiding, abetting the invasion of Jammu and Kashmir and might use this money to further this aggression against India. I could cite other instances but do not wish to overweight this letter with detail.

3. Kashmir undoubtedly is a cause of acute tension between Pakistan and us. But, as we have already pointed out to your Ambassador, there are other causes as well, the root cause being the emotional climate of Pakistan whose people are being constantly encouraged by its government and leaders to pursue a policy inspired by fear of and hatred towards India in the false belief that India seeks to destroy this new state. Apart from other considerations, it is not to India’s interest to have any such aim. Her paramount need is peace in the world, of which the maintenance of friendly relations with her neighbours is an essential condition. In particular, the maintenance of such relations with Pakistan is of the greatest importance because of historical, geographic, economic and other factors.

4. You have referred to the inability of my Government and the Government of Pakistan to agree through negotiations with the assistance of the United Nations Commission on terms of truce in Jammu and Kashmir. We have, since the Commission first visited this sub-continent last year, given manifold proof of active cooperation with that body. The last example was our readiness to discuss truce terms, under the auspices of the Commission, with representatives of Pakistan. It was a matter of painful surprise to us that the Commission decided to abandon the idea of a conference, in our view, primarily because Pakistan refused even to discuss some matters to which we attach importance, particularly the large-scale disbanding and disarming of so called ‘Azad Kashmir’ forces, a step to which, according to assurances given us, Commission has agreed. As we have repeatedly stated to Commission, firm decisions to implement this assurance are condition precedent to withdrawal of our forces. Without satisfactory arrangements for large scale disbanding and disarming of ‘Azad’ forces, withdrawal of Indian forces will gravely imperil security of portion of the state held by us. And, unless there is this large-scale disbanding and disarming of ‘Azad’ forces, the conditions for a free and impartial plebiscite cannot come into being.

5. As regards Commission’s proposal for arbitration, I should like to state, at the outset, that India is not opposed to principle of arbitration. Arbitration is, under Article 33(1) of Charter of United Nations, one of the methods of achieving a peaceful solution of a dispute which is likely to endanger the maintenance of international peace and security, and India is a firm believer in principles embodied in Charter. The reference to arbitration should, however, be of a precise and defined issue which, if settled by the method, will have effect of creating conditions for ending a dispute that threatens international peace and security. The proposal for arbitration as presented to us by the Commission does not satisfy the necessary conditions and we have found ourselves unable accept it for reasons which are briefly set out below: (1) According to interpretation given to us, the arbitrator would have authority not only to arbitrate but would also be free to determine points on which he should arbitrate. So far as Government of India are aware, this procedure is novel and without precedent and could hardly be justified.

(2) The main difference between us and the Government of Pakistan is about disbanding and disarming of ‘Azad Kashmir’ forces. The Commission has given us an assurance that there is to be large-scale disbanding and disarming of these forces. If steps to implement assurance are not taken immediately, it will be impossible for us, consistently with necessity of safeguarding portion of Jammu and Kashmir state against a repetition of horrors of invasion of the valley in October, 1947, to withdraw the bulk of our forces. Moreover, if there is to be no large-scale disbandment and disarming of Azad Kashmir forces, one of essential conditions for holding free and impartial plebiscite will not be satisfied. As we explained to Commission’s principal representative, Dr. Lozano, when he discussed with us the draft of what subsequently became Commission’s resolution of 5th January, 1949, with such large number members of ‘Azad Kashmir forces’ under arms, it will be impossible for a substantial number of persons normally resident in so-called Azad-Kashmir area who are now refugees, to express their opinion freely re future of the State. The large-scale disbanding and disarming of ‘Azad-Kashmir’ forces is, therefore, not a matter for arbitration but for affirmative and immediate decision.

6. I would also like to draw your attention to fact that since the assurance re disbanding and disarming of ‘Azad-Kashmir’ forces was given to us by Commission, number of these forces has been increased by Pakistan considerably. For all practical purposes, they form a part of Pakistan Army. The mere withdrawal of the regular Pakistan Army from territory of Jammu and Kashmir State will thus leave a large and well trained army under Pakistan leadership behind in the State territory. That will be contrary to basis of resolution of UN Commission of 13th August, 1948 and will create a new situation full of peril to the State. It is for this reason that we have laid stress on inter-dependence of phasing of the withdrawal of their forces from the State with the disbanding and disarming of the ‘Azad-Kashmir’ forces.

7. In conclusion I wish assure you that India does not wish the Kashmir or any other dispute be settled by the sword. She will always be ready to consider a solution by any method that would lead to a peaceful settlement of the entire dispute.

May I ask you, Mr. President, to accept the best wishes of the Government and people of India for the great nation of which you are the chosen head and, for yourself, the assurance of my most frendly sentiments and my highest consideration.

Yours sincerely, signed Jawaharlal Nehru.”

Henderson

The Ambassador in India (Henderson) to the Secretary of State 501.BC Kashmir/9–849: Telegram

[Document 1209]

The Ambassador in India (Henderson) to the Secretary of State

secret
niact
priority New Delhi, September 8, 1949—9 p. m.

1044. 1. When I saw Bajpai this afternoon at his request he handed me copy of Nehru’s reply to President submitted in Telegram 1043, September 8 and also text GOI reply to UNCIP 1 summary of which will be forwarded in subsequent telegram. Both dated today.

2. After I had glanced through documents he said he wished stress (a) their friendly tone and (b) fact they still left door open to arbitration. He added Prime Minister was sorry his expression of surprise during speech [at] Alláhábad had apparently given impression he was irritated at receipt appeals. He insisted Prime Minister appreciated motives behind appeals and has accepted them as indication friendly interest US and UK in problem of south Asia.

3. I said it seemed to me Indian press and public must have obtained impression that Prime Minister was displeased; otherwise I could not account for critical attitude Indian press has subsequently taken this regard. He said both Prime Minister and he deeply regretted line press had taken. They were particularly unhappy at distorted leaks that had appeared this morning’s papers.

4. I told him I was sure he had considerable responsibility for the friendly tone of Prime Minister’s reply. After some hesitation he admitted he had long conversation which lasted until small hours of morning. He said Governor General2 perhaps more than anyone else deserved credit for fact door was still left open for arbitration.

5. Continuing in personal vein Bajpai said he did not believe however that any good purpose would be served in further attempts at arbitration under auspices of UNCIP. He was convinced the UNCIP had made its final contribution by obtaining cease fire. It could not, however, contribute further to solution. He hoped therefore in view unbreakable deadlock on disbandment Azzad forces UNCIP could be wound up soon leaving perhaps some observers to supervise cease fire and to continue line demarcation.

He could state categorically that India would never initiate resort to arms to solve problem.

6. Speaking only personally and without authority from his government he earnestly hoped SC could explore further arbitration or preferably mediation. Arbitration or mediation however should not be limited to question of truces since that avenue apparently hopelessly blocked by attitude Pakistan re Azzad forces. Mediation could cover much wider range including even final solution Kashmir problem. He wished again stress that this was personal view expressed by him to me and not suggestion on part his government.

7. As I was preparing depart, Bajpai remarked we were both dedicated to purpose strengthening friendly relations between India and US. Such relations were in the mutual interest our respective countries. In interpreting American approaches to his government he had this purpose in mind and he sincerely hoped that in commenting to my government re exchanges such as those we were discussing I would bear in mind basic underlying friendship of India for US. I obtained impression from his remarks and attitude he desired me understand he was trying to smooth over what had probably been for him trying situation and wanted my cooperation as far as my government was concerned.

Sent Department 1044, repeated London.

Henderson

1 For the text of the letter dated September 8 from the Secretary-General of the Ministry of External Affairs, Government of India, to the Chairman of the United Nations Commission for India and Pakistan, see SC, 4th yr., Special Suppl. No. 7, pp. 143 ff.

2 Shri Chakravarti Rajagopalachari.

The Chargé in Pakistan (Wolf) to the Secretary of State 501.BC Kashmir/9–849: Telegram

[Document 1210]

The Chargé in Pakistan (Wolf) to the Secretary of State

top secret
priority Karachi, September 8, 1949.

379. To Director of Intelligence USAF, Washington, D.C., Kab 23, pass to State Department as 379. At 8 p. m. this evening at my residence Foreign Office Protocol Officer handed me personally an original letter to President signed by Prime Minister at 7:45 p. m. accepting on behalf of his government latest proposals of UNCIP for arbitration truce agreement relating to state of Jammu and Kashmir by Fleet Admiral Chester W. Nimitz. He requested me to open and read it in his presence, which I did. He then asked me to cable at once its contents to my government and requested that the Department should provide the Pakistan Ambassador immediately with a copy so that the latter might request an opportunity formally to present such copy of the letter to the Secretary of State pending delivery of the original to the President. He emphasized that the matter was to be considered urgent and top secret and that it was the wish of Pakistan that no publicity should be given even to the fact that the Prime Minister had replied to the President until UNCIP had received reply of Pakistan to its proposals and had given publicity thereto. Pakistan’s Ambassador will receive similar instructions re secrecy from Foreign Minister.

1. The text of the letter reads as follows: “My Dear Mr. President, I thank you for your message of August 30, 1949, urging the acceptance of the recommendation by the United Nations Commission to refer to arbitration the determination of the truce agreement relating to the state of Jammu and Kashmir. The Pakistan Government greatly appreciates the keen interest you have shown to the early settlement of the Kashmir dispute, which has been pending for so long between India and Pakistan. I agree with you that the Kashmir dispute is the greatest threat to peace and cooperation between India and Pakistan which are essential to the maintenance and continuance of social and political progress in the sub-continent.

2. The geographical and strategic position of Kashmir in relation to Pakistan, the flow of its rivers, the direction of its roads, the channels of its trade, the historical, economic and cultural ties which bind its peoples to Pakistan, link Kashmir indissolutely with Pakistan. Nature has so to speak fashioned the two together. Pakistan could, therefore, have claimed in reason that Kashmir should accede to Pakistan without question. From the very beginning, however, Pakistan’s stand has been that the dispute should be peacefully settled through the democratic method of a free and impartial plebiscite of the citizens of the state of Jammu and Kashmir. On the other hand, India has sought to coerce Kashmir into the Indian Union by force of arms and is today in military occupation of the greater part of the more populous areas of Jammu and Kashmir against the will of its people.

3. No doubt India has paid lip service to the principle of a plebiscite but in practice she has throughout obstructed every attempt on the part, first of the Security Council and later on of the United Nations Commission to define and establish the conditions that would guarantee a fair and impartial plebiscite. Pakistan’s efforts have been directed towards securing and promoting these conditions. One of the essential conditions for organizing and holding a fair and impartial plebiscite is the withdrawal of the Indian armed forces from the territories of the state. India has hitherto resisted every effort made by Security Council and later on by the United Nations Commission to bring about that result and difficulties that the Commission has lately encountered in promoting an agreement on the truce terms are related mainly to this aspect of the problem. Having been baffled almost at every turn in securing India’s agreement to truce terms based on part 2 of the Commission’s resolution of 13 August, 1948, the Commission has now made its latest proposal for arbitration.

4. My government have naturally given the most earnest and sympathetic consideration both to the terms of the proposal itself and the message that you have sent to me. Had the proposal not hinged round the eminent personality of Fleet Admiral Chester W. Nimitz and had it not been so emphatically sponsored by the President of the United States my government would have felt considerable hesitation in accepting it mainly on the score that the decision of any other arbitrator on the points in dispute between the parties relating to the truce might have been rendered of no effect by India’s failure to implement it in practice. We feel, however, that that apprehension is largely met by the qualities and personality of the proposed arbitrator and may be taken to be completely eliminated by the keen interest that you are taking and will, I hope, continue henceforth to take in this matter. We rely upon Admiral Nimitz supported by your great authority to ensure that his decision shall be faithfully and promptly carried into effect so that he can immediately proceed towards the definition and assumption of the powers that he considers necessary for the organization and holding of a free and impartial plebiscite, powers that are guaranteed to him by the Commission’s resolution of 5 January 1949.

5. As you have remarked, Asia is today in the midst of a great social and political revolution. The direction and outcome of that revolution will be determined by the faith which the people of Asia acquire in the practical efficacy of the democratic principles for which the United Nations stands. A just and peaceful settlement of the Kashmir dispute accordance with the frequent expressed wishes of its people will be a vindication of those high principles and a reaffirmation of the faith of the people of Asia in the cause of democracy.

6. In view of these considerations, I am glad, Mr. President, to inform you that my government have accepted the latest proposal of the United Nations Commission for arbitration of the truce agreement by Fleet Admiral Chester W. Nimitz.

Will you please accept my best wishes for your continued health and success, and for the welfare of your great country and people. Yours sincerely,”

The original of letter will be transmitted by courier leaving Karachi Friday, September 9. Embassy not yet informed re reply to Attlee.

Wolf

Memorandum of Conversation, by Mr. F. D. Collins of the Division of South Asian Affairs 501.BC Kashmir/9–1449

[Document 1211]

Memorandum of Conversation, by Mr. F. D. Collins of the Division of South Asian Affairs

secret [Washington,] September 14, 1949.

Participants: Mr. M. E. Dening, Head of the Southeast Asian Dept., British Foreign Office

Mr. C. A. Meade, Counselor, British Embassy

Mr. C. Michael Walker, First Secretary, British Embassy

Mr. G. C. McGhee, Assistant Secretary, NEA

Mr. R. A. Hare, Deputy Assistant Secretary, NEA

Mr. S. K. C. Kopper, NEA

Mr. W. Allen, UNP

Messrs. E. G. Mathews, D. D. Kennedy, B. E. Usher and F. D. Collins, SOA

At the suggestion of the British Embassy, Mr. Dening, British Foreign Office, accompanied by Messrs. Meade and Walker, visited NEA for discussions involving a number of problems of current interest to the UK and to the US.

Mr. Mathews, after alluding to the recent clarification given by the Commission following the Indian rejection of arbitration, stated we doubted whether a rewording of the Commission’s recent proposal would have any material effect upon the GOI. Mr. McGhee inquired as to whether clarification of the points raised in the Indian reply would be of help and Mr. Dening indicated that it would only be of help in the event that Nehru had changed his mind and realized that he had gone too far. Mr. Dening then referred to the Attlee reply to the negative response on the part of the GOI to the arbitration appeal and indicated that he thought the British answer which in brief consisted of an expression of disappointment could have been stronger. Mr. Dening remarked that it would be a pity if the Indians felt that we were accepting their negative response and that we did not contemplate doing anything further on this matter. He stated further that the British have considerable doubts regarding a reference of the Kashmir issue to the Security Council, adding that old wounds would probably be torn open when the discussions began in the Security Council.

Mr. Dening mentioned that the recent legal opinion of the British to the effect that the accession of Kashmir to India could be seriously questioned in view of the Stand-Still Agreement which Kashmir had concluded with Pakistan was a bit late and that he did not see that the UK or anyone else at this time could effectively make use of this.

Mr. McGhee inquired as to what we should recommend that the President say when receiving the Indian negative reply (the Indian reply had not as yet been delivered to President Truman, but was subsequently delivered at 12:45 p. m. on September 15). Mr. Dening indicated that he thought it would be helpful if we could express the hope that in view of clarifications by the Commission to the GOI that they would reconsider their negative answer to the Commission’s arbitration proposal.1

At this point it was mentioned that such an approach might be more effective by the American Embassy in New Delhi where they could talk directly with the GOI and express the same hope of India’s reconsidering. Mr. Dening mentioned that the British contemplated taking advantage of this opening to further point out to the Indians the desirability of their accepting the arbitration proposal and that in view of this and the possibility of a similar approach by the US he believed we should await further developments in the next few days before deciding on any further action which might have the effect of a reference back to the Security Council.

Mr. McGhee asked the question, “If India turns down the Commission’s arbitration proposal are we agreed on the next step?” Mr. Dening replied that there appeared to be little left short of reference to the Security Council but that the thought of reference to the Security Council by the British Government was “horrible”. The discussion then centered on what the US and UK might do in the event the issue was referred to the Security Council. It was pointed out that we could recommend to the Kashmir Commission that they word their report in such a way so as to recommend that the Security Council, in dealing with the Kashmir issue, would confine itself to procedural recommendations and avoid any substantive recommendations.

The British were asked what their viewpoint was with respect to partition, considering the recent Nehru–Nye conversations in which the question of partition came up. Mr. Dening replied that the British had given long and careful consideration to various partition proposals but felt that the crux of the matter was the Vale, and that by recommending partition you merely compress the problem into the question of the “Vale of Kashmir”. In addition there was the very decided objection which Pakistan would raise to any partition proposal. Mr. Mathews indicated that the US, as a member of UNCIP, would find it difficult to take any initiative in support of partition as UNCIP was committed by its January 5 resolution to preparing for a plebiscite.

1 Telegram 642 to New Delhi, September 15, recommended to the Embassy an approach to the Government of India to request reconsideration of their position on arbitration (501.BC Kashmir/5–2649).

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Secretary of State Secretary’s Memoranda, Lot 53 D 444

1 [Document 1212]

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Secretary of State

restricted [Washington,] September 15, 1949.

Participants: Sir Zafrulla Khan, Pakistan Foreign Minister

Mr. M. A. H. Ispahani, Pakistan Ambassador

Mr. Acheson—S

Mr. McGhee—NEA

Mr. Fox—SOA

Sir Zafrulla and Ambassador Ispahani called this afternoon at their request. Sir Zafrulla said that he had come to talk to me mainly about Kashmir. He said that in view of India’s unfavorable response to the UNCIP proposal for arbitration the Government of Pakistan was very concerned over the outlook for a settlement. Pakistan felt that India was resisting every attempt to move forward toward a fair plebiscite. He was afraid now that there would be interminable delay, during which time there was danger that some indiscreet act on one side or the other would touch fire to an atmosphere that was becoming explosive. He said that Pakistan had not hesitated in accepting the UNCIP proposal for arbitration. In this dispute Pakistan thought that India was wrong; but India believed that Pakistan was wrong, and arbitration, therefore, was called for. He said that Pakistan relies upon the eminent personality of Admiral Nimitz to ensure that a fair settlement is faithfully carried into effect; and that, since this is now supported by the great authority of the President, he hoped that we would endeavor to press for a quick settlement.

I replied that this Government shared Pakistan’s concern in this matter, as was evidenced by the President’s letter. I said that we were very pleased over Pakistan’s acceptance of the arbitration proposal, and greatly disappointed by the reply we had received from India. I continued to the effect that we were not yet certain, however, that India has completely rejected the arbitration proposal, and that so long as there was any possibility that India might accept we hoped that no one would release any statements that might tend to make the Government of India more firm in its refusal.

Sir Zafrulla then said that a second point he wished to mention to me was the issue that had arisen between Pakistan and Afghanistan over the status of the Frontier tribes; and he then reviewed at some length the background of this controversy and the attitude of the Government of Pakistan toward it. He indicated that Pakistan was at a loss to understand clearly what Afghanistan wanted, or how Pakistan could best approach a settlement.

1 Lot 53 D 444 is a comprehensive chronological collection of the Secretary of State’s memoranda and memoranda of conversation for the years 1947–1953, as maintained by the Executive Secretariat of the Department of State.

Memorandum of Conversation, by Mr. F. D. Collins of the Division of South Asian Affairs 501.BC Kashmir/9–1949

[Document 1213]

Memorandum of Conversation, by Mr. F. D. Collins of the Division of South Asian Affairs

secret [Washington,] September 19, 1949.

Participants: Mr. M. E. Dening, Head of the Southeast Asian Dept., British Foreign Office

Mr. C. M. Walker, First Secretary, British Embassy

Mr. G. C. McGhee, Assistant Secretary, NEA

Mr. E. G. Mathews and Mr. F. D. Collins, SOA

Mr. W. Allen, UNP

Mr. R. A. Hare, Deputy Assistant Secretary, NEA

Mr. Dening began the conversations by alluding to a recent gathering attended by Foreign Minister Schuman, Foreign Minister Bevin, Ambassador Franks, and Secretary of State Acheson and mentioned he believed Mr. Bevin and Sir Oliver Franks discussed privately the Kashmir problem with the Secretary of State.1

Mr. Dening stated Mr. Bevin had sent a telegram to Prime Minister Attlee expressing regrets at the UK support of India for the SC and urging that the Prime Minister send a message to Nehru pointing out the difficulties which the UK would face in the support of India’s candidacy and that the UK would be free to determine its own attitude if the Kashmir case came up in the Security Council. Mr. Dening said that such a message would be an implied threat which might have the effect of India’s reconsidering her present position on the Kashmir issue. He added that he was not sure that Mr. Attlee would go along on this suggestion. (Department subsequently informed message not sent.)

Mr. McGhee inquired as to whether anything further could be done before the Kashmir case came up in the SC. Mr. Mathews mentioned that we were considering the possibility of the Secretary issuing a statement at his Press Conference in which he would express the United States’ disappointment at India’s rejection of UNCIP’s arbitration proposal. Mr. Dening mentioned that he had made a courtesy call this morning on the Pakistani Ambassador, Mr. Ispahani, who in the conversation brought up the Kashmir issue and indicated Pakistan’s disappointment in the delays which were being encountered.

The question was then raised as to the timing of the presentation of the Kashmir case before the SC, and the feeling prevailed that the sooner the case could be brought before the SC the better. It was agreed that it would be preferable for the Commission not to proceed to Geneva but to complete their report quickly in Srinagar and proceed to New York. Mr. Dening observed that the presentation of the case in the SC would probably coincide with the Nehru visit to the US and possibly Liaquat’s visit to Moscow.

Mr. Dening was queried as to whether the British felt that assuming the case came before the SC that the arbitration approach was still the best means to solve the Kashmir problem. Mr. Dening replied by saying that he felt that a condemnatory resolution by the SC would be of no use and that to attempt to impose a settlement would not succeed. He added that the SC might go as far as their resolution on Indonesia with the hope that India might reconsider her views. Mr. Dening went on to add that if you don’t try arbitration you have the problem of renegotiating resolutions embodying the principles upon which a settlement could be made and that Pakistan would not look with favor upon any such proposal.

Mr. Mathews mentioned that it was quite clear in view of the second reply of the GOI to the Commission that the former was opposed to arbitration. Mr. Dening quoted from a London telegram to the effect that the UK was now willing to focus their ideas on how the arbitration proposal might be dealt with once the case was referred to the SC and that question of the legality of Kashmir’s accession was still occupying the attention of the British. In reply to an observation that there would be no point in putting India in the position of refusing to carry out a SC directive, Mr. Dening replied that you could put India in the position that the Dutch were with respect to Indonesia, but they may not show the good sense which the Dutch finally demonstrated.

The question of how the Kashmir case would develop in the SC was raised, and it was indicated that India might wish to revert to her position when the case was first brought before the SC in which she asked the Council to label Pakistan as the aggressor and cited her legal position. In the event India approached the SC along these lines Pakistan might reply by questioning her legal position in view of Pakistan’s Stand-Still Agreement with Kashmir. A feeling prevailed that if India’s legal position was shaken she might reconsider and be in a more compromising mood. However, if the case were referred to the I.C.J. for a decision this would have the effect of delaying a settlement which would be very undesirable. It might be further complicated by I.C.J.’s decision in favor of India.

It was agreed that we would recommend: (1) That the Commission speed up the conclusion of its report. (2) That efforts be made when the case came before the SC to stress the procedural aspects and not have the Council engage in substantive talks. (3) That it would be desirable to keep the Kashmir issue apart from other issues such as the Punjab Water Rights and the Refugee Property Problems.

In reply to a question as to what the British felt the Russians might do when the case came before the SC, Mr. Dening expressed the opinion that the Russians would either abstain or take any action which would tend to complicate and delay the settlement of the problem. It was agreed that the UK and the US would continue to maintain close contact and to exchange views on the Kashmir issue.

1 The three Foreign Ministers and their staffs held several conversations in Washington in September on Germany and other questions, but no record of a separate discussion of the Kashmir problem has been found.

The Acting Secretary of State to the Embassy in India 501.BC Kashmir/9–2149: Telegram

[Document 1214]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Embassy in India 1

secret Washington, September 21, 1949—7 p. m.

656. Kascom 116. Dept agrees the most fruitful course UNCIP can now pursue is return case SC with suggestions as to most suitable action SC cld take in order to provide machinery for settlement. Dept has given further consideration to UNCIP and SC action and this tel supersedes Kascom 1122 to extent they inconsistent.

In Depts view important seek limit SC discussion to procedures for advancing settlement avoiding debate substance issues. Believe best course wld be approval by SC of Res with fol recitals: (1) reaffirmation cease-fire line and important its continued observance;

(2) reaffirmation of agreement to decide future of state by pleb, principles of which have been agreed to in UNCIP Jan 5 Res;

(3) notation that unresolved pre-pleb issues revolve around demilitarization of state;

(4) notation that GOP accepted Comm proposal arb these issues and GOI stated not opposed principle of arb.

Res cld then state conclusion that continued efforts shld be made thru UN machinery to resolve these narrow issues and cld provide that: (1) PA Designate shld proceed to subcontinent to use his good offices to bring about agreement between parties in respect to a settlement of the outstanding issues of demilitarization or to methods of reaching such settlement including arbitration, taking into account but not being bound by Comm action on this subject;

(2) he be authorized arb such remaining points of difference as parties then agree may be subject arb;

(3) pending efforts this end Comm shld remain available for such work as SC may decide.

Chances limiting SC debate and directing action along above lines wld be greatly increased if Comm itself cld recommend SC adopt this course. This Tel being sent for your comments and those of embs and as holding device prior consultation with Nimitz in so far as he involved. Will cable his reaction.

Unless decision already taken move Geneva please seek have Comm complete report in subcontinent. Dept believes Geneva move likely to cause delay and loss working majority thru visits of the Members to home capitals.

Webb

1 Repeated to the United States Mission to the United Nations as 491, London as 3433, and Karachi as 350.

2 Not printed.

The Chargé in India (Donovan) to the Secretary of State 501.BC Kashmir/10–1249: Telegram

[Document 1215]

The Chargé in India (Donovan) to the Secretary of State

secret
priority New Delhi, October 12, 1949—9 a. m.

1227. 1. UK office showed US privately several days ago copy lengthy mail instruction sent British Embassy Washington re Kashmir. This instruction appears to have been written with knowledge of procedure recommended Kascom 1121 but not 116.2 We assume views contained therein already discussed with Department.

2. We concur emphatically with British that GOI is searching for new basis settlement which would permit departure from terms SC and UNCIP resolutions and that it is thinking of following possibilities: (a) partition; (b) single mediator other than the plebiscite administrator; and (c) over-all arbitration of major issues between Pakistan and India.

3. We also agree with underlying thought arbitration technique which was accepted by Pakistan and not excluded by GOI and which was urged by President and Attlee should not be summarily abandoned. If GOI is able to reject without further disadvantage to itself so reasonable a proposal as that which UNCIP advanced and President, Attlee supported it may result in tendency GOI consider it can afford disregard views expressed to it by us on other matters.

4. As indicated in Embtel 11503 September 27 we are by no means satisfied, however, that all efforts should continue to be directed to goal of eventual plebiscite even though it be assumed GOP would not now accept any other solution. Here in Delhi very few indeed believe there ever will be a plebiscite under UN auspices in Kashmir. In Srinagar, where a crude and damaging campaign against UNCIP has been in progress, opinion is even more emphatic on this point. It is clear Sheikh Abdullah will go to great length avoid UN plebiscite and that he has enormous influence on Nehru regarding Kashmir. In view foregoing we repeat view expressed in reftel that if GOI is to be brought to plebiscite on any but its own terms much greater pressure will have to be exerted through SC or otherwise.

5. If renewed efforts in SC fail to make progress towards settlement on basis UNCIP resolution problem of how to shift efforts to a new basis of settlement would become urgent. One possibility which has emerged in informal talk with British here would be for UN representative, perhaps Nimitz, come to Subcontinent as fact-finder and report back to SC. If he found conditions Kashmir and attitudes two governments such that plebiscite would not be held or if held might not provide lasting solution SC could then turn to other methods.

6. Foregoing does not mean Embassy not in sympathy with another effort to bring about demilitarization of state by arbitration and achievement truce agreement. On contrary, we feel because of considerations mentioned paragraph 3 US should support this despite slim prospects success and that if it fails record should clearly show who responsible for failure. But we do feel strongly way should be left open for broader application arbitration technique or for shift to different method of settlement.

Sent Department 1227, pouched Karachi, Department pass London, Geneva from Delhi,

Donovan

1 Not printed.

2 Telegram 656, September 21, supra.

3 Not printed.

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Secretary of State 845.002/10–1349

[Document 1216]

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Secretary of State

secret [Washington,] October 13, 1949.

Participants: The President

Secretary Acheson

Prime Minister Nehru

Sir Girja Bajpai

The President received Prime Minister Nehru at 4:30 this afternoon. Sir Girja Bajpai and the Secretary of State were present. The interview lasted three quarters of an hour.

The President hoped that the Prime Minister was enjoying his visit, expressed his desire that he should have a real opportunity to see and know the people throughout the country, and assured him that he would have a warm and enthusiastic welcome. The Prime Minister spoke feelingly of the impression which the visit was making upon him.

The President referred to his deep concern for the welfare of the Indian people and of the people throughout Asia who were facing problems of the greatest magnitude. He spoke of the difficult transition being made in Indonesia, throughout Southeast Asia and in India, and expressed the earnest hope that this transformation could be made peacefully and speedily.

The Prime Minister noted that a great change had come over all the Asian peoples. They no longer accepted poverty and misery with resignation and believed that an organized effort was capable of improving their situation. All of this great change was being expressed politically through the growing nationalism in Asia. It was this nationalism which had completely outmoded the colonial status. Wherever it came in conflict with colonialism there was trouble. Wherever that obstacle was removed, progress was possible although other difficulties still existed. The President observed that we in this country have been through the same experience. We had found that the solution of the colonial problem was not the end. It had taken a great civil war to teach us that we must live peacefully together and it had taken involvement in two world wars to bring home to us that we could not be independent of peoples beyond our shores. He devoutly trusted that the people of India would not have to repeat our experience. The Prime Minister agreed and asserted his determination that the problems which confronted India must be solved without conflict. He stated that perhaps the most pressing of the Indian problems had to do with the relation of people to the land. He said that over the past few decades both the total number and the percentage of people living on the land and living by agriculture had increased, and that it was necessary to reverse this trend to increase industrialization and to increase the productivity of agriculture. He thought that the critical time was in the next few years and he mentioned he had spoken to the Secretary of State last evening about the Indian desire to acquire a stockpile of approximately one million tons of wheat. The importance of this was both to reassure the people that the food supply was secure and also to bring about a reduction in the price of wheat which had a controlling influence on all other prices in India.

The President observed that twenty years ago half of our population lived by agriculture whereas now only twenty-nine percent did so. However, we had increased both the production rate and the total output of agriculture. We were now faced with the possibility of agricultural production in excess of the present purchasing power in the world. He mentioned that if the peoples of India and China could purchase an amount of cotton equal to one ounce per person there would be an actual shortage of cotton. He said that we would be glad to cooperate with India in our mutual interest in the matter referred to by the Prime Minister.

Kashmir

The President referred to the Kashmir situation as one of the problems which he hoped fell within the Prime Minister’s determination to solve without conflict. The Prime Minister assured the President that this was so. He reviewed the circumstances which led to his belief that an important and perhaps basic element in the Kashmir situation was to solve this problem on other than an adherence to one nation or another on a religious basis. He thought that determination on a religious basis would have a deeply unsettling effect upon the Moslems living in India and upon the Hindus living in Pakistan. He discussed the Indian conception of the secular state which the President said was thoroughly in accord with American institutions and ideas. The President again stated that his only concern was to be of assistance in the common aim of maintaining the peace and obtaining a just settlement.

China

The conversation then turned to the situation in China. The Prime Minister expressed his view that the basic situation in China was that the agrarian revolution, which had begun many years ago but had been intensified in 1911, had been so mishandled by the Kuomintang that power had fallen by default in the hands of the Communists. He thought that they were not desired in China but were accepted in the absence of any other apparent force interested in dealing with the problem. He thought that Communism was alien to the Chinese mind and that foreign domination would be deeply resented. He believed that the course of events would restore Chinese nationalism as a governing force and would weaken the subservience to Moscow.

In regard to recognition, he thought that India’s proximity to China put India in a somewhat different position from that of other countries and indicated a leaning toward early recognition. The President hoped that this was a matter in regard to which the non-Communist countries could consult and if possible concert their action. The Prime Minister agreed that there should certainly be consultation.

Memorandum of Conversation, by Mr. Joseph S. Sparks, Adviser to the United States Delegation at the United Nations 845.002/10–1949

[Document 1217]

Memorandum of Conversation, by Mr. Joseph S. Sparks, Adviser to the United States Delegation at the United Nations

top secret [New York,] October 19, 1949.

Participants: Prime Minister Jawaharlal Nehru, Indian Delegation Sir Girja Bajpai, Secretary-General of the Indian Ministry of External Affairs

Ambassador Warren R. Austin, United States Delegation

Ambassador Philip C. Jessup, United States Delegation

Mr. Joseph S. Sparks, United States Delegation

Withdrawing to the study in his apartment from a small reception in honor of Prime Minister Nehru, along with the participants listed above, Ambassador Austin opened the conversation by saying that whereas he certainly did not wish to impose upon the Prime Minister’s time we were anxious to be of any service which we could and to discuss any matters which the Prime Minister might care to raise or on which he might have questions in this early portion of his important and memorable visit to the United States.

The Prime Minister immediately launched into a full discussion of Indian and United States relations with Russia as he understands them. He did so in a tone and attitude of equality and partnership of understanding and purpose between India and the United States. He said that he did not know that he could say that all of the people of India felt toward Russia as the people of the United States do but that India has lost all faith in Russia and in the dependability of Russia’s words. He traced in detail the Indian experience with Communism, saying that prior to the Second World War there was little or no Communism in India but that during the war the British, in their search for some element of popular support among the people and at a time when the Congress leaders were in jail, encouraged the development of a strong communist party which would assist in the war effort because of Russia’s involvement in the war. Although he said that the British now regretted their actions, their result was that the Communist party in India emerged from the war greatly strengthened and expanded. He stressed that Communism had enjoyed a great deal of good will in India because of the progress which Indians understood had been made in Russia and particularly in Central Asia, because of the poverty in India, and because of the agrarian nature of India’s population. Following the gaining of India’s independence, however, the Communists had turned on the Indian Government under guidance from Moscow and had alienated the people by resorting to large scale violence. The reservoir of good will which the Communists had enjoyed had thus been dissipated as the Indian people came to realize that the Communists stood not for the pure Marxist Communist theories but for destruction and violence.

The Prime Minister said that his Government had sufficient strength to deal with the physical threat to its existence which the Communists posed, and that already the Communist party was splitting within itself between those who wish to continue its program of violence and those who realize what they were losing by such violence. In this connection, he mentioned that the situation in China did not represent a real danger to India in the sense of external aggression which India was already strong enough to withstand but was a danger in the degree to which Communist victories in neighboring countries encouraged the Communists in India and led others to believe in the possibility of their success.

Pandit Nehru said that he felt the important element in dealing with Communism was the nature of “our approach” to the problem and that he felt this approach should be psychological and indirect instead of direct. Ambassador Austin asked if he meant education by “indirect approach”. The Prime Minister replied that education was important but that that was not quite what he had in mind. He said that if the Ambassador would pardon him for being critical of the United States it was his feeling that we too frequently dealt with the Russians in their own chosen weapons of name-calling, deprecation, and verbal belligerency and that the Russians were very hard to beat in this field because of their adeptness in the utilization of the weapons. He believed that such direct approaches should be avoided and that a sort of “mental jiujitsu” would be more productive. He added that of course in case one were faced with actual aggression, it would be necessary to resist, but that was not the situation now.

When Ambassador Austin asked if Pandit Nehru felt that grounds for cooperation existed with Russia, Nehru said that he thought there was very little basis for cooperation under the present circumstances, but that for the sake of our own public reactions we must never admit openly our belief in the lack of a basis for cooperation and must make every gesture possible of apparent cooperation. He said that the United States policy of attempting to contain Communism had not been without its success and mentioned in particular and approvingly both the Berlin incident and the Marshall Plan, but he felt that in the ideological realm we should make a greater show of attempted cooperation. Ambassador Austin said that he was in complete agreement with the Prime Minister, but believed that we did make every such show of cooperation. He said that we repeatedly stated and that it is true that our objective is the promotion of agreement and not the promotion of disagreement and that our policies and actions are in accordance with this objective of agreement. In particular the Ambassador told of his experiences in the last few days in the meetings of the Permanent Representatives to the United Nations of the five major powers which he had called in his capacity of President of the Security Council.1 He told of the problems encountered with Mr. Malik in these meetings which were held for the purpose of encouraging the cooperative approach to problems before the Security Council and of how Malik had finally agreed to the idea of the meetings only to launch a vicious attack on the participating members a few hours later before the Security Council. The Ambassador asked “What can you do with such people?”

Ambassador Jessup said that he felt that we were following very much the suggested line of the Prime Minister in our recommended handling of the Chinese complaint to the General Assembly. We hope that a resolution will be adopted by the General Assembly which will reassure the Chinese people that the world has not forgotten them and is dedicated to the evolution of a truly representative government in China without interference from any external sources. At the same time the resolution should avoid any overt condemnation of the role played by the Russians up to the present time in China.2

Nehru said that according to his information, which he believed to be reliable, there was already a very real split among the Communists in China between those more ideologically subservient under Mao Tse Tung’s leadership who sought to hue strictly to the Moscow line and those under Chou-En-Lai who wanted to build up international contacts and cooperation in trade. He said that he felt that China was experiencing a comprehensive agrarian revolution quite aside from the Communist influence and that it was only the weakness of the national leadership which permitted the Communists to capitalize on the agrarian revolution to seize leadership.

It was the Prime Minister’s opinion that the objective should be to divert the Communists away from Moscow leadership as quickly as possible. Because of the distance of China from Moscow, the size of the country, and most of all the phlegmatic characteristics of the people who were poverty stricken rather than Communistic, hungry rather than nationalistic and politically insensible rather than conscious, it was Nehru’s belief that Russia in any event could not long dominate China and that a situation “stronger than a Titoism” would grow up. He did believe, however, that the difficulties being experienced by the Communists which were outlined by Ambassador Jessup should be augmented as much as possible. In this connection he felt that as long as recognition was withheld and the Communists had not taken all of China (though he felt nothing could prevent them from doing so in the near future if they wished), the Communists could blame the failure to achieve fulfillment of the many promises which they had made for an improved life on the state of war that existed and on the “foreign devils” who were responsible for it. Once they were unable to do this, he felt that their problems would be increased and fissiparous tendencies among them would grow.

Ambassador Jessup wondered if it would not be a mistake to recognize the successes of the Communists so readily and if such recognition might not be discouraging to the forces opposing Communism elsewhere. He mentioned in particular the situation existing in the border areas such as Manchuria, Sinkiang, Korea, Mongolia, the agreement which the Russians had already made with Manchuria, and the return of the machinery, in its original crates to Manchuria, as evidences of Russian confidence in achieving domination over the area. Pandit Nehru thought that the successes of the Communists had already been considerable and that it would not be possible to postpone their recognition indefinitely though it might be possible for a few months.

Ambassador Austin raised directly the question with which the United Nations might be confronted in the near future with the appearance at Lake Success of a Communist Chinese delegation sponsored by the Russians and seeking to oust Tsiang in order that a Communist might be representing China when the Chinese complaint against Russia came before the General Assembly. Nehru said that he felt that if the Chinese Communists asked to be heard on the subject it would be very difficult to deny them the privilege of being called as witnesses. Ambassador Jessup said that we might well face this problem when the Communist delegation applied for visas to come to the United States. He said that if we denied these visas on the basis that we had already issued visas to representatives of China to the United Nations, the matter might well be referred by the Russians to the Secretary-General. This would place the Secretary-General in an extremely embarrassing position. Nehru felt it would be difficult to postpone the recognition of the Communists very long and referred to the rapidity with which the new government in Syria had been recognized after its recent coup d’ état. Ambassador Jessup pointed out that the cases were not analogous and that there were still many territories in China under the control of the government recognized by the government of China. Nehru felt that the United Nations would have to recognize the Communist government when a large number of its Members had done so, but he spoke of the Communists only in the capacity of “witnesses” in the consideration of the Chinese charges against Russia.

Ambassador Austin spoke of his personal experiences in China and said that it was his belief that no government could live in China without external assistance and support and that whereas this support had formerly meant that of one or more of the Western European powers today it was the United Nations as a whole whose recognition and support any Chinese government must have if it is to survive. Pandit Nehru did not fully accept this point of view as he felt that the fundamental change in China was the agrarian revolution. He did not think that there was any possibility of disintegration of central administration into the type of war lord heterogeneity possible before the agrarian revolution and that whereas a new government might not be able to subsist over an extended period of time without external recognition and assistance it probably could so exist for a period of at least a few years. The Prime Minister did not speak once of a seated delegation of Chinese Communists in the United Nations, and it would appear that he was not thinking in terms of recognition in a matter of days or perhaps even weeks or months.

Ambassador Austin referred to the Russian resolution and the substitute resolution which the United States and the United Kingdom would submit, and concerning which we strongly hoped that there would be a minimum of abstentions. He explained the important difference in the nature of the current Russian resolution and that of any previous attack which had been made by the Russians. For the first time the Russian Government was directly accusing the Governments of the United States and the United Kingdom rather than isolated groups within Russia or the United States. The Ambassador explained the strong psychological cooperative nature of the substitute resolution which would be submitted, and said that it was a fundamental statement of principle which should attract and justify the support and faith of all peoples everywhere.

1 For minutes of these meetings of October 17 and 18, see vol. ii, pp. 324 ff.

2 For documentation regarding the resolution on China, see ibid., pp. 144 ff.

The Secretary of State to the Consulate at Geneva 501.BC Kashmir/10–2049: Telegram

[Document 1218]

The Secretary of State to the Consulate at Geneva 1

secret Washington, October 20, 1949—8 p. m.

1331. Kascom 125. For Macatee. Fol are conclusions and recommendations which Dept wld like to see included in UNCIP report, accompanied by rationale on which they are based. Portions this rationale might be included UNCIP report and may prove useful obtaining favorable consideration by other members UNCIP of suggested conclusions and recommendations.

Conclusions

In light of the above review its activities Comm has reached fol conclusions: 1. That Comm has been unable within framework its Res 13 Aug2 and 5 Jan to effect agreement between GOI and GOP on demilitarization Jammu Kashmir State and therefore it has not yet been possible establish conditions necessary holding of plebiscite within framework those Res;

2. That demilitarization of State is desirable in order permit pacific settlement dispute;

3. That Comm has exhausted possibilities mediation dispute within framework its present terms of reference contained SC Res 20 Jan and 21 April, 1948;3

4. That early settlement dispute between India and Pak over Kashmir is nevertheless imperative; and that it is important that conditions be estab at an early date which will permit carrying out pleb by which will of people as to future of State may be freely and impartially ascertained.

5. That since GOP accepted the Comm’s proposal for arbitration of the issues relating to truce and GOI made clear that it has no objection to the principle of arbitration, further consideration shld be given to the employment of this procedure.

6. That in its opinion appointment by SC of a single individual with broad auth to seek bring parties together on issues which divide them offers practical procedure for advancing settlement this problem.

Recommendations

In light above conclusions Comm suggests for SC consideration fol course of action: 1. That SC request the parties to take necessary measures to ensure that agreements already reached re cease-fire be scrupulously observed.

2. That SC appoint single individual as its Rep with broad auth to seek bring parties together on issues which divide them, taking into account in performance of his task (a) basic principles already accepted by parties in UNCIP Ress; and (b) importance of early estab of conditions which will permit carrying out pleb by which will of people as to future of State may be freely and impartially ascertained.

3. That SC after consultations with parties determine terms of reference of its Rep including the scope of his auth to resolve by arbitration outstanding issues relating to demilitarization of State.

Rationale

Attainment by UNCIP of demarcation cease-fire line in Kashmir is solid accomplishment and first recommendation is designed to preserve it.

It is desirable that UNCIP not abandon principle of pleb at this stage. However, since overall pleb may ultimately be found unnecessary and impossible, above recommendations seek to avoid specifying exact nature of pleb and do not preclude possibility of some modification of an overall pleb.

Meanwhile demilitarization of state is desirable in order to reduce possibility of violation of cease-fire and also contribute to more pacific atmosphere necessary to proceed toward final settlement. Moreover both sides continue to adhere to principle that demilitarization is desirable.

Dept believes that UNCIP difficulties in achieving agreement on demilitarization resulted largely from artificial division this question into truce and pleb periods as set forth UNCIP Ress 13 Aug and Jan and believes this artificial division shld be removed in future attempts solve this problem.

In view GOP acceptance arbitration proposal and GOI statement it does not object in principle to arbitration, Dept believes UNCIP can not logically avoid suggesting that possibilities settlement demilitarization issues by arbitration be further explored. Approach suggested in recommendation 3 has advantage of requiring UNCIP neither to recommend arbitration exclusively nor itself to abandon possibilities remaining in this approach. The exact terms of reference for further approach this problem wld be left to SC in consultation with parties.

Finally UNCIP experience wld seem indicate further attempts solve Kashmir problem might be more effectively handled under direction of a single individual. Designation this individual wld be, under recommendations, left discretion of SC.

You will observe that these recommendations differ from those tentatively agreed upon during your recent consultations in Dept.

Dept feels, however, that while placing due emphasis on arbitration for demilitarization issues pleb as already agreed objective at same time they provide broad framework within which any other procedure of settlement may be pursued.

FYI, since Canada will assume SC presidency Dec 1 critical discussion UNCIP report may occur about that time, thus providing possibility coordination SC procedures with Commonwealth approach now being explored with Canada.

Acheson

1 Repeated to London as 3783, Karachi as 400, and New Delhi as 735.

2 For documentation on the work of the UNCIP in 1948, see Foreign Relations, 1948, vol. v, Part 1, pp. 265 ff.

3 For documentation on consideration of the Kashmir question by the Security Council in 1948, see ibid .

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom 501.BC Kashmir/10–3149: Telegram

[Document 1219]

The Secretary of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom

secret Washington, October 31, 1949—7 p. m.

3914. Fol msg from Bevin presented Secy by Brit Amb Oct. 20.

“I understand that there is a possibility that the Kashmir Comm in submitting their report to SC may abandon their arbitration proposal in favor of proposal for appointment of a conciliator. I think I shld tell you that I fear that a recommendation to the Council on these lines wld take us no further towards a solution of the Kashmir problem and wld indeed be a retrograde step. I hope therefore that the US Rep will be able to persuade the Comm to stand firm on their arbitration proposal and to commend it in their report to the Council.

2. From reports which we have recd from our High Commissioner in New Delhi, we feel sure that the Indian Govt now hope to persuade the SC to substitute partition on terms acceptable to them for settlement by plebiscite. For reasons which we have set out at length in recent msgs to the St Dept, we are sure that Pakistan will not agree to abandon the basis for settlement contained in the SC’s Res on 21st April 1948, nor do we consider that the Council wld be justified at this stage in calling on them to do so.

3. Both Govt’s are committed to settlement by plebiscite and to the arrangements for bringing about conditions in which a fair and impartial plebiscite can be held in the Comm’s two Res. They are also both committed to arbitration as a way of settling the differences of opinion at present standing in the way of a truce agreement. The SO are therefore tactically in a strong position to press modified arbitration proposals designed to meet objections raised by India to present proposals.

4. Apart from these considerations, however, there is the major consideration of the effect on Pakistan of abandonment of arbitration at this stage. As you know, the PriMin, like the Pres, has committed himself in support of arbitration as the best means of settling the present deadlock in his mesg to the Indian and Pakistan PriMins. If the Kashmir Comm and the SC now abandon arbitration it will inevitably be regarded by the Pakistan Govt as a surrender by the UK and the US Govts to Indian pressure. The effect of this wld be particularly unfortunate as it wld coincide with Mr. Liaquat Ali Khan’s visit to Moscow.”

Acheson

The United States Representative at the United Nations (Austin) to the Secretary of State 501.BC Kashmir/12–1649: Telegram

[Document 1220]

The United States Representative at the United Nations (Austin) to the Secretary of State

secret New York, December 16, 1949—1 p. m.

1440. Same group as reported in our 1433 of December 15,1 plus McNaughton2 had lengthy meeting today of which following are principal points.

McNaughton agrees that plebiscite objective should be strictly adhered to and no mention made of other solution such as partition unless by parties. Smith3 personally seems sympathetic toward Bajpai’s proposed partition–plebiscite solution but agrees it should not be brought up by McNaughton with parties now. McNaughton emphasized that Pakistan weakening on partition as reported by Frank Symonds4 shows promise for future compromise, but should be brought up only by Pakistan.

McNaughton seems willing to go as far into substance as circumstances warrant in talking with parties, but will concentrate at this stage on demilitarization, leaving out, on our advice, matter of ultimate objective, plebiscite, so far as possible. He does not have great hope of going much beyond possibly getting agreement in principle on demilitarization and northern area, but does not rule out entirely achievement of such results as might make unnecessary appointment of SC representative recommended in UNCIP’s report. In this case, lie thinks scope of plebiscite administrator’s activity could be moved somewhat back into terrain of mediator arbitrator.

Consensus was that Bajpai’s failure directly to mention Pakistan’s alleged lack of status in Kashmir was significant and showed conciliatory attitude. Curson5 read telegram from Noel Baker6 saying that latter had discussed legality of accession with Bajpai in London, had advised Indians against raising it in view of strong argument Pakistan has against legality, and thought Bajpai “took the hint”. McNaughton here remarked that he felt that Indians desire to forget past and move on to solution and felt that this, in addition to Symonds’ report and Zafrullah’s as yet confidential reasonableness about Azad disbandment gave prospect of solution.

McNaughton wondered whether he might tell Indians about Pakistan concession on Azad’s and ask them to be equally reasonable on withdrawals and northern area. We cautioned him not to give Pakistan’s position away and he accepted the point. He felt, however, that after talking with General Delvoie regarding the northern area matter, he could convince Indians they had no valid point in that respect and should abandon their demand for garrisoning and administering area.

McNaughton felt that arbitration should not be mentioned at this stage since he understood from Canadian representative, New Delhi, that Nehru allergic to word. We dissented on ground that India should be shown full force of UNCIP report at outset.

It was agreed upon McNaughton’s suggestion that fact of our meetings should be held in utmost secrecy. He wanted US–UK advice and felt “board of strategy” thus formed would be most useful working anonymously.

Canadians are receiving this afternoon visit from Bajpai, Rau7 and Abdullah, and after general discussion decided to treat visit as purely courtesy call, reserving substantive talks for Bajpai and Ran alone.

Our impression, especially from remarks of Hopkins,8 is that in view of basic conflict of GOP and GOI objectives—overall plebiscite vs. plebiscite cum partition—Canadians may further on again bring up matter of compromise, including territorial adjustments on basis of prior agreement between parties, pattern of plebiscite results, or other variation of theme. Campbell9 of British also seemed interested in such compromise although Curson’s instructions from London are clear that until further notice UK wants overall plebiscite line held.

Austin

1 Not printed; it reported that Canadian, United States, and British representatives had discussed various facets of the Kashmir dispute and had noted some possibility that agreement might be reached on the issues of Azad forces and Indian and Pakistani withdrawals. The consensus was that on these points the positions of the two parties were not irreconcilable. (501.BC Kashmir/12–1549)

2 Gen. A. G. L. McNaughton, a member of the Canadian Delegation to the United Nations, who during December was President of the Security Council.

3 Presumably A. C. Smith, a member of the Canadian Delegation to the United Nations.

4 Frank Symonds, a reporter for The Times of India, New Delhi.

5 B. R. Curson, of the Commonwealth Relations Office, an adviser to the British Delegation to the United Nations.

6 Philip J. Noel-Baker, British Secretary of State for Commonwealth Relations.

7 Sir Senegal Rama Ran, Permanent Representative of India at the United Nations.

8 J. H. Hopkins of the Canadian Delegation to the United Nations.

9 Gordon Thomas Calthrop Campbell, Second Secretary at the British Mission to the United Nations.

The United States Representative at the United Nations (Austin) to the Secretary of State 501.BC Kashmir/12–1949: Telegram

[Document 1221]

The United States Representative at the United Nations (Austin) to the Secretary of State

top secret New York, December 19, 1949—10:05 p. m.

1452. Following is text of Indian position as revised in light of McNaughton’s conversation with Bajpai this afternoon.

Revised Pakistan position will follow tomorrow since conversation with Zafrullah terminated too late for copy to be made available to USUN.

“What follows is a brief statement of the attitude taken by the delegation of India in respect of the Kashmir question as understood by the President following the SC’s resolution of Saturday, 14[17] December, under which the President was authorized to consult with the parties and to report subsequently to the Council.1 1. It is important that the necessary enlargement of the area of agreement take place as soon as possible, so that the necessary basis will be established for dealing with this question if possible before the end of 1949.

2. The problems to be resolved may be dealt with seriatim under the headings: (a) Azad forces, (b) demilitarization, (c) the northern area. These problems relate basically to the establishment of conditions under which, in the language of Part III of the Commission’s resolution of 13 August 1948, ‘the future status of the state of Jammu and Kashmir shall be determined in accordance with the will of the people.’

3. So far as demilitarization is concerned, assuming that the disbandment and disarmament of the Azad Kashmir forces were included, the fullest regard would have to be had to reasonable security considerations.

4. So far as the ‘Azad Kashmir forces’ are concerned, their disbandment and disarmament must be included in any program for progressive demilitarization.

5. So far as the ‘northern area’ is concerned, India’s position is that India should have the right to garrison certain points for security reasons; i.e., as a protection against the activities of tribesmen from outside Jammu and Kashmir over whom Pakistan had originally maintained that she could exercise no effective control.

6. Subject to the provisions of Paragraph 7 below, any future negotiations respecting a settlement of the Kashmir question which may need to be undertaken in the subcontinent should be carried on by a single individual.

7. Such a representative of the UN, assuming that an agreement in principle may be reached on the basis of demilitarization, etc., should be given broad powers of mediation to enable the two parties to resolve any differences which might arise between them.

Such a UN representative should not have authority to arbitrate matters of military security.”

Austin

1 For the discussion leading to the adoption on December 17 of a Norwegian proposal that the President of the Security Council (McNaughton) “should meet informally with the two parties and examine with them the possibility of finding a mutually satisfactory basis for dealing with the Kashmir problem”, see United Nations, Official Records of the Security Council, Fourth Year, No. 53, pp. 1–8.

The United States Representative at the United Nations (Austin) to the Secretary of State 501.BC Kashmir/12–2049: Telegram

[Document 1222]

The United States Representative at the United Nations (Austin) to the Secretary of State

top secret New York, December 20, 1949—12: 52 p. m.

1454. Following is text of Pakistan position as revised after McNaughton’s conversation with Zafrullah yesterday afternoon reference mytel 1452 of December 19:

“1. It is important to preserve the measure of agreement already reached between the two governments as represented by the two resolutions of the commission dated 13 August 1948 and 5 January 1949, which have been accepted by the two governments and which taken together cover all the stages from cease fire to the holding of the plebiscite.

2. The differences between the two governments relate to matters of detail regarding the implementation of Part II of the commission’s resolution of 13 August 1948. Since these differences could not be resolved by mediation, the best and most expeditious manner of dealing with them is to submit them to arbitration.

3. These differences relate to:

(a). Withdrawal of the armed forces of India and Pakistan;

(b). Azad forces; and

(c). Northern areas.

The programme of demilitarization envisaged in the commission’s resolutions of 13 August 1948 and 5 January 1949 consisted of the truce stage in which Pakistan forces and the bulk of the Indian forces were to withdraw and the plebiscite stage in which the plebiscite administrator was to determine the final disposal of the remaining Indian and State forces on the one hand and the Azad Kashmir forces on the other.

The programme of demilitarization, whether taken in two distinct stages or combined into one stage covering the final disposal of all armed forces in the State, should proceed in such manner that the balance of security as between the areas on either side of the cease-fire line remains undisturbed and should lead to the establishment of conditions in which a free and impartial plebiscite can be held.

. . . . . . . . . . . . . .

4. If India is not agreeable to arbitration of the points of difference enumerated above, an effort should be made to reach an agreement on them as soon as possible so that the dispute is resolved before the end of 1949.

5. There is no objection to the replacement of UNCIP by a single representative of UN with full authority to implement the provisions of the two resolutions of the commission already accepted by India and Pakistan.

6. Another method of expediting a settlement would be to telescope the two stages of demilitarization referred to above. Under such an arrangement the plebiscite administrator would be authorized to proceed to Kashmir at once and exercise in addition to his powers as plebiscite administrator the authority to effect the demilitarization of the State. He should also be given authority to arbitrate in matters of detail in the implementation of the agreement.”

Austin

The United States Representative at the United Nations (Austin) to the Secretary of State 501.BC Kashmir/12–2249: Telegram

[Document 1223]

The United States Representative at the United Nations (Austin) to the Secretary of State

top secret New York, December 22, 1949—7:12 p. m.

1467. There follows the text of the most recent revised draft 6 point Canadian proposal which McNaughton hopes to submit to the parties by tomorrow. Immediately following this is a tentative Point 7 which McNaughton has discussed with Bajpai and Zafrullah today on a very tentative basis. In response to McNaughton’s inquiry regarding the advisability of incorporating this point in his proposal, we have informed the Canadians that if agreement is reached between the parties on this point, we think it should certainly be included, but that if agreement is not reached we think it inadvisable at this stage.

“1. The principal considerations underlying the following proposals of the President of the SC of the UN are: (a) To determine the future of Jammu and Kashmir by the democratic method of a free and impartial plebiscite, to take place as early as possible;

(b) Thus to settle this issue between the Governments of India and Pakistan in acccordance with the freely expressed will of the inhabitants, as is desired by both governments;

(c) To preserve the substantial measure of agreement on fundamental principles which has already been reached between the two governments under the auspices of the UN;

(d) To avoid unprofitable discussion of disputed issues of the past, and to look forward into the future towards the good-neighbourly and constructive cooperation of the two great nations.

2. There should be an agreed programme of progressive demilitarization, the basic principle of which should be the reduction of armed forces on either side of the cease-fire line by withdrawal, disbandment and disarmament in such stages as not to cause fear at any point of time to the people on either side of the cease-fire line. The aim should be to reduce the armed personnel in the state of Jammu and Kashmir on each side of the cease-fire line to the minimum compatible with the maintenance of security and of local law and order, and to a level sufficiently low and with the forces so disposed that they will not constitute a restriction on the free expression of opinion for the purposes of the plebiscite. (a) The programme of demilitarization should include the withdrawal from the state of Jammu and Kashmir of the regular forces of Pakistan; and the withdrawal of the regular forces of India not required for purposes of security or for the maintenance of local law and order on the Indian side of the cease-fire line; also the reduction, by disbanding and disarming, of local forces, including on the one side the armed forces and militia of the state of Kashmir, and on the other, the Azad forces.

(b) The northern area should also be included in the above programme of demilitarization, and its subsequent administration should, subject to UN supervision, be undertaken by the local inhabitants.

3. The Governments of India and Pakistan should reach agreement on the following points in New York: (a) The Government of Pakistan should give unconditional assurance to the Government of India that they will deal effectively within their own borders with any possibility of tribal incursion into Jammu and Kashmir to the end that, under no circumstances, will tribesmen be able unlawfully to enter the state of Jammu and Kashmir from or through the territory of Pakistan, it being understood that the UN military observer will be constantly informed of the above arrangements and that these arrangements will continue to be maintained or enlarged as the military observer may deem necessary.

(b) The Governments of India and Pakistan should confirm the continued and unconditional inviolability of the “cease-fire line”.

(c) Agreement should be reached on the basic principles of demilitarization outlined in Paragraph 2 above.

(d) Agreement should be reached on the minimum forces required for the maintenance of security and of local law and order, and on their general disposition.

(e) Agreement should be reached on a date by which the reduction of forces, to the level envisaged in Paragraph 2 above, is to be accomplished.

(f) Agreement should be reached on the progressive steps to be taken in reducing and redistributing the forces to the level envisaged in Paragraph 2 above.

4. In respect to the foregoing matters, the Governments of India and of Pakistan should further agree that a UN representative, to be appointed by the SYG of the UN in agreement with the two governments, should supervise the execution of the progressive steps in reduction and redistribution of armed forces and that it should be the responsibility of this UN representative to give assurance to the people on both sides of the cease-fire line that they have no cause for fear at any stage throughout the process. This UN representative should have the duty, (a) Of interpreting the agreements reached between the parties pursuant to Paragraph 3, subparagraphs (c), (d), (e) and (f) above, and

(b) Of determining, in consultation with the Governments of India and Pakistan respectively, the implementation of the plans for the reduction and redistribution of armed forces referred to in Paragraph 3 (f) above.

5. The UN representative should be authorized to place his good offices at the disposal of the Governments of India and Pakistan on any issues between these governments in which they may agree to use his services.

6. When the agreed program of demilitarization has been accomplished to the satisfaction of the UN representative, the plebiscite administrator should proceed forthwith to exercise the functions assigned to him under the terms of UNCIP resolution of 5 January 1949 which, together with UNCIP resolution of 13 August 1948, was accepted by the Governments of India and Pakistan and which are now reaffirmed by these governments except insofar as the provisions therein contained are superseded by the relevant provisions of this document.

7. It is understood to be probable that the results of the plebiscite will evidence that in certain local areas contiguous to the territories of India or of Pakistan there will be majorities predominantly in favour of joining with the neighbouring state. In such cases, and with a view to the satisfaction of the local inhabitants concerned, and to promotion of stable and friendly relations between neighbouring states, it will be open to the UN representative to propose appropriate adjustments in the boundaries between the state of Jammu and Kashmir and of India or of Pakistan, as the case may be, depending on the over-all result of the plebiscite.

The determination of any such proposals so raised by the UN representative will be subject to the procedure authorized in Paragraph 5 above.”

Austin

The Ambassador in India (Henderson) to the Secretary of State 845.00/12–2649: Telegram

[Document 1224]

The Ambassador in India (Henderson) to the Secretary of State

secret New Delhi, December 26, 1949—6 p. m.

1605. At Nehru’s request I called on him this afternoon. He greeted me courteously and although polite and restrained betrayed considerable feeling. He pointed out how his Christmas had been spoiled by message from Bajpai outlining McNaughton’s proposals re Kashmir He regretted Government of India had been compelled to instruct Bajpai turn them down. This decision made after long discussions among GOI leaders, including representatives from Kashmir Government. During conversation he read aloud text instructions to Bajpai and expounded to considerable extent on them. Among objections to proposals were: 1. They placed India and Pakistan on same footing in, Kashmir, something which previous resolutions and decisions of UN bodies had not done. For instance they balanced withdrawal Pakistan troops with Indian troops and partial disbandment Azad forces with that of Kashmir State forces and militia.

2. Government of India had always contended that after withdrawal Pakistan forces who were in Kashmir illegally and total disbandment of Azad forces which had no standing whatsoever, it would withdraw Indian forces leaving enough only to protect population. Government of India could not agree to use of remnant of Azad forces acting as police in so-called Azad territory. It could not thus recognize legal position of any Azad forces whatsoever. After withdrawal Pakistan and Azad forces from Azad territory Government of India wanted local police force set up. This force might include members of former Azad forces but no contingents or units. Suggestion that Kashmir state forces and militia should also disband strikes entirely novel note. These forces had been in existence long before Government of India troops entered Kashmir and had not materially increased in size. There were only about 9000 state forces and 6000 militia. Neither contingent was prepared to carry on warfare. They had not been trained or disciplined for this purpose. Their job was merely that maintaining local law and order. There could be no excuse for disbanding old organizations like them.

3. Government of India was also surprised at proposal relating to northern territories. It had requested withdrawal all Pakistan forces and setting up civilian administration of area by Government of India. It had not, however, insisted on installing civilian administration in whole territory but had indicated it would be satisfied if given control certain key points from which it could prevent infiltration of hostile parties into rest of Kashmir. Proposal suggested withdrawal of Pakistan forces and control territory by Gilgi and Balti scouts. These scouts were without argument units of Pakistan Army so proposals were really self-contradictory. Government of India could not agree to any proposals which did not provide for withdrawal of all Pakistan forces and forces subordinate to Pakistan from all of Kashmir. It could never recognize that such forces had any right in a country they had entered by aggression.

4. He could not understand paragraph in proposals suggesting that mediator in addition to interpreting agreement entered into as a result of these negotiations might also concern himself with other matters. This paragraph seemed ambiguous. He thought it would be unfortunate for a mediator to be appointed unless he clearly had right to consider broad question of future Kashmir.

Prime Minister said he was all the more disappointed at character proposals since had thought that Washington, Ottawa and London had been given Government of India views during his recent visits. They therefore must have known that suggestions this character could not be acceptable to Government of India.

He said he was giving his views also to British High Commissioner who entered anteroom as I left.

Henderson

The United States Deputy Representative at the United Nations (Gross) to the Secretary of State 501.BC Kashmir/12–2749: Telegram

[Document 1225]

The United States Deputy Representative at the United Nations (Gross) to the Secretary of State

secret New York, December 27, 1949—1:29 p. m.

1472. Following is text of Indian letter containing written reply to McNaughton’s proposal, handed him last night by Bajpai, Rau and Abdullah. McNaughton said Bajpai and Rau appeared embarrassed and close to apologetic while feathers were sticking out of Abdullah’s mouth.

“Dear Gen. McNaughton,

The proposals regarding the settlement of the Jammu and Kashmir dispute which you communicated to us on the mid-night of 23rd December were transmitted four hours later to the Government of India. Owing to the unfortunate delay in the transmission of an important part of our telegram, the reply of our government has been somewhat delayed. Their views on the proposals have, however, now been received and I hasten to communicate them to you.

2. My government recognize the care that you have devoted to the formulation of your proposals. After the fullest consideration, however, they have come to the conclusion that: (a) The proposals fail to take account of the relative positions of India and Pakistan in this dispute, and

(b) In material respects, they do not preserve the agreements already reached under the auspices of the UN.

3. As you are aware, from your own initimate association with the discussion of the Kashmir dispute by the SC and our recent conversations, the position of the Government of India has always been that Pakistan is the aggressor and cannot, therefore, be regarded as being on a footing of equality with India. They have held and urged this opinion on the Council and its Commission, not in any spirit of narrow legalism but because of their conviction that, in the consideration of all disputes that may come before the Council, moral considerations should be paramount. The Government of India cannot help thinking that the new approach in the proposals to the problem of demilitarization as also the question of the northern areas does not recognize this fundamental difference between the positions of India and Pakistan. This is even truer of the respective positions of the Government of Jammu and Kashmir, whose sovereignty over the whole state has been recognized by the UNCIP, and the so-called Azad Kashmir Government which even the government of Pakistan has not recognized.

4. The specific points, which my government have made about the proposals are: I. That the so-called Azad Kashmir forces should be disbanded and disarmed. This was repeatedly represented to the UNCIP, first in the course of the conversations that took place between the Prime Minister of India and Messrs. Lozano and Colban on the 20th and 22nd of Dec., 1948, respectively and later in the discussion and correspondence between the Government of India and the Commission in 1949 on the subject of the truce. In the latter connection I would invite your attention to paragraph 1 of Sir G. S. Bajpai’s letter No. 165–PASG/49, dated [10th March, 1949, to His Excellency Monsieur Carlos A. Leguizamon, then Chairman of the Commission, and to paragraph 2 of the memorandum forwarded under his letter No. 210–PASG/49, dated]1 28th March 1949, to His Excellency Monsieur Robert Van de Kher-chove who succeeded Mon Leguizamon as chairman. In the aides mémoires and the memorandum the dangers of not disbanding and disarming the so-called Azad Kashmir forces were fully explained. In the memorandum we made detailed proposals for the creation of a civil armed force to maintain law and order in the so-called Azad Kashmir territory. My government feel that this is all that is necessary for the maintenance of law and order and of internal security in this territory.

II. Paragraph 2(a) of the proposals provides for ‘the reduction by disbanding and disarming of local forces, including on the one side the armed forces and militia of the state of Kashmir, and on the other the Azad forces’. This puts the Government of Jammu and Kashmir and the so-called Azad Kashmir authorities on an equal level. Moreover, at no time previously has it been suggested that Kashmir state forces should be disbanded or disarmed.

III. My government wish to emphasize that the proposals put the northern area, administratively and militarily, in the same position as the so-called Azad Kashmir territory. It has been admitted all along that the sovereignty of the Jammu and Kashmir state should be accepted over the whole area of the state. If Pakistan irregular forces such as the Gilgit or the Baltistan scouts remain in the northern area, the sovereignty of the state will be violated militarily. Further, if as suggested, the administration of this area is to remain in the hands of the existing local authorities, which have been created by Pakistan and are aided by Pakistan officials, the sovereignty of the Jammu and Kashmir state in this area will be equally violated in the administrative field. There is no justification either for the retention of Pakistan irregular forces, such as the Gilgit and Baltistan scouts or for the continuance of the existing administrative authorities in this area. As requested in the Prime Minister’s letter of the 20th August on the subject of this area to the then chairman of the commission, Mr. Korbel, responsibility for the defence of this area should revert to the Government of India and for its administration to the Government of Jammu and Kashmir. The only reason that the majority of the commission have given for not complying with the Prime Minister’s request (which the commission itself had promised to consider at the time of the implementation of the resolution of the 15th August) is that the entry of Indian forces into this territory would lead to an extension of military activity. In the first place, if, as is proposed in the commission’s resolution of the 13th August, 1948, Pakistan troops are withdrawn from this area, there is no reason why the garrisoning of selected points in this area should involve an extension of military activity. Such military resistance as may be offered to Indian forces in this area could be offered only by forces which Pakistan has raised against the spirit of the assurance that Pakistan would not be allowed to consolidate any part of the territory of the state under its control to the disadvantage of the state. These forces must be withdrawn. No resistance need be expected from the local population which has never been hostile to the state.

IV. My government consider paragraph 6 of the proposals relating to the functions of the UN representative to be vague and liable to be interpreted as being restricted by matters contained in paragraph 4 of the proposals.

5. For the foregoing reasons my government have found themselves unable to accept the proposals. Yours sincerely, (signed) B. N. Rau.”

Gross

1 Bracketed portion supplied from another text.

The Ambassador in India (Henderson) to the Secretary of State 845.00/12–2849: Telegram

[Document 1226]

The Ambassador in India (Henderson) to the Secretary of State

secret New Delhi, December 28, 1949—1 p. m.

1609. Member UK office has shown us telegram reporting HiCom’s conversation with Nehru on 26th. Nehru gave him same explanation Government of India rejection McNaughton proposals as outlined my 1605 December 26th. It appears principal participants in GOI discussions leading up to rejection were Nehru, Governor General Patel and Bakshi (Kashmir Deputy Prime Minister).

In lengthy discussion which ensued Nye took line with Prime Minister that there were only four possibilities: war, continued stalemate, mediation and arbitration. As first two were unthinkable it remained to discuss latter two. Nehru was advocating mediation but he should remember McNaughton was in fact now acting as mediator. GOI’s out-of-hand rejection McNaughton’s proposals was hi itself evidence of not willing compromise or take conciliatory attitude necessary for successful mediation. Therefore GOI, which desired settlement, should accept arbitration.

Nehru apparently gave Nye no encouragement whatever.

Nye’s evaluation of conversation was that Nehru was thinking in terms of partition although he did not mention it at this talk. Nye felt that although GOI rejection McNaughton proposals was based on sincere belief in merits Indian case nevertheless uncompromising position was in part at least tactical and designed to lead to consideration of partition. He concluded that if SC stood firm there was at least possibility GOI might soften its attitude somewhat towards arbitration of demilitarization issues and so make it possible proceed to overall plebiscite.

We feel UK office here has consistently been overoptimistic on likelihood GOI acceptance of arbitration and we see no basis for expecting GOI will modify its stand. We fear McNaughton’s proposals will encourage Pakistan to remain obdurate on overall plebiscite as will current British line. If GOI rejection McNaughton’s proposals made public it seems to us SC debate likely reveal strongly pro-Pakistan bias and difficulty of shift to other basis of settlement will be intensified. We remain convinced there will be no overall plebiscite unless it be one carried out on India’s own terms, i.e., prior withdrawal of Pakistan control over all Jammu-Kashmir and that India is prepared to thwart UN rather than give way. So far as we are aware Nehru gave not slightest reason in London, Washington or elsewhere which might afford grounds for optimism that GOI will modify its attitude. After all, India is now in possession of most of Kashmir and is convinced its legal position there is unassailable. We are inclined believe that if deadlock promises be long duration GOI may proceed further, absorbing all areas Jammu-Kashmir under its control into India—it may call Constituent Assembly Kashmir during 1950 and even begin to prepare for some expression of choice by population these areas.

Henderson

The United States Deputy Representative at the United Nations (Gross) to the Secretary of State 501.BC Kashmir/12–2849: Telegram

[Document 1227]

The United States Deputy Representative at the United Nations (Gross) to the Secretary of State

top secret New York, December 28, 1949—3:44 p. m.

1478. Following is text of Pakistan reply to McNaughton’s proposals confidentially made available to us:

“My Dear General: I have the honour to refer to the proposals which you handed over to me on 22 December 1949, concerning settlement of the question of Jammu and Kashmir and to say that the Government of Pakistan have authorised me to communicate their acceptance of these proposals subject to the amendments set out in annexure I. As you will be pleased to observe, these amendments do not seek to alter your proposals and were suggested to bring out more clearly the objective you have in view. They are confined to such of the amendments originally proposed by us as you were agreed might well be accepted as clarifications of intent. A memo explaining the amendments is enclosed (annexure II). Please accept the assurances of my highest consideration. (Signed) Zafrullah Khan.

Annexure I; amendments proposed by Pakistan to General McNaughton’s proposals of 22 December 1949: 1. Paragraph I(a). For the words ‘the future of Jammu and Kashmir’ substitute the following: ‘The question of the accession of the state of Jammu and Kashmir to India or Pakistan’.

2. Paragraph 2. At the end of sub-paragraph (a) of paragraph 2 add the following: ‘The final disposal of all forces remaining in the state will be determined by the PA under UNCIP’s resolution of 5 January 1949’.

3. Paragraph 3. Omit the words ‘to the Government of India’ in the first sentence of sub-paragraph 3(a).

4. Paragraph 4. Add the following as sub-clause 4(c): ‘of obtaining an assurance from the appropriate authorities on either side of the cease fire line and of making it publicly known throughout the state of Jammu and Kashmir that peace, law and order will be safeguarded and that all human and political rights will be guaranteed’.

5. Paragraphs. Put a full stop after the words ‘India and Pakistan’, and substitute the immediately following words ‘and which’ by the words ‘these resolutions’.

6. Paragraph 6. Omit the words ‘and enduring’.

Annexure II; explanations of amendments proposed by Pakistan in annexure I: 1. Paragraph 1(a). The phrase employed in the original is vague. The amendment seeks to substitute the accepted language of the preamble to the SC’s resolution of 21 April 1948, and of clause 1 of UNCIP’s resolution of 5 January 1949.

2. Paragraph 2. As is apparent from its heading, paragraph 2 of the proposals deals with ‘demilitarisation preparatory to the plebiscite’. The proposals do not affect the arrangements already arrived at with regard to the plebiscite stage. The concluding sentence of paragraph 5 of the proposals provides that ‘the functions and powers of the PA remain as set forth in UNCIP’s resolution of 5 January 1949’. These functions include the final disposal of all forces remaining in the state (vide clause 4). The amendment makes it clear that the final disposal of all forces remaining in the state after the programme of demilitarisation envisaged in paragraph 2 of the proposals has been carried out will be determined by the PA under UNCIP’s resolution of 5 January 1949.

3. Paragraph 3. The use of the words ‘to the Government of India’ in sub-paragraph 3 (a) might lead to difficulties and is open to serious objection. The assurance sought could be expressed in the terms or to the UN.

4. Paragraph 4. The amendment seeks to incorporate clause B–3 of part II of UNCIP’s resolution of 13 August 1948 in the proposals.

5. Paragraph 5. This is only a drafting change.

6. Paragraph 6. The use of the words ‘and enduring’ might give rise to misunderstanding as to the scope of the proposal.”

Gross

The United States Deputy Representative at the United Nations (Gross) to the Secretary of State 501.BC Kashmir/12–2949: Telegram

[Document 1228]

The United States Deputy Representative at the United Nations (Gross) to the Secretary of State

top secret New York, December 29, 1949—2:30 a. m.

1481. Remytels 1467, December 22 and 1469, December 23.1 Bajpai informed McNaughton late today [December 28] that he had received new instructions from Delhi permitting him to modify GOI reply to Canadian proposals so as to avoid insistence on legality GOI position and to make specific suggestions for amendments to proposals. He did not reveal nature or extent these amendments, but promised to deliver revised reply Thursday a.m. He indicated GOI felt it desirable replies of parties not be made public this stage. He further stressed GOI desire that McNaughton continue his efforts to mediate.

McNaughton agreed that replies of parties would not be circulated to Security Council tomorrow but intends to proceed with his plan to table his proposals and still feels strongly other members of Council will indicate their support of them.

In light this apparent modification GOI attitude, McNaughton now less reluctant continue his current efforts, provided GOI adheres to intention as stated to McNaughton and refrains from interjecting question GOP guilt. We outlined possible procedure for keeping McNaughton in the case by relying on December 17 resolution and on Article 33 of Charter in order to avoid a new resolution appointing him rapporteur, thereby opening door to Soviet double veto.

Article 33 approach had some appeal for McNaughton. He assured us that although Canadians would welcome an opportunity to override double veto he will seek to avoid having this problem arise. McNaughton added that Canada is so opposed to the double veto that his ruling as President may have to reflect that fact. He agreed that if question of his continuance should be forced to a vote our argument can effectively be pressed that the will of the parties acting under Article 33 may not be thwarted by negative vote of any permanent member.

Cadogan clearly indicated that UK would not be in a position to override double veto in this case. He was not convinced that December 17 resolution, if carefully analyzed, would be basis for continued action by McNaughton of and by itself. He added that it was not so clear-cut as AEC case before him as President. (In subsequent conversation, Ordonneau, France, found US approach appealing and was most concerned that double veto angle should not arise. Ordonneau added that if matter of McNaughton’s continuance is presented lightly and skillfully, Russians will look for no difficulties not clearly presented to them and will therefore not oppose.)

Gross

1 Telegram 1469 not printed.

The United States Deputy Representative at the United Nations (Gross) to the Secretary of State 501.BC Kashmir/12–2949: Telegram

[Document 1229]

The United States Deputy Representative at the United Nations (Gross) to the Secretary of State

top secret New York, December 29, 1949—2:24 p. m.

1482. Mytel 1467, December 22. Following are GOI amendments to McNaughton’s proposals …:

“I. Revise sub-paragraph (a) of paragraph 2 as follows: ‘(a) the programme of demilitarization should include the withdrawal from the state of Jammu and Kashmir of the regular and irregular forces of Pakistan; the disbanding and disarming of the Azad Kashmir forces; and the withdrawal of the regular forces of India not required for purposes of security or for the maintenance of local law and order on the Indian side of the cease-fire line.’

II. Delete sub-paragraph (b) of paragraph 2 and substitute: ‘(b) After the withdrawal of Pakistan forces referred to in subparagraph (a)—(I) the responsibility for the defence of the northern areas shall vest in the GOI; and (II) the responsibility for the administration of the northern areas shall vest in the Government of Jammu and Kashmir who will guarantee that there shall be no victimization of the inhabitants of the area.’

III. In sub-paragraph (a) of paragraph 3 for ‘tribal incursions’ substitute ‘incursions by tribesmen of Pakistan nationals’ and for ‘tribesmen’ substitute ‘tribesmen or Pakistan nationals’.

IV. Revise second half of paragraph 4 as follows: ‘and that it should be their responsibility of the UN representative to give assurance to the people on both sides of the cease-fire line that they have no cause for fear at any stage throughout the process. In addition to the functions assigned to him in paragraphs 3 and 6, the UN representative should have the duty.’

V. In sub-paragraph (b) of paragraph 4 for ‘respectively’ substitute ‘as the case may be’ and at the end of the sub-paragraph add ‘and of the guarantee referred to in paragraph 2 (b).’

VI. In paragraph 6 for the words ‘to make any suggestions to the Governments of India and of Pakistan’ substitute ‘to make to the Governments of India and of Pakistan and to the SC any suggestions’; and at the end of the paragraph for ‘their disposal’ substitute ‘the disposal of the two governments for the purpose’.”

Communication from B. N. Rau adds: “These are the main amendments; there may have to be minor or consequential amendments, which we think it unnecessary to detail at this stage.”

Gross

Editorial Note [Document 1230]

Editorial Note

McNaughton made an interim report at the Security Council meeting on December 29. For text, see United Nations, Official Records of the Security Council, Fourth Year, No. 54, pages 4–8.

The United States Representative at the United Nations (Austin) to the Secretary of State 501.BC Kashmir/12–3149: Telegram

[Document 1231]

The United States Representative at the United Nations (Austin) to the Secretary of State

secret New York, December 31, 1949—1:20 p. m.

1492. McNaughton called meeting with Cadogan and Gross late on December 30. Following is summary, meeting fully reported in memorandum. Gross described his interview with Bajpai and Rau reported in our 14901 of December 30. McNaughton described conversation in which Zafrullah acting as a Foreign Minister pushed almost beyond endurance spoke feelingly of inability to restrain his people much longer. He felt UN sought any kind of agreement, not justice. Could imagine a “Sampsonian Act” by which Pakistan would destroy herself, India and stability in Far East, but it would be death with honor. Cadogan and McNaughton felt this was more than tactical outburst.

In exchange of letters McNaughton has indicated to Zafrullah his unwillingness to insist that any amendment to proposals should be consistent with them, because parties can agree to change them.

Re next step, McNaughton feels force of SC opinion should be given chance to work on parties. He has told them he wants government, not delegation views on amendments. Sees the block in lack of agreement on demilitarization. Pressure is necessary in New Delhi, but Nehru should be left ways of negotiating without loss of face.

After this month he proposes simply to be channel of communication between parties until SC may act to give him mandate to go on. His price as he states it to parties would then be agreement on demilitarization. It was generally agreed McNaughton should be kept in case. He does not insist on formal action by SC, but renewed indication of members’ support and desire of parties. He will be out of city until January 9.

Cadogan reported that Malik (USSR) confirmed indications in his speech he would not veto motion to keep McNaughton in case.

Austin

1 Not printed.

Afghanistan:Afghanistan:

Contents

Discussion with Afghanistan concerning Afghan requests for financial and military assistance (Documents 1232-1234)

Discussion with Afghanistan concerning Afghan requests for financial and military assistanceDiscussion with Afghanistan concerning Afghan requests for financial and military assistance1

1 For previous documentation, see Foreign Relations, 1948, vol. v, Part 1, pp. 488 ff.

[1232] Memorandum of Conversation, by Mr. Richard S. Leach of the Division of South Asian Affairs

[Washington,] February 11, 1949.

890H.24/2–1149

[1233] The Ambassador in Afghanistan (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State

Kabul, September 19, 1949—2 p. m.

890H.51/9–1949: Telegram

[1234] Memorandum of Conversation, by Mr. Richard S. Leach of the Division of South Asian Affairs

[Washington,] December 15, 1949.

890H.51/12–1549

Memorandum of Conversation, by Mr. Richard S. Leach of the Division of South Asian Affairs 890H.24/2–1149

[Document 1232]

Memorandum of Conversation, by Mr. Richard S. Leach of the Division of South Asian Affairs

secret [Washington,] February 11, 1949.

In the course of a conversation at the Department today Mr. Aziz2 again referred to the urgency of Afghan need for military equipment. He said that he had been asked to do this by the Afghan Ambassador.3

Mr. Aziz again raised the question of the priority position of Afghanistan among the various claimants for US military supplies and was told that no definite information was available on this point, but that if any assistance at all could be given by the US it would be on an extremely modest scale. In response to a query by Mr. Aziz as to whether there was a continuing interest by the US in Afghan security the writer indicated that there was such a continuing interest; that the US would make a sympathetic study of specific requirements when these were brought to its attention; that it appeared currently that this study could not go forward until the Department has received comments from the US Military Attaché at Kabul on the Afghan defense proposals, which are understood to be in the course of transmission.4 When these comments are at hand the Department will study them, and endeavor to obtain the views of experts who can bring together a knowledge both of Afghan military units and of equipment of corresponding US units. It may then be possible to define in terms of American standards what would be a reasonable organization for internal security in Afghanistan and what its equipment ought to be.

Mr. Aziz urged that this step be taken as soon as possible so that Afghan counterviews might be discussed. He reiterated the Afghan intention to equip itself for purposes of internal security only and indicated that the present state of the Afghan forces was critically weak.

Although stressing the non-aggressive nature of Afghan military plans, Mr. Aziz said it was the hope of Afghan officials that the equipping of the armed forces could be carried out in such a way as to integrate these forces into plans for operations by guerrilla units in the event of outside attack.

2 Abdul Hai Aziz of the Afghan Economic Mission at Washington, First Undersecretary of National Economy.

3 Sardar Mohammad Naim.

4 Final action on the Afghan request for military equipment was delayed through 1949. On July 27, 1949, in telegram 117 to Kabul, not printed, Secretary of State Acheson instructed the Embassy that in view of the dispute between Afghanistan and Pakistan over the North West Frontier Province and Tribal Areas, it should leave the initiative on the final arms list to the Afghans (890H.24/5–3149).

The Ambassador in Afghanistan (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State 890H.51/9–1949: Telegram

[Document 1233]

The Ambassador in Afghanistan (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State

priority
confidential Kabul, September 19, 1949—2 p. m.

217. Recent talks with Majid1 Minister of National Economy confirms Embassy belief that loan urgently needed and economically sound. US goodwill being jeopardized by what appears to Afghans as unreasonable delay in considering loan. Present widespread criticism of MK2 and American efficiency voiced by Majid seriously undermining US prestige. For approximately $20,000,000 spent only tangible returns Afghanistan has are one short road, one diversion dam and one incomplete canal.

Justly or unjustly MK cannot avoid being scapegoat for Afghan critical economic situation. Abandoned MK camps will stand as monuments of American inefficiency. Arghandab and Kajkai dams would be monuments American ability. Only loan making possible continued MK employment and completion Helmand project can avoid reduced US prestige and cooling of present cordial Afghan-US relations.

Dreyfus

1 Abdul Majid Khan.

2 Morrison–Knudsen, Afghanistan, an American construction firm working on contract to the Government of Afghanistan.

Memorandum of Conversation, by Mr. Richard S. Leach of the Division of South Asian Affairs 890H.51/12–1549

[Document 1234]

Memorandum of Conversation, by Mr. Richard S. Leach of the Division of South Asian Affairs

restricted [Washington,] December 15, 1949.

Subject: Call on Mr. Mathews by Mr. Chouaib, Chargé d’Affaires of the Afghan Embassy.

Participants: Mr. Chouaib,1 Afghan Embassy

SOA—Mr. Mathews2

Mr. Leach

Problem: None

Action Required: None

In calling on Mr. Mathews today Mr. Chouaib said he had come to express his Government’s and his own personal gratification over the recent extension of an Export–Import Bank credit to Afghanistan.3

He said he wished to reflect the friendly feelings of his Government not in a “diplomatic way” as heretofore but to register them from the heart. He also wanted to convey his own and his Government’s appreciation of the hard work which had gone into study on the loan on the part of numerous Department representatives.

He said that the announcement of the loan was of great value to his Government in improved national morale and would serve to reinforce his Government’s basic desire to align itself with the Western democracies. He expressed the hope that the US, as a great power, would never need help but he felt that if difficulties occurred for us Afghanistan would welcome an opportunity to demonstrate her wish to reciprocate the assistance the US had extended to his country.

Mr. Mathews responded to the effect that the loan had been justified through the joint efforts of many Afghan and US officials, and said he hoped we could continue to work together for the social and economic betterment of conditions in the area and its general stability.

1 Mohammad Chouaib, Counselor of Embassy.

2 Elbert George Mathews, Director, Office of South Asian Affairs.

3 On March 21, 1949, the Afghan Minister of National Economy submitted an “unofficial report” to the Export–Import Bank. A formal loan application was submitted on August 15 (890H.51/12–2849). On November 23, the Bank approved a loan of $21,000,000 to cover construction costs of Kajakai Dam, completion of the Boghra canal system, and such subsequent river development and irrigation projects in the Helmand and Arghandab valleys as might later be approved by the Bank. (890H.51/11–849)

Africa:Africa:

Contents

Conference at Tangier, Morocco, of American consular officials in North Africa, June 6–10, 1949 (Documents 1235-1236)

Agreement between the United States and Ethiopia respecting a mutual aid settlement (Documents 1237-1237)

Discussion between the United States and the Union of South Africa concerning the adverse effect on United States shipping of import controls imposed by the Union of South Africa; matters related to the Union’s requests for United States financial and military assistance (Documents 1238-1242)

Multilateral Relations:Multilateral Relations:

Contents

Conference at Tangier, Morocco, of American consular officials in North Africa, June 6–10, 1949 (Documents 1235-1236)

Conference at Tangier, Morocco, of American consular officials in North Africa, June 6–10, 1949Conference at Tangier, Morocco, of American consular officials in North Africa, June 6–10, 1949

[1235] The Chargé in Morocco (More) to the Secretary of State

Tangier, Morocco, June 13, 1949.

125.0081 Conferences/6–1349

[1236] The Chargé in Morocco (More) to the Secretary of State

Tangier, Morocco, June 13, 1949.

125.0081 Conferences/6–1349

The Chargé in Morocco (More) to the Secretary of State 125.0081 Conferences/6–1349

[Document 1235]

The Chargé in Morocco (More) to the Secretary of State

secret Tangier, Morocco, June 13, 1949.

No. 129

Sir: I have the honor to transmit herewith a report on the political items on the agenda of the North African Conference1 held at this Legation on June 6, 7, 8, 9 and 10, 1949 pursuant to the Department’s instructions. The officers who attended the Conference are listed in Enclosure 1.

It was my privilege to preside at the opening session, after which Mr. Earl L. Packer, Consul General at Tunis, acted as Chairman. I designated Mr. Albert W. Sherer, Jr., of the Legation, as Drafting Officer and he was greatly assisted by Mr. Ridgway B. Knight, of the Embassy at Paris, as well as by the Chairman and other officers in preparing the report, all sections of which were unanimously approved.

The Legation’s despatch no. 130 dated June 13, 1949 includes a discussion of the other items on the agenda.

Respectfully yours,

Bolard More

[Enclosure 1]

List of Officers Attending

Tunis Chairman Earl L. Packer Consul General

John A. Sabini Vice Consul—PAO

Algeria George Tait Consul General

Thomas L. Nicholson Vice Consul—PAO

Casablanca C. Paul Fletcher Consul General

Robert M. Beaudrv Vice Consul—PAO

Rabat Maurice Pasquet Consul

Tripoli Department of State Orray Taft, Jr. Consul

Harry A. Schwartz Assistant Chief, Division African Affairs

John R. Kennedy Assistant Chief, Division Foreign Reporting Services

Mrs. Ruth C. Sloan Public Overseas Program Staff

Department of Commerce Paul Hawk Office of International Trade

Paris John L. Stewart First Secretary and consul (Agricultural Attaché)

Ridgway B. Knight Second Secretary and Consul

Madrid Charles Sitler Labor Attaché

Cairo Philip W. Ireland First Secretary and Consul

Tangier (The following officers of the Legation attended some or all of the sessions): Bolard More Chargé d’Affaires a.i.

Robert M. Sheehan Second Secretary and Vice Consul—PAO

Drafting Officer: Albert W. Sherer, Jr. Second Secretary and Vice Consul

Elmer E. Yelton Third Secretary and Vice Consul

Converse Hettinger Third Secretary and Vice Consul

Fred K. Blackburn Resident Radio Engineer

George E. Palmer Vice Consul

Robert G. Caldwell Attaché

Margaret M. Barrett Research Analyst

Bernice Cloutier Librarian USIS

Colonel Marion Carson Military Attaché

Captain John P. Bedford Air Attaché

[Enclosure 2]

Report on Political Problems

appraisal of present political situation in north africa

I French policy

It was the sense of the meeting that the record of French reform achievements in North Africa since the 1948 North African meeting has been definitely discouraging—in particular, it was unanimously agreed that the programs of minimum reforms which had been drafted by the French during the summer of 1947 have largely, and at least temporarily, been abandoned in fact if not in theory, especially in Morocco. Concern was expressed that the French authorities have allowed themselves to become overconfident as a result of the apparent calm reigning in North Africa. Different theories were expressed with reference to the effect of plentiful crops on both French policy and nationalist activities. It was, however, agreed that the French authorities would be making a grave mistake should they believe that economic well-being alone is sufficient to replace political evolution and sufficient to assure long term stability. On the contrary, the Conference unanimously endorsed the reform programs with time-tables adopted in 1947 and 1948 and further agreed that France should and could usefully exploit these favorable economic circumstances in order to implement such a liberal and constructive policy. Such concessions would thus appear voluntary rather than forced, and consequently should have the maximum effect on Moslem public opinion.

Several different patterns were recognized as existing in France vis-à-vis the North African problem: a) Foreign Office and other official thinking: generally confident that the situation has so improved as to render further reforms unnecessary at this time. Furthermore, this element in some instances resents American discussion of such problems as impinging on French sovereignty.

b) General Public Opinion: The French public regardless of party affiliation is traditionally nationalist and conservative when colonial problems are involved. Compared to 20 and 10 years ago, there has been a slight evolution; in particular the cost in treasure and in manpower of the Indo-Chinese war has tended to illustrate the depth of present-day nationalist aspirations and the necessity intelligently to deal therewith. Yet evolution has been slower than the march of events and the Conference does not believe that a sufficiently strong current of public opinion would originate in France sufficiently soon alone to compel the French Government to adopt the programs of evolution thought to be necessary by this meeting.

c) French Political Parties* and Politicians: The political parties reflecting public opinion and conscious of electoral necessities, have not yet adopted specific programs of concrete liberal action. However, they generally accept a vague and undefined French Union which would, by some slight of hand, eliminate the faults and weaknesses of the old French Empire and yet remain a political organization centered on France. Fortunately it would appear that a number of important French politicians in key positions realize the urgency of the basic problem confronting France and have already engaged in missionary work within their organizations. In particular the Conference noted the already expressed opinion of important MRP elements that France should soon negotiate new agreements with Morocco and Tunisia inspired by the March 8th agreements between President Auriol and Bao Dai concerning the Vietnam, (see Appendix A)2

It was also reported that prominent socialist leaders are actively campaigning for early implementation in fact of the well-known socialist progressive theories concerning dependent peoples.

The meeting unanimously agreed that regardless of France’s desires, her policy in North Africa would necessarily be affected to an unknown extent by both the Vietnam agreements and developments in neighboring Libya. Special mention was made of the impact of the Cyrenaican proclamation of “independence”.

II French reforms since 1948 meeting

[Here follows a discussion of the situation in Morocco, Tunisia, and Algeria with regard to proposed reforms in the fields of elections, education, and administration.]

III Reasons for apparent decrease in nationalist activity since June, 1948

It was unanimously agreed that in Morocco and Algeria such activities have in recent months been less apparent than at any other time since the end of the war, but that very recently there has been a new spurt of activity in Tunisia where the Bey himself appears to have become somewhat involved with the Neo-Destours. It was believed, however, that the current situation does not imply a decrease in the aspirations of the nationalist leaders involved.

Several reasons were advanced as contributing to this situation: 1. An excellent crop year.

2. Lack of faith in the value of Arab League leadership and assistance after the Palestine fiasco.

3. Increased doubts as to United States support.

4. Somewhat increased French prestige resulting from her gradual economic and political rehabilitation—however uneven this may be in various fields.

It was also noted that the activity and influence of the Moghreb Office in Cairo had sharply declined. Such decline appeared to arise, in a large degree, from its discouragement at Arab failures concerning Palestine militarily and before the UN, and from the realization that the decrease in French North African tension and the emergence of new leadership in the North African countries had deprived the Cairo group of its importance. In particular the Arab League had not realized the decline in Abdel Krim’s importance since he left for exile 22 years ago. It was also noted that many of the Moghreb leaders in Cairo had either declined in personal influence, as has Habib Bourghiba, or have left Egypt as have Abdel Khalek Torres, and Allal al Fassi.

It was thought that the decrease in nationalist activity above mentioned may be more apparent than actual and it was agreed that any resulting lesser emphasis on the necessity for reforms would be detrimental to the long-term interests and stability of the area. As previously stated, the Conference is of the opinion that this reduced tension should facilitate the implementation of evolutionary programs.

IV The Arab League and nationalist plans for bringing North African problem before the United Nations

It was unanimously agreed that it was unlikely that the French North African situation would be introduced into the forthcoming September meeting of the United Nations General Assembly. It was recognized that the Arab League remains interested in North Africa (especially Azzam Pasha, who because of his participation in the early Libyan independence movement, feels especially close to Libya and to a lesser degree to French North Africa.) In particular it was believed that the indifferent support received by the Arab League countries from Morocco and Tunisia during the hostilities in Palestine caused some cooling in the member states’ interest in French North Africa for the immediate present. It was also suggested that member states’ interest had been further dampened by their present preoccupation with political and economic problems arising from the creation of the Israeli State and from the influx of Arab refugees from Palestine. In the light of the Arab States’ attitude and of the League’s currently reduced prestige and its present trend towards concentration on economic and cultural activities, the Conference believes that the League would undertake support of the French North African cause at UN only if a reasonably good possibility existed for a result satisfactory to Azzam Pasha and the member states. It was considered possible that the Philippines would be willing to introduce the question but would probably not do so without the agreement and support of the Arab States.

V Libya

It was the sense of the meeting that France for reasons of national prestige and because of the possibility of mineral wealth in the area would continue to make every effort to hold the Fezzan. It was further unanimously agreed that France would in all likelihood continue actively to support some form of Italian administration for Tripoli-tania, for the following reasons: a) Any form of Italian administration would in all probability be comparable to French methods in the neighboring territories thus preventing invidious comparisons.

b) The mere fact of returning a colonial area to a continental European nation contrary to the trend in evidence since the war would be considered by the French as a vindication of their colonial policy.

c) Independence, however nominal, or trusteeship of any power likely to honor the terms of the trusteeship agreement would be obnoxious to France.

The Conference further agreed that British or American trusteeship with the ensuing quasi certainty that the trust territories would be granted their independence at the end of the trusteeship period would serve to oblige France to institute in French North Africa a reform program of the type advocated by the United States.

While it was the sense of the meeting that full and complete independence would probably exert the same influence, it was thought possible that the French might stall for a few years in the hope that the new countries unprepared for their new responsibility would so misconduct their own affairs as to make French administration in French North Africa appear in a favorable light.

The Conference strongly believed that in the event some form of Italian administration were instilled, Arab armed resistance and bloodshed would ensue. The impact of such fighting on neighboring Tunisia and French North Africa would lead to unrest and perhaps riots though the French forces stationed in North Africa would probably be able rapidly to suppress such disorders. In this connection current reductions in garrison strengths were noted as well as French concern over the adequacy of the remaining effectives for maintaining order.

Material based on Consul Orray Taft’s remarks about Libya is contained in Appendix C.3

VI Communist activities

It was the unanimous opinion of the Conference that temporary tactical changes in the party line for French North Africa in no way alters the ultimate objective of Stalinist Communism: the separation of these dependent areas from the so-called “imperialistic exploiting nations” and eventually their integration into the orbit of Moscow.

In order to achieve this long term objective, it was accepted that the oft-announced communist revolutionary program for colonial areas would be followed.

a) During the first phase the communists can be expected actively to support the various nationalist pro-independence movements regardless of their social policies and notwithstanding any and all rebuffs which they may receive from nationalist or other groups in these countries. The use of the words “independence” or “independence within the French Union” or “liberty” was said to be based on communist needs for their propaganda within French and other such contingencies as the likelihood of the communists coming to power in France and thus not to affect basic policy which remains the separation of the colonial area from the mother country so as both to weaken the “imperialistic power” and prepare the ground for the second phase of the communist blue print.

This second phase calls for the “social revolution” at which time the nationalist-bourgeois temporary allies would be ruthlessly eliminated and the “dictatorship of the proletariat” instituted. The latter, of course, means the dictatorship of the communist party and complete subservience to the Kremlin.

A. Morocco

The meeting noted the recent change in the party line in Morocco when the expression “independence within the French Union” was replaced by “liberty”. It was believed that now, when the Communist Party has, at least momentarily, abandoned hope of capturing the French Government through the ballot box the Communist Party of Morocco can be expected to adopt once again the slogan of full independence.

The Istiqlal Party, which includes the overwhelming majority of Moroccan nationalists, maintained during the year its past policy of refusing cooperation with the communists and participation in any joint “front” organization. Some concern, however, was expressed that should the French maintain their intransigeant and discriminatory attitude on nationalist as compared to communist activities, the nationalists might eventually be led to cooperation with the communists.

The main communist efforts were described as directed toward the European and Moslem proletariat in Casablanca where the CGT, completely under communist control, is a precious auxiliary. Propaganda efforts among agricultural workers were said to be sporadic and none too effective, the major slogan being higher pay with little if any agitation for division of property or a land reform.

Communist catering to the Moslems was illustrated by a reference to their new committee which includes several Moslems more than last year. These Moslems have taken the place of prominent European labor leaders.

Considerable concern was expressed by the Conference over the apparent under-estimation by the Residency of the strength of communism.

B. Algeria

Importance was granted to several recent reports that the Algerian communist party had established a close working relationship with the “Amis du Manifesto” of Ferhat Abbas. Some of these reports even indicate that a number of the Manifesto leaders are in the pay of the communists and controlled by them.

It was not felt that a similar evolution had occurred in the “Mouvement pour le Triomphe de la Liberté et la Democracie” (MTLD) of Messali Hadj. As in 1947 and 1948 the difficulty of evaluating the relative strength of these two nationalist movements was recognized. Indeed, since 1945 there has been a continuous see-saw with one or the other of these parties dominating the other for brief periods.

The Conference was informed that Governor General Naegelen was fully aware of the communist danger and was rooting out communist influence wherever possible.

The party is continuing to strive, with some success, especially in the “cultural” field, for the establishment of communist-nationalist Moslem front organizations. The party line remains “the creation of an Algerian republic” with lessening emphasis on “within the French Union”.

The Communist strongholds in Algeria are to be found in the large urban centers principally in the Department of Oran which now has the distinction of having the only communist mayor in all of Algeria (Sidi Bel Abbes). In the recent cantonal elections held on March 20th and 27th, 1949 the strength of the anti-communist “entente” between the French political parties was such that a severe defeat was inflicted upon the communists without the necessity of an official coalition as in the previous municipal elections. In the second electoral college (non-citizens) the crushing defeat suffered by the communists is impossible to interpret in view of the admitted manipulation of electoral results in some areas.

C. Tunisia

In view of the contrary situation prevailing in Morocco the Conference was encouraged to note that the Residency at Tunis appears to be seriously concerned by communist developments and the potential communist threat. This attitude is in sharp contrast to the attitude reported in 1948 when French officials were inclined to dismiss the communists with the irrelevant and all too frequently heard statement that “Islam and Communism do not mix”.

Civilian, army and navy authorities are submitting the local communist party to greater surveillance. Communist literature is banned from the Ferryville arsenal and General Duval, commander of troops, has taken legal steps against the communist organ “L’Avenir” for the publication of an item of military importance.

The party line was reported as modified since January 1949 allegedly by orders emanating from Moscow and communicated through the French Communist Party. Essentially there appears to be greater insistence on attaining collaboration between leading nationalists and the communists. To date, however, this cooperation has been manifest in connection with a few strikes and also hi connection with the communist sponsored Peace Congress held at Paris on April 20, 1949. Nationalists were represented in the Tunisian delegation and subsequently a joint local committee was organized to implement the Congress’ resolutions.

The Conference recognized that in Tunisia as elsewhere in French North Africa the relationship between nationalists and communists depends on world events and on the world power ratio more than on purely internal considerations.

Surprisingly enough it was noted that the communist press has recently attacked the nationalist press in Tunisian and the nationalist leaders in Morocco in apparent contradiction to the “greater unity” party line.

1 This conference was similar to other regional conferences periodically conducted abroad by the Department of State. For documentation on the Near Eastern regional conference for diplomatic and consular officers held in Istanbul, November 26–29, see pp. 165 [Pg. 165 is part of Doc. 71] ff.

* Unless otherwise stated throughout this paper, the term political parties does not include the Communists. [Footnote in the source text.]

2 The appendices to this paper are not printed. Appendix A was a summary of the principal points of the exchange of letters of March 8 between French President Vincent Auriol and Vietnamese Chief of State Bao Dai. For documentation regarding the agreements, see vol. vii, Part 1, pp. 4 ff.

3 Appendices not printed.

The Chargé in Morocco (More) to the Secretary of State 125.0081 Conferences/6–1349

[Document 1236]

The Chargé in Morocco (More) to the Secretary of State

[Extracts]

confidential Tangier, Morocco, June 13, 1949.

No.130

Sir: [Here follow two paragraphs similar to those in despatch No. 129, supra.]

I believe that all the officers who attended this Conference found it very useful as it permitted an exchange of valuable information and personal views among a larger group of officers and covering a more extensive agenda than at the previous two conferences in Paris.

Respectfully yours,

Bolard More

[Enclosure 2]

1 North African Conference, Tangier, June 6–10, 1949

i. labor problems in french north africa

A. Appraisal of labor reporting

The importance of labor reporting in accordance with FSS 314, January 16, 1945,2 as presented by the representative of the Department of Labor, was fully realized by the meeting. This is especially true today when American labor unions are fully cooperating with the Government in the present vital phase of the struggle between democracy and dictatorship. It was pointed out that labor information is frequently included in political reports. It was recognized that more systematic reporting is, of course, desirable especially concerning the background, points of view, and strengths of the North African labor movements, the personalities of the more important leaders, regular reports on such things as unemployment, industrial relations, labor and related social legislation, wage rates, and hours. While many of these subjects receive occasional treatment it was agreed that the local staffs were insufficient for the adequate fulfillment of such a comprehensive program at regular intervals, unless other work were to suffer.

It was agreed to request the Department to study the possibility of granting assistance in one form or another. However, the meeting suggested that the appointment of a regional labor attaché for Morocco, Algeria and Tunisia would be the most desirable solution if personnel and funds permit. It was pointed out that such an officer versed in labor matters and familiar with North Africa would not only make constant and useful comparisons between the three areas in addition to reporting on each component, but could also supply the political and economic officers with valuable data. It was unanimously agreed that the labor attache and political officers should cooperate intimately in view of the obvious close connections between labor problems, politics and more particularly communism.

It was agreed that copies of despatches and airgrams dealing with labor matters (as well as with any subject of general import) would continue to be sent by each North African office to the others. It was also agreed that the Embassies at Paris and Madrid should be requested to supply the North African offices with copies of papers reporting on general labor developments which could be helpful in following local trends.

B. Methods for spreading information on US labor activities

While it was considered desirable that information as to the standard of living and working conditions of American workers be distributed in French North Africa, concern was expressed that indiscriminate propaganda of this type might prove to be a boomerang and increase the dissatisfaction of native workers who have no prospect of achieving similar standards for generations to come. Furthermore, it was recognized that such injudicious propaganda would arouse the hostility of the local authorities which would charge the United States with increasing and perhaps fomenting unrest.

It was the sense of the meeting that as USIS activities develop information on the US labor movement and activities should receive distribution within such limits both as to character and value as the principal officer may deem appropriate.

C. Ways in which the State and Labor Departments may be more useful to the Offices in regard to labor matters

It was unanimously agreed that documents relative to the US labor scene would be of much greater interest if received in translated form. It was suggested that a limited and judiciously selected number of such translated papers would be of distinctly greater use than a more comprehensive selection in English. It was recognized that the distribution of such material in Arabic would be unfavorably viewed by the Residency at Rabat. The same objection, however, was not revealed at Tunis in view of the official status of a large Moslem Federation (the UGTT). In Algeria knowledge of the French language is so extensive as to render Arabic texts largely unnecessary. The Conference believed that should it be impossible to supply Arabic translations, French texts would be extremely useful everywhere in North Africa.

It was also suggested that the Office of Intelligence Research could usefully supply the North African Posts with any studies prepared on the French labor movement and more specifically on the present status of French labor organizations and their inter-relationships.

D. Influence of Communism on the labor movements in French North Africa

1. French Morocco

The communist controlled CGT is the only organized labor movement in French Morocco. Although Moslem representation is being increased in the councils of the CGT, the movement is directed by European and principally French communists.

The French authorities appear to fear communism less than nationalism. Consequently they have long opposed the formation in Morocco of Moslem labor unions. Recently a French proposal was made, but with the proviso that 50% of the officers be Frenchmen. This proviso was deplored as tending to facilitate communist infiltration in any such new movement. This French consent, however, has remained theoretical as the Sultan has refused to sign the necessary dahir.

2. Algeria

The labor movement in Algeria is considerably more important than that in Morocco, largely due to a considerably more numerous European proletariat and a larger mass of Moslem laborers with some education. The CGT, by far the largest labor movement in Algeria, is completely communist controlled. Minute Christian (CFTC) and Force Ouvrière unions exist. The development of these anti-communist federations is handicapped, however, by severe lack of funds and a corresponding shortage of organizers.

3. Tunisia

The Tunisian labor movement was found to be more complex than anywhere else in North Africa. a) The Union Générals des Travailleurs Tunisiens ( UGTT )

This three year old purely Moslem group is both the most numerous labor movement (with about 75,000 members as compared with about 50,000 a year ago) and a political vehicle for the Neo-Destour nationalist party (while this party is tolerated it does not exist legally). It was reported that communist efforts to obtain adherents from the UGTT had been a failure and that unity of action by the UGTT with the communist controlled union (the USTT) was limited to parallel action in respect to individual strikes and to action in respect to the Paris “Peace Congress”. Both the UGTT and USTT are among the organizations which joined in the sending of a delegation to the Paris “Peace Congress” and in the formation of a post-congress committee to continue its work. The UGTT’s long-pending application for membership in the WFTU was recently accepted by the latter (after the CIO, British and Dutch unions broke away); so far the UGTT has neither repudiated nor confirmed the WFTU action. It appears to desire access to a forum in an international organization in order, if desired, to expound the Nationalist cause and it may consequently hold open for some time to come the door to that forum. It was generally agreed that this situation bears careful watching in view of the known communist skill in exploiting temporary unity for their own more permanent ends.

b) The communist controlled labor union organization (Union des Syndicats des Travailleurs de Tunisie—USTT) was reported as losing strength rapidly to the UGTT. Its current strength was now estimated as between 12 and 20 thousand (some 25 thousand less than a year ago). The cleavage between these two groups was shown lately by the UGTT’s refusal to participate in a May Day Parade with the USTT.

c) The CGT–FO (Confédération Générate de Travail—Force Ouvrière) remains of little importance, numbering only approximately 2–3 thousand members.

d) The Christian Federation of Workers (Confédération Française des Travailleurs Chrétiens—CFTC). A small labor movement which groups approximately 2–3 thousand members, essentially white collar workers and government employees.

4. Spanish Morocco and Internal [International] Zone of Tangier

There is no labor organization in the International Zone of Tangier.

Spanish Morocco does not have bona fide labor unions. Employers, employees and the Government participate in the Spanish Syndicate system. Their officers are members of the Falange and of course the communist influence is combatted forcefully and systematically.

E. Strikes

It was noted that a flurry of strikes has recently spread across French North Africa. It was the sense of the meeting that while the communists have been partially responsible, these strikes resulted also in part from genuine labor demands due to the increase in the cost of living.

ii. agriculture

The Conference noted the importance of agriculture as a factor in North African political and economic problems. While it was recognized that any fundamental alteration of existing inequalities between French and Arab agricultural enterprises is primarily a question of French policy, it was also recognized that the admittedly unfavorable position of Arab farmers could be improved through USIS and Point 4 programs. Further reference to such programs will be made later in this report.

iii. information and cultural program for the fiscal year 1950

After full presentation of the organization of the USIS both in Washington and in the North African Posts, the Conference agreed on the advisability of disseminating information concerning certain non-controversial subjects such as health, sanitary measures, education, and agricultural methods. While it was believed that information concerning the American way of life can be supplied, it was considered essential that caution be exercised. Indeed, not only do the North African populations have little chance of attaining comparable standards in the foreseeable future but such undiscriminating information would also cause complications with the French authorities who would view such activities as sources of dissatisfaction and unrest. The French would also resent and oppose any policy which could be interpreted as developing the popularity of the United States at the expense of France. It was agreed on the one hand to take a positive attitude with the local authorities endeavoring to convince them of the usefulness of our programs; on the other hand it was accepted that satisfactory relations with the French were essential to avoid systematic sabotage.

With reference to the European element in North Africa, several specific objectives were mentioned: (a) Propaganda similar to that used in Europe in the cold war with a view to convincing the non-communist, fence-sitting elements that they should belong to and actively partcipate in the Atlantic community.

(b) In view of the wide-spread ignorance of ECA purposes and mode of operation it was unanimously agreed that means to remedy this state of affairs should be granted a high priority by the USIS.

(c) The meeting also recommended that efforts should continue unabated to expose communism and describe both ‘clearly and simply the truth about the Soviet world. It was recognized that arguments pertaining to the Russian standards of living would not be specially effective on the underprivileged Moslem masses. Nevertheless, even this aspect may be of some use as the Moslem is more likely to turn in his own interest towards the wealthier and more powerful group of nations. It was also thought that stress of the difference between Soviet claims and actual worker conditions in the USSR would serve a useful purpose.

As to media it was generally felt that in addition to the press, motion pictures would be very effective in view of the high illiteracy among the Arabs. Literature in Arabic was deemed necessary for Morocco where very few Moslems speak French. In Algeria, however, it was noted that French was nearly universally spoken and that the rate of literacy in French was approximately the same as in Arabic. Tunisia was found to occupy an intermediate position. It was also believed that Arabic translations of certain well-selected books would be highly useful among educated Moslems. Special mention was made of “I Chose Freedom”, the Arabic edition of which appeared unfortunately to be exhausted. It was noted that the agreement with the French concerning the Tangier relay station limits our USIS radio activities from Tangier, which post, however, is not technically adapted to broadcast in the French North African area. It was ascertained, however, that Egyptian short wave broadcasts were received thus presenting the possibility of USIS material being broadcast from Cairo to North Africa. It was recommended, however, that no material be used of a nature which would obviously be irritating to the French.

iv. president’s point four program in north africa 3

The meeting was interested to receive information on the Point Four Program and to learn of its relationship to the other foreign economic and cultural development activities undertaken by the U.S. Government. It was pointed out that the primary objective of the Economic Cooperation Administration was the economic rehabilitation of Western Europe insofar as possible prior to June 30, 1952, whereas that of the Point Four program concerned problems of wider scope (social welfare, education, health, etc.) and longer range. It was further stated, however, that ECA, because of its interest in economic stability after 1952 is also interested in the economic development of dependent areas and thus in certain cases would have concurrent interest in the health, welfare, educational, agricultural and other economic activities, of the Point Four Program. One example of such concurrent activity might be the Thomas Campbell Wheat Plan (Appendix A).4

It was understood by the Conference that Point Four is still in the formative stage and that recommendations concerning development programs from officers in the field would be welcomed by the Government agencies responsible for its administration and coordination. It was further understood that the relationship of the Point Four program to the United Nations was under discussion and the opinion was expressed that the implementation of the program in French North Africa would, perhaps, be easier under UN auspices than under US auspices because of the sensitive French attitude toward US activities in North Africa.

It was understood by the Conference that the major portion of any fund appropriated for the Point Four program would be used for technicians who would assist dependent areas in projects designed to improve living conditions in order to encourage investment in those areas. Initiative and self-help are expected from the interested countries (for example: France in the case of FNA).

Since the Point Four program is an integral part of American foreign policy the desire was expressed that officers in the field should be kept informed as much as possible so that they may be of maximum assistance. It was believed that the Tangier International Zone would offer a good starting point for the implementation of the program in North Africa. There is at present in the International Zone an anti-tuberculosis drive which is receiving the enthusiastic support of the Zone’s Administrator and of the eight European powers represented in Tangier. It was also suggested that if experimental farms are contemplated under the program, it would be far easier to obtain local support in Tangier than in the other Zones of Morocco, Tunisia or Algeria.

v. economic problems in north africa

After an extensive review of economic reporting by the officers representing the reporting activities in the Departments of State, Agriculture, and Commerce, and by the field offices, various specific economic problems were considered.

A. Present policy in French North Africa with respect to investments of American private capital

1. Morocco

It was found that theoretically opportunties exist for American private capital more particularly in the extractive industries. It was reported that the policy of the Residency called for equal participation by Moroccan, French and American (or any other nationality) capital. This policy, however, was described as being flexible and mention was made of the recent agreement between the Newmont Mining Corporation and Zellidja which provided for 49% American participation.

The meeting concluded that the only definite policy forbids control of an important local corporation by other than French interests.

2. Tunisia

Investment possibilities in the Regency were found to be less extensive at the present time than in Morocco, even though it was recognized that this situation might be radically altered should the currently planned oil exploration and exploitation contracts be signed and exploration yield positive results.

The policy as to corporate control was found to be more liberal in Tunisia where the Gulf and Shell companies recently established prospection subsidiaries in which control did not rest with the French. However, this policy cannot be accepted as firm in view of the political storm which this provision created in Paris, a result of which the draft agreements between the oil companies and the Regency have not yet been signed.

3. Algeria

Investment possibilities in Algeria were described as most limited. As Algeria is part of Metropolitan France the same financial and fiscal policies obtain. French policy with regard to corporate enterprises in both Metropolitan France, Algeria, and the overseas territories calls for French control. It was also realized that a contrary policy would cause suspicion and protest among Frenchmen of ail political opinions still afraid of foreign designs on their overseas domain.

It was the unanimous opinion of the Conference that France’s insistence on French control constituted one of the main obstacles to extensive private American investments in North Africa.

Another deterrent was described as being French fiscal control which prevents the transfer out of the franc area of profits. The hope was expressed that such control would be relaxed as France’s rehabilitation proceeds. However, there were several indications that the French authorities are willing to allow such remittances in kind (more particularly in the extractive industries). For the time being at least, individual negotiations are necessary in each case.

B. Administration of ECA program and of counterpart funds and advisability of assignment of an ECA representative

While recognizing that the bilateral ECA agreement has defined the term “France” as including inter alia the three North African entities, it was the unanimous opinion of the meeting that allocations of ECA funds (both dollars and counterpart) should be segregated for each area. It was also recommended that the North African offices be kept informed currently of such allocations in order to facilitate local reporting on “end use”.

While fully aware of the personnel difficulties confronting the ECA Mission to France and while anxious to follow as closely as possible the “end use” of ECA assistance, all officers present recommended that an ECA representative from Paris visit the North African posts at regular intervals. It was also recommended that the same official be intrusted with this responsibility over a period of time as his usefulness and efficiency should increase as his familiarity with the area and its problems develops. In view of the limited amount of information concerning all phases of ECA it was recommended that the above representative act also as a liaison officer and come specially prepared to discuss all latest ECA problems with the principal officers. It was urged that ECA officials other than the North African representative above-mentioned, who may visit the area, call at the Consular offices and volunteer whatever information they may be able to impart.

It was found that in general little if anything is known in North Africa (in French as well as in Moslem circles) about ECA, its methods and its purposes. As reported in the USIS section of this paper, it was unanimously recommended that the dissemination of such information receive a high priority among the objectives of the USIS program.

In order to assist the officers in the field the following requests for specific material were made: 1. The mimeographed weekly bulletins “Aide Américaine à la France” from ECA (Paris) should be distributed. It was also suggested that local USIS offices obtain material from ECA (Paris) and prepare bulletins for each country for distribution to individuals as well as to the press. Perhaps less technical and more popular appeal might be stressed in such papers. The “Aide Americaine a la France” has been found to be extremely educative and valuable in combatting communist propaganda in Army circles.

2. In view of past experience it was found that the French Government in Paris should issue instructions to the French Residents General and Governor General to the effect that ECA representatives are authorized to make such checks as they deem necessary in the operation of that program in the territories concerned.

Due note was made of the request of the ECA Mission (Paris) that the officers in North Africa report freely any comments which they may care to formulate concerning local use of ECA assistance. It was also noted that ECA (Paris) has asked for recommendations regarding projects believed to be worthy of ECA consideration.

vi. consular and administrative problems in french north africa

A. Housing

A brief description of the housing conditions at each of the several posts in French North Africa was furnished. There was unanimous agreement that housing conditions present a very serious morale as well as functional problem. Tangier is the only post in French North Africa where sufficient apartments or houses are available for the staff, due to very recent improvements in the housing situation. There has been a great deal of correspondence between the field offices and the FBO (Paris), as well as FBO (Washington). The absence of results from the principal officers’ efforts to solve this serious problem was deplored. There was general agreement that the housing problem has not received sufficient consideration from the authorities responsible for the adoption and implementation of an FBO program in French North Africa and that American representation in FNA will continue to be handicapped until appropriate action is taken Hope was expressed that the Department would take immediate decisions and inform the officers concerned.

B. Security

. . . . . . . . . . . . . .

C. Possibility of personnel in Algeria and Tunisia benefiting from Tangier exchange rate

. . . . . . . . . . . . . .

D. Greater incidence of criticism and evaluation by Department of reports and despatches from field

The meeting was in unanimous agreement that criticism and evaluation of despatches and reports had in the past proved of great assistance to the drafting officers. It was felt, however, that if at all possible, more reports and despatches should be evaluated and the field informed of such evaluation more promptly.

1 Enclosure 1 was the same as enclosure 1 to despatch No. 129, supra.

2 Not printed.

3 For related documentation on the Point Four program, see vol. i, pp. 757 ff.

4 Not printed.

Ethiopia:Ethiopia:

Contents

Agreement between the United States and Ethiopia respecting a mutual aid settlement (Documents 1237-1237)

Agreement between the United States and Ethiopia respecting a mutual aid settlementAgreement between the United States and Ethiopia respecting a mutual aid settlement1

1 Signed at Addis Ababa on May 20; for text, see Department of State, Treaties and Other International Acts Series (TIAS) No. 1931, or 63 Stat. (pt. 3) 2446.

[1237] Current Economic Developments

[Washington,] May 31, 1949.

Current Economic Developments, Lot 70 D 467

Current Economic Developments Current Economic Developments, Lot 70 D 467

2 [Document 1237]

Current Economic Developments 3

[Extract]

secret [Washington,] May 31, 1949.

No. 204

. . . . . . . . . . . . . .

On May 20, 1949 the US and Ethiopia signed an agreement for the final settlement of lend-lease reciprocal aid and financial claims of each government against the other arising out of World War II. Under this agreement, Ethiopia will pay the US $200,000, which is considered as payment for lend-lease goods of civilian utility remaining in inventory on V–J Day. At the designation of the US, and upon mutual agreement, these funds will be used, in Ethiopia, for the following purposes, or any combination thereof: 1) delivery of real property and improvements thereto; 2) educational and cultural programs of benefit to both countries; and 3) defraying US government expenses. Ethiopia will pay to the US any unused balance of the $200,000 within five years and ninety days after the date of the agreement.

US lend-lease aid to Ethiopia totalled approximately $5,152,000, the overwhelming proportion of which was expended during hostilities.

. . . . . . . . . . . . . .

2 Lot 70 D 467 is a master set of the Department of State classified internal publication Current Economic Developments for the years 1945–1969, as retired by the Bureau of Economic Affairs.

3 Prepared by the Policy Information Committee of the Department of State.

Union of South Africa:Union of South Africa:

Contents

Discussion between the United States and the Union of South Africa concerning the adverse effect on United States shipping of import controls imposed by the Union of South Africa; matters related to the Union’s requests for United States financial and military assistance (Documents 1238-1242)

Discussion between the United States and the Union of South Africa concerning the adverse effect on United States shipping of import controls imposed by the Union of South Africa; matters related to the Union’s requests for United States financial and military assistanceDiscussion between the United States and the Union of South Africa concerning the adverse effect on United States shipping of import controls imposed by the Union of South Africa; matters related to the Union’s requests for United States financial and military assistance

[1238] Memorandum of Conversation, by the Assistant Secretary of State for Economic Affairs (Thorp)

[Washington,] January 5, 1949.

848A.5151/1–549

[1239] The Ambassador in the Union of South Africa (Winship) to the Secretary of State

Capetown, February 11, 1949—4 p. m.

848A.5151/2–1149: Telegram

[1240] Memorandum by the Director of the Office of European Affairs (Hickerson) to the Under Secretary of State (Webb)

[Washington,] May 16, 1949.

848A.002/5–949

[1241] Memorandum of Conversation, by the Under Secretary of State (Webb)

[Washington,] August 17, 1949.

848A.20/8–1749

[1242] The Ambassador in the Union of South Africa (Winship) to the Secretary of State

Pretoria, October 14, 1949.

848A.51/10–1449

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Assistant Secretary of State for Economic Affairs (Thorp) 848A.5151/1–549

[Document 1238]

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Assistant Secretary of State for Economic Affairs (Thorp)

[Washington,] January 5, 1949.

Participants: Mr. Thorp, E

Mr. Andrews, Minister, South African Legation

Mr. Eustace, Counselor, South African Legation

Mr. Horrocks, Commercial Attaché

Mr. Baker, ED

Mr. Lewis, CP

Mr. Rosenson, FN

Mr. Shullaw, BC

Mr. Blankenheimer, Commerce

Mr. Berkmeier, Commerce

Mr. Andrews called on me today at my request. I told him that this Government was fully appreciative of the situation which had prompted South Africa to impose import controls. I said, however, that there was one particular problem arising from the application of these controls which had caused a number of representations to be made to the Department and which we consider as a very serious matter. I said that I had reference to the effect of the controls on U.S. shipping. I told Mr. Andrews that however unintentional, the effect of the regulations was discriminatory against American shipping. I said that apart from considerations of principle we objected to the practical effect which these controls would have on our shipping services to South Africa. In no other case where controls had been imposed by a country in my experience had the effect been to virtually destroy existing shipping patterns.

I told Mr. Andrews that I did not feel a discussion would be useful until after he had had an opportunity to study the aide-mémoire summarizing our views which I then handed to him.1 I explained that our Legation at Pretoria had been instructed to convey the same information to the South African Government.

Mr. Andrews in replying said that he was sure that we realized South Africa had applied import controls only with the utmost reluctance. He said that the matter of controls had really been initiated on August 10 when he had called on the Department to inform this Government that such controls might be necessary in the event that efforts on the part of the South African Government to discourage excessive buying by South African importers were unsuccessful. Mr. Andrews said that the question of saving dollar expenditures for freight charges was a part of the general savings which South Africa was attempting to effect through the import controls. He added that there was only one real solution to the problem and that was suggested in his conversation with Departmental officers on August 10.2

I replied that I believed I knew what he had reference to and that I felt that this might not necessarily be the answer to the problem since unless South Africa’s imbalance was a matter of extraordinarily temporary nature the action he referred to would be only a palliative. Mr. Andrews replied by saying that his idea was that if South Africa were to receive a loan it would be possible to modify certain aspects of the controls which had aroused complaints.

I said that while I was aware in general of the South African interest in this matter I did not feel myself in a position to discuss it. In any case I pointed out that we believe the question of the effect of the controls on shipping is a separate problem. Mr. Andrews told me as he was leaving that he had had instructions from his Government to make a formal request for an Export-Import Bank loan next week.

[Enclosure]

Aide-Mémoire

Reference is made to the Exchange Quota Regulations imposed by the Government of the Union of South Africa on November 5, 1948 and, in particular, to the effect of these regulations on shipping lines of the United States. The application of the regulations in such a manner as to require that dollar freight payments be deducted from the importer’s exchange quota will seriously impair the ability of the American shipping lines to continue the service which they have gone to such unusual efforts to build up and which has been of mutual benefit to the United States and South Africa. The adverse effect of the regulations is intensified by the announcement by shipping lines of certain other countries that they will accept payment in sterling or South African pounds, whereas under South African regulations such action is not permitted to American shipping lines.

This Government, therefore, has requested the American Legation at Pretoria to make strong representations to the Government of the Union of South Africa, stressing the concern which this Government feels at the effect the exchange regulations as presently applied will have on American shipping. Concern is prompted in the first instance by this Government’s strong conviction that artificial changes in shipping patterns brought about by exchange regulations are undesirable in principle and harmful to world trade, and that convertibility of exchange in the case of transport should be kept outside the exchange regulations.

This Government also feels that curtailment of American shipping may seriously impede prompt shipment to the Union of many essential manufactured goods and raw materials in short supply in the Union. Furthermore, such curtailment would have an adverse effect on South African exports to the United States, since the bulk of these exports is carried in American ships. Ships of other third countries do not maintain direct route to the United States and apparently have little interest in this trade. Therefore, should American shipping be forced to curtail or abandon operations as now seems imminent, the South African dollar position might be further weakened by the inability of the Union to maintain even the current level of exports to the United States during the period when it is understood that every effort is being made to increase such exports. Thus assured continuation of American shipping services should be in the interest of the Union’s economy from the long-term standpoint.

The American Legation at Pretoria has been informed by the Union authorities that in framing the regulations savings in dollar freights were visualized, but that no discrimination against American shipping was intended. In view of the actual discriminatory effect of the regulations, therefore, this Government fails to see the reason for the refusal of the Union Government to consider alleviatory measures.

The suggestion made by Dr. Holloway3 in conversations with members of the Legation staff in Pretoria to the effect that if South Africa were to obtain an Export-Import Bank loan it might be in a position to modify the restrictions, especially as they affect freight payments, has been noted. The apparent use of the exchange regulations as a lever to facilitate an Export-Import Bank loan has been most unfavorably received here.

The American Legation at Pretoria has been instructed to advance certain proposals to the Union Government which it is believed take cognizance of the South African dollar position and are entirely justified in the circumstances. This Government feels that the maintenance of shipping services is as essential to the economies of both our countries as the maintenance of import trade and that provision should be made at least to keep American shipping on a par with shipping of other third countries so far as any action of the Government of the Union of South Africa is concerned.

Washington, January 6, 1949.

1 The aide-mémoire, printed below, was dated January 6 and carried the marginal notation “Original handed to Minister Andrews by Mr. Thorp, 1/6/49 at 4 p. m.” This casts some doubt as to the accuracy of the January 5 date shown on the source text of this memorandum of conversation.

2 No memorandum of this conversation has been found in the Department of State files.

3 John Edward Holloway, South African Secretary for Finance.

The Ambassador in the Union of South Africa (Winship) to the Secretary of State 848A.5151/2–1149: Telegram

[Document 1239]

The Ambassador in the Union of South Africa (Winship) to the Secretary of State

confidential Capetown, February 11, 1949—4 p. m.

11. Accompanied by Dickerson,1 I saw Holloway and Steyn2 this morning and they provided orally substance of reply I shall receive from External Affairs within next 2 or 3 days to repeated representations made in accordance Deptel 2, January 4:3

As from April 1 (end of current quota quarter) all shipping charges will be deducted from import quotas regardless currency in which paid, with exception that vessels of South African registry shall be exempted from this provision (now approximately 3 South African Marine and 2 Union Castle). Additionally South African Marine’s charter position will be permitted to continue to degree necessary maintain fortnightly sailings to United States. No South African or other excepted line will be permitted increase sailings to United States above schedule currently prevailing and no such line will be allowed enter this trade. In other words, it is intended maintain status quo but not increase advantage of excepted lines, and evidence that line has been plying United States–South Africa must be provided by anyone endeavoring profit from exception mentioned. No further chartering and no switching of routes from sterling to nonsterling areas to take advantage thereof will be permitted.

Officials mentioned emphasized right of South Africa accord flag protection its vessels and, after I had indicated dissatisfaction with foregoing, they stated confidentially (which will not appear in formal note under preparation) that as matter of internal policy, Ministers concerned had decided exception referred to would only apply until about June 1, or at latest June 30, after which all lines of whatever flag would receive parity treatment as above without exemption in favor vessels of South African registry. South African Marine and Union Castle are being notified of this now.

Public announcement in sense of paragraph 2 this telegram may be expected early next week and it should not be released in United States in any circumstances before appearing here as this would cause great and obvious embarrassment South African Government.

Paragraph 3 remains highly confidential and Farrell and Lewis4 have been so informed. They have also been informed of entire message and express view South African authorities could go no further at this time. To ensure no leaks they are refraining from even cabling New York until public announcement made here.

Text of note mentioned will be forwarded when received.

Winship

1 Charles E. Dickerson, Jr., Counselor of Legation at Pretoria.

2 Dr. Colin Fraser Steyn, South African Minister of Labor.

3 Not printed.

4 James A. Farrell, Jr., president of Farrell Lines, Inc. of New York City, and Arthur R. Lewis, Jr., president of Robin Line.

Memorandum by the Director of the Office of European Affairs (Hickerson) to the Under Secretary of State (Webb) 848A.002/5–949

[Document 1240]

Memorandum by the Director of the Office of European Affairs (Hickerson) to the Under Secretary of State (Webb)

[Washington,] May 16, 1949.

Mr. Eric Louw, Minister of Economic Affairs and Mines in the South African Government and head of the South African UN Delegation, has an appointment to see you at 11:30 a. m. on May 17.1

Mr. Louw was the first South African Minister to the United States and held a number of diplomatic posts prior to re-entering the South African Parliament in 1937. A biographic sketch is attached.2 The Nationalist Party, of which he is a member, came to power as a result of the General Election in May, 1948.

It is conceivable that the following topics may be bought up by Mr. Louw in the course of his visit:

Complaint in UN by India Against Treatment of the Indian Minority in South Africa.

The South African Delegation to UN has argued that the UN has no jurisdiction in the dispute between India and South Africa concerning the treatment of the Indian minority in South Africa. During the present session of the UN General Assembly we have not taken a leading part and have favored a simple resolution inviting the two parties to endeavor to resolve their dispute by direct means of their own choice. Such a resolution has been adopted by the Assembly. The South African Government is aware of our moderating influence in earlier discussions of this problem and can have no complaint about our attitude at the Third Session.

South African Application for a $100,000,000 ExIm Bank Credit.

South Africa made a formal application for a loan in January 1949. The ExIm bank requested the South African Government to supply certain additional information to clarify the issues involved in consideration of such a loan. This additional information was supplied by the South African Government late in April and is now being studied. Mr. Louw has an appointment to discuss the loan application with ExIm Bank officials on May 17.

While it is likely that he will refer to the subject, no comment on our attitude toward the loan, other than that the application is being considered, would appear to be required.

Shipments of Manganese to the United States.

This matter will be discussed with Mr. Louw when he calls on Mr. Brown,3 Director of ITP, on May 17. In the event that the subject is introduced by Mr. Louw, the following is a summary of the present situation:

In September, 1948 when this Government initiated several programs to increase its receipts of manganese it appeared that lack of railway cars was retarding shipments from South Africa. We therefore supplied steel to Canada in order to expedite delivery of cars ordered by South Africa in that country. Figures for the first four months of this year show an increase in exports of manganese. It is disturbing, however, to note that the United States is receiving a smaller proportion of the total exports than in 1948.

South African Import Controls.

This subject will also be discussed with Mr. Louw when he calls on Mr. Brown. In the event that the matter is mentioned by Mr. Louw, the following is a summary of the present situation:

The South African Government imposed import controls in November, 1948 on imports from hard currency countries. Because of a deterioration in the sterling position, the South African Government is extending controls to purchases from the sterling area after June 30, 1949. Present indications are that these controls will be discriminatory against imports from the dollar area as opposed to imports from the sterling area. We feel that South Africa’s sterling position is no better than her dollar position at the present time, and therefore we consider such discrimination unjustified.

Shipping Situation.

In connection with the application of import controls by South Africa, United States shipping has been adversely affected by the fact that freight charges are not deducted from dollar import quotas allocated to South African importers when South African owned on chartered ships are used. As a consequence importers have specified shipment on South African vessels.

We consider that our shipping services to South Africa are of mutual benefit and feel that import controls should not be applied in such a manner as to disrupt existing transportation patterns. For that reason we have welcomed the South African assurance that the preference enjoyed by South African shipping will be terminated on June 30, 1949. It is recommended that you express the foregoing sentiments with regard to shipping to Mr. Louw.

1 No record of this conversation has been found in the Department of State files.

2 Not printed.

3 Winthrop G. Brown, Director of the Office of International Trade Policy.

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Under Secretary of State (Webb) 848A.20/8–1749

[Document 1241]

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Under Secretary of State (Webb)

secret [Washington,] August 17, 1949.

Mr. F. C. Erasmus, Minister of Defense in the South African Government, accompanied by General L. Beyers, Chief of Staff of the South African Defense Forces, and the South African Ambassador, Mr. H. T. Andrews, called on me at his request today.1

After expressing appreciation for the arrangements which had been made for his visit, Mr. Erasmus made a brief statement on South African defense planning. He stated that South Africa had occupied a strategic position on the sea lanes during the last war and could do so again, particularly if control of the Mediterranean and Suez Canal were lost in some future war. Mr. Erasmus commented, in passing, that South Africa was not a member of the Atlantic Pact,2 although this did not mean that his country would not have liked to have participated. He also mentioned the substantial uranium resources of South Africa which enhanced its strategic position.

Mr. Erasmus said that South Africa wished to be in a position to make a useful contribution in the event of war, and for that reason he had visited the United Kingdom and was now in the United States in an effort to obtain certain military equipment. He indicated that his Government would probably obtain some destroyers and jet fighter aircraft from the United Kingdom. He went on to say that his Government hoped to obtain bombers and other equipment such as tanks from the United States. He said that South Africa, because of her limited manpower and financial resources, was for the most part seeking only training equipment which would enable trained South African forces, in the event of hostilities to go into action in Egypt, or elsewhere, earlier than would otherwise be the case.

Mr. Erasmus went on to say that his Government’s financial position, at the present time, would not permit payment for equipment required. In reply to my question whether the problem was basically one of South Africa’s current dollar shortage, Mr. Erasmus indicated that the difficulty was both a question of the dollar shortage and lack of funds.

I pointed out that the flexible provision permitting the President to make military equipment available on a cash or deferred payment basis to other countries, such as South Africa, had been eliminated from the legislation. I did say, however, that the MAP legislation, when enacted, would provide a basis on which we could continue to build a security system on a broader basis. I said that I was sure Mr. Erasmus would appreciate that, given limited supplies, it was necessary to utilize them at those points where the danger was greatest. In strengthening the defense of Western Europe, however, we were, by discouraging aggression, contributing indirectly to the security of other countries including South Africa.

Mr. Andrews remarked that as he saw the problem it was a question of sufficient flexibility in the military aid programs of the United States to permit assistance to additional countries such as South Africa. He recognized that it was impossible to anticipate the final shape which the MAP legislation would take. He went on to say that the uranium resources to which Mr. Erasmus had alluded also provided a quid pro quo for the military assistance which South Africa was seeking.

I remarked that the development of these uranium resources would furnish South Africa with dollars which would enable her to take advantage of any increase in flexibility in our aid programs. I remarked, however, that the amount intended for use at the President’s discretion in the MAP legislation as originally drafted was already covered by commitments which could be anticipated in such places as the Philippines and Austria. Restoration of this provision to the present legislation would not provide the basis for immediate assistance to South Africa. In this connection, I said that it appeared very unlikely to me that there would be any prospect of being able to assist South Africa in the next nine months.

Mr. Erasmus said that he understood the situation and sought only to bring to the attention of the United States the strategic significance of South Africa. He said that he felt now, after his talks with our Defense officials, that the United States did appreciate this fact. I told him that we would be glad to have further talks with his people on this subject and in reply to his question, said that the proper approach was through the State Department.

General Beyers did not participate in the discussion except to refer briefly to South African apprehensions because of Indian penetration in East Africa.

1 J. Harold Shullaw of the Division of British Commonwealth Affairs also participated in this conversation.

2 For documentation on the negotiation of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization, see vol. iv, pp. 1 ff.

The Ambassador in the Union of South Africa (Winship) to the Secretary of State 848A.51/10–1449

[Document 1242]

The Ambassador in the Union of South Africa (Winship) to the Secretary of State

[Extracts] confidential Pretoria, October 14, 1949.

No. 344

Sir: I have the honor to refer to my despatch No. 87, dated June 29, 1949,1 from Cape Town, regarding the proposed visit of Finance Minister Havenga to the United States, and now to report on his return and his attitude on the South African loan negotiations. Other references in this connection are to the Embassy’s despatches Nos. 313 of September 28, 1949, and 329 of October 7, 1949.2

At my request Mr. Havenga received me yesterday morning and as usual was most friendly and cordial, but when the conversation turned to the Export-Import Bank and Washington loan negotiations he showed definite evidence of disappointment if not resentment.

He told me that upon his arrival in Washington he was optimistic, believing that the ground work had been done and that a loan of at least 50 million dollars would be extended. The Minister stated that it was agreed that the loan would be used for capital goods purchases in the United States for the South African Railroads and Harbours, Iscor and Escom.

His first discussions with Mr. Gaston3 appeared to be fairly satisfactory but on his return to Washington he was unable to see Mr. Gaston, and had to talk with another officer of the bank who seemed to know little or nothing of the previous conversations; Mr. Havenga said he was annoyed and discouraged at having to begin at the beginning again.

He told me he had chided some of the officials he had met by pointing out that they apparently had no machinery for loans to sound countries, but excellent machinery for giving away millions!

He said that now all negotiations with the ExIm Bank had been suspended, that he would not approach the World Bank, and that he would not attempt to float a public loan in the United States.

He believes that he has made very valuable contacts in New York, and that future credits through private banks can be arranged to meet South Africa’s needs. He also feels that the way is open for an increase of American investment in Union industries.

There is little doubt that Messrs. Havenga and Holloway knew what the requirements of the ExIm Bank were before leaving Pretoria. On the other hand, they intimated to me that they believed they could by their presence in Washington find a way around these.

At my request the Counselor of the Embassy also called on Dr. de Kock, Governor of the South African Reserve Bank, yesterday morning to put various questions to him concerning the foregoing loan negotiations. …

. . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Dr. de Kock said that when Mr. Havenga left New York he had arranged no loan at all with private banking circles there. While Mr. Havenga was on the boat crossing to England, Dillon Read and Company renewed exploratory discussions with certain banking houses in New York and obtained their agreement to participate in the 10 million dollar revolving credit or “overdraft” which has now been announced here, whereupon a high official of Dillon Read flew to England and met Mr. Havenga on his arrival there. The arrangement was then completed. The interest rate on this credit is ½% for the credit itself plus 3% on any amount drawn. Thus, if the whole amount were immediately drawn the rate would total 3½%. Dr. de Kock said that when Messrs. Havenga and Holloway were having discussions with New York bankers, as nearly as he can judge there was misunderstanding on both sides with regard to what was being discussed. The South Africans seemed to think a fixed loan with bond issue was had in mind, whereas the New York bankers were actually thinking in terms of a “line of credit”, which is what has now emerged.

Dr. de Kock’s opinion is that Mr. Havenga really feels that his announcement was of signal importance inasmuch as this 10 million dollar credit represents the first trickle of money of this sort ever obtained from the United States. Mr. Havenga is pleased, according to Dr. de Kock, to have obtained it and they both feel as above indicated, that more on the same basis can be had without very much difficulty. Dr. de Kock appears to expect to go to the United States toward the end of November or early in December and thinks that by approaching directly such banks as the Chase National Bank, the National City Bank, and the Bank of Manhattan, he may be able to obtain, as suggested, additional credits on similar terms from one or more of them without using an intermediary such as Dillon Bead. …

. . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Dr. de Kock said that he feels South Africa is now on top of its balance of payments position. The control measures which have been progressively applied are having their effect and it will have been noted that the gold and foreign exchange holdings of the Reserve Bank have moved upward slightly over the past six weeks. This, he feels, will strengthen his hand if and when he goes to New York and seeks further credits. Furthermore, if he can show that the issuance of import permits is based almost entirely on actual money in hand and not on hopes of money which may or may not be forthcoming, this should impress favorably the American financial community.

Respectfully yours,

North Winship

1 Not printed.

2 Neither printed.

3 Herbert E. Gaston, Board of Directors, Export-Import Bank.

Index Index

Abaza Pasha, 718–719 [Pgs. 718–719 include portions of Doc. 443 and Doc. 444]

Abbas, Ferhat, 1787 [Pg. 1787 is part of Doc. 1235]

Abdullah, Sheikh Mohamad, 1692 [Pg. 1692 is part of Doc. 1171], 1694 [Pg. 1694 is part of Doc. 1172], 1718–1719 [Pgs. 1718–1719 include portions of Doc. 1193 and Doc. 1194], 1749 [Pg. 1749 is part of Doc. 1215], 1761 [Pg. 1761 is part of Doc. 1220], 1768 [Pg. 1768 includes portions of Doc. 1224 and Doc. 1225]

Abdullah ibn Hussein, King of Jordan, 171 [Pg. 171 is part of Doc. 73], 183 [Pg. 183 is part of Doc. 78], 598 [Pg. 598 includes portions of Doc. 344 and Doc. 345], 604 [Pg. 604 is part of Doc. 350], 607–608 [Pgs. 607–608 include portions of Doc. 351 and Doc. 352], 630 [Pg. 630 includes portions of Doc. 369 and Doc. 370], 632–633 [Pgs. 632–633 include portions of Doc. 370, Doc. 371, and Doc. 372], 635 [Pg. 635 is part of Doc. 372], 638 [Pg. 638 is part of Doc. 374], 644 [Pg. 644 is part of Doc. 381], 647–651 [Pgs. 647–651 include portions of Doc. 382, Doc. 383, Doc. 384, Doc. 385, and Doc. 386], 657 [Pg. 657 is part of Doc. 391], 661 [Pg. 661 includes portions of Doc. 392 and Doc. 393], 663 [Pg. 663 includes portions of Doc. 393 and Doc. 394], 666–669 [Pgs. 666–669 include portions of Doc. 396, Doc. 397, Doc. 398, Doc. 399, and Doc. 400], 684–685 [Pgs. 684–685 include portions of Doc. 409, Doc. 410, and Doc. 411], 687–688 [Pgs. 687–688 include portions of Doc. 413, Doc. 414, and Doc. 415], 708 [Pg. 708 includes portions of Doc. 431 and Doc. 432], 716–717 [Pgs. 716–717 include portions of Doc. 440, Doc. 441, Doc. 442, and Doc. 443], 721 [Pg. 721 is part of Doc. 446], 732–733 [Pgs. 732–733 include portions of Doc. 454 and Doc. 455], 744 [Pg. 744 includes portions of Doc. 461, Doc. 462, and Doc. 463], 746 [Pg. 746 is part of Doc. 463], 749 [Pg. 749 includes portions of Doc. 466 and Doc. 467], 768n [Pg. 768 includes portions of Doc. 485 and Doc. 486], 779 [Pg. 779 is part of Doc. 494], 783n [Pg. 783 includes portions of Doc. 496 and Doc. 497], 803–804 [Pgs. 803–804 include portions of Doc. 511, Doc. 512, Doc. 513, and Doc. 514], 810 [Pg. 810 includes portions of Doc. 517 and Doc. 518], 821–823 [Pgs. 821–823 include portions of Doc. 528, Doc. 529, and Doc. 530], 847 [Pg. 847 is part of Doc. 537], 850–852 [Pgs. 850–852 include portions of Doc. 540, Doc. 541, and Doc. 542], 859–862 [Pgs. 859–862 include portions of Doc. 546, Doc. 547, Doc. 548, and Doc. 549], 866 [Pg. 866 is part of Doc. 553], 868–869 [Pgs. 868–869 include portions of Doc. 555 and Doc. 556], 871–873 [Pgs. 871–873 include portions of Doc. 557, Doc. 558, Doc. 559, Doc. 560, and Doc. 561], 878–879 [Pgs. 878–879 include portions of Doc. 563, Doc. 564, and Doc. 565], 882 [Pg. 882 is part of Doc. 567], 886n [Pg. 886 includes portions of Doc. 572 and Doc. 573], 892 [Pg. 892 is part of Doc. 577], 901–902 [Pgs. 901–902 include portions of Doc. 586 and Doc. 587], 915–917 [Pgs. 915–917 include portions of Doc. 592, Doc. 593, and Doc. 594], 919–920 [Pgs. 919–920 include portions of Doc. 596, Doc. 597, and Doc. 598], 922 [Pg. 922 is part of Doc. 599], 924–925 [Pgs. 924–925 include portions of Doc. 600, Doc. 601, and Doc. 602], 927 [Pg. 927 includes portions of Doc. 602 and Doc. 603], 929 [Pg. 929 is part of Doc. 604], 932 [Pg. 932 includes portions of Doc. 605 and Doc. 606], 963 [Pg. 963 is part of Doc. 622], 966 [Pg. 966 includes portions of Doc. 625 and Doc. 626], 978 [Pg. 978 includes portions of Doc. 634 and Doc. 635], 1037 [Pg. 1037 is part of Doc. 675], 1040n [Pg. 1040 is part of Doc. 678], 1049 [Pg. 1049 includes portions of Doc. 687 and Doc. 688], 1056–1057 [Pgs. 1056–1057 include portions of Doc. 691, Doc. 692, Doc. 693, Doc. 694, and Doc. 695], 1060 [Pg. 1060 is part of Doc. 697], 1072 [Pg. 1072 includes portions of Doc. 704 and Doc. 705], 1077–1084 [Pgs. 1077–1084 include portions of Doc. 710, Doc. 711, Doc. 712, Doc. 713, Doc. 714, Doc. 715, Doc. 716, Doc. 717, Doc. 718, and Doc. 719], 1097–1099 [Pgs. 1097–1099 include portions of Doc. 731, Doc. 732, and Doc. 733], 1121 [Pg. 1121 is part of Doc. 750], 1125 [Pg. 1125 is part of Doc. 753], 1141 [Pg. 1141 includes portions of Doc. 764 and Doc. 765], 1144–1146 [Pgs. 1144–1146 include portions of Doc. 768, Doc. 769, and Doc. 770], 1158 [Pg. 1158 includes portions of Doc. 778 and Doc. 779], 1186n [Pg. 1186 includes portions of Doc. 798 and Doc. 799], 1196 [Pg. 1196 is part of Doc. 808], 1215 [Pg. 1215 includes portions of Doc. 822 and Doc. 823], 1231n [Pg. 1231 includes portions of Doc. 834 and Doc. 835], 1247–1248 [Pgs. 1247–1248 include portions of Doc. 851 and Doc. 852], 1268 [Pg. 1268 is part of Doc. 871], 1284–1285 [Pgs. 1284–1285 include portions of Doc. 886, Doc. 887, and Doc. 888], 1377–1388 [Pgs. 1377–1388 include portions of Doc. 958, Doc. 959, Doc. 960, Doc. 961, Doc. 962, Doc. 963, Doc. 964, and Doc. 965], 1414 [Pg. 1414 is part of Doc. 983], 1416 [Pg. 1416 is part of Doc. 984], 1423n [Pg. 1423 includes portions of Doc. 990 and Doc. 991], 1424 [Pg. 1424 is part of Doc. 992], 1426n [Pg. 1426 includes portions of Doc. 993 and Doc. 994], 1448–1449 [Pgs. 1448–1449 include portions of Doc. 1002, Doc. 1003, Doc. 1004, and Doc. 1005], 1451 [Pg. 1451 includes portions of Doc. 1006 and Doc. 1007], 1456–1458 [Pgs. 1456–1458 include portions of Doc. 1012 and Doc. 1013], 1461–1462 [Pgs. 1461–1462 include portions of Doc. 1015, Doc. 1016, and Doc. 1017], 1468–1471 [Pgs. 1468–1471 include portions of Doc. 1019, Doc. 1020, Doc. 1021, Doc. 1022, Doc. 1023, and Doc. 1024], 1483–1486 [Pgs. 1483–1486 include portions of Doc. 1028, Doc. 1029, and Doc. 1030], 1489 [Pg. 1489 is part of Doc. 1031], 1494–1495 [Pgs. 1494–1495 include portions of Doc. 1034, Doc. 1035, and Doc. 1036], 1502–1503 [Pgs. 1502–1503 include portions of Doc. 1038 and Doc. 1039], 1509–1510 [Pgs. 1509–1510 include portions of Doc. 1043, Doc. 1044, Doc. 1045, and Doc. 1046], 1512–1517 [Pgs. 1512–1517 include portions of Doc. 1047, Doc. 1048, Doc. 1049, Doc. 1050, Doc. 1051, Doc. 1052, and Doc. 1053], 1521 [Pg. 1521 is part of Doc. 1057], 1526 [Pg. 1526 is part of Doc. 1060], 1528 [Pg. 1528 includes portions of Doc. 1061 and Doc. 1062], 1533–1534 [Pgs. 1533–1534 include portions of Doc. 1067, Doc. 1068, and Doc. 1069], 1541 [Pg. 1541 includes portions of Doc. 1074, Doc. 1075, and Doc. 1076], 1545–1546 [Pg. 1545 is part of Doc. 1079], 1547n [Pg. 1547 includes portions of Doc. 1079 and Doc. 1080], 1553 [Pg. 1553 is part of Doc. 1083], 1558–1562 [Pgs. 1558–1562 include portions of Doc. 1086, Doc. 1087, Doc. 1088, Doc. 1089, Doc. 1090, and Doc. 1091], 1564–1565 [Pgs. 1564–1565 include portions of Doc. 1093, Doc. 1094, and Doc. 1095], 1578n [Pg. 1578 includes portions of Doc. 1103 and Doc. 1104], 1579 [Pg. 1579 includes portions of Doc. 1104 and Doc. 1105], 1595 [Pg. 1595 is part of Doc. 1113]

Abu Dhabi, 152 [Pg. 152 is part of Doc. 60]

Abu Saafa, 83 [Pg. 83 is part of Doc. 12], 85 [Pg. 85 is part of Doc. 12], 151n [Pg. 151 is part of Doc. 59], 153–154 [Pgs. 153–154 include portions of Doc. 60, Doc. 61, Doc. 62, and Doc. 63], 155n [Pg. 155 is part of Doc. 63]

Acheson, Barclay, 840 [Pg. 840 is part of Doc. 533]

Acheson, Dean G.: Afghanistan, request for U.S. economic and military assistance by, 1777n [Pg. 1777 is part of Doc. 1232], 1778 [Pg. 1778 includes portions of Doc. 1232 and Doc. 1233]

Albania, U.S. policy toward, 392–394 [Pgs. 392–394 include portions of Doc. 206, Doc. 207, and Doc. 208], 397–398 [Pgs. 397–398 include portions of Doc. 209, Doc. 210, and Doc. 211], 414–415 [Pgs. 414–415 include portions of Doc. 218 and Doc. 219], 422–423 [Pgs. 422–423 include portions of Doc. 224, Doc. 225, and Doc. 226], 438 [Pg. 438 is part of Doc. 240]

Anglo-American-French talks on the Middle East, proposed, 89–90 [Pgs. 89–90 include portions of Doc. 12 and Doc. 13]

Anglo-Egyptian military staff talks, 219–221 [Pgs. 219–221 include portions of Doc. 97, Doc. 98, Doc. 99, and Doc. 100], 223 [Pg. 223 includes portions of Doc. 102 and Doc. 103]

Arab states, U.S. policy toward, 1339 [Pg. 1339 includes portions of Doc. 930 and Doc. 931]

Balkan pact, Greek proposal for, 447–449 [Pgs. 447–449 include portions of Doc. 244, Doc. 245, and Doc. 246], 460–461 [Pgs. 460–461 include portions of Doc. 253, Doc. 254, and Doc. 255]

China, U.S. policy toward, 53 [Pg. 53 is part of Doc. 8]

Conference of U.S. consular officials in North Africa, 1780 [Pg. 1780 is part of Doc. 1235], 1788 [Pg. 1788 includes portions of Doc. 1235 and Doc. 1236]

Egypt: Participation in Anglo-American military staff talks, proposed, 194–195 [Pgs. 194–195 include portions of Doc. 87, Doc. 88, and Doc. 89], 197 [Pg. 197 includes portions of Doc. 89 and Doc. 90], 199 [Pg. 199 is part of Doc. 91], 203–205 [Pgs. 203–205 include portions of Doc. 92, Doc. 93, and Doc. 94]; political situation in, 187 [Pg. 187 is part of Doc. 82], 222–223 [Pgs. 222–223 include portions of Doc. 100, Doc. 101, Doc. 102, and Doc. 103]

Far Eastern Commission, U.S. policy toward; 53 [Pg. 53 is part of Doc. 8]

German questions, 285 [Pg. 285 includes portions of Doc. 136 and Doc. 137]

Greater Syria, U.S. position regarding; 882–883 [Pgs. 882–883 include portions of Doc. 567, Doc. 568, and Doc. 569]

Greece: Anglo-American cooperation regarding, 256 [Pg. 256 includes portions of Doc. 121 and Doc. 122], 412 [Pg. 412 includes portions of Doc. 216, Doc. 217, and Doc. 218]; British policy, 286–287 [Pgs. 286–287 include portions of Doc. 138 and Doc. 139], 416 [Pg. 416 includes portions of Doc. 219 and Doc. 220]; British troops, proposed withdrawal of, 437 [Pg. 437 is part of Doc. 239]; cease-fire proposals, 434 [Pg. 434 includes portions of Doc. 236 and Doc. 237]; Communist Party, activities of, 250 [Pg. 250 is part of Doc. 119]; conscientious objectors, treatment of, 259–260 [Pgs. 259–260 include portions of Doc. 124, Doc. 125, and Doc. 126]; military forces, size of, 248–249 [Pgs. 248–249 include portions of Doc. 117 and Doc. 118], 290–291 [Pgs. 290–291 include portions of Doc. 140, Doc. 141, and Doc. 142], 297–298 [Pgs. 297–298 include portions of Doc. 145, Doc. 146, and Doc. 147], 300–301 [Pgs. 300–301 include portions of Doc. 148 and Doc. 149], 359–360 [Pgs. 359–360 include portions of Doc. 181, Doc. 182, Doc. 183, and Doc. 184], 435–436 [Pgs. 435–436 include portions of Doc. 235, Doc. 236, Doc. 237, and Doc. 238], 440n [Pg. 440 is part of Doc. 242], 443 [Pg. 443 is part of Doc. 243]; political situation, 241 [Pg. 241 is part of Doc. 114], 245 [Pg. 245 includes portions of Doc. 115, Doc. 116, and Doc. 117], 295 [Pg. 295 includes portions of Doc. 144 and Doc. 145], 309 [Pg. 309 includes portions of Doc. 150 and Doc. 151]; 311 [Pg. 311 includes portions of Doc. 151 and Doc. 152], 314–315 [Pgs. 314–315 include portions of Doc. 153, Doc. 154, and Doc. 155], 318 [Pg. 318 is part of Doc. 157], 362–363 [Pgs. 362–363 include portions of Doc. 185 and Doc. 186], 460–461 [Pgs. 460–461 include portions of Doc. 253, Doc. 254, and Doc. 255], 465 [Pg. 465 includes portions of Doc. 257, Doc. 258, and Doc. 259]; security of, 8 [Pg. 8 includes portions of Doc. 1, Doc. 2, and Doc. 3]; U.N. conciliation efforts, 289 [Pg. 289 is part of Doc. 140], 294–295 [Pgs. 294–295 include portions of Doc. 144 and Doc. 145], 315–316 [Pgs. 315–316 include portions of Doc. 154, Doc. 155, and Doc. 156], 319 [Pg. 319 is part of Doc. 158], 333 [Pg. 333 includes portions of Doc. 165 and Doc. 166], 399 [Pg. 399 includes portions of Doc. 211 and Doc. 212]; U.N. General Assembly considerations, 409–412 [Pgs. 409–412 include portions of Doc. 215, Doc. 216, Doc. 217, and Doc. 218], 417 [Pg. 417 includes portions of Doc. 220 and Doc. 221], 419 [Pg. 419 includes portions of Doc. 222 and Doc. 223], 426 [Pg. 426 includes portions of Doc. 228 and Doc. 229], 430 [Pg. 430 is part of Doc. 233], 450 [Pg. 450 is part of Doc. 247], 458 [Pg. 458 includes portions of Doc. 252 and Doc. 253], 465 [Pg. 465 includes portions of Doc. 257, Doc. 258, and Doc. 259]; U.N. Special Committee on the Balkans, matters concerning, 253 [Pg. 253 includes portions of Doc. 119, Doc. 120, and Doc. 121], 257–258 [Pgs. 257–258 include portions of Doc. 122, Doc. 123, and Doc. 124], 312 [Pg. 312 includes portions of Doc. 152 and Doc. 153], 400 [Pg. 400 includes portions of Doc. 212 and Doc. 213]; U.S. policy, 269n [Pg. 269 is part of Doc. 133], 280 [Pg. 280 includes portions of Doc. 134 and Doc. 135], 284n [Pg. 284 is part of Doc. 136], 285 [Pg. 285 includes portions of Doc. 136 and Doc. 137], 303n [Pg. 303 includes portions of Doc. 149 and Doc. 150], 320–325 [Pgs. 320–325 include portions of Doc. 158, Doc. 159, Doc. 160, Doc. 161, Doc. 162, and Doc. 163], 331 [Pg. 331 is part of Doc. 165], 341–342 [Pgs. 341–342 include portions of Doc. 170 and Doc. 171], 343n [Pg. 343 is part of Doc. 171], 344–345 [Pgs. 344–345 include portions of Doc. 171, Doc. 172, and Doc. 173], 347 [Pg. 347 includes portions of Doc. 173 and Doc. 174], 350–351 [Pgs. 350–351 include portions of Doc. 176 and Doc. 177], 353n [Pg. 353 includes portions of Doc. 177 and Doc. 178], 355–356 [Pgs. 355–356 include portions of Doc. 178, Doc. 179, and Doc. 180], 365 [Pg. 365 is part of Doc. 188], 371 [Pg. 371 includes portions of Doc. 192 and Doc. 193], 376 [Pg. 376 includes portions of Doc. 194 and Doc. 195], 385 [Pg. 385 is part of Doc. 201], 392 [Pg. 392 includes portions of Doc. 206 and Doc. 207], 428 [Pg. 428 includes portions of Doc. 230, Doc. 231, and Doc. 232], 463 [Pg. 463 includes portions of Doc. 256 and Doc. 257], 465 [Pg. 465 includes portions of Doc. 257, Doc. 258, and Doc. 259], 467 [Pg. 467 is part of Doc. 260], 495n [Pg. 495 includes portions of Doc. 279 and Doc. 280], 500 [Pg. 500 includes portions of Doc. 282, Doc. 283, and Doc. 284], 519 [Pg. 519 includes portions of Doc. 301 and Doc. 302]; Yugoslav policy toward, 267 [Pg. 267 includes portions of Doc. 131 and Doc. 132], 360 [Pg. 360 includes portions of Doc. 182, Doc. 183, and Doc. 184], 364 [Pg. 364 includes portions of Doc. 186 and Doc. 187], 366 [Pg. 366 includes portions of Doc. 188 and Doc. 189], 368–370 [Pgs. 368–370 include portions of Doc. 190, Doc. 191, and Doc. 192], 380 [Pg. 380 includes portions of Doc. 196, Doc. 197, and Doc. 198], 387 [Pg. 387 is part of Doc. 203], 458 [Pg. 458 includes portions of Doc. 252 and Doc. 253]

Haifa oil refinery, proposed reopening of, 140–142 [Pgs. 140–142 include portions of Doc. 48, Doc. 49, Doc. 50, and Doc. 51], 145–147 [Pgs. 145–147 include portions of Doc. 52, Doc. 53, Doc. 54, and Doc. 55], 162–164 [Pgs. 162–164 include portions of Doc. 69 and Doc. 70]

India: U.S. economic: assistance, 1751 [Pg. 1751 is part of Doc. 1216]; U.S. policy, 53 [Pg. 53 is part of Doc. 8]

Indonesia, U.S. policy toward, 53 [Pg. 53 is part of Doc. 8]

Iran: Gendarmerie, proposed absorption, of by Army, 518 [Pg. 518 includes portions of Doc. 300 and Doc. 301]; petroleum concessions, questions concerning, 125 [Pg. 125 includes portions of Doc. 33 and Doc. 34], 141 [Pg. 141 includes portions of Doc. 49 and Doc. 50], 149–150 [Pgs. 149–150 include portions of Doc. 55, Doc. 56, Doc. 57, and Doc. 58], 162 [Pg. 162 includes portions of Doc. 69 and Doc. 70]; political situation, 475–478 [Pgs. 475–478 include portions of Doc. 264, Doc. 265, Doc. 266, Doc. 267, Doc. 268, and Doc. 269], 481 [Pg. 481 includes portions of Doc. 270 and Doc. 271], 484–486 [Pgs. 484–486 include portions of Doc. 271, Doc. 272, and Doc. 273], 507 [Pg. 507 includes portions of Doc. 291, Doc. 292, and Doc. 293]; security of, 8 [Pg. 8 includes portions of Doc. 1, Doc. 2, and Doc. 3]; Soviet policy, 480 [Pg. 480 includes portions of Doc. 269 and Doc. 270], 487n [Pg. 487 includes portions of Doc. 274 and Doc. 275], 489–492 [Pgs. 489–492 include portions of Doc. 276, Doc. 277, and Doc. 278], 494–501 [Pgs. 494–501 include portions of Doc. 278, Doc. 279, Doc. 280, Doc. 281, Doc. 282, Doc. 283, Doc. 284, Doc. 285, and Doc. 286], 504–505 [Pgs. 504–505 include portions of Doc. 287, Doc. 288, and Doc. 289], 507 [Pg. 507 includes portions of Doc. 291, Doc. 292, and Doc. 293], 509–510 [Pgs. 509–510 include portions of Doc. 294 and Doc. 295], 513–514 [Pgs. 513–514 include portions of Doc. 296, Doc. 297, and Doc. 298], 516 [Pg. 516 includes portions of Doc. 298 and Doc. 299], 519–522 [Pgs. 519–522 include portions of Doc. 301, Doc. 302, and Doc. 303]; U.S. economic and military assistance, 472–473 [Pgs. 472–473 include portions of Doc. 262 and Doc. 263], 487–489 [Pgs. 487–489 include portions of Doc. 274, Doc. 275, Doc. 276, and Doc. 277], 503–506 [Pgs. 503–506 include portions of Doc. 286, Doc. 287, Doc. 288, Doc. 289, and Doc. 290], 512 [Pg. 512 includes portions of Doc. 295 and Doc. 296], 514 [Pg. 514 includes portions of Doc. 297 and Doc. 298], 517–518 [Pgs. 517–518 include portions of Doc. 299, Doc. 300, and Doc. 301], 521 [Pg. 521 is part of Doc. 302], 526 [Pg. 526 includes portions of Doc. 305 and Doc. 306], 528–529 [Pgs. 528–529 include portions of Doc. 308, Doc. 309, and Doc. 310], 536 [Pg. 536 is part of Doc. 312], 540 [Pg. 540 is part of Doc. 313], 552 [Pg. 552 is part of Doc. 316], 555–563 [Pgs. 555–563 include portions of Doc. 316, Doc. 317, Doc. 318, Doc. 319, Doc. 320, Doc. 321, Doc. 322, and Doc. 323], 565–567 [Pgs. 565–567 include portions of Doc. 323, Doc. 324, Doc. 325, and Doc. 326], 573–582 [Pgs. 573–582 include portions of Doc. 329, Doc. 330, Doc. 331, Doc. 332, Doc. 333, and Doc. 334], 585 [Pg. 585 includes portions of Doc. 335 and Doc. 336], 588n [Pg. 588 includes portions of Doc. 336 and Doc. 337], 589 [Pg. 589 includes portions of Doc. 337 and Doc. 338]; U.S. policy, 487 [Pg. 487 includes portions of Doc. 274 and Doc. 275], 491 [Pg. 491 is part of Doc. 277], 495 [Pg. 495 includes portions of Doc. 279 and Doc. 280], 500–501 [Pgs. 500–501 include portions of Doc. 282, Doc. 283, Doc. 284, Doc. 285, and Doc. 286], 510 [Pg. 510 includes portions of Doc. 294 and Doc. 295], 519–522 [Pgs. 519–522 include portions of Doc. 301, Doc. 302, and Doc. 303], 545n [Pg. 545 includes portions of Doc. 314 and Doc. 315], 551n [Pg. 551 is part of Doc. 315], 579–580 [Pgs. 579–580 include portions of Doc. 330, Doc. 331, and Doc. 332], 584 [Pg. 584 is part of Doc. 335]; visit to the United-States by the Shah, 568–569 [Pgs. 568–569 include portions of Doc. 326, Doc. 327, and Doc. 328], 572–581 [Pgs. 572–581 include portions of Doc. 329, Doc. 330, Doc. 331, Doc. 332, and Doc. 333], 588n [Pg. 588 includes portions of Doc. 336 and Doc. 337], 589 [Pg. 589 includes portions of Doc. 337 and Doc. 338]

Iraq-Syrian union, proposed, 180n [Pg. 180 is part of Doc. 76], 182–185 [Pgs. 182–185 include portions of Doc. 77, Doc. 78, Doc. 79, and Doc. 80]

Israel: Export-Impart Bank loan, 1455–1456 [Pgs. 1455–1456 include portions of Doc. 1011, Doc. 1012, and Doc. 1013]; U.N. membership, 1004–1005 [Pgs. 1004–1005 include portions of Doc. 654, Doc. 655, and Doc. 656]; U.S. de jure recognition, 702–703 [Pgs. 702–703 include portions of Doc. 427, Doc. 428, and Doc. 429], 759 [Pg. 759 includes portions of Doc. 476 and Doc. 477]; U.S. policy, 918 [Pg. 918 includes portions of Doc. 595 and Doc. 596], 973 [Pg. 973 includes portions of Doc. 631 and Doc. 632], 1009 [Pg. 1009 is part of Doc. 659], 1197 [Pg. 1197 is part of Doc. 809], 1339 [Pg. 1339 includes portions of Doc. 930 and Doc. 931]

Japan, U.S. policy toward, 53 [Pg. 53 is part of Doc. 8]

Japanese peace treaty, 53 [Pg. 53 is part of Doc. 8]

Jerusalem, future status of, 1015n [Pg. 1015 includes portions of Doc. 660 and Doc. 661], 1167–1168 [Pgs. 1167–1168 include portions of Doc. 786, Doc. 787, and Doc. 788], 1182 [Pg. 1182 includes portions of Doc. 794 and Doc. 795], 1184 [Pg. 1184 includes portions of Doc. 795 and Doc. 796], 1187–1188 [Pgs. 1187–1188 include portions of Doc. 799, Doc. 800, and Doc. 801], 1193–1194 [Pgs. 1193–1194 include portions of Doc. 804, Doc. 805, and Doc. 806], 1215 [Pg. 1215 includes portions of Doc. 822 and Doc. 823], 1225 [Pg. 1225 includes portions of Doc. 829 and Doc. 830], 1242–1243 [Pgs. 1242–1243 include portions of Doc. 846, Doc. 847, and Doc. 848], 1245 [Pg. 1245 includes portions of Doc. 849 and Doc. 850], 1256 [Pg. 1256 includes portions of Doc. 860 and Doc. 861], 1259 [Pg. 1259 is part of Doc. 863], 1268 [Pg. 1268 is part of Doc. 871], 1273 [Pg. 1273 includes portions of Doc. 876 and Doc. 877], 1293–1294 [Pg. 1293 is part of Doc. 895], 1308 [Pg. 1308 includes portions of Doc. 904 and Doc. 905], 1314 [Pg. 1314 includes portions of Doc. 908 and Doc. 909], 1321 [Pg. 1321 includes portions of Doc. 913, Doc. 914, and Doc. 915], 1331 [Pg. 1331 includes portions of Doc. 922 and Doc. 923], 1336 [Pg. 1336 is part of Doc. 928], 1348–1349 [Pgs. 1348–1349 include portions of Doc. 934, Doc. 935, and Doc. 936], 1381 [Pg. 1381 is part of Doc. 960], 1390 [Pg. 1390 includes portions of Doc. 966 and Doc. 967], 1393 [Pg. 1393 includes portions of Doc. 969 and Doc. 970], 1419 [Pg. 1419 includes portions of Doc. 986 and Doc. 987], 1444 [Pg. 1444 includes portions of Doc. 999 and Doc. 1000], 1471 [Pg. 1471 includes portions of Doc. 1023 and Doc. 1024], 1481 [Pg. 1481 includes portions of Doc. 1026 and Doc. 1027], 1498–1499 [Pgs. 1498–1499 include portions of Doc. 1036 and Doc. 1037], 1522–1523 [Pgs. 1522–1523 include portions of Doc. 1057, Doc. 1058, and Doc. 1059], 1531–1532 [Pgs. 1531–1532 include portions of Doc. 1063, Doc. 1064, Doc. 1065, Doc. 1066, and Doc. 1067], 1534 [Pg. 1534 includes portions of Doc. 1068 and Doc. 1069], 1538–1539 [Pgs. 1538–1539 include portions of Doc. 1071, Doc. 1072, and Doc. 1073], 1541 [Pg. 1541 includes portions of Doc. 1074, Doc. 1075, and Doc. 1076], 1547 [Pg. 1547 includes portions of Doc. 1079 and Doc. 1080], 1551–1555 [Pgs. 1551–1555 include portions of Doc. 1081, Doc. 1082, Doc. 1083, and Doc. 1084]

Jordan, U.S. policy toward, 1284–1285 [Pgs. 1284–1285 include portions of Doc. 886, Doc. 887, and Doc. 888]

Kashmir dispute, 1689–1693 [Pgs. 1689–1693 include portions of Doc. 1166, Doc. 1167, Doc. 1168, Doc. 1169, Doc. 1170, Doc. 1171, and Doc. 1172], 1695–1696 [Pgs. 1695–1696 include portions of Doc. 1173, Doc. 1174, and Doc. 1175], 1698–1703 [Pgs. 1698–1703 include portions of Doc. 1175, Doc. 1176, Doc. 1177, Doc. 1178, Doc. 1179, Doc. 1180, Doc. 1181, and Doc. 1182], 1705–1708 [Pgs. 1705–1708 include portions of Doc. 1183, Doc. 1184, Doc. 1185, Doc. 1186, and Doc. 1187], 1714 [Pg. 1714 includes portions of Doc. 1189 and Doc. 1190], 1716–1717 [Pgs. 1716–1717 include portions of Doc. 1191, Doc. 1192, and Doc. 1193], 1719–1726 [Pgs. 1719–1726 include portions of Doc. 1193, Doc. 1194, Doc. 1195, Doc. 1196, Doc. 1197, Doc. 1198, Doc. 1199, Doc. 1200, Doc. 1201, and Doc. 1202], 1728–1736 [Pgs. 1728–1736 include portions of Doc. 1202, Doc. 1203, Doc. 1204, Doc. 1205, Doc. 1206, Doc. 1207, and Doc. 1208], 1738 [Pg. 1738 includes portions of Doc. 1208 and Doc. 1209], 1740 [Pg. 1740 includes portions of Doc. 1209 and Doc. 1210], 1744–1745 [Pgs. 1744–1745 include portions of Doc. 1211, Doc. 1212, and Doc. 1213], 1748 [Pg. 1748 includes portions of Doc. 1214 and Doc. 1215], 1751 [Pg. 1751 is part of Doc. 1216], 1757–1760 [Pgs. 1757–1760 include portions of Doc. 1218, Doc. 1219, and Doc. 1220], 1762 [Pg. 1762 is part of Doc. 1221], 1764 [Pg. 1764 includes portions of Doc. 1222 and Doc. 1223], 1766 [Pg. 1766 includes portions of Doc. 1223 and Doc. 1224], 1768 [Pg. 1768 includes portions of Doc. 1224 and Doc. 1225], 1770–1771 [Pgs. 1770–1771 include portions of Doc. 1225, Doc. 1226, and Doc. 1227], 1773–1775 [Pgs. 1773–1775 include portions of Doc. 1227, Doc. 1228, Doc. 1229, Doc. 1230, and Doc. 1231]

Kuwait, proposed establishment of U.S. consulate in, 1566–1570 [Pgs. 1566–1570 include portions of Doc. 1096 and Doc. 1097]

Lebanon, U.S. relations with, 789–792 [Pgs. 789–792 include portions of Doc. 503, Doc. 504, and Doc. 505]

Macedonian question, 262–263 [Pgs. 262–263 include portions of Doc. 127, Doc. 128, and Doc. 129], 292 [Pg. 292 includes portions of Doc. 142 and Doc. 143]

Mutual Defense Assistance Act of 1949, 48 [Pg. 48 includes portions of Doc. 6 and Doc. 7]

Near and Middle East, U.S. policy toward, 44 [Pg. 44 is part of Doc. 4], 50 [Pg. 50 is part of Doc. 8], 52 [Pg. 52 is part of Doc. 8], 55n [Pg. 55 is part of Doc. 9], 167 [Pg. 167 includes portions of Doc. 71 and Doc. 72], 171n [Pg. 171 is part of Doc. 73], 188 [Pg. 188 is part of Doc. 83], 191–492 [Pgs. 191–492 include portions of Doc. 84, Doc. 85, Doc. 86, Doc. 87, Doc. 88, Doc. 89, Doc. 90, Doc. 91, Doc. 92, Doc. 93, Doc. 94, Doc. 95, Doc. 96, Doc. 97, Doc. 98, Doc. 99, Doc. 100, Doc. 101, Doc. 102, Doc. 103, Doc. 104, Doc. 105, Doc. 106, Doc. 107, Doc. 108, Doc. 109, Doc. 110, Doc. 111, Doc. 112, Doc. 113, Doc. 114, Doc. 115, Doc. 116, Doc. 117, Doc. 118, Doc. 119, Doc. 120, Doc. 121, Doc. 122, Doc. 123, Doc. 124, Doc. 125, Doc. 126, Doc. 127, Doc. 128, Doc. 129, Doc. 130, Doc. 131, Doc. 132, Doc. 133, Doc. 134, Doc. 135, Doc. 136, Doc. 137, Doc. 138, Doc. 139, Doc. 140, Doc. 141, Doc. 142, Doc. 143, Doc. 144, Doc. 145, Doc. 146, Doc. 147, Doc. 148, Doc. 149, Doc. 150, Doc. 151, Doc. 152, Doc. 153, Doc. 154, Doc. 155, Doc. 156, Doc. 157, Doc. 158, Doc. 159, Doc. 160, Doc. 161, Doc. 162, Doc. 163, Doc. 164, Doc. 165, Doc. 166, Doc. 167, Doc. 168, Doc. 169, Doc. 170, Doc. 171, Doc. 172, Doc. 173, Doc. 174, Doc. 175, Doc. 176, Doc. 177, Doc. 178, Doc. 179, Doc. 180, Doc. 181, Doc. 182, Doc. 183, Doc. 184, Doc. 185, Doc. 186, Doc. 187, Doc. 188, Doc. 189, Doc. 190, Doc. 191, Doc. 192, Doc. 193, Doc. 194, Doc. 195, Doc. 196, Doc. 197, Doc. 198, Doc. 199, Doc. 200, Doc. 201, Doc. 202, Doc. 203, Doc. 204, Doc. 205, Doc. 206, Doc. 207, Doc. 208, Doc. 209, Doc. 210, Doc. 211, Doc. 212, Doc. 213, Doc. 214, Doc. 215, Doc. 216, Doc. 217, Doc. 218, Doc. 219, Doc. 220, Doc. 221, Doc. 222, Doc. 223, Doc. 224, Doc. 225, Doc. 226, Doc. 227, Doc. 228, Doc. 229, Doc. 230, Doc. 231, Doc. 232, Doc. 233, Doc. 234, Doc. 235, Doc. 236, Doc. 237, Doc. 238, Doc. 239, Doc. 240, Doc. 241, Doc. 242, Doc. 243, Doc. 244, Doc. 245, Doc. 246, Doc. 247, Doc. 248, Doc. 249, Doc. 250, Doc. 251, Doc. 252, Doc. 253, Doc. 254, Doc. 255, Doc. 256, Doc. 257, Doc. 258, Doc. 259, Doc. 260, Doc. 261, Doc. 262, Doc. 263, Doc. 264, Doc. 265, Doc. 266, Doc. 267, Doc. 268, Doc. 269, Doc. 270, Doc. 271, Doc. 272, Doc. 273, Doc. 274, Doc. 275, Doc. 276, Doc. 277, and Doc. 278], 501 [Pg. 501 includes portions of Doc. 284, Doc. 285, and Doc. 286], 897–898 [Pgs. 897–898 include portions of Doc. 581, Doc. 582, and Doc. 583]

North Atlantic Treaty, 44 [Pg. 44 is part of Doc. 4]

Palestine question, 689 [Pg. 689 includes portions of Doc. 415 and Doc. 416], 691–692 [Pgs. 691–692 include portions of Doc. 417 and Doc. 418], 694–697 [Pgs. 694–697 include portions of Doc. 419, Doc. 420, Doc. 421, Doc. 422, Doc. 423, and Doc. 424], 700 [Pg. 700 includes portions of Doc. 426 and Doc. 427], 705–707 [Pgs. 705–707 include portions of Doc. 429, Doc. 430, and Doc. 431], 710–713 [Pgs. 710–713 include portions of Doc. 433, Doc. 434, Doc. 435, Doc. 436, Doc. 437, and Doc. 438], 715 [Pg. 715 includes portions of Doc. 439 and Doc. 440], 717–718 [Pgs. 717–718 include portions of Doc. 441, Doc. 442, Doc. 443, and Doc. 444], 719n [Pg. 719 is part of Doc. 444], 720–721 [Pgs. 720–721 include portions of Doc. 444, Doc. 445, and Doc. 446], 723–732 [Pgs. 723–732 include portions of Doc. 447, Doc. 448, Doc. 449, Doc. 450, Doc. 451, Doc. 452, Doc. 453, Doc. 454, and Doc. 455], 734–735 [Pgs. 734–735 include portions of Doc. 455, Doc. 456, and Doc. 457], 739–744 [Pgs. 739–744 include portions of Doc. 458, Doc. 459, Doc. 460, Doc. 461, Doc. 462, and Doc. 463], 747–750 [Pgs. 747–750 include portions of Doc. 464, Doc. 465, Doc. 466, Doc. 467, and Doc. 468], 752 [Pg. 752 includes portions of Doc. 468 and Doc. 469], 755–757 [Pgs. 755–757 include portions of Doc. 471, Doc. 472, Doc. 473, Doc. 474, and Doc. 475], 759–761 [Pgs. 759–761 include portions of Doc. 476, Doc. 477, Doc. 478, and Doc. 479], 764 [Pg. 764 includes portions of Doc. 479 and Doc. 480], 766 [Pg. 766 includes portions of Doc. 481, Doc. 482, Doc. 483, and Doc. 484], 708 [Pg. 708 includes portions of Doc. 431 and Doc. 432], 770–772 [Pgs. 770–772 include portions of Doc. 488, Doc. 489, and Doc. 490], 775–776 [Pgs. 775–776 include portions of Doc. 491, Doc. 492, and Doc. 493], 778 [Pg. 778 includes portions of Doc. 493 and Doc. 494], 780 [Pg. 780 includes portions of Doc. 494 and Doc. 495], 785–787 [Pgs. 785–787 include portions of Doc. 499, Doc. 500, Doc. 501, and Doc. 502], 796 [Pg. 796 includes portions of Doc. 506 and Doc. 507], 798–800 [Pgs. 798–800 include portions of Doc. 507, Doc. 508, Doc. 509, and Doc. 510], 802–803 [Pgs. 802–803 include portions of Doc. 511, Doc. 512, and Doc. 513], 808–817 [Pgs. 808–817 include portions of Doc. 516, Doc. 517, Doc. 518, Doc. 519, Doc. 520, Doc. 521, Doc. 522, Doc. 523, and Doc. 524], 817–821 [Pgs. 817–821 include portions of Doc. 522, Doc. 523, Doc. 524, Doc. 525, Doc. 526, Doc. 527, Doc. 528, and Doc. 529], 823–824 [Pgs. 823–824 include portions of Doc. 529, Doc. 530, and Doc. 531], 825n [Pg. 825 includes portions of Doc. 531 and Doc. 532], 842–844 [Pgs. 842–844 include portions of Doc. 533, Doc. 534, Doc. 535, and Doc. 536], 846 [Pg. 846 includes portions of Doc. 536 and Doc. 537], 848 [Pg. 848 includes portions of Doc. 537, Doc. 538, and Doc. 539], 850–851 [Pgs. 850–851 include portions of Doc. 540, Doc. 541, and Doc. 542], 853–856 [Pgs. 853–856 include portions of Doc. 543, Doc. 544, and Doc. 545], 859 [Pg. 859 includes portions of Doc. 546 and Doc. 547], 861 [Pg. 861 includes portions of Doc. 547 and Doc. 548], 863–868 [Pgs. 863–868 include portions of Doc. 550, Doc. 551, Doc. 552, Doc. 553, Doc. 554, Doc. 555, and Doc. 556], 871–873 [Pgs. 871–873 include portions of Doc. 557, Doc. 558, Doc. 559, Doc. 560, and Doc. 561], 875–876 [Pgs. 875–876 include portions of Doc. 562 and Doc. 563], 878n [Pg. 878 includes portions of Doc. 563 and Doc. 564], 870–881 [Pgs. 870–881 include portions of Doc. 557, Doc. 558, Doc. 559, Doc. 560, Doc. 561, Doc. 562, Doc. 563, Doc. 564, Doc. 565, and Doc. 566], 883–887 [Pgs. 883–887 include portions of Doc. 568, Doc. 569, Doc. 570, Doc. 571, Doc. 572, Doc. 573, and Doc. 574], 890–896 [Pgs. 890–896 include portions of Doc. 577, Doc. 578, Doc. 579, Doc. 580, and Doc. 581], 899–900 [Pgs. 899–900 include portions of Doc. 583, Doc. 584, Doc. 585, and Doc. 586], 902 [Pg. 902 includes portions of Doc. 586 and Doc. 587], 905 [Pg. 905 includes portions of Doc. 588 and Doc. 589], 910–911 [Pgs. 910–911 include portions of Doc. 590, Doc. 591, and Doc. 592], 915–916 [Pgs. 915–916 include portions of Doc. 592, Doc. 593, and Doc. 594], 919–920 [Pgs. 919–920 include portions of Doc. 596, Doc. 597, and Doc. 598], 922–925 [Pgs. 922–925 include portions of Doc. 599, Doc. 600, Doc. 601, and Doc. 602], 927–928 [Pgs. 927–928 include portions of Doc. 602, Doc. 603, and Doc. 604], 930 [Pg. 930 includes portions of Doc. 604 and Doc. 605], 933 [Pg. 933 includes portions of Doc. 606 and Doc. 607], 943–947 [Pgs. 943–947 include portions of Doc. 608, Doc. 609, Doc. 610, and Doc. 611], 949 [Pg. 949 is part of Doc. 612], 951 [Pg. 951 is part of Doc. 612], 952n [Pg. 952 includes portions of Doc. 612 and Doc. 613], 953–961 [Pgs. 953–961 include portions of Doc. 613, Doc. 614, Doc. 615, Doc. 616, Doc. 617, Doc. 618, Doc. 619, Doc. 620, and Doc. 621], 967–968 [Pgs. 967–968 include portions of Doc. 626, Doc. 627, and Doc. 628], 975 [Pg. 975 is part of Doc. 633], 977–978 [Pgs. 977–978 include portions of Doc. 633, Doc. 634, and Doc. 635], 980 [Pg. 980 includes portions of Doc. 637 and Doc. 638], 988 [Pg. 988 is part of Doc. 641], 990 [Pg. 990 includes portions of Doc. 642 and Doc. 643], 992–993 [Pgs. 992–993 include portions of Doc. 643, Doc. 644, and Doc. 645], 996–1005 [Pgs. 996–1005 include portions of Doc. 647, Doc. 648, Doc. 649, Doc. 650, Doc. 651, Doc. 652, Doc. 653, Doc. 654, Doc. 655, and Doc. 656], 1008 [Pg. 1008 includes portions of Doc. 657 and Doc. 658], 1017–1018 [Pgs. 1017–1018 include portions of Doc. 661, Doc. 662, and Doc. 663], 1020–1022 [Pgs. 1020–1022 include portions of Doc. 663, Doc. 664, Doc. 665, and Doc. 666], 1028 [Pg. 1028 includes portions of Doc. 667 and Doc. 668], 1030 [Pg. 1030 includes portions of Doc. 670 and Doc. 671], 1036 [Pg. 1036 is part of Doc. 675], 1039 [Pg. 1039 includes portions of Doc. 676, Doc. 677, and Doc. 678], 1042–1044 [Pgs. 1042–1044 include portions of Doc. 679, Doc. 680, Doc. 681, Doc. 682, and Doc. 683], 1046 [Pg. 1046 includes portions of Doc. 684 and Doc. 685], 1049 [Pg. 1049 includes portions of Doc. 687 and Doc. 688], 1053 [Pg. 1053 includes portions of Doc. 689 and Doc. 690], 1055–1059 [Pgs. 1055–1059 include portions of Doc. 690, Doc. 691, Doc. 692, Doc. 693, Doc. 694, Doc. 695, and Doc. 696], 1071 [Pg. 1071 includes portions of Doc. 703 and Doc. 704], 1072n [Pg. 1072 includes portions of Doc. 704 and Doc. 705], 1074 [Pg. 1074 includes portions of Doc. 705 and Doc. 706], 1076–1078 [Pgs. 1076–1078 include portions of Doc. 708, Doc. 709, Doc. 710, and Doc. 711], 1081–1082 [Pgs. 1081–1082 include portions of Doc. 715, Doc. 716, and Doc. 717], 1084–1086 [Pgs. 1084–1086 include portions of Doc. 718, Doc. 719, Doc. 720, and Doc. 721], 1090 [Pg. 1090 includes portions of Doc. 723 and Doc. 724], 1096–1097 [Pgs. 1096–1097 include portions of Doc. 730, Doc. 731, and Doc. 732], 1099–1100 [Pgs. 1099–1100 include portions of Doc. 733, Doc. 734, and Doc. 735], 1110–1112 [Pgs. 1110–1112 include portions of Doc. 741, Doc. 742, Doc. 743, and Doc. 744], 1114 [Pg. 1114 includes portions of Doc. 744 and Doc. 745], 1117 [Pg. 1117 includes portions of Doc. 747 and Doc. 748], 1119 [Pg. 1119 includes portions of Doc. 748 and Doc. 749], 1121–1124 [Pgs. 1121–1124 include portions of Doc. 750, Doc. 751, Doc. 752, and Doc. 753], 1126 [Pg. 1126 is part of Doc. 754], 1128–1131 [Pgs. 1128–1131 include portions of Doc. 756, Doc. 757, and Doc. 758], 1133 [Pg. 1133 includes portions of Doc. 758 and Doc. 759], 1135 [Pg. 1135 includes portions of Doc. 760 and Doc. 761], 1141 [Pg. 1141 includes portions of Doc. 764 and Doc. 765], 1143–1144 [Pgs. 1143–1144 include portions of Doc. 767, Doc. 768, and Doc. 769], 1147 [Pg. 1147 is part of Doc. 771], 1150 [Pg. 1150 is part of Doc. 772], 1154 [Pg. 1154 includes portions of Doc. 773 and Doc. 774], 1158 [Pg. 1158 includes portions of Doc. 778 and Doc. 779], 1161 [Pg. 1161 is part of Doc. 781], 1163 [Pg. 1163 includes portions of Doc. 782 and Doc. 783], 1165–1168 [Pgs. 1165–1168 include portions of Doc. 784, Doc. 785, Doc. 786, Doc. 787, and Doc. 788], 1173–1178 [Pgs. 1173–1178 include portions of Doc. 788, Doc. 789, Doc. 790, Doc. 791, and Doc. 792], 1182 [Pg. 1182 includes portions of Doc. 794 and Doc. 795], 1186 [Pg. 1186 includes portions of Doc. 798 and Doc. 799], 1189 [Pg. 1189 includes portions of Doc. 801 and Doc. 802], 1191–1193 [Pgs. 1191–1193 include portions of Doc. 803, Doc. 804, and Doc. 805], 1195–1196 [Pgs. 1195–1196 include portions of Doc. 806, Doc. 807, and Doc. 808], 1202–1203 [Pgs. 1202–1203 include portions of Doc. 810, Doc. 811, Doc. 812, and Doc. 813], 1213–1214 [Pgs. 1213–1214 include portions of Doc. 820, Doc. 821, and Doc. 822], 1217–1218 [Pgs. 1217–1218 include portions of Doc. 824, Doc. 825, and Doc. 826], 1221 [Pg. 1221 includes portions of Doc. 826 and Doc. 827], 1225–1226 [Pgs. 1225–1226 include portions of Doc. 829, Doc. 830, and Doc. 831], 1228–1231 [Pgs. 1228–1231 include portions of Doc. 831, Doc. 832, Doc. 833, Doc. 834, and Doc. 835], 1233–1235 [Pgs. 1233–1235 include portions of Doc. 836, Doc. 837, Doc. 838, and Doc. 839], 1237–1240 [Pgs. 1237–1240 include portions of Doc. 839, Doc. 840, Doc. 841, Doc. 842, Doc. 843, Doc. 844, Doc. 845, and Doc. 846], 1243–1244 [Pgs. 1243–1244 include portions of Doc. 847 and Doc. 848], 1247 [Pg. 1247 includes portions of Doc. 851 and Doc. 852], 1249 [Pg. 1249 includes portions of Doc. 852, Doc. 853, Doc. 854, and Doc. 855], 1253–1258 [Pgs. 1253–1258 include portions of Doc. 856, Doc. 857, Doc. 858, Doc. 859, Doc. 860, Doc. 861, and Doc. 862], 1260–1261 [Pgs. 1260–1261 include portions of Doc. 863, Doc. 864, Doc. 865, and Doc. 866], 1263 [Pg. 1263 is part of Doc. 866], 1272 [Pg. 1272 includes portions of Doc. 874 and Doc. 875], 1274–1277 [Pgs. 1274–1277 include portions of Doc. 877, Doc. 878, Doc. 879, Doc. 880, Doc. 881, and Doc. 882], 1280 [Pg. 1280 includes portions of Doc. 882 and Doc. 883], 1284–1286 [Pgs. 1284–1286 include portions of Doc. 886, Doc. 887, Doc. 888, and Doc. 889], 1280–1291 [Pgs. 1280–1291 include portions of Doc. 882, Doc. 883, Doc. 884, Doc. 885, Doc. 886, Doc. 887, Doc. 888, Doc. 889, Doc. 890, Doc. 891, Doc. 892, and Doc. 893], 1299 [Pg. 1299 is part of Doc. 899], 1301–1302 [Pgs. 1301–1302 include portions of Doc. 899, Doc. 900, Doc. 901, and Doc. 902], 1304 [Pg. 1304 is part of Doc. 903], 1305n [Pg. 1305 is part of Doc. 904], 1312 [Pg. 1312 is part of Doc. 907], 1315–1318 [Pgs. 1315–1318 include portions of Doc. 910 and Doc. 911], 1321–1324 [Pgs. 1321–1324 include portions of Doc. 913, Doc. 914, Doc. 915, Doc. 916, Doc. 917, and Doc. 918], 1327 [Pg. 1327 includes portions of Doc. 919, Doc. 920, and Doc. 921], 1332 [Pg. 1332 is part of Doc. 924], 1338–1339 [Pgs. 1338–1339 include portions of Doc. 929, Doc. 930, and Doc. 931], 1341–1342 [Pgs. 1341–1342 include portions of Doc. 931, Doc. 932, and Doc. 933], 1348–1349 [Pgs. 1348–1349 include portions of Doc. 934, Doc. 935, and Doc. 936], 1354 [Pg. 1354 includes portions of Doc. 937 and Doc. 938], 1356 [Pg. 1356 includes portions of Doc. 939 and Doc. 940], 1358–1361 [Pgs. 1358–1361 include portions of Doc. 941, Doc. 942, Doc. 943, Doc. 944, Doc. 945, and Doc. 946], 1365–1366 [Pgs. 1365–1366 include portions of Doc. 947, Doc. 948, Doc. 949, and Doc. 950], 1369 [Pg. 1369 includes portions of Doc. 951 and Doc. 952], 1373–1376 [Pgs. 1373–1376 include portions of Doc. 954, Doc. 955, Doc. 956, Doc. 957, and Doc. 958], 1382 [Pg. 1382 includes portions of Doc. 960 and Doc. 961], 1387–1390 [Pgs. 1387–1390 include portions of Doc. 962, Doc. 963, Doc. 964, Doc. 965, Doc. 966, and Doc. 967], 1392–1396 [Pgs. 1392–1396 include portions of Doc. 967, Doc. 968, Doc. 969, Doc. 970, Doc. 971, Doc. 972, and Doc. 973], 1398 [Pg. 1398 is part of Doc. 974], 1415 [Pg. 1415 is part of Doc. 984], 1420 [Pg. 1420 includes portions of Doc. 987 and Doc. 988], 1423–1425 [Pgs. 1423–1425 include portions of Doc. 990, Doc. 991, Doc. 992, and Doc. 993], 1427–1430 [Pgs. 1427–1430 include portions of Doc. 994, Doc. 995, Doc. 996, and Doc. 997], 1440n [Pg. 1440 includes portions of Doc. 997 and Doc. 998], 1442 [Pg. 1442 includes portions of Doc. 998 and Doc. 999], 1446–1454 [Pgs. 1446–1454 include portions of Doc. 1001, Doc. 1002, Doc. 1003, Doc. 1004, Doc. 1005, Doc. 1006, Doc. 1007, Doc. 1008, Doc. 1009, and Doc. 1010], 1456 [Pg. 1456 includes portions of Doc. 1012 and Doc. 1013], 1459–1465 [Pgs. 1459–1465 include portions of Doc. 1013, Doc. 1014, Doc. 1015, Doc. 1016, Doc. 1017, Doc. 1018, and Doc. 1019], 1468–1469 [Pgs. 1468–1469 include portions of Doc. 1019, Doc. 1020, and Doc. 1021], 1471 [Pg. 1471 includes portions of Doc. 1023 and Doc. 1024], 1482–1483 [Pgs. 1482–1483 include portions of Doc. 1027, Doc. 1028, and Doc. 1029], 1488 [Pg. 1488 includes portions of Doc. 1030 and Doc. 1031], 1494 [Pg. 1494 includes portions of Doc. 1034 and Doc. 1035], 1502 [Pg. 1502 includes portions of Doc. 1038 and Doc. 1039], 1504 [Pg. 1504 includes portions of Doc. 1039 and Doc. 1040], 1508–1509 [Pgs. 1508–1509 include portions of Doc. 1042, Doc. 1043, Doc. 1044, and Doc. 1045], 1512 [Pg. 1512 includes portions of Doc. 1047, Doc. 1048, and Doc. 1049], 1515–1516 [Pgs. 1515–1516 include portions of Doc. 1051, Doc. 1052, and Doc. 1053], 1521 [Pg. 1521 is part of Doc. 1057], 1524–1528 [Pgs. 1524–1528 include portions of Doc. 1059, Doc. 1060, Doc. 1061, and Doc. 1062], 1533 [Pg. 1533 includes portions of Doc. 1067 and Doc. 1068], 1535–1536 [Pgs. 1535–1536 include portions of Doc. 1069, Doc. 1070, and Doc. 1071], 1540 [Pg. 1540 includes portions of Doc. 1073 and Doc. 1074], 1542 [Pg. 1542 includes portions of Doc. 1076 and Doc. 1077], 1545 [Pg. 1545 is part of Doc. 1079], 1556 [Pg. 1556 is part of Doc. 1085], 1558 [Pg. 1558 includes portions of Doc. 1086, Doc. 1087, and Doc. 1088], 1560–1562 [Pgs. 1560–1562 include portions of Doc. 1089, Doc. 1090, and Doc. 1091], 1564n [Pg. 1564 includes portions of Doc. 1093 and Doc. 1094], 1565 [Pg. 1565 is part of Doc. 1095]

Palestine refugees, 722–723 [Pgs. 722–723 include portions of Doc. 446, Doc. 447, and Doc. 448], 754–755 [Pgs. 754–755 include portions of Doc. 470, Doc. 471, and Doc. 472], 761 [Pg. 761 includes portions of Doc. 478 and Doc. 479], 781 [Pg. 781 includes portions of Doc. 495 and Doc. 496], 783 [Pg. 783 includes portions of Doc. 496 and Doc. 497], 804–807 [Pgs. 804–807 include portions of Doc. 513, Doc. 514, and Doc. 515], 818 [Pg. 818 includes portions of Doc. 524, Doc. 525, and Doc. 526], 827 [Pg. 827 is part of Doc. 533], 833 [Pg. 833 is part of Doc. 533], 842n [Pg. 842 includes portions of Doc. 533 and Doc. 534], 855–857 [Pgs. 855–857 include portions of Doc. 544, Doc. 545, and Doc. 546], 863 [Pg. 863 includes portions of Doc. 550 and Doc. 551], 870–871 [Pgs. 870–871 include portions of Doc. 557, Doc. 558, and Doc. 559], 894 [Pg. 894 includes portions of Doc. 577 and Doc. 578], 899 [Pg. 899 includes portions of Doc. 583, Doc. 584, and Doc. 585], 906 [Pg. 906 includes portions of Doc. 589 and Doc. 590], 918 [Pg. 918 includes portions of Doc. 595 and Doc. 596], 934 [Pg. 934 includes portions of Doc. 607 and Doc. 608], 941 [Pg. 941 is part of Doc. 608], 945–946 [Pg. 945 is part of Doc. 610], 959–960 [Pgs. 959–960 include portions of Doc. 618, Doc. 619, and Doc. 620], 962 [Pg. 962 includes portions of Doc. 621 and Doc. 622], 964–965 [Pgs. 964–965 include portions of Doc. 622, Doc. 623, Doc. 624, and Doc. 625], 969–974 [Pgs. 969–974 include portions of Doc. 628, Doc. 629, Doc. 630, Doc. 631, and Doc. 632], 979 [Pg. 979 is part of Doc. 636], 982–984 [Pgs. 982–984 include portions of Doc. 638, Doc. 639, and Doc. 640], 994–995 [Pgs. 994–995 include portions of Doc. 645, Doc. 646, and Doc. 647], 1007–1008 [Pgs. 1007–1008 include portions of Doc. 656, Doc. 657, and Doc. 658], 1013 [Pg. 1013 is part of Doc. 660], 1021–1022 [Pgs. 1021–1022 include portions of Doc. 664, Doc. 665, and Doc. 666], 1023n [Pg. 1023 includes portions of Doc. 666 and Doc. 667], 1029 [Pg. 1029 includes portions of Doc. 668 and Doc. 669], 1032–1035 [Pgs. 1032–1035 include portions of Doc. 671, Doc. 672, Doc. 673, and Doc. 674], 1038–1039 [Pgs. 1038–1039 include portions of Doc. 675, Doc. 676, Doc. 677, and Doc. 678], 1044–1045 [Pgs. 1044–1045 include portions of Doc. 682 and Doc. 683], 1058 [Pg. 1058 includes portions of Doc. 695 and Doc. 696], 1065 [Pg. 1065 includes portions of Doc. 699 and Doc. 700], 1067 [Pg. 1067 includes portions of Doc. 700 and Doc. 701], 1134 [Pg. 1134 is part of Doc. 760], 1142 [Pg. 1142 includes portions of Doc. 765, Doc. 766, and Doc. 767], 1170–1182 [Pgs. 1170–1182 include portions of Doc. 788, Doc. 789, Doc. 790, Doc. 791, Doc. 792, Doc. 793, Doc. 794, and Doc. 795], 1185–1186 [Pgs. 1185–1186 include portions of Doc. 797, Doc. 798, and Doc. 799], 1188 [Pg. 1188 includes portions of Doc. 800 and Doc. 801], 1191–1193 [Pgs. 1191–1193 include portions of Doc. 803, Doc. 804, and Doc. 805], 1202–1203 [Pgs. 1202–1203 include portions of Doc. 810, Doc. 811, Doc. 812, and Doc. 813], 1206–1208 [Pgs. 1206–1208 include portions of Doc. 814, Doc. 815, Doc. 816, and Doc. 817], 1210–1211 [Pg. 1210 is part of Doc. 818], 1214–1215 [Pgs. 1214–1215 include portions of Doc. 821, Doc. 822, and Doc. 823], 1217 [Pg. 1217 includes portions of Doc. 824 and Doc. 825], 1223–1224 [Pgs. 1223–1224 include portions of Doc. 827 and Doc. 828], 1232–1233 [Pgs. 1232–1233 include portions of Doc. 836 and Doc. 837], 1245–1247 [Pgs. 1245–1247 include portions of Doc. 849, Doc. 850, Doc. 851, and Doc. 852], 1257–1258 [Pgs. 1257–1258 include portions of Doc. 861 and Doc. 862], 1264–1267 [Pgs. 1264–1267 include portions of Doc. 866, Doc. 867, Doc. 868, Doc. 869, and Doc. 870], 1271 [Pg. 1271 includes portions of Doc. 872, Doc. 873, and Doc. 874], 1273 [Pg. 1273 includes portions of Doc. 876 and Doc. 877], 1276 [Pg. 1276 includes portions of Doc. 879, Doc. 880, and Doc. 881], 1281–1283 [Pgs. 1281–1283 include portions of Doc. 884, Doc. 885, and Doc. 886], 1287 [Pg. 1287 includes portions of Doc. 889 and Doc. 890], 1292 [Pg. 1292 is part of Doc. 894], 1297–1298 [Pgs. 1297–1298 include portions of Doc. 896, Doc. 897, and Doc. 898], 1313 [Pg. 1313 includes portions of Doc. 907 and Doc. 908], 1319 [Pg. 1319 includes portions of Doc. 912 and Doc. 913], 1334 [Pg. 1334 is part of Doc. 926], 1337 [Pg. 1337 includes portions of Doc. 928 and Doc. 929], 1349–1350 [Pgs. 1349–1350 include portions of Doc. 935, Doc. 936, and Doc. 937], 1394 [Pg. 1394 includes portions of Doc. 970 and Doc. 971], 1430 [Pg. 1430 includes portions of Doc. 995, Doc. 996, and Doc. 997], 1460n [Pg. 1460 includes portions of Doc. 1014 and Doc. 1015], 1500n [Pg. 1500 is part of Doc. 1038], 1557–1558 [Pgs. 1557–1558 include portions of Doc. 1086, Doc. 1087, and Doc. 1088], 1563 [Pg. 1563 includes portions of Doc. 1092 and Doc. 1093]

Persian Gulf territorial questions, 93 [Pg. 93 includes portions of Doc. 14 and Doc. 15], 104 [Pg. 104 includes portions of Doc. 19 and Doc. 20], 107–109 [Pgs. 107–109 include portions of Doc. 21, Doc. 22, Doc. 23, and Doc. 24], 111–122 [Pgs. 111–122 include portions of Doc. 24, Doc. 25, Doc. 26, Doc. 27, Doc. 28, Doc. 29, Doc. 30, Doc. 31, and Doc. 32], 125 [Pg. 125 includes portions of Doc. 33 and Doc. 34], 127–130 [Pgs. 127–130 include portions of Doc. 34, Doc. 35, Doc. 36, Doc. 37, Doc. 38, and Doc. 39], 133–134 [Pgs. 133–134 include portions of Doc. 42, Doc. 43, and Doc. 44], 151–154 [Pgs. 151–154 include portions of Doc. 59, Doc. 60, Doc. 61, Doc. 62, and Doc. 63], 157–161 [Pgs. 157–161 include portions of Doc. 65, Doc. 66, Doc. 67, and Doc. 68]

Saudi Arabia, U.S. relations with, 1574 [Pg. 1574 includes portions of Doc. 1099 and Doc. 1100], 1577–1584 [Pgs. 1577–1584 include portions of Doc. 1102, Doc. 1103, Doc. 1104, Doc. 1105, Doc. 1106, Doc. 1107, Doc. 1108, Doc. 1109, and Doc. 1110], 1589 [Pg. 1589 includes portions of Doc. 1110 and Doc. 1111], 1594–1598 [Pgs. 1594–1598 include portions of Doc. 1111, Doc. 1112, Doc. 1113, Doc. 1114, Doc. 1115, and Doc. 1116], 1599n [Pg. 1599 includes portions of Doc. 1116 and Doc. 1117], 1602 [Pg. 1602 includes portions of Doc. 1118 and Doc. 1119], 1613 [Pg. 1613 includes portions of Doc. 1119 and Doc. 1120], 1615–1616 [Pgs. 1615–1616 include portions of Doc. 1121, Doc. 1122, and Doc. 1123], 1618 [Pg. 1618 is part of Doc. 1124], 1620 [Pg. 1620 includes portions of Doc. 1124 and Doc. 1125], 1622–1623 [Pgs. 1622–1623 include portions of Doc. 1125, Doc. 1126, and Doc. 1127], 1627–1628 [Pgs. 1627–1628 include portions of Doc. 1129, Doc. 1130, and Doc. 1131]

Secretary of State, appointment as, 232n [Pg. 232 is part of Doc. 106], 1638n [Pg. 1638 includes portions of Doc. 1139 and Doc. 1140]

Southeast Asia, 50 [Pg. 50 is part of Doc. 8]

Syria, U.S. relations with, 901n [Pg. 901 is part of Doc. 586], 1630–1637 [Pgs. 1630–1637 include portions of Doc. 1132, Doc. 1133, Doc. 1134, Doc. 1135, Doc. 1136, Doc. 1137, and Doc. 1138]

Turkey, U.S. relations with, 8 [Pg. 8 includes portions of Doc. 1, Doc. 2, and Doc. 3], 269n [Pg. 269 is part of Doc. 133], 495n [Pg. 495 includes portions of Doc. 279 and Doc. 280], 500 [Pg. 500 includes portions of Doc. 282, Doc. 283, and Doc. 284], 519 [Pg. 519 includes portions of Doc. 301 and Doc. 302], 1640 [Pg. 1640 includes portions of Doc. 1140 and Doc. 1141], 1645 [Pg. 1645 is part of Doc. 1144], 1647–1654 [Pgs. 1647–1654 include portions of Doc. 1146, Doc. 1147, and Doc. 1148], 1656n [Pg. 1656 is part of Doc. 1149], 1657 [Pg. 1657 includes portions of Doc. 1149 and Doc. 1150], 1650–1660 [Pgs. 1650–1660 include portions of Doc. 1146, Doc. 1147, Doc. 1148, Doc. 1149, Doc. 1150, Doc. 1151, and Doc. 1152], 1662 [Pg. 1662 is part of Doc. 1152], 1669–1671 [Pgs. 1669–1671 include portions of Doc. 1152, Doc. 1153, and Doc. 1154], 1673–1676 [Pgs. 1673–1676 include portions of Doc. 1155, Doc. 1156, Doc. 1157, and Doc. 1158], 1679–1680 [Pgs. 1679–1680 include portions of Doc. 1158 and Doc. 1159]

Union of South Africa, U.S. relations with, 1802 [Pg. 1802 includes portions of Doc. 1238 and Doc. 1239], 1807 [Pg. 1807 includes portions of Doc. 1241 and Doc. 1242]

U.S. airfields in the United Kingdom and in the Cairo–Suez area, proposed construction of, 205 [Pg. 205 includes portions of Doc. 92, Doc. 93, and Doc. 94]

Achilles, Theodore C., 414 [Pg. 414 includes portions of Doc. 218 and Doc. 219]

Aden, 78 [Pg. 78 is part of Doc. 12]

Afghanistan: British policy, 13 [Pg. 13 is part of Doc. 3], 51 [Pg. 51 is part of Doc. 8]; Czechoslovak technical mission, 15 [Pg. 15 is part of Doc. 3]; Export-Import Bank loan, 1779 [Pg. 1779 is part of Doc. 1234]; Helmand river waters, dispute with Iran concerning distribution of, 567n [Pg. 567 includes portions of Doc. 325 and Doc. 326], 1778 [Pg. 1778 includes portions of Doc. 1232 and Doc. 1233]; Middle East pact, question of inclusion in proposed, 37 [Pg. 37 is part of Doc. 4]; military strength, 21–22 [Pg. 21 is part of Doc. 3]; Pakistan’s northwest frontier, dispute concerning, 13 [Pg. 13 is part of Doc. 3], 1745 [Pg. 1745 includes portions of Doc. 1212 and Doc. 1213], 1777n [Pg. 1777 is part of Doc. 1232]; regional cooperation with India, Iran, and Pakistan, proposed, 6 [Pg. 6 is part of Doc. 1]; Soviet policy, 15–16 [Pg. 15 is part of Doc. 3], 474 [Pg. 474 is part of Doc. 264], 545 [Pg. 545 includes portions of Doc. 314 and Doc. 315]; Syrian government, recognition of, 1636 [Pg. 1636 is part of Doc. 1137]; U.S. economic and military assistance, 1–2 [Pg. 1 is part of Doc. 1], 6–8 [Pgs. 6–8 include portions of Doc. 1, Doc. 2, and Doc. 3], 19 [Pg. 19 is part of Doc. 3], 23 [Pg. 23 is part of Doc. 3], 46–47 [Pgs. 46–47 include portions of Doc. 5 and Doc. 6], 1691 [Pg. 1691 includes portions of Doc. 1169, Doc. 1170, and Doc. 1171], 1777–1779 [Pgs. 1777–1779 include portions of Doc. 1232, Doc. 1233, and Doc. 1234]; U.S. policy, 8 [Pg. 8 includes portions of Doc. 1, Doc. 2, and Doc. 3], 29 [Pg. 29 is part of Doc. 3], 31 [Pg. 31 includes portions of Doc. 3 and Doc. 4], 46 [Pg. 46 is part of Doc. 5]

Africa: British policy, 53 [Pg. 53 is part of Doc. 8]; Communist menace, 62 [Pg. 62 is part of Doc. 12], 224 [Pg. 224 includes portions of Doc. 103 and Doc. 104]; Conference at Tangier of U.S. consular officials in North Africa, June 6–10, 1949, 1780–1797 [Pgs. 1780–1797 include portions of Doc. 1235 and Doc. 1236]; U.S. policy, 63 [Pg. 63 is part of Doc. 12]

Aglion, Raoul, 458 [Pg. 458 includes portions of Doc. 252 and Doc. 253]

Agricultural Adjustment Act, 212 [Pg. 212 is part of Doc. 96]

Agriculture, U.S. Department of, 566 [Pg. 566 is part of Doc. 325]

Ailianos, Michael, 378 [Pg. 378 includes portions of Doc. 195 and Doc. 196]

Air Force, U.S. Department of the, 24 [Pg. 24 is part of Doc. 3], 216 [Pg. 216 is part of Doc. 96], 496n [Pg. 496 includes portions of Doc. 280 and Doc. 281], 568 [Pg. 568 includes portions of Doc. 326 and Doc. 327], 583n [Pg. 583 includes portions of Doc. 334 and Doc. 335], 865 [Pg. 865 is part of Doc. 552], 1583 [Pg. 1583 includes portions of Doc. 1108 and Doc. 1109], 1591–1592 [Pg. 1591 is part of Doc. 1111], 1605n [Pg. 1605 is part of Doc. 1119], 1687n [Pg. 1687 includes portions of Doc. 1165 and Doc. 1166]

Akdur, Faik Zehni, 1676n [Pg. 1676 is part of Doc. 1158]

Aklilou, Ato, 88 [Pg. 88 is part of Doc. 12]

Aksal, Ismail Rustu, 1673 [Pg. 1673 is part of Doc. 1155], 1676n [Pg. 1676 is part of Doc. 1158], 1677–1678 [Pg. 1677 is part of Doc. 1158]

Ala, Hussein, 4 [Pg. 4 is part of Doc. 1], 8 [Pg. 8 includes portions of Doc. 1, Doc. 2, and Doc. 3], 471–475 [Pgs. 471–475 include portions of Doc. 262, Doc. 263, Doc. 264, and Doc. 265], 487 [Pg. 487 includes portions of Doc. 274 and Doc. 275], 489–492 [Pgs. 489–492 include portions of Doc. 276, Doc. 277, and Doc. 278], 494 [Pg. 494 includes portions of Doc. 278 and Doc. 279], 497 [Pg. 497 is part of Doc. 281], 503 [Pg. 503 includes portions of Doc. 286 and Doc. 287], 507 [Pg. 507 includes portions of Doc. 291, Doc. 292, and Doc. 293], 509 [Pg. 509 is part of Doc. 294], 517–519 [Pgs. 517–519 include portions of Doc. 299, Doc. 300, Doc. 301, and Doc. 302], 522–523 [Pgs. 522–523 include portions of Doc. 302, Doc. 303, and Doc. 304], 525–528 [Pgs. 525–528 include portions of Doc. 304, Doc. 305, Doc. 306, Doc. 307, Doc. 308, and Doc. 309], 536–537 [Pg. 536 is part of Doc. 312], 540 [Pg. 540 is part of Doc. 313], 558–561 [Pgs. 558–561 include portions of Doc. 319, Doc. 320, and Doc. 321], 567 [Pg. 567 includes portions of Doc. 325 and Doc. 326], 570 [Pg. 570 is part of Doc. 328], 572 [Pg. 572 is part of Doc. 329], 574 [Pg. 574 includes portions of Doc. 329 and Doc. 330], 578–580 [Pgs. 578–580 include portions of Doc. 330, Doc. 331, and Doc. 332], 585 [Pg. 585 includes portions of Doc. 335 and Doc. 336], 588–589 [Pgs. 588–589 include portions of Doc. 336, Doc. 337, and Doc. 338], 1642–1643 [Pgs. 1642–1643 include portions of Doc. 1141, Doc. 1142, and Doc. 1143], 1684 [Pg. 1684 is part of Doc. 1162]

Alami, Musa, 1247n [Pg. 1247 includes portions of Doc. 851 and Doc. 852]

Albania (see also Albanian subheadings under Greece): British policy, 414–415 [Pgs. 414–415 include portions of Doc. 218 and Doc. 219], 422 [Pg. 422 includes portions of Doc. 224 and Doc. 225]; Corfu incident, 343 [Pg. 343 is part of Doc. 171], 345 [Pg. 345 includes portions of Doc. 172 and Doc. 173]; Free Albania Committee, 382 [Pg. 382 is part of Doc. 200], 392 [Pg. 392 includes portions of Doc. 206 and Doc. 207], 394 [Pg. 394 is part of Doc. 208], 415 [Pg. 415 is part of Doc. 219]; French policy, 422–423 [Pgs. 422–423 include portions of Doc. 224, Doc. 225, and Doc. 226]; Greek policy, 375 [Pg. 375 is part of Doc. 194], 381–386 [Pgs. 381–386 include portions of Doc. 199, Doc. 200, Doc. 201, and Doc. 202], 389 [Pg. 389 includes portions of Doc. 204, Doc. 205, and Doc. 206], 392 [Pg. 392 includes portions of Doc. 206 and Doc. 207], 412 [Pg. 412 includes portions of Doc. 216, Doc. 217, and Doc. 218], 415 [Pg. 415 is part of Doc. 219], 418 [Pg. 418 includes portions of Doc. 221 and Doc. 222], 423 [Pg. 423 includes portions of Doc. 225 and Doc. 226], 425–428 [Pgs. 425–428 include portions of Doc. 227, Doc. 228, Doc. 229, Doc. 230, Doc. 231, and Doc. 232], 438 [Pg. 438 is part of Doc. 240]; Italian policy, 392 [Pg. 392 includes portions of Doc. 206 and Doc. 207]; political situation, 453 [Pg. 453 is part of Doc. 249]; Soviet support, 266 [Pg. 266 is part of Doc. 131], 276 [Pg. 276 is part of Doc. 133], 349n [Pg. 349 is part of Doc. 175], 384 [Pg. 384 is part of Doc. 200], 386 [Pg. 386 includes portions of Doc. 201 and Doc. 202], 394 [Pg. 394 is part of Doc. 208], 397–398 [Pgs. 397–398 include portions of Doc. 209, Doc. 210, and Doc. 211], 426 [Pg. 426 includes portions of Doc. 228 and Doc. 229], 438 [Pg. 438 is part of Doc. 240]; U.N. membership, proposed, 328 [Pg. 328 is part of Doc. 163], 398 [Pg. 398 includes portions of Doc. 210 and Doc. 211], 775 [Pg. 775 includes portions of Doc. 491 and Doc. 492]; U.S. policy, 365–366 [Pgs. 365–366 include portions of Doc. 188 and Doc. 189], 384 [Pg. 384 is part of Doc. 200], 392–393 [Pgs. 392–393 include portions of Doc. 206 and Doc. 207], 397–398 [Pgs. 397–398 include portions of Doc. 209, Doc. 210, and Doc. 211], 412 [Pg. 412 includes portions of Doc. 216, Doc. 217, and Doc. 218], 422–423 [Pgs. 422–423 include portions of Doc. 224, Doc. 225, and Doc. 226], 438 [Pg. 438 is part of Doc. 240], 447 [Pg. 447 includes portions of Doc. 244, Doc. 245, and Doc. 246], 465 [Pg. 465 includes portions of Doc. 257, Doc. 258, and Doc. 259]; Yugoslav policy, 383–384 [Pg. 383 is part of Doc. 200], 386 [Pg. 386 includes portions of Doc. 201 and Doc. 202], 392 [Pg. 392 includes portions of Doc. 206 and Doc. 207], 412 [Pg. 412 includes portions of Doc. 216, Doc. 217, and Doc. 218], 415 [Pg. 415 is part of Doc. 219], 423 [Pg. 423 includes portions of Doc. 225 and Doc. 226], 426–427 [Pgs. 426–427 include portions of Doc. 228, Doc. 229, and Doc. 230], 438 [Pg. 438 is part of Doc. 240]

Algeria. see under French North Africa. Ali, Rashid, 648 [Pg. 648 is part of Doc. 383]

Allen, W., 1742 [Pg. 1742 includes portions of Doc. 1210 and Doc. 1211], 1745 [Pg. 1745 includes portions of Doc. 1212 and Doc. 1213]

Allen, William Denis, 184 [Pg. 184 includes portions of Doc. 78 and Doc. 79], 203n [Pg. 203 is part of Doc. 92], 235n [Pg. 235 includes portions of Doc. 107, Doc. 108, and Doc. 109], 265 [Pg. 265 includes portions of Doc. 130 and Doc. 131], 279 [Pg. 279 includes portions of Doc. 133 and Doc. 134], 435 [Pg. 435 includes portions of Doc. 235 and Doc. 236]

American Eastern Corporation, 136n [Pg. 136 includes portions of Doc. 45 and Doc. 46]

American Export Lines, 217 [Pg. 217 includes portions of Doc. 96 and Doc. 97], 224 [Pg. 224 includes portions of Doc. 103 and Doc. 104], 1418 [Pg. 1418 includes portions of Doc. 984, Doc. 985, and Doc. 986]

American Friends Service Committee, 665 [Pg. 665 includes portions of Doc. 394 and Doc. 395], 840 [Pg. 840 is part of Doc. 533], 1472 [Pg. 1472 includes portions of Doc. 1024 and Doc. 1025], 1500 [Pg. 1500 is part of Doc. 1038]

American Independent Oil Company, 94–95 [Pgs. 94–95 include portions of Doc. 15 and Doc. 16], 105 [Pg. 105 includes portions of Doc. 20 and Doc. 21], 109 [Pg. 109 includes portions of Doc. 23 and Doc. 24], 132n [Pg. 132 is part of Doc. 41], 839 [Pg. 839 is part of Doc. 533], 1567 [Pg. 1567 is part of Doc. 1096], 1569 [Pg. 1569 is part of Doc. 1096], 1572 [Pg. 1572 includes portions of Doc. 1097 and Doc. 1098]

American Red Cross, 840 [Pg. 840 is part of Doc. 533]

Amoun, Fuad Bey, 955–956 [Pgs. 955–956 include portions of Doc. 615 and Doc. 616]

Amr, Abdel Fattah, 198 [Pg. 198 is part of Doc. 90], 205 [Pg. 205 includes portions of Doc. 92, Doc. 93, and Doc. 94]

Anderson, Maj. Gen. S.E., 1627 [Pg. 1627 includes portions of Doc. 1129 and Doc. 1130]

Andrews, H.T., 1799–1800 [Pg. 1799 is part of Doc. 1238], 1805–1806 [Pgs. 1805–1806 include portions of Doc. 1240 and Doc. 1241]

Andrus, Col. Burton C., 752 [Pg. 752 includes portions of Doc. 468 and Doc. 469], 802 [Pg. 802 is part of Doc. 511]

Anglo-Iranian Gil Company, 110–111 [Pgs. 110–111 include portions of Doc. 24 and Doc. 25], 125–127 [Pgs. 125–127 include portions of Doc. 33, Doc. 34, and Doc. 35], 141–142 [Pgs. 141–142 include portions of Doc. 49, Doc. 50, and Doc. 51], 149–151 [Pgs. 149–151 include portions of Doc. 55, Doc. 56, Doc. 57, Doc. 58, and Doc. 59], 162–163 [Pgs. 162–163 include portions of Doc. 69 and Doc. 70], 483 [Pg. 483 is part of Doc. 271], 497 [Pg. 497 is part of Doc. 281], 508 [Pg. 508 is part of Doc. 293], 528 [Pg. 528 includes portions of Doc. 308 and Doc. 309], 549 [Pg. 549 is part of Doc. 315]

Arab League, see under Palestine question.

Arab Sheikdoms, 83–85 [Pg. 83 is part of Doc. 12], 88 [Pg. 88 is part of Doc. 12], 93 [Pg. 93 includes portions of Doc. 14 and Doc. 15], 108n [Pg. 108 includes portions of Doc. 22 and Doc. 23], 117n [Pg. 117 includes portions of Doc. 26 and Doc. 27], 118 [Pg. 118 includes portions of Doc. 27 and Doc. 28], 121 [Pg. 121 includes portions of Doc. 30 and Doc. 31], 128n [Pg. 128 includes portions of Doc. 36 and Doc. 37], 129 [Pg. 129 includes portions of Doc. 37 and Doc. 38], 132 [Pg. 132 is part of Doc. 41], 136–137 [Pgs. 136–137 include portions of Doc. 45, Doc. 46, Doc. 47, and Doc. 48], 909 [Pg. 909 is part of Doc. 590]

Arab states (see also Arab subheadings under Palestine question), 70 [Pg. 70 is part of Doc. 12], 177 [Pg. 177 is part of Doc. 74], 208 [Pg. 208 is part of Doc. 96], 214 [Pg. 214 is part of Doc. 96], 656 [Pg. 656 includes portions of Doc. 390 and Doc. 391], 1011 [Pg. 1011 is part of Doc. 659], 1620 [Pg. 1620 includes portions of Doc. 1124 and Doc. 1125], 1668 [Pg. 1668 is part of Doc. 1152]; U.S. policy toward, 56–58 [Pg. 56 is part of Doc. 10], 172 [Pg. 172 is part of Doc. 73], 1339–1340 [Pgs. 1339–1340 include portions of Doc. 930 and Doc. 931], 1430–1440 [Pgs. 1430–1440 include portions of Doc. 995, Doc. 996, Doc. 997, and Doc. 998], 1619 [Pg. 1619 is part of Doc. 1124], 1651 [Pg. 1651 is part of Doc. 1146]

Arabi Island, 151–152 [Pgs. 151–152 include portions of Doc. 59 and Doc. 60], 154 [Pg. 154 includes portions of Doc. 62 and Doc. 63], 155n [Pg. 155 is part of Doc. 63], 156 [Pg. 156 includes portions of Doc. 63, Doc. 64, and Doc. 65], 161 [Pg. 161 includes portions of Doc. 67 and Doc. 68]

Arabian-American Oil Company, 95–107 [Pgs. 95–107 include portions of Doc. 16, Doc. 17, Doc. 18, Doc. 19, Doc. 20, Doc. 21, and Doc. 22], 111–120 [Pgs. 111–120 include portions of Doc. 24, Doc. 25, Doc. 26, Doc. 27, Doc. 28, Doc. 29, and Doc. 30], 122–125 [Pgs. 122–125 include portions of Doc. 31, Doc. 32, Doc. 33, and Doc. 34], 128n [Pg. 128 includes portions of Doc. 36 and Doc. 37], 129n [Pg. 129 includes portions of Doc. 37 and Doc. 38], 132n [Pg. 132 is part of Doc. 41], 133n [Pg. 133 is part of Doc. 42], 135 [Pg. 135 includes portions of Doc. 44 and Doc. 45], 145 [Pg. 145 includes portions of Doc. 52 and Doc. 53], 151–156 [Pgs. 151–156 include portions of Doc. 59, Doc. 60, Doc. 61, Doc. 62, Doc. 63, Doc. 64, and Doc. 65], 161 [Pg. 161 includes portions of Doc. 67 and Doc. 68], 806 [Pg. 806 is part of Doc. 515], 839 [Pg. 839 is part of Doc. 533], 1414 [Pg. 1414 is part of Doc. 983]

Arabian Peninsula, 545 [Pg. 545 includes portions of Doc. 314 and Doc. 315]

Arai, Nasser Fakhr, 481 [Pg. 481 includes portions of Doc. 270 and Doc. 271]

Aram, Gholam Abbas, 488n [Pg. 488 includes portions of Doc. 275 and Doc. 276], 501 [Pg. 501 includes portions of Doc. 284, Doc. 285, and Doc. 286], 527 [Pg. 527 includes portions of Doc. 306 and Doc. 307]

Archibald, Col. Edwin P., 632 [Pg. 632 includes portions of Doc. 370 and Doc. 371]

Argentina, 159 [Pg. 159 is part of Doc. 66], 677 [Pg. 677 includes portions of Doc. 404 and Doc. 405], 1636 [Pg. 1636 is part of Doc. 1137], 1724 [Pg. 1724 includes portions of Doc. 1198, Doc. 1199, and Doc. 1200]

Army, U.S. Department of the: Anglo-Egyptian military staff talks, 221 [Pg. 221 is part of Doc. 100] n; Greece, U.S. policy, 453 [Pg. 453 is part of Doc. 249], 456 [Pg. 456 includes portions of Doc. 249, Doc. 250, and Doc. 251] n; India; U.S. military assistance for, 25 [Pg. 25 is part of Doc. 3]; Iran, situation in, 496 [Pg. 496 includes portions of Doc. 280 and Doc. 281], 522 [Pg. 522 includes portions of Doc. 302 and Doc. 303]; Iran, U.S. military assistance for, 558 [Pg. 558 includes portions of Doc. 319 and Doc. 320], 564–565 [Pgs. 564–565 include portions of Doc. 323, Doc. 324, and Doc. 325], 583 [Pg. 583 includes portions of Doc. 334 and Doc. 335] n; Kashmir dispute, 1687 [Pg. 1687 includes portions of Doc. 1165 and Doc. 1166] n; Palestine question, 803 [Pg. 803 includes portions of Doc. 511, Doc. 512, and Doc. 513], 865 [Pg. 865 is part of Doc. 552]; Syria, approval of petroleum pipeline agreement by, 743 [Pg. 743 includes portions of Doc. 460 and Doc. 461]

Arslan, Adil, 1102n [Pg. 1102 includes portions of Doc. 735 and Doc. 736], 1119–1120 [Pgs. 1119–1120 include portions of Doc. 748 and Doc. 749], 1156 [Pg. 1156 includes portions of Doc. 776 and Doc. 777], 1165 [Pg. 1165 includes portions of Doc. 784 and Doc. 785], 1390n [Pg. 1390 includes portions of Doc. 966 and Doc. 967], 1421 [Pg. 1421 is part of Doc. 988]

Asad al-Faqih, Shaikh, 1594 [Pg. 1594 includes portions of Doc. 1111 and Doc. 1112]

Asia, 11n [Pg. 11 is part of Doc. 3], 13 [Pg. 13 is part of Doc. 3], 48–49 [Pgs. 48–49 include portions of Doc. 6 and Doc. 7], 62–63 [Pg. 62 is part of Doc. 12], 308 [Pg. 308 is part of Doc. 150], 1750 [Pg. 1750 is part of Doc. 1216]

Asian bloc, proposed, 12–13 [Pg. 12 is part of Doc. 3]

Asian Conference on Indonesia at New Delhi, Jan. 1949, 12 [Pg. 12 is part of Doc. 3]

Atassi, Adnan el-, 955 [Pg. 955 is part of Doc. 615], 1287 [Pg. 1287 includes portions of Doc. 889 and Doc. 890]

Atassi, Hashim al-, 1633n [Pg. 1633 includes portions of Doc. 1134 and Doc. 1135], 1635 [Pg. 1635 includes portions of Doc. 1136 and Doc. 1137]

Ataturk, Kemal, 1032 [Pg. 1032 includes portions of Doc. 671 and Doc. 672]

Athenagoras, Archbishop of Constantinople, 179 [Pg. 179 is part of Doc. 75], 1679–1680 [Pgs. 1679–1680 include portions of Doc. 1158 and Doc. 1159], 1685 [Pg. 1685 includes portions of Doc. 1162, Doc. 1163, and Doc. 1164]

Atomic bombs, 224 [Pg. 224 includes portions of Doc. 103 and Doc. 104], 575 [Pg. 575 is part of Doc. 330]

Attlee, Clement R., 628 [Pg. 628 is part of Doc. 367], 1014n [Pg. 1014 is part of Doc. 660], 1720 [Pg. 1720 includes portions of Doc. 1194 and Doc. 1195], 1722 [Pg. 1722 includes portions of Doc. 1196 and Doc. 1197], 1729 [Pg. 1729 includes portions of Doc. 1203 and Doc. 1204], 1742 [Pg. 1742 includes portions of Doc. 1210 and Doc. 1211], 1745–1746 [Pgs. 1745–1746 include portions of Doc. 1212 and Doc. 1213], 1749 [Pg. 1749 is part of Doc. 1215]

Atyeo, Sam L., 316–317 [Pgs. 316–317 include portions of Doc. 155 and Doc. 156], 319–320 [Pgs. 319–320 include portions of Doc. 158 and Doc. 159], 333n [Pg. 333 includes portions of Doc. 165 and Doc. 166], 335 [Pg. 335 is part of Doc. 166], 396 [Pg. 396 is part of Doc. 209], 401 [Pg. 401 includes portions of Doc. 213 and Doc. 214], 413n [Pg. 413 is part of Doc. 218], 414 [Pg. 414 includes portions of Doc. 218 and Doc. 219]

Auriol, Vincent, 1782–1783 [Pg. 1782 is part of Doc. 1235]

Austin, Warren R.: Chinese representation question, 1755 [Pg. 1755 is part of Doc. 1217]; Iranian question, 499 [Pg. 499 is part of Doc. 282]; Israeli membership in the United Nations, 789 [Pg. 789 includes portions of Doc. 503, Doc. 504, and Doc. 505], 944 [Pg. 944 includes portions of Doc. 609 and Doc. 610], 995–996 [Pgs. 995–996 include portions of Doc. 646, Doc. 647, and Doc. 648], 1005 [Pg. 1005 includes portions of Doc. 655 and Doc. 656]; Kashmir dispute, 1726 [Pg. 1726 is part of Doc. 1202], 1729 [Pg. 1729 includes portions of Doc. 1203 and Doc. 1204], 1760–1766 [Pgs. 1760–1766 include portions of Doc. 1219, Doc. 1220, Doc. 1221, Doc. 1222, Doc. 1223, and Doc. 1224], 1775–1776 [Pgs. 1775–1776 include portions of Doc. 1229, Doc. 1230, and Doc. 1231]; Palestine question, 622 [Pg. 622 includes portions of Doc. 360, Doc. 361, Doc. 362, and Doc. 363], 685–687 [Pgs. 685–687 include portions of Doc. 410, Doc. 411, Doc. 412, Doc. 413, and Doc. 414], 691 [Pg. 691 includes portions of Doc. 417 and Doc. 418], 707–708 [Pgs. 707–708 include portions of Doc. 431 and Doc. 432], 755–756 [Pgs. 755–756 include portions of Doc. 471, Doc. 472, Doc. 473, and Doc. 474], 787 [Pg. 787 includes portions of Doc. 501 and Doc. 502], 809–810 [Pgs. 809–810 include portions of Doc. 517 and Doc. 518], 817 [Pg. 817 includes portions of Doc. 522, Doc. 523, and Doc. 524], 820–821 [Pgs. 820–821 include portions of Doc. 527, Doc. 528, and Doc. 529], 930–934 [Pgs. 930–934 include portions of Doc. 604, Doc. 605, Doc. 606, Doc. 607, and Doc. 608], 1001 [Pg. 1001 includes portions of Doc. 651 and Doc. 652], 1005–1007 [Pgs. 1005–1007 include portions of Doc. 655, Doc. 656, and Doc. 657], 1046 [Pg. 1046 includes portions of Doc. 684 and Doc. 685], 1053–1056 [Pgs. 1053–1056 include portions of Doc. 689, Doc. 690, Doc. 691, Doc. 692, and Doc. 693], 1079 [Pg. 1079 includes portions of Doc. 711, Doc. 712, and Doc. 713], 1213 [Pg. 1213 includes portions of Doc. 820 and Doc. 821], 1225n [Pg. 1225 includes portions of Doc. 829 and Doc. 830], 1253–1254 [Pgs. 1253–1254 include portions of Doc. 856, Doc. 857, and Doc. 858], 1270–1271 [Pgs. 1270–1271 include portions of Doc. 872, Doc. 873, and Doc. 874], 1283–1284 [Pgs. 1283–1284 include portions of Doc. 885, Doc. 886, and Doc. 887], 1290–1291 [Pgs. 1290–1291 include portions of Doc. 891, Doc. 892, and Doc. 893], 1302 [Pg. 1302 includes portions of Doc. 900, Doc. 901, and Doc. 902], 1341–1342 [Pgs. 1341–1342 include portions of Doc. 931, Doc. 932, and Doc. 933], 1365 [Pg. 1365 includes portions of Doc. 947 and Doc. 948], 1368–1369 [Pgs. 1368–1369 include portions of Doc. 951 and Doc. 952], 1436 [Pg. 1436 is part of Doc. 997], 1447–1448 [Pgs. 1447–1448 include portions of Doc. 1002, Doc. 1003, and Doc. 1004], 1450–1451 [Pgs. 1450–1451 include portions of Doc. 1006 and Doc. 1007], 1454 [Pg. 1454 includes portions of Doc. 1009 and Doc. 1010], 1471–1472 [Pgs. 1471–1472 include portions of Doc. 1023, Doc. 1024, and Doc. 1025], 1492 [Pg. 1492 is part of Doc. 1033], 1555 [Pg. 1555 includes portions of Doc. 1083 and Doc. 1084]; Palestinian refugees, relief for, 642 [Pg. 642 includes portions of Doc. 378 and Doc. 379]; Soviet policy, 1752–1754 [Pgs. 1752–1754 include portions of Doc. 1216 and Doc. 1217]; U.N. conciliation efforts concerning Greece, 294 [Pg. 294 is part of Doc. 144], 316–317 [Pgs. 316–317 include portions of Doc. 155 and Doc. 156], 310–320 [Pgs. 310–320 include portions of Doc. 151, Doc. 152, Doc. 153, Doc. 154, Doc. 155, Doc. 156, Doc. 157, Doc. 158, and Doc. 159], 399–400 [Pgs. 399–400 include portions of Doc. 211, Doc. 212, and Doc. 213]; U.N. Security Council lifting of arms embargo to Israel and neighboring countries, 225–226 [Pg. 225 is part of Doc. 104]

Austrialia. see Australian subheadings under individual countries.

Austria, 265–266 [Pgs. 265–266 include portions of Doc. 130 and Doc. 131], 447 [Pg. 447 includes portions of Doc. 244, Doc. 245, and Doc. 246], 577 [Pg. 577 is part of Doc. 330], 1806 [Pg. 1806 is part of Doc. 1241]

Austrian peace treaty, 577 [Pg. 577 is part of Doc. 330]

Averof-Tossitsas, Evangelos, 310 [Pg. 310 is part of Doc. 151]

Await, Frederick H., 158n [Pg. 158 is part of Doc. 66], 1625–1627 [Pgs. 1625–1627 include portions of Doc. 1129 and Doc. 1130]

Ayyangar, N.G., 1702 [Pg. 1702 includes portions of Doc. 1180 and Doc. 1181], 1707 [Pg. 1707 is part of Doc. 1185], 1719 [Pg. 1719 includes portions of Doc. 1193 and Doc. 1194]

Azcarate, Pablo de, 609 [Pg. 609 includes portions of Doc. 352 and Doc. 353], 610n [Pg. 610 is part of Doc. 353], 667 [Pg. 667 includes portions of Doc. 397 and Doc. 398], 669n [Pg. 669 includes portions of Doc. 399 and Doc. 400], 968 [Pg. 968 includes portions of Doc. 627 and Doc. 628], 1080 [Pg. 1080 includes portions of Doc. 713 and Doc. 714], 1298 [Pg. 1298 includes portions of Doc. 897 and Doc. 898], 1315 [Pg. 1315 is part of Doc. 910], 1336–1337 [Pgs. 1336–1337 include portions of Doc. 928 and Doc. 929], 1362 [Pg. 1362 includes portions of Doc. 946 and Doc. 947], 1447 [Pg. 1447 is part of Doc. 1002], 1465 [Pg. 1465 includes portions of Doc. 1018 and Doc. 1019], 1468 [Pg. 1468 includes portions of Doc. 1019 and Doc. 1020]

Azer, Avis, 725 [Pg. 725 includes portions of Doc. 449 and Doc. 450]

Azerbaijan. see under Iran.

Aziz, Abdul Hai, 1777–1778 [Pgs. 1777–1778 include portions of Doc. 1232 and Doc. 1233]

Azm, Khalid Bey al-, 637–639 [Pgs. 637–639 include portions of Doc. 373, Doc. 374, and Doc. 375], 742–743 [Pgs. 742–743 include portions of Doc. 459, Doc. 460, and Doc. 461], 754 [Pg. 754 includes portions of Doc. 470 and Doc. 471], 766–767 [Pgs. 766–767 include portions of Doc. 481, Doc. 482, Doc. 483, Doc. 484, and Doc. 485], 770 [Pg. 770 is part of Doc. 488], 796–800 [Pgs. 796–800 include portions of Doc. 506, Doc. 507, Doc. 508, Doc. 509, and Doc. 510], 851n [Pg. 851 includes portions of Doc. 541 and Doc. 542], 1630 [Pg. 1630 is part of Doc. 1132]

Azzam Pasha, 1001 [Pg. 1001 includes portions of Doc. 651 and Doc. 652], 1243n [Pg. 1243 includes portions of Doc. 847 and Doc. 848], 1784 [Pg. 1784 is part of Doc. 1235]

Bacopoulos, 244 [Pg. 244 is part of Doc. 115]

Bahrein: British policy, 1571 [Pg. 1571 is part of Doc. 1097]; territorial boundaries, questions concerning, 85 [Pg. 85 is part of Doc. 12], 92 [Pg. 92 is part of Doc. 14], 98 [Pg. 98 is part of Doc. 17], 121–423 [Pgs. 121–423 include portions of Doc. 30, Doc. 31, Doc. 32, Doc. 33, Doc. 34, Doc. 35, Doc. 36, Doc. 37, Doc. 38, Doc. 39, Doc. 40, Doc. 41, Doc. 42, Doc. 43, Doc. 44, Doc. 45, Doc. 46, Doc. 47, Doc. 48, Doc. 49, Doc. 50, Doc. 51, Doc. 52, Doc. 53, Doc. 54, Doc. 55, Doc. 56, Doc. 57, Doc. 58, Doc. 59, Doc. 60, Doc. 61, Doc. 62, Doc. 63, Doc. 64, Doc. 65, Doc. 66, Doc. 67, Doc. 68, Doc. 69, Doc. 70, Doc. 71, Doc. 72, Doc. 73, Doc. 74, Doc. 75, Doc. 76, Doc. 77, Doc. 78, Doc. 79, Doc. 80, Doc. 81, Doc. 82, Doc. 83, Doc. 84, Doc. 85, Doc. 86, Doc. 87, Doc. 88, Doc. 89, Doc. 90, Doc. 91, Doc. 92, Doc. 93, Doc. 94, Doc. 95, Doc. 96, Doc. 97, Doc. 98, Doc. 99, Doc. 100, Doc. 101, Doc. 102, Doc. 103, Doc. 104, Doc. 105, Doc. 106, Doc. 107, Doc. 108, Doc. 109, Doc. 110, Doc. 111, Doc. 112, Doc. 113, Doc. 114, Doc. 115, Doc. 116, Doc. 117, Doc. 118, Doc. 119, Doc. 120, Doc. 121, Doc. 122, Doc. 123, Doc. 124, Doc. 125, Doc. 126, Doc. 127, Doc. 128, Doc. 129, Doc. 130, Doc. 131, Doc. 132, Doc. 133, Doc. 134, Doc. 135, Doc. 136, Doc. 137, Doc. 138, Doc. 139, Doc. 140, Doc. 141, Doc. 142, Doc. 143, Doc. 144, Doc. 145, Doc. 146, Doc. 147, Doc. 148, Doc. 149, Doc. 150, Doc. 151, Doc. 152, Doc. 153, Doc. 154, Doc. 155, Doc. 156, Doc. 157, Doc. 158, Doc. 159, Doc. 160, Doc. 161, Doc. 162, Doc. 163, Doc. 164, Doc. 165, Doc. 166, Doc. 167, Doc. 168, Doc. 169, Doc. 170, Doc. 171, Doc. 172, Doc. 173, Doc. 174, Doc. 175, Doc. 176, Doc. 177, Doc. 178, Doc. 179, Doc. 180, Doc. 181, Doc. 182, Doc. 183, Doc. 184, Doc. 185, Doc. 186, Doc. 187, Doc. 188, Doc. 189, Doc. 190, Doc. 191, Doc. 192, Doc. 193, Doc. 194, Doc. 195, Doc. 196, Doc. 197, Doc. 198, Doc. 199, Doc. 200, Doc. 201, Doc. 202, Doc. 203, Doc. 204, Doc. 205, Doc. 206, Doc. 207, Doc. 208, Doc. 209, Doc. 210, Doc. 211, Doc. 212, Doc. 213, Doc. 214, Doc. 215, Doc. 216, Doc. 217, Doc. 218, Doc. 219, Doc. 220, Doc. 221, Doc. 222, Doc. 223, Doc. 224, Doc. 225, and Doc. 226], 134–435 [Pgs. 134–435 include portions of Doc. 43, Doc. 44, Doc. 45, Doc. 46, Doc. 47, Doc. 48, Doc. 49, Doc. 50, Doc. 51, Doc. 52, Doc. 53, Doc. 54, Doc. 55, Doc. 56, Doc. 57, Doc. 58, Doc. 59, Doc. 60, Doc. 61, Doc. 62, Doc. 63, Doc. 64, Doc. 65, Doc. 66, Doc. 67, Doc. 68, Doc. 69, Doc. 70, Doc. 71, Doc. 72, Doc. 73, Doc. 74, Doc. 75, Doc. 76, Doc. 77, Doc. 78, Doc. 79, Doc. 80, Doc. 81, Doc. 82, Doc. 83, Doc. 84, Doc. 85, Doc. 86, Doc. 87, Doc. 88, Doc. 89, Doc. 90, Doc. 91, Doc. 92, Doc. 93, Doc. 94, Doc. 95, Doc. 96, Doc. 97, Doc. 98, Doc. 99, Doc. 100, Doc. 101, Doc. 102, Doc. 103, Doc. 104, Doc. 105, Doc. 106, Doc. 107, Doc. 108, Doc. 109, Doc. 110, Doc. 111, Doc. 112, Doc. 113, Doc. 114, Doc. 115, Doc. 116, Doc. 117, Doc. 118, Doc. 119, Doc. 120, Doc. 121, Doc. 122, Doc. 123, Doc. 124, Doc. 125, Doc. 126, Doc. 127, Doc. 128, Doc. 129, Doc. 130, Doc. 131, Doc. 132, Doc. 133, Doc. 134, Doc. 135, Doc. 136, Doc. 137, Doc. 138, Doc. 139, Doc. 140, Doc. 141, Doc. 142, Doc. 143, Doc. 144, Doc. 145, Doc. 146, Doc. 147, Doc. 148, Doc. 149, Doc. 150, Doc. 151, Doc. 152, Doc. 153, Doc. 154, Doc. 155, Doc. 156, Doc. 157, Doc. 158, Doc. 159, Doc. 160, Doc. 161, Doc. 162, Doc. 163, Doc. 164, Doc. 165, Doc. 166, Doc. 167, Doc. 168, Doc. 169, Doc. 170, Doc. 171, Doc. 172, Doc. 173, Doc. 174, Doc. 175, Doc. 176, Doc. 177, Doc. 178, Doc. 179, Doc. 180, Doc. 181, Doc. 182, Doc. 183, Doc. 184, Doc. 185, Doc. 186, Doc. 187, Doc. 188, Doc. 189, Doc. 190, Doc. 191, Doc. 192, Doc. 193, Doc. 194, Doc. 195, Doc. 196, Doc. 197, Doc. 198, Doc. 199, Doc. 200, Doc. 201, Doc. 202, Doc. 203, Doc. 204, Doc. 205, Doc. 206, Doc. 207, Doc. 208, Doc. 209, Doc. 210, Doc. 211, Doc. 212, Doc. 213, Doc. 214, Doc. 215, Doc. 216, Doc. 217, Doc. 218, Doc. 219, Doc. 220, Doc. 221, Doc. 222, Doc. 223, Doc. 224, Doc. 225, Doc. 226, Doc. 227, Doc. 228, Doc. 229, Doc. 230, Doc. 231, Doc. 232, Doc. 233, Doc. 234, Doc. 235, and Doc. 236], 151–155 [Pgs. 151–155 include portions of Doc. 59, Doc. 60, Doc. 61, Doc. 62, and Doc. 63]; U.S. consular services, 1570 [Pg. 1570 includes portions of Doc. 1096 and Doc. 1097]

Bahrein Petroleum Company, 85 [Pg. 85 is part of Doc. 12], 151–155 [Pgs. 151–155 include portions of Doc. 59, Doc. 60, Doc. 61, Doc. 62, and Doc. 63]

Bajpai, Sir Girja, 24 [Pg. 24 is part of Doc. 3], 1699 [Pg. 1699 is part of Doc. 1178], 1702–1703 [Pgs. 1702–1703 include portions of Doc. 1180, Doc. 1181, and Doc. 1182], 1707–1708 [Pgs. 1707–1708 include portions of Doc. 1185, Doc. 1186, and Doc. 1187], 1713–1714 [Pgs. 1713–1714 include portions of Doc. 1189 and Doc. 1190], 1719 [Pg. 1719 includes portions of Doc. 1193 and Doc. 1194], 1721 [Pg. 1721 includes portions of Doc. 1195 and Doc. 1196], 1726–1729 [Pgs. 1726–1729 include portions of Doc. 1202, Doc. 1203, and Doc. 1204], 1731–1733 [Pgs. 1731–1733 include portions of Doc. 1204, Doc. 1205, and Doc. 1206], 1736 [Pg. 1736 includes portions of Doc. 1207 and Doc. 1208], 1738–1740 [Pgs. 1738–1740 include portions of Doc. 1208, Doc. 1209, and Doc. 1210], 1750 [Pg. 1750 is part of Doc. 1216], 1752 [Pg. 1752 includes portions of Doc. 1216 and Doc. 1217], 1760–1762 [Pgs. 1760–1762 include portions of Doc. 1219, Doc. 1220, and Doc. 1221], 1764 [Pg. 1764 includes portions of Doc. 1222 and Doc. 1223], 1766–1769 [Pgs. 1766–1769 include portions of Doc. 1223, Doc. 1224, and Doc. 1225], 1773 [Pg. 1773 includes portions of Doc. 1227 and Doc. 1228], 1775 [Pg. 1775 includes portions of Doc. 1229, Doc. 1230, and Doc. 1231]

Bakr, Abdullah Ibrahim, 1350 [Pg. 1350 includes portions of Doc. 936 and Doc. 937], 1352–1353 [Pg. 1352 is part of Doc. 937]

Bakshi, 1770 [Pg. 1770 includes portions of Doc. 1225 and Doc. 1226]

Balkan pact. see under Greece.

Balkans, 42 [Pg. 42 is part of Doc. 4], 279 [Pg. 279 includes portions of Doc. 133 and Doc. 134], 288–290 [Pgs. 288–290 include portions of Doc. 139, Doc. 140, and Doc. 141], 293 [Pg. 293 is part of Doc. 143], 325–328 [Pg. 325 is part of Doc. 163], 332 [Pg. 332 is part of Doc. 165], 341–342 [Pgs. 341–342 include portions of Doc. 170 and Doc. 171], 353 [Pg. 353 includes portions of Doc. 177 and Doc. 178], 365 [Pg. 365 is part of Doc. 188], 384 [Pg. 384 is part of Doc. 200], 412 [Pg. 412 includes portions of Doc. 216, Doc. 217, and Doc. 218], 445 [Pg. 445 includes portions of Doc. 243 and Doc. 244], 450–451 [Pgs. 450–451 include portions of Doc. 247 and Doc. 248], 453 [Pg. 453 is part of Doc. 249], 455 [Pg. 455 is part of Doc. 249], 456n [Pg. 456 includes portions of Doc. 249, Doc. 250, and Doc. 251], 469 [Pg. 469 is part of Doc. 261]

Ballentine, Col. Samuel S., 1314 [Pg. 1314 includes portions of Doc. 908 and Doc. 909]

Baltic states, Soviet absorption of, 403 [Pg. 403 is part of Doc. 214]

Bancroft, Harding F., 399 [Pg. 399 includes portions of Doc. 211 and Doc. 212], 1465 [Pg. 1465 includes portions of Doc. 1018 and Doc. 1019]

Bao Dai, 1783 [Pg. 1783 is part of Doc. 1235]

Barazi, Muhsin, 1233–1234 [Pgs. 1233–1234 include portions of Doc. 836, Doc. 837, and Doc. 838], 1235n [Pg. 1235 includes portions of Doc. 838 and Doc. 839], 1246n [Pg. 1246 is part of Doc. 850], 1633 [Pg. 1633 includes portions of Doc. 1134 and Doc. 1135], 1635 [Pg. 1635 includes portions of Doc. 1136 and Doc. 1137]

Barclay, Roderick E., 50 [Pg. 50 is part of Doc. 8], 353n [Pg. 353 includes portions of Doc. 177 and Doc. 178], 414 [Pg. 414 includes portions of Doc. 218 and Doc. 219], 1482 [Pg. 1482 includes portions of Doc. 1027 and Doc. 1028]

Barco, James W., 988 [Pg. 988 is part of Doc. 641], 1028n [Pg. 1028 includes portions of Doc. 667 and Doc. 668], 1039 [Pg. 1039 includes portions of Doc. 676, Doc. 677, and Doc. 678], 1041 [Pg. 1041 is part of Doc. 678], 1108 [Pg. 1108 includes portions of Doc. 738 and Doc. 739], 1295 [Pg. 1295 is part of Doc. 896]

Barkley, Alben, 943 [Pg. 943 includes portions of Doc. 608 and Doc. 609]

Barrett, Margaret M., 1781 [Pg. 1781 is part of Doc. 1235]

Barrow, John R., 139n [Pg. 139 is part of Doc. 48], 144 [Pg. 144 includes portions of Doc. 51 and Doc. 52]

Barzani, Mustafa al-, 843n [Pg. 843 includes portions of Doc. 534 and Doc. 535]

Battle, Lucius D., 572n [Pg. 572 is part of Doc. 329], 1249 [Pg. 1249 includes portions of Doc. 852, Doc. 853, Doc. 854, and Doc. 855], 1482–1483 [Pgs. 1482–1483 include portions of Doc. 1027, Doc. 1028, and Doc. 1029], 1680n [Pg. 1680 is part of Doc. 1159]

Baxter, William O., 231 [Pg. 231 is part of Doc. 106], 235n [Pg. 235 includes portions of Doc. 107, Doc. 108, and Doc. 109], 258–259 [Pgs. 258–259 include portions of Doc. 123, Doc. 124, and Doc. 125], 279n [Pg. 279 includes portions of Doc. 133 and Doc. 134], 298 [Pg. 298 includes portions of Doc. 146 and Doc. 147], 300n [Pg. 300 is part of Doc. 148]

Beam, Jacob D., 50 [Pg. 50 is part of Doc. 8]

Beaudry, Robert M., 1780 [Pg. 1780 is part of Doc. 1235]

Bebler, Aleš, 252 [Pg. 252 is part of Doc. 119], 265 [Pg. 265 includes portions of Doc. 130 and Doc. 131], 355 [Pg. 355 includes portions of Doc. 178 and Doc. 179], 363 [Pg. 363 includes portions of Doc. 185 and Doc. 186], 380–381 [Pgs. 380–381 include portions of Doc. 196, Doc. 197, Doc. 198, Doc. 199, and Doc. 200], 386n [Pg. 386 includes portions of Doc. 201 and Doc. 202], 387 [Pg. 387 is part of Doc. 203], 427 [Pg. 427 includes portions of Doc. 229 and Doc. 230], 458 [Pg. 458 includes portions of Doc. 252 and Doc. 253]

Bedford, Capt. John P., 1781 [Pg. 1781 is part of Doc. 1235]

Beith, John, 906 [Pg. 906 includes portions of Doc. 589 and Doc. 590], 910 [Pg. 910 includes portions of Doc. 590 and Doc. 591], 969 [Pg. 969 includes portions of Doc. 628 and Doc. 629], 1285 [Pg. 1285 includes portions of Doc. 887 and Doc. 888], 1326–1327 [Pgs. 1326–1327 include portions of Doc. 918, Doc. 919, Doc. 920, and Doc. 921]

Belgium, 63 [Pg. 63 is part of Doc. 12], 453 [Pg. 453 is part of Doc. 249], 694 [Pg. 694 includes portions of Doc. 419, Doc. 420, and Doc. 421], 800 [Pg. 800 includes portions of Doc. 509 and Doc. 510], 835 [Pg. 835 is part of Doc. 533], 1491 [Pg. 1491 includes portions of Doc. 1032 and Doc. 1033], 1554 [Pg. 1554 is part of Doc. 1083], 1644 [Pg. 1644 includes portions of Doc. 1143 and Doc. 1144], 1665 [Pg. 1665 is part of Doc. 1152], 1683 [Pg. 1683 is part of Doc. 1161], 1724 [Pg. 1724 includes portions of Doc. 1198, Doc. 1199, and Doc. 1200]

Bell, Colin, 836 [Pg. 836 is part of Doc. 533]

Benard, Jean Pierre, 666 [Pg. 666 includes portions of Doc. 396 and Doc. 397], 1032 [Pg. 1032 includes portions of Doc. 671 and Doc. 672], 1465 [Pg. 1465 includes portions of Doc. 1018 and Doc. 1019]

Benelux, 277 [Pg. 277 is part of Doc. 133]

Ben-Gurion, David, 594–595 [Pgs. 594–595 include portions of Doc. 341 and Doc. 342], 601 [Pg. 601 includes portions of Doc. 347 and Doc. 348], 605 [Pg. 605 is part of Doc. 351], 607 [Pg. 607 includes portions of Doc. 351 and Doc. 352], 627 [Pg. 627 includes portions of Doc. 366 and Doc. 367], 631n [Pg. 631 is part of Doc. 370], 632 [Pg. 632 includes portions of Doc. 370 and Doc. 371], 695 [Pg. 695 includes portions of Doc. 421 and Doc. 422], 702 [Pg. 702 includes portions of Doc. 427 and Doc. 428], 730 [Pg. 730 is part of Doc. 453], 734–735 [Pgs. 734–735 include portions of Doc. 455, Doc. 456, and Doc. 457], 749 [Pg. 749 includes portions of Doc. 466 and Doc. 467], 750n [Pg. 750 includes portions of Doc. 467 and Doc. 468], 761 [Pg. 761 includes portions of Doc. 478 and Doc. 479], 773 [Pg. 773 is part of Doc. 490], 775–778 [Pgs. 775–778 include portions of Doc. 491, Doc. 492, Doc. 493, and Doc. 494], 781 [Pg. 781 includes portions of Doc. 495 and Doc. 496], 815 [Pg. 815 includes portions of Doc. 520 and Doc. 521], 817–818 [Pgs. 817–818 include portions of Doc. 522, Doc. 523, Doc. 524, Doc. 525, and Doc. 526], 825 [Pg. 825 includes portions of Doc. 531 and Doc. 532], 877 [Pg. 877 is part of Doc. 563], 883n [Pg. 883 includes portions of Doc. 568 and Doc. 569], 838–894 [Pgs. 838–894 include portions of Doc. 533, Doc. 534, Doc. 535, Doc. 536, Doc. 537, Doc. 538, Doc. 539, Doc. 540, Doc. 541, Doc. 542, Doc. 543, Doc. 544, Doc. 545, Doc. 546, Doc. 547, Doc. 548, Doc. 549, Doc. 550, Doc. 551, Doc. 552, Doc. 553, Doc. 554, Doc. 555, Doc. 556, Doc. 557, Doc. 558, Doc. 559, Doc. 560, Doc. 561, Doc. 562, Doc. 563, Doc. 564, Doc. 565, Doc. 566, Doc. 567, Doc. 568, Doc. 569, Doc. 570, Doc. 571, Doc. 572, Doc. 573, Doc. 574, Doc. 575, Doc. 576, Doc. 577, and Doc. 578], 896–897 [Pgs. 896–897 include portions of Doc. 580, Doc. 581, and Doc. 582], 899–900 [Pgs. 899–900 include portions of Doc. 583, Doc. 584, Doc. 585, and Doc. 586], 902–904 [Pgs. 902–904 include portions of Doc. 586 and Doc. 587], 911–912 [Pgs. 911–912 include portions of Doc. 591 and Doc. 592], 914 [Pg. 914 is part of Doc. 592], 923n [Pg. 923 is part of Doc. 600], 925–927 [Pgs. 925–927 include portions of Doc. 601, Doc. 602, and Doc. 603], 946 [Pg. 946 is part of Doc. 610], 947n [Pg. 947 includes portions of Doc. 610 and Doc. 611], 949 [Pg. 949 is part of Doc. 612], 955 [Pg. 955 is part of Doc. 615], 967–968 [Pgs. 967–968 include portions of Doc. 626, Doc. 627, and Doc. 628], 975 [Pg. 975 is part of Doc. 633], 982 [Pg. 982 includes portions of Doc. 638 and Doc. 639], 990 [Pg. 990 includes portions of Doc. 642 and Doc. 643], 1006–1007 [Pgs. 1006–1007 include portions of Doc. 656 and Doc. 657], 1017 [Pg. 1017 includes portions of Doc. 661 and Doc. 662], 1031–1032 [Pgs. 1031–1032 include portions of Doc. 671 and Doc. 672], 1046 [Pg. 1046 includes portions of Doc. 684 and Doc. 685], 1053 [Pg. 1053 includes portions of Doc. 689 and Doc. 690], 1072 [Pg. 1072 includes portions of Doc. 704 and Doc. 705], 1074–1076 [Pgs. 1074–1076 include portions of Doc. 705, Doc. 706, Doc. 707, Doc. 708, and Doc. 709], 1085 [Pg. 1085 includes portions of Doc. 719 and Doc. 720], 1102n [Pg. 1102 includes portions of Doc. 735 and Doc. 736], 1107 [Pg. 1107 is part of Doc. 737], 1115 [Pg. 1115 includes portions of Doc. 745, Doc. 746, and Doc. 747], 1124–1125 [Pgs. 1124–1125 include portions of Doc. 752 and Doc. 753], 1144 [Pg. 1144 includes portions of Doc. 768 and Doc. 769], 1146 [Pg. 1146 includes portions of Doc. 769 and Doc. 770], 1152 [Pg. 1152 is part of Doc. 772], 1163–1164 [Pgs. 1163–1164 include portions of Doc. 782, Doc. 783, and Doc. 784], 1166 [Pg. 1166 includes portions of Doc. 785 and Doc. 786], 1175 [Pg. 1175 is part of Doc. 790], 1185 [Pg. 1185 includes portions of Doc. 797 and Doc. 798], 1190 [Pg. 1190 is part of Doc. 802], 1202 [Pg. 1202 includes portions of Doc. 810, Doc. 811, and Doc. 812], 1234 [Pg. 1234 is part of Doc. 838], 1238 [Pg. 1238 includes portions of Doc. 840, Doc. 841, and Doc. 842], 1249 [Pg. 1249 includes portions of Doc. 852, Doc. 853, Doc. 854, and Doc. 855], 1257 [Pg. 1257 includes portions of Doc. 861 and Doc. 862], 1273 [Pg. 1273 includes portions of Doc. 876 and Doc. 877], 1292 [Pg. 1292 is part of Doc. 894], 1320 [Pg. 1320 is part of Doc. 913], 1484 [Pg. 1484 is part of Doc. 1029], 1512–1513 [Pgs. 1512–1513 include portions of Doc. 1047, Doc. 1048, and Doc. 1049], 1521–1522 [Pgs. 1521–1522 include portions of Doc. 1057 and Doc. 1058], 1524 [Pg. 1524 includes portions of Doc. 1059 and Doc. 1060], 1528 [Pg. 1528 includes portions of Doc. 1061 and Doc. 1062], 1532–1534 [Pgs. 1532–1534 include portions of Doc. 1066, Doc. 1067, Doc. 1068, and Doc. 1069], 1537 [Pg. 1537 is part of Doc. 1071], 1541–1542 [Pgs. 1541–1542 include portions of Doc. 1074, Doc. 1075, Doc. 1076, and Doc. 1077], 1545–1547 [Pgs. 1545–1547 include portions of Doc. 1079 and Doc. 1080], 1553 [Pg. 1553 is part of Doc. 1083], 1555 [Pg. 1555 includes portions of Doc. 1083 and Doc. 1084], 1559 [Pg. 1559 is part of Doc. 1088]

Benoist, Philippe, 1300–1301 [Pgs. 1300–1301 include portions of Doc. 899 and Doc. 900]

Bergman, Abraham, 1076 [Pg. 1076 includes portions of Doc. 708 and Doc. 709]

Bergus, Donald C., 1598n [Pg. 1598 is part of Doc. 1116], 1602–1666 [Pgs. 1602–1666 include portions of Doc. 1118, Doc. 1119, Doc. 1120, Doc. 1121, Doc. 1122, Doc. 1123, Doc. 1124, Doc. 1125, Doc. 1126, Doc. 1127, Doc. 1128, Doc. 1129, Doc. 1130, Doc. 1131, Doc. 1132, Doc. 1133, Doc. 1134, Doc. 1135, Doc. 1136, Doc. 1137, Doc. 1138, Doc. 1139, Doc. 1140, Doc. 1141, Doc. 1142, Doc. 1143, Doc. 1144, Doc. 1145, Doc. 1146, Doc. 1147, Doc. 1148, Doc. 1149, Doc. 1150, Doc. 1151, and Doc. 1152]

Berkner, Lloyd 45 [Pg. 45 includes portions of Doc. 4 and Doc. 5], 47–48 [Pgs. 47–48 include portions of Doc. 5, Doc. 6, and Doc. 7], 506 [Pg. 506 is part of Doc. 290], 557 [Pg. 557 includes portions of Doc. 317 and Doc. 318], 1365 [Pg. 1365 includes portions of Doc. 947 and Doc. 948]

Berlin, 52 [Pg. 52 is part of Doc. 8], 301 [Pg. 301 includes portions of Doc. 148 and Doc. 149], 308 [Pg. 308 is part of Doc. 150], 332 [Pg. 332 is part of Doc. 165], 344 [Pg. 344 includes portions of Doc. 171 and Doc. 172], 1754 [Pg. 1754 is part of Doc. 1217]

Bernadotte, Count Folke, 138–139 [Pg. 138 is part of Doc. 48], 634 [Pg. 634 is part of Doc. 372], 667 [Pg. 667 includes portions of Doc. 397 and Doc. 398], 669n [Pg. 669 includes portions of Doc. 399 and Doc. 400], 679 [Pg. 679 is part of Doc. 405], 800 [Pg. 800 includes portions of Doc. 509 and Doc. 510], 829 [Pg. 829 is part of Doc. 533], 833 [Pg. 833 is part of Doc. 533], 869 [Pg. 869 is part of Doc. 556], 885 [Pg. 885 includes portions of Doc. 570 and Doc. 571], 931 [Pg. 931 is part of Doc. 605], 1104 [Pg. 1104 is part of Doc. 736], 1269 [Pg. 1269 includes portions of Doc. 871 and Doc. 872], 1301–1302 [Pgs. 1301–1302 include portions of Doc. 899, Doc. 900, Doc. 901, and Doc. 902], 1305 [Pg. 1305 is part of Doc. 904], 1397 [Pg. 1397 is part of Doc. 973], 1412 [Pg. 1412 is part of Doc. 981], 1416 [Pg. 1416 is part of Doc. 984], 1444n [Pg. 1444 includes portions of Doc. 999 and Doc. 1000], 1467 [Pg. 1467 is part of Doc. 1019]

Berry, Burton Y., 168 [Pg. 168 includes portions of Doc. 72 and Doc. 73], 310 [Pg. 310 is part of Doc. 151], 314 [Pg. 314 includes portions of Doc. 153 and Doc. 154], 1465 [Pg. 1465 includes portions of Doc. 1018 and Doc. 1019], 1495 [Pg. 1495 includes portions of Doc. 1035 and Doc. 1036], 1507n [Pg. 1507 is part of Doc. 1042]

Berthoud, E. A., 906 [Pg. 906 includes portions of Doc. 589 and Doc. 590]

Bevin, Ernest: Albania, British policy toward, 414–415 [Pgs. 414–415 include portions of Doc. 218 and Doc. 219]

Anglo-American-French consultations, Washington, 285 [Pg. 285 includes portions of Doc. 136 and Doc. 137]

Anglo-Egyptian military staff talks, 197n [Pg. 197 includes portions of Doc. 89 and Doc. 90], 198 [Pg. 198 is part of Doc. 90], 199n [Pg. 199 is part of Doc. 91], 202 [Pg. 202 is part of Doc. 91], 1077 [Pg. 1077 is part of Doc. 710]

Anglo-Iranian Oil Company, 127n [Pg. 127 includes portions of Doc. 34 and Doc. 35]

Arms embargo to Palestine and neighboring countries, 953 [Pg. 953 is part of Doc. 613], 958 [Pg. 958 is part of Doc. 618], 1017–1018 [Pgs. 1017–1018 include portions of Doc. 661, Doc. 662, and Doc. 663], 1057–1058 [Pgs. 1057–1058 include portions of Doc. 693, Doc. 694, Doc. 695, and Doc. 696], 1081 [Pg. 1081 is part of Doc. 715], 1254n [Pg. 1254 includes portions of Doc. 857 and Doc. 858], 1279 [Pg. 1279 is part of Doc. 882]

Austria, Yugoslav claims against, 265 [Pg. 265 includes portions of Doc. 130 and Doc. 131]

China, British policy toward, 152 [Pg. 152 is part of Doc. 60]

Egypt, British policy toward, 223n [Pg. 223 includes portions of Doc. 102 and Doc. 103], 1377 [Pg. 1377 is part of Doc. 958]

Germany, British policy toward, 285 [Pg. 285 includes portions of Doc. 136 and Doc. 137]

Greece: British policy toward, 236n [Pg. 236 includes portions of Doc. 109 and Doc. 110], 256 [Pg. 256 includes portions of Doc. 121 and Doc. 122], 265 [Pg. 265 includes portions of Doc. 130 and Doc. 131], 285–286 [Pgs. 285–286 include portions of Doc. 136, Doc. 137, and Doc. 138], 290 [Pg. 290 includes portions of Doc. 140 and Doc. 141], 297–298 [Pgs. 297–298 include portions of Doc. 145, Doc. 146, and Doc. 147], 300 [Pg. 300 is part of Doc. 148], 320 [Pg. 320 includes portions of Doc. 158 and Doc. 159], 324–326 [Pgs. 324–326 include portions of Doc. 162 and Doc. 163], 341–342 [Pgs. 341–342 include portions of Doc. 170 and Doc. 171], 344n [Pg. 344 includes portions of Doc. 171 and Doc. 172], 345 [Pg. 345 includes portions of Doc. 172 and Doc. 173], 350–352 [Pgs. 350–352 include portions of Doc. 176 and Doc. 177], 353n [Pg. 353 includes portions of Doc. 177 and Doc. 178], 354–356 [Pgs. 354–356 include portions of Doc. 178, Doc. 179, and Doc. 180], 370 [Pg. 370 includes portions of Doc. 191 and Doc. 192], 412 [Pg. 412 includes portions of Doc. 216, Doc. 217, and Doc. 218]; British troops, proposed withdrawal of, 445n [Pg. 445 includes portions of Doc. 243 and Doc. 244]; security of, 8 [Pg. 8 includes portions of Doc. 1, Doc. 2, and Doc. 3]

India, British policy toward, 51–53 [Pg. 51 is part of Doc. 8]

Iran, British policy toward, 498 [Pg. 498 is part of Doc. 282]

Iraq-Syrian union, proposed, 180n [Pg. 180 is part of Doc. 76]

Israel: De facto recognition of, 711 [Pg. 711 includes portions of Doc. 434 and Doc. 435]; de jure recognition of, 1058 [Pg. 1058 includes portions of Doc. 695 and Doc. 696]

Japan, British policy toward, 52 [Pg. 52 is part of Doc. 8]

Jordan, British arms shipments to, 850 [Pg. 850 is part of Doc. 540], 1078 [Pg. 1078 includes portions of Doc. 710 and Doc. 711], 1099 [Pg. 1099 is part of Doc. 733]

Kashmir dispute, 1728–1729 [Pgs. 1728–1729 include portions of Doc. 1202, Doc. 1203, and Doc. 1204], 1745 [Pg. 1745 includes portions of Doc. 1212 and Doc. 1213], 1759–1760 [Pgs. 1759–1760 include portions of Doc. 1218, Doc. 1219, and Doc. 1220]

Near and Middle East, British policy in, 50–54 [Pgs. 50–54 include portions of Doc. 8 and Doc. 9], 55n [Pg. 55 is part of Doc. 9], 166 [Pg. 166 is part of Doc. 71], 188 [Pg. 188 is part of Doc. 83], 611–612 [Pg. 611 is part of Doc. 354], 613n [Pg. 613 is part of Doc. 354], 675 [Pg. 675 is part of Doc. 403], 897 [Pg. 897 includes portions of Doc. 581 and Doc. 582], 910 [Pg. 910 includes portions of Doc. 590 and Doc. 591], 1376–1377 [Pgs. 1376–1377 include portions of Doc. 957 and Doc. 958], 1482–1483 [Pgs. 1482–1483 include portions of Doc. 1027, Doc. 1028, and Doc. 1029]

North Atlantic Treaty, signing of, 285 [Pg. 285 includes portions of Doc. 136 and Doc. 137]

Palestine question, 51 [Pg. 51 is part of Doc. 8], 66 [Pg. 66 is part of Doc. 12], 94 [Pg. 94 includes portions of Doc. 15 and Doc. 16], 595 [Pg. 595 includes portions of Doc. 341 and Doc. 342], 609n [Pg. 609 includes portions of Doc. 352 and Doc. 353], 611–612 [Pg. 611 is part of Doc. 354], 613n [Pg. 613 is part of Doc. 354], 620–621 [Pgs. 620–621 include portions of Doc. 359 and Doc. 360], 627–628 [Pgs. 627–628 include portions of Doc. 366 and Doc. 367], 652 [Pg. 652 is part of Doc. 386], 658–661 [Pgs. 658–661 include portions of Doc. 391, Doc. 392, and Doc. 393], 670–675 [Pgs. 670–675 include portions of Doc. 400, Doc. 401, Doc. 402, and Doc. 403], 678–680 [Pgs. 678–680 include portions of Doc. 405, Doc. 406, and Doc. 407], 694 [Pg. 694 includes portions of Doc. 419, Doc. 420, and Doc. 421], 696–697 [Pgs. 696–697 include portions of Doc. 422, Doc. 423, and Doc. 424], 705 [Pg. 705 includes portions of Doc. 429 and Doc. 430], 742n [Pg. 742 includes portions of Doc. 459 and Doc. 460], 1077 [Pg. 1077 is part of Doc. 710], 1081 [Pg. 1081 is part of Doc. 715], 1083–1084 [Pgs. 1083–1084 include portions of Doc. 717, Doc. 718, and Doc. 719], 1090 [Pg. 1090 includes portions of Doc. 723 and Doc. 724], 1126–1127 [Pgs. 1126–1127 include portions of Doc. 754 and Doc. 755], 1143–1144 [Pgs. 1143–1144 include portions of Doc. 767, Doc. 768, and Doc. 769], 1229n [Pg. 1229 includes portions of Doc. 832 and Doc. 833], 1247 [Pg. 1247 includes portions of Doc. 851 and Doc. 852], 1377–1378 [Pg. 1377 is part of Doc. 958], 1395 [Pg. 1395 is part of Doc. 972], 1427 [Pg. 1427 is part of Doc. 994], 1482–1483 [Pgs. 1482–1483 include portions of Doc. 1027, Doc. 1028, and Doc. 1029]

Palestinian refugees, 835–836 [Pg. 835 is part of Doc. 533], 897 [Pg. 897 includes portions of Doc. 581 and Doc. 582], 906 [Pg. 906 includes portions of Doc. 589 and Doc. 590], 910 [Pg. 910 includes portions of Doc. 590 and Doc. 591], 970 [Pg. 970 includes portions of Doc. 629 and Doc. 630], 1058 [Pg. 1058 includes portions of Doc. 695 and Doc. 696], 1123 [Pg. 1123 includes portions of Doc. 751 and Doc. 752], 1191 [Pg. 1191 includes portions of Doc. 803 and Doc. 804], 1378 [Pg. 1378 is part of Doc. 958], 1563 [Pg. 1563 includes portions of Doc. 1092 and Doc. 1093]

Persian Gulf territorial questions, 93–94 [Pgs. 93–94 include portions of Doc. 14, Doc. 15, and Doc. 16], 104 [Pg. 104 includes portions of Doc. 19 and Doc. 20], 107 [Pg. 107 includes portions of Doc. 21 and Doc. 22]

Petroleum resources in the Middle East, 51 [Pg. 51 is part of Doc. 8]

Ruhr, opposition to Four-Power control over the, 50 [Pg. 50 is part of Doc. 8]

Southeast Asia, British policy toward, 50–52 [Pg. 50 is part of Doc. 8], 54 [Pg. 54 includes portions of Doc. 8 and Doc. 9]

Turkey, British policy toward, 8 [Pg. 8 includes portions of Doc. 1, Doc. 2, and Doc. 3], 1662–1663 [Pg. 1662 is part of Doc. 1152], 1670–1671 [Pgs. 1670–1671 include portions of Doc. 1152, Doc. 1153, and Doc. 1154]

Beyers, Gen. L., 1805 [Pg. 1805 includes portions of Doc. 1240 and Doc. 1241], 1807 [Pg. 1807 includes portions of Doc. 1241 and Doc. 1242]

Bin Jihuwi, Amir Saud, 154–155 [Pgs. 154–155 include portions of Doc. 62 and Doc. 63]

Birla, Ghanshyam Das, 1726n [Pg. 1726 is part of Doc. 1202]

Bishop, Max W., 1339 [Pg. 1339 includes portions of Doc. 930 and Doc. 931]

Blackburn, Fred K., 1781 [Pg. 1781 is part of Doc. 1235]

Bloom, Sol, 697 [Pg. 697 includes portions of Doc. 423 and Doc. 424], 833n [Pg. 833 is part of Doc. 533]

Boggs, Samuel W., 91 [Pg. 91 is part of Doc. 14], 96 [Pg. 96 is part of Doc. 17], 99 [Pg. 99 is part of Doc. 17]

Bohlen, Charles E., 188 [Pg. 188 is part of Doc. 83], 191–192 [Pgs. 191–192 include portions of Doc. 84, Doc. 85, Doc. 86, and Doc. 87], 875 [Pg. 875 is part of Doc. 562], 918 [Pg. 918 includes portions of Doc. 595 and Doc. 596]

Boisanger, Claude de, 735 [Pg. 735 includes portions of Doc. 456 and Doc. 457], 737 [Pg. 737 is part of Doc. 457], 745–746 [Pg. 745 is part of Doc. 463], 776 [Pg. 776 includes portions of Doc. 492 and Doc. 493], 787 [Pg. 787 includes portions of Doc. 501 and Doc. 502], 857 [Pg. 857 includes portions of Doc. 545 and Doc. 546], 884 [Pg. 884 includes portions of Doc. 569 and Doc. 570], 697 [Pg. 697 includes portions of Doc. 423 and Doc. 424], 904n [Pg. 904 is part of Doc. 587], 920 [Pg. 920 includes portions of Doc. 597 and Doc. 598], 1039 [Pg. 1039 includes portions of Doc. 676, Doc. 677, and Doc. 678], 1096 [Pg. 1096 includes portions of Doc. 730 and Doc. 731], 1123 [Pg. 1123 includes portions of Doc. 751 and Doc. 752], 1135 [Pg. 1135 includes portions of Doc. 760 and Doc. 761], 1164 [Pg. 1164 includes portions of Doc. 783 and Doc. 784], 1258 [Pg. 1258 is part of Doc. 862], 1281 [Pg. 1281 is part of Doc. 884], 1299–1301 [Pgs. 1299–1301 include portions of Doc. 899 and Doc. 900], 1316n [Pg. 1316 is part of Doc. 910], 1423 [Pg. 1423 includes portions of Doc. 990 and Doc. 991], 1448 [Pg. 1448 includes portions of Doc. 1002, Doc. 1003, and Doc. 1004], 1465–1468 [Pgs. 1465–1468 include portions of Doc. 1018, Doc. 1019, and Doc. 1020]

Bolger, Rear Adm. Joseph F., 192–193 [Pgs. 192–193 include portions of Doc. 86 and Doc. 87], 1640n [Pg. 1640 includes portions of Doc. 1140 and Doc. 1141]

Bolivia, 1512 [Pg. 1512 includes portions of Doc. 1047, Doc. 1048, and Doc. 1049]

Bodthby, E. B., 906 [Pg. 906 includes portions of Doc. 589 and Doc. 590], 1476 [Pg. 1476 includes portions of Doc. 1025 and Doc. 1026], 1481 [Pg. 1481 includes portions of Doc. 1026 and Doc. 1027]

Bourghiba, Habib, 1784 [Pg. 1784 is part of Doc. 1235]

Boyd, Max, 838 [Pg. 838 is part of Doc. 533]

Bradley, Gen. Omar N., 449 [Pg. 449 is part of Doc. 246], 568 [Pg. 568 includes portions of Doc. 326 and Doc. 327], 572 [Pg. 572 is part of Doc. 329], 576 [Pg. 576 is part of Doc. 330], 582 [Pg. 582 includes portions of Doc. 333 and Doc. 334], 590 [Pg. 590 is part of Doc. 339]

Brant, Lt. Col. Phillip D., 562–563 [Pgs. 562–563 include portions of Doc. 321, Doc. 322, and Doc. 323], 582 [Pg. 582 includes portions of Doc. 333 and Doc. 334]

Brazil, 677 [Pg. 677 includes portions of Doc. 404 and Doc. 405], 1511 [Pg. 1511 includes portions of Doc. 1046 and Doc. 1047]

British Somaliland, 88 [Pg. 88 is part of Doc. 12]

Bromley, Thomas E., 92 [Pg. 92 is part of Doc. 14], 99 [Pg. 99 is part of Doc. 17], 122 [Pg. 122 includes portions of Doc. 31 and Doc. 32], 124 [Pg. 124 is part of Doc. 32], 132n [Pg. 132 is part of Doc. 41], 136–137 [Pgs. 136–137 include portions of Doc. 45, Doc. 46, Doc. 47, and Doc. 48], 139n [Pg. 139 is part of Doc. 48], 207n [Pg. 207 includes portions of Doc. 94 and Doc. 95], 531 [Pg. 531 is part of Doc. 311], 611 [Pg. 611 is part of Doc. 354], 613 [Pg. 613 is part of Doc. 354], 651–652 [Pgs. 651–652 include portions of Doc. 385 and Doc. 386], 671 [Pg. 671 includes portions of Doc. 401 and Doc. 402], 674 [Pg. 674 is part of Doc. 402], 774–775 [Pgs. 774–775 include portions of Doc. 490, Doc. 491, and Doc. 492], 783–784 [Pgs. 783–784 include portions of Doc. 496, Doc. 497, and Doc. 498], 1177n [Pg. 1177 includes portions of Doc. 790 and Doc. 791]

Brown, Aaron S., 1252n [Pg. 1252 includes portions of Doc. 855 and Doc. 856]

Brown, Harry C., 1415n [Pg. 1415 is part of Doc. 984], 1515n [Pg. 1515 is part of Doc. 1051]

Brown, Winthrop G., 1804 [Pg. 1804 is part of Doc. 1240]

Bruce, David K. E., 422 [Pg. 422 includes portions of Doc. 224 and Doc. 225], 1124–1125 [Pgs. 1124–1125 include portions of Doc. 752 and Doc. 753], 1316n [Pg. 1316 is part of Doc. 910], 1392n [Pg. 1392 includes portions of Doc. 967 and Doc. 968]

Bruce, James E., 563 [Pg. 563 includes portions of Doc. 322 and Doc. 323], 565n [Pg. 565 includes portions of Doc. 323, Doc. 324, and Doc. 325], 583n [Pg. 583 includes portions of Doc. 334 and Doc. 335], 1627 [Pg. 1627 includes portions of Doc. 1129 and Doc. 1130]

Bryan, Douglas, 1642 [Pg. 1642 includes portions of Doc. 1141 and Doc. 1142]

Budget, U.S. Bureau of the, 233 [Pg. 233 includes portions of Doc. 106 and Doc. 107], 359 [Pg. 359 includes portions of Doc. 181 and Doc. 182], 428–429 [Pgs. 428–429 include portions of Doc. 230, Doc. 231, Doc. 232, and Doc. 233], 432 [Pg. 432 is part of Doc. 234], 503 [Pg. 503 includes portions of Doc. 286 and Doc. 287], 698 [Pg. 698 includes portions of Doc. 424 and Doc. 425], 965 [Pg. 965 includes portions of Doc. 623, Doc. 624, and Doc. 625], 970 [Pg. 970 includes portions of Doc. 629 and Doc. 630], 1023n [Pg. 1023 includes portions of Doc. 666 and Doc. 667], 1211 [Pg. 1211 is part of Doc. 818], 1506 [Pg. 1506 includes portions of Doc. 1041 and Doc. 1042], 1626 [Pg. 1626 is part of Doc. 1129]

Bulgaria (see also Bulgarian subheadings under Greece), 251n [Pg. 251 is part of Doc. 119], 252 [Pg. 252 is part of Doc. 119], 266 [Pg. 266 is part of Doc. 131], 276 [Pg. 276 is part of Doc. 133], 293n [Pg. 293 is part of Doc. 143], 328 [Pg. 328 is part of Doc. 163], 336–337 [Pgs. 336–337 include portions of Doc. 167 and Doc. 168], 342 [Pg. 342 is part of Doc. 171], 365 [Pg. 365 is part of Doc. 188], 427n [Pg. 427 includes portions of Doc. 229 and Doc. 230], 453 [Pg. 453 is part of Doc. 249], 465 [Pg. 465 includes portions of Doc. 257, Doc. 258, and Doc. 259], 775 [Pg. 775 includes portions of Doc. 491 and Doc. 492], 1668 [Pg. 1668 is part of Doc. 1152]

Bunche, Ralph J., 226 [Pg. 226 is part of Doc. 104], 597 [Pg. 597 is part of Doc. 344], 609–610 [Pgs. 609–610 include portions of Doc. 352 and Doc. 353], 621–622 [Pgs. 621–622 include portions of Doc. 360, Doc. 361, Doc. 362, and Doc. 363], 629n [Pg. 629 includes portions of Doc. 368 and Doc. 369], 654–656 [Pgs. 654–656 include portions of Doc. 388, Doc. 389, Doc. 390, and Doc. 391], 667 [Pg. 667 includes portions of Doc. 397 and Doc. 398], 686–687 [Pgs. 686–687 include portions of Doc. 411, Doc. 412, Doc. 413, and Doc. 414], 689–691 [Pgs. 689–691 include portions of Doc. 415, Doc. 416, Doc. 417, and Doc. 418], 697–701 [Pgs. 697–701 include portions of Doc. 423, Doc. 424, Doc. 425, Doc. 426, and Doc. 427], 702n [Pg. 702 includes portions of Doc. 427 and Doc. 428], 706n [Pg. 706 is part of Doc. 430], 707 [Pg. 707 is part of Doc. 431], 708n [Pg. 708 includes portions of Doc. 431 and Doc. 432], 709 [Pg. 709 is part of Doc. 432], 713–719 [Pgs. 713–719 include portions of Doc. 436, Doc. 437, Doc. 438, Doc. 439, Doc. 440, Doc. 441, Doc. 442, Doc. 443, and Doc. 444], 721 [Pg. 721 is part of Doc. 446], 723–724 [Pgs. 723–724 include portions of Doc. 447 and Doc. 448], 726–728 [Pgs. 726–728 include portions of Doc. 450 and Doc. 451], 730–732 [Pgs. 730–732 include portions of Doc. 453, Doc. 454, and Doc. 455], 734–735 [Pgs. 734–735 include portions of Doc. 455, Doc. 456, and Doc. 457], 742n [Pg. 742 includes portions of Doc. 459 and Doc. 460], 743–744 [Pgs. 743–744 include portions of Doc. 460, Doc. 461, Doc. 462, and Doc. 463], 749–750 [Pgs. 749–750 include portions of Doc. 466, Doc. 467, and Doc. 468], 752–756 [Pgs. 752–756 include portions of Doc. 468, Doc. 469, Doc. 470, Doc. 471, Doc. 472, Doc. 473, and Doc. 474], 759–760 [Pgs. 759–760 include portions of Doc. 476, Doc. 477, and Doc. 478], 765 [Pg. 765 includes portions of Doc. 480 and Doc. 481], 768 [Pg. 768 includes portions of Doc. 485 and Doc. 486], 776 [Pg. 776 includes portions of Doc. 492 and Doc. 493], 784–787 [Pgs. 784–787 include portions of Doc. 497, Doc. 498, Doc. 499, Doc. 500, Doc. 501, and Doc. 502], 799n [Pg. 799 includes portions of Doc. 508 and Doc. 509], 800–803 [Pgs. 800–803 include portions of Doc. 509, Doc. 510, Doc. 511, Doc. 512, and Doc. 513], 809–813 [Pgs. 809–813 include portions of Doc. 517, Doc. 518, and Doc. 519], 814n [Pg. 814 includes portions of Doc. 519 and Doc. 520], 816–818 [Pgs. 816–818 include portions of Doc. 521, Doc. 522, Doc. 523, Doc. 524, Doc. 525, and Doc. 526], 820 [Pg. 820 includes portions of Doc. 527 and Doc. 528], 822–824 [Pgs. 822–824 include portions of Doc. 529, Doc. 530, and Doc. 531], 825n [Pg. 825 includes portions of Doc. 531 and Doc. 532], 829 [Pg. 829 is part of Doc. 533], 844 [Pg. 844 includes portions of Doc. 535 and Doc. 536], 846–847 [Pgs. 846–847 include portions of Doc. 536 and Doc. 537], 850 [Pg. 850 is part of Doc. 540], 851n [Pg. 851 includes portions of Doc. 541 and Doc. 542], 864–865 [Pgs. 864–865 include portions of Doc. 551 and Doc. 552], 868–869 [Pgs. 868–869 include portions of Doc. 555 and Doc. 556], 874 [Pg. 874 is part of Doc. 561], 884–885 [Pgs. 884–885 include portions of Doc. 569, Doc. 570, and Doc. 571], 888–889 [Pgs. 888–889 include portions of Doc. 574, Doc. 575, and Doc. 576], 894 [Pg. 894 includes portions of Doc. 577 and Doc. 578], 896 [Pg. 896 includes portions of Doc. 580 and Doc. 581], 900n [Pg. 900 includes portions of Doc. 585 and Doc. 586], 916 [Pg. 916 includes portions of Doc. 592, Doc. 593, and Doc. 594], 918 [Pg. 918 includes portions of Doc. 595 and Doc. 596], 930–933 [Pgs. 930–933 include portions of Doc. 604, Doc. 605, Doc. 606, and Doc. 607], 953 [Pg. 953 is part of Doc. 613], 957n [Pg. 957 includes portions of Doc. 616 and Doc. 617], 958 [Pg. 958 is part of Doc. 618], 990n [Pg. 990 includes portions of Doc. 642 and Doc. 643], 993 [Pg. 993 includes portions of Doc. 644 and Doc. 645], 1000–1003 [Pgs. 1000–1003 include portions of Doc. 650, Doc. 651, Doc. 652, Doc. 653, and Doc. 654], 1005–1007 [Pgs. 1005–1007 include portions of Doc. 655, Doc. 656, and Doc. 657], 1020–1021 [Pgs. 1020–1021 include portions of Doc. 663, Doc. 664, and Doc. 665], 1030–1031 [Pgs. 1030–1031 include portions of Doc. 670 and Doc. 671], 1046 [Pg. 1046 includes portions of Doc. 684 and Doc. 685], 1053–1055 [Pgs. 1053–1055 include portions of Doc. 689, Doc. 690, and Doc. 691], 1058 [Pg. 1058 includes portions of Doc. 695 and Doc. 696], 1063 [Pg. 1063 includes portions of Doc. 697 and Doc. 698], 1077–1079 [Pgs. 1077–1079 include portions of Doc. 710, Doc. 711, Doc. 712, and Doc. 713], 1091–1092 [Pgs. 1091–1092 include portions of Doc. 724, Doc. 725, Doc. 726, and Doc. 727], 1098n [Pg. 1098 is part of Doc. 732], 1099–1100 [Pgs. 1099–1100 include portions of Doc. 733, Doc. 734, and Doc. 735], 1102 [Pg. 1102 includes portions of Doc. 735 and Doc. 736]/1 [Pg. 1 is part of Doc. 1], 1112 [Pg. 1112 includes portions of Doc. 742, Doc. 743, and Doc. 744], 1114 [Pg. 1114 includes portions of Doc. 744 and Doc. 745], 1119–1122 [Pgs. 1119–1122 include portions of Doc. 748, Doc. 749, Doc. 750, and Doc. 751], 1126–1127 [Pgs. 1126–1127 include portions of Doc. 754 and Doc. 755], 1131–1133 [Pgs. 1131–1133 include portions of Doc. 757, Doc. 758, and Doc. 759], 1137 [Pg. 1137 includes portions of Doc. 762 and Doc. 763], 1145 [Pg. 1145 is part of Doc. 769], 1147 [Pg. 1147 is part of Doc. 771], 1150–1151 [Pg. 1150 is part of Doc. 772], 1153 [Pg. 1153 includes portions of Doc. 772 and Doc. 773], 1156 [Pg. 1156 includes portions of Doc. 776 and Doc. 777], 1158 [Pg. 1158 includes portions of Doc. 778 and Doc. 779], 1162 [Pg. 1162 includes portions of Doc. 781 and Doc. 782], 1165–1166 [Pgs. 1165–1166 include portions of Doc. 784, Doc. 785, and Doc. 786], 1168n [Pg. 1168 includes portions of Doc. 787 and Doc. 788], 1178–1179 [Pgs. 1178–1179 include portions of Doc. 791, Doc. 792, and Doc. 793], 1225 [Pg. 1225 includes portions of Doc. 829 and Doc. 830], 1240–1241 [Pg. 1240 is part of Doc. 845], 1245n [Pg. 1245 includes portions of Doc. 849 and Doc. 850], 1251 [Pg. 1251 is part of Doc. 855], 1255 [Pg. 1255 includes portions of Doc. 858 and Doc. 859], 1261 [Pg. 1261 includes portions of Doc. 865 and Doc. 866], 1269–1270 [Pgs. 1269–1270 include portions of Doc. 871 and Doc. 872], 1274–1275 [Pgs. 1274–1275 include portions of Doc. 877, Doc. 878, and Doc. 879], 1277–1280 [Pgs. 1277–1280 include portions of Doc. 881, Doc. 882, and Doc. 883], 1284 [Pg. 1284 includes portions of Doc. 886 and Doc. 887], 1291 [Pg. 1291 includes portions of Doc. 892 and Doc. 893], 1302 [Pg. 1302 includes portions of Doc. 900, Doc. 901, and Doc. 902], 1304n [Pg. 1304 is part of Doc. 903], 1305 [Pg. 1305 is part of Doc. 904], 1394 [Pg. 1394 includes portions of Doc. 970 and Doc. 971], 1432 [Pg. 1432 is part of Doc. 997], 1436 [Pg. 1436 is part of Doc. 997], 1465–1466 [Pgs. 1465–1466 include portions of Doc. 1018 and Doc. 1019], 1554–1555 [Pgs. 1554–1555 include portions of Doc. 1083 and Doc. 1084], 1601 [Pg. 1601 is part of Doc. 1118]

Burdett, William C., 168 [Pg. 168 includes portions of Doc. 72 and Doc. 73], 661–663 [Pgs. 661–663 include portions of Doc. 392, Doc. 393, and Doc. 394], 669–670 [Pgs. 669–670 include portions of Doc. 399, Doc. 400, and Doc. 401], 680 [Pg. 680 includes portions of Doc. 406 and Doc. 407], 683 [Pg. 683 includes portions of Doc. 408 and Doc. 409], 710–712 [Pgs. 710–712 include portions of Doc. 433, Doc. 434, Doc. 435, and Doc. 436], 717 [Pg. 717 includes portions of Doc. 441, Doc. 442, and Doc. 443], 718n [Pg. 718 includes portions of Doc. 443 and Doc. 444], 729 [Pg. 729 includes portions of Doc. 451 and Doc. 452], 735–738 [Pgs. 735–738 include portions of Doc. 456 and Doc. 457], 740 [Pg. 740 is part of Doc. 458], 744–747 [Pgs. 744–747 include portions of Doc. 461, Doc. 462, Doc. 463, Doc. 464, and Doc. 465], 756n [Pg. 756 includes portions of Doc. 472, Doc. 473, and Doc. 474], 772–781 [Pgs. 772–781 include portions of Doc. 489, Doc. 490, Doc. 491, Doc. 492, Doc. 493, Doc. 494, Doc. 495, and Doc. 496], 785–787 [Pgs. 785–787 include portions of Doc. 499, Doc. 500, Doc. 501, and Doc. 502], 793 [Pg. 793 is part of Doc. 506], 798–799 [Pgs. 798–799 include portions of Doc. 507, Doc. 508, and Doc. 509], 814–815 [Pgs. 814–815 include portions of Doc. 519, Doc. 520, and Doc. 521], 817 [Pg. 817 includes portions of Doc. 522, Doc. 523, and Doc. 524], 825–826 [Pgs. 825–826 include portions of Doc. 531 and Doc. 532], 842–843 [Pgs. 842–843 include portions of Doc. 533, Doc. 534, and Doc. 535], 848–849 [Pgs. 848–849 include portions of Doc. 537, Doc. 538, and Doc. 539], 853 [Pg. 853 includes portions of Doc. 543 and Doc. 544], 883 [Pg. 883 includes portions of Doc. 568 and Doc. 569], 895–896 [Pgs. 895–896 include portions of Doc. 578, Doc. 579, Doc. 580, and Doc. 581], 900–905 [Pgs. 900–905 include portions of Doc. 585, Doc. 586, Doc. 587, Doc. 588, and Doc. 589], 920–921 [Pgs. 920–921 include portions of Doc. 597 and Doc. 598], 923–930 [Pgs. 923–930 include portions of Doc. 600, Doc. 601, Doc. 602, Doc. 603, Doc. 604, and Doc. 605], 960–961 [Pgs. 960–961 include portions of Doc. 619, Doc. 620, and Doc. 621], 978 [Pg. 978 includes portions of Doc. 634 and Doc. 635], 999–1000 [Pgs. 999–1000 include portions of Doc. 649, Doc. 650, and Doc. 651], 1039–1041 [Pgs. 1039–1041 include portions of Doc. 676, Doc. 677, and Doc. 678], 1076 [Pg. 1076 includes portions of Doc. 708 and Doc. 709], 1084–1085 [Pgs. 1084–1085 include portions of Doc. 718, Doc. 719, and Doc. 720], 1098n [Pg. 1098 is part of Doc. 732], 1117–1119 [Pgs. 1117–1119 include portions of Doc. 747, Doc. 748, and Doc. 749], 1147 [Pg. 1147 is part of Doc. 771], 1154n [Pg. 1154 includes portions of Doc. 773 and Doc. 774], 1178–1179 [Pgs. 1178–1179 include portions of Doc. 791, Doc. 792, and Doc. 793], 1182–1184 [Pgs. 1182–1184 include portions of Doc. 794, Doc. 795, and Doc. 796], 1193 [Pg. 1193 includes portions of Doc. 804 and Doc. 805], 1194n [Pg. 1194 is part of Doc. 806], 1203–1206 [Pgs. 1203–1206 include portions of Doc. 812, Doc. 813, Doc. 814, and Doc. 815], 1216 [Pg. 1216 is part of Doc. 823], 1221–1223 [Pgs. 1221–1223 include portions of Doc. 826, Doc. 827, and Doc. 828], 1225–1226 [Pgs. 1225–1226 include portions of Doc. 829, Doc. 830, and Doc. 831], 1259–1260 [Pgs. 1259–1260 include portions of Doc. 863 and Doc. 864], 1273–1274 [Pgs. 1273–1274 include portions of Doc. 876, Doc. 877, and Doc. 878], 1276–1277 [Pgs. 1276–1277 include portions of Doc. 879, Doc. 880, Doc. 881, and Doc. 882], 1292 [Pg. 1292 is part of Doc. 894], 1314 [Pg. 1314 includes portions of Doc. 908 and Doc. 909], 1319–1321 [Pgs. 1319–1321 include portions of Doc. 912, Doc. 913, Doc. 914, and Doc. 915], 1331 [Pg. 1331 includes portions of Doc. 922 and Doc. 923], 1336n [Pg. 1336 is part of Doc. 928], 1381–1382 [Pgs. 1381–1382 include portions of Doc. 960 and Doc. 961], 1390–1392 [Pgs. 1390–1392 include portions of Doc. 966, Doc. 967, and Doc. 968], 1398–1399 [Pgs. 1398–1399 include portions of Doc. 974 and Doc. 975], 1420–1421 [Pgs. 1420–1421 include portions of Doc. 987 and Doc. 988], 1446 [Pg. 1446 is part of Doc. 1001], 1456–1459 [Pgs. 1456–1459 include portions of Doc. 1012, Doc. 1013, and Doc. 1014], 1502–1504 [Pgs. 1502–1504 include portions of Doc. 1038, Doc. 1039, and Doc. 1040], 1551 [Pg. 1551 includes portions of Doc. 1081, Doc. 1082, and Doc. 1083], 1560–1561 [Pgs. 1560–1561 include portions of Doc. 1089 and Doc. 1090]

Burma: British position, 26 [Pg. 26 is part of Doc. 3], 52 [Pg. 52 is part of Doc. 8]; Communist movement, 15–16 [Pg. 15 is part of Doc. 3], 26–27 [Pg. 26 is part of Doc. 3]; independence, 11 [Pg. 11 is part of Doc. 3]; military forces, 21 [Pg. 21 is part of Doc. 3]; situation in, 17 [Pg. 17 is part of Doc. 3], 19 [Pg. 19 is part of Doc. 3], 21 [Pg. 21 is part of Doc. 3]; Soviet policy, 15 [Pg. 15 is part of Doc. 3]; U.S. military assistance, 26–27 [Pg. 26 is part of Doc. 3]; U.S. policy, 8 [Pg. 8 includes portions of Doc. 1, Doc. 2, and Doc. 3], 29 [Pg. 29 is part of Doc. 3]

Burrows, Bernard A., 129n [Pg. 129 includes portions of Doc. 37 and Doc. 38], 142–147 [Pgs. 142–147 include portions of Doc. 50, Doc. 51, Doc. 52, Doc. 53, Doc. 54, and Doc. 55], 150 [Pg. 150 includes portions of Doc. 57 and Doc. 58], 607–609 [Pgs. 607–609 include portions of Doc. 351, Doc. 352, and Doc. 353], 674n [Pg. 674 is part of Doc. 402], 679n [Pg. 679 is part of Doc. 405], 684–685 [Pgs. 684–685 include portions of Doc. 409, Doc. 410, and Doc. 411], 694 [Pg. 694 includes portions of Doc. 419, Doc. 420, and Doc. 421], 714–715 [Pgs. 714–715 include portions of Doc. 438, Doc. 439, and Doc. 440], 742n [Pg. 742 includes portions of Doc. 459 and Doc. 460], 868 [Pg. 868 includes portions of Doc. 555 and Doc. 556], 1285 [Pg. 1285 includes portions of Doc. 887 and Doc. 888], 1338n [Pg. 1338 includes portions of Doc. 929 and Doc. 930], 1375–1376 [Pgs. 1375–1376 include portions of Doc. 956, Doc. 957, and Doc. 958], 1430n [Pg. 1430 includes portions of Doc. 995, Doc. 996, and Doc. 997], 1476 [Pg. 1476 includes portions of Doc. 1025 and Doc. 1026], 1478–1480 [Pg. 1478 is part of Doc. 1026], 1540 [Pg. 1540 includes portions of Doc. 1073 and Doc. 1074], 1570–1572 [Pgs. 1570–1572 include portions of Doc. 1096, Doc. 1097, and Doc. 1098]

Butterworth, W. Walton, 1376 [Pg. 1376 includes portions of Doc. 957 and Doc. 958]

Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic, 430 [Pg. 430 is part of Doc. 233]

Byrnes, James F., 350 [Pg. 350 is part of Doc. 176], 697 [Pg. 697 includes portions of Doc. 423 and Doc. 424]

Cadogan, Sir Alexander, 330 [Pg. 330 includes portions of Doc. 164 and Doc. 165], 399–400 [Pgs. 399–400 include portions of Doc. 211, Doc. 212, and Doc. 213], 416 [Pg. 416 includes portions of Doc. 219 and Doc. 220], 1530 [Pg. 1530 includes portions of Doc. 1065 and Doc. 1066], 1774–1776 [Pgs. 1774–1776 include portions of Doc. 1228, Doc. 1229, Doc. 1230, and Doc. 1231]

Caffery, Jefferson, 157n [Pg. 157 includes portions of Doc. 65 and Doc. 66], 168 [Pg. 168 includes portions of Doc. 72 and Doc. 73], 169n [Pg. 169 is part of Doc. 73], 223–224 [Pgs. 223–224 include portions of Doc. 102, Doc. 103, and Doc. 104], 1369n [Pg. 1369 includes portions of Doc. 951 and Doc. 952], 1415 [Pg. 1415 is part of Doc. 984], 1419n [Pg. 1419 includes portions of Doc. 986 and Doc. 987], 1508–1509 [Pgs. 1508–1509 include portions of Doc. 1042, Doc. 1043, Doc. 1044, and Doc. 1045], 1542 [Pg. 1542 includes portions of Doc. 1076 and Doc. 1077], 1558 [Pg. 1558 includes portions of Doc. 1086, Doc. 1087, and Doc. 1088]

Cakir, Hüsnü, 1640n [Pg. 1640 includes portions of Doc. 1140 and Doc. 1141], 1673 [Pg. 1673 is part of Doc. 1155]

Caldwell, Robert G., 1781 [Pg. 1781 is part of Doc. 1235]

Campbell, Gordon Thomas Calthrop, 1761 [Pg. 1761 is part of Doc. 1220]

Campbell, John C., 364 [Pg. 364 includes portions of Doc. 186 and Doc. 187], 381–383 [Pgs. 381–383 include portions of Doc. 199 and Doc. 200], 412 [Pg. 412 includes portions of Doc. 216, Doc. 217, and Doc. 218]

Campbell, Sir Ronald Ian, 189 [Pg. 189 is part of Doc. 84], 192–194 [Pgs. 192–194 include portions of Doc. 86, Doc. 87, and Doc. 88], 197n [Pg. 197 includes portions of Doc. 89 and Doc. 90], 198 [Pg. 198 is part of Doc. 90], 199n [Pg. 199 is part of Doc. 91], 200 [Pg. 200 is part of Doc. 91], 202 [Pg. 202 is part of Doc. 91], 203n [Pg. 203 is part of Doc. 92], 206 [Pg. 206 is part of Doc. 94], 219n [Pg. 219 includes portions of Doc. 97 and Doc. 98], 220–221 [Pgs. 220–221 include portions of Doc. 98, Doc. 99, and Doc. 100], 224 [Pg. 224 includes portions of Doc. 103 and Doc. 104], 651 [Pg. 651 includes portions of Doc. 385 and Doc. 386], 670 [Pg. 670 includes portions of Doc. 400 and Doc. 401], 780 [Pg. 780 includes portions of Doc. 494 and Doc. 495], 953 [Pg. 953 is part of Doc. 613], 1045 [Pg. 1045 is part of Doc. 683], 1180 [Pg. 1180 is part of Doc. 793], 1243n [Pg. 1243 includes portions of Doc. 847 and Doc. 848], 1373 [Pg. 1373 is part of Doc. 954]

Canada, 277 [Pg. 277 is part of Doc. 133], 1275 [Pg. 1275 includes portions of Doc. 878 and Doc. 879], 1284 [Pg. 1284 includes portions of Doc. 886 and Doc. 887], 1290 [Pg. 1290 includes portions of Doc. 891 and Doc. 892], 1291n [Pg. 1291 includes portions of Doc. 892 and Doc. 893], 1302 [Pg. 1302 includes portions of Doc. 900, Doc. 901, and Doc. 902], 1341 [Pg. 1341 includes portions of Doc. 931 and Doc. 932], 1490–1491 [Pgs. 1490–1491 include portions of Doc. 1031, Doc. 1032, and Doc. 1033], 1511 [Pg. 1511 includes portions of Doc. 1046 and Doc. 1047], 1759–1762 [Pgs. 1759–1762 include portions of Doc. 1218, Doc. 1219, Doc. 1220, and Doc. 1221], 1764–1766 [Pgs. 1764–1766 include portions of Doc. 1222, Doc. 1223, and Doc. 1224], 1773 [Pg. 1773 includes portions of Doc. 1227 and Doc. 1228]

Cannon, Cavendish N., 250–252 [Pg. 250 is part of Doc. 119], 256n [Pg. 256 includes portions of Doc. 121 and Doc. 122], 263–264 [Pgs. 263–264 include portions of Doc. 128 and Doc. 129], 292–293 [Pgs. 292–293 include portions of Doc. 142 and Doc. 143], 355 [Pg. 355 includes portions of Doc. 178 and Doc. 179], 363–364 [Pgs. 363–364 include portions of Doc. 185, Doc. 186, and Doc. 187], 368–369 [Pgs. 368–369 include portions of Doc. 190 and Doc. 191], 370n [Pg. 370 includes portions of Doc. 191 and Doc. 192], 374 [Pg. 374 is part of Doc. 194], 380–381 [Pgs. 380–381 include portions of Doc. 196, Doc. 197, Doc. 198, Doc. 199, and Doc. 200], 386n [Pg. 386 includes portions of Doc. 201 and Doc. 202], 391 [Pg. 391 is part of Doc. 206], 403 [Pg. 403 is part of Doc. 214], 423 [Pg. 423 includes portions of Doc. 225 and Doc. 226], 426–427 [Pgs. 426–427 include portions of Doc. 228, Doc. 229, and Doc. 230]

Cargo, William I., 793 [Pg. 793 is part of Doc. 506]

Carim, Fuad, 1640n [Pg. 1640 includes portions of Doc. 1140 and Doc. 1141]

Carinthian question, 368 [Pg. 368 is part of Doc. 190]

Carney, Vice Adm. Robert B., 1640n [Pg. 1640 includes portions of Doc. 1140 and Doc. 1141]

Carson, Col. Marion, 1781 [Pg. 1781 is part of Doc. 1235]

Carter, Brig. Gen. Marshal S., 727n [Pg. 727 includes portions of Doc. 450 and Doc. 451]

Central Intelligence Agency, 182 [Pg. 182 includes portions of Doc. 77 and Doc. 78], 1134 [Pg. 1134 is part of Doc. 760], 1204 [Pg. 1204 is part of Doc. 813]

Ceylon. see Sri Lanka.

Chadwick, John E., 93 [Pg. 93 includes portions of Doc. 14 and Doc. 15], 107–108 [Pgs. 107–108 include portions of Doc. 21, Doc. 22, and Doc. 23], 134–135 [Pgs. 134–135 include portions of Doc. 43, Doc. 44, and Doc. 45], 143 [Pg. 143 is part of Doc. 51]

Chapman, Wilbert M., 158n [Pg. 158 is part of Doc. 66]

Chapman-Andrews, Edwin A., 190 [Pg. 190 is part of Doc. 84], 193 [Pg. 193 is part of Doc. 87], 221–222 [Pgs. 221–222 include portions of Doc. 100 and Doc. 101], 780 [Pg. 780 includes portions of Doc. 494 and Doc. 495], 1373–1374 [Pgs. 1373–1374 include portions of Doc. 954 and Doc. 955], 1404–1405 [Pgs. 1404–1405 include portions of Doc. 976, Doc. 977, and Doc. 978]

Charles-Roux, Francois, 197n [Pg. 197 includes portions of Doc. 89 and Doc. 90]

Chataigneau, Yves, 365n [Pg. 365 is part of Doc. 188]

Chauvel, Jean, 399–400 [Pgs. 399–400 include portions of Doc. 211, Doc. 212, and Doc. 213]

Chiang Kai-shek, 53 [Pg. 53 is part of Doc. 8], 576 [Pg. 576 is part of Doc. 330]

Chiati, M.B., 1304 [Pg. 1304 is part of Doc. 903], 1327–1328 [Pgs. 1327–1328 include portions of Doc. 919, Doc. 920, Doc. 921, and Doc. 922], 1350 [Pg. 1350 includes portions of Doc. 936 and Doc. 937]

Childs, J. Rives, 58 [Pg. 58 is part of Doc. 10], 91 [Pg. 91 is part of Doc. 14], 107 [Pg. 107 includes portions of Doc. 21 and Doc. 22], 116n [Pg. 116 is part of Doc. 25], 127–128 [Pgs. 127–128 include portions of Doc. 34, Doc. 35, Doc. 36, and Doc. 37], 129n [Pg. 129 includes portions of Doc. 37 and Doc. 38], 133 [Pg. 133 is part of Doc. 42], 136 [Pg. 136 includes portions of Doc. 45 and Doc. 46], 160–161 [Pgs. 160–161 include portions of Doc. 66, Doc. 67, and Doc. 68], 168 [Pg. 168 includes portions of Doc. 72 and Doc. 73], 170 [Pg. 170 is part of Doc. 73], 625–626 [Pgs. 625–626 include portions of Doc. 364 and Doc. 365], 720 [Pg. 720 includes portions of Doc. 444 and Doc. 445], 1414 [Pg. 1414 is part of Doc. 983], 1424n [Pg. 1424 is part of Doc. 992], 1506n [Pg. 1506 includes portions of Doc. 1041 and Doc. 1042], 1573–1574 [Pgs. 1573–1574 include portions of Doc. 1099 and Doc. 1100], 1576–1579 [Pgs. 1576–1579 include portions of Doc. 1101, Doc. 1102, Doc. 1103, Doc. 1104, and Doc. 1105], 1581–1622 [Pgs. 1581–1622 include portions of Doc. 1106, Doc. 1107, Doc. 1108, Doc. 1109, Doc. 1110, Doc. 1111, Doc. 1112, Doc. 1113, Doc. 1114, Doc. 1115, Doc. 1116, Doc. 1117, Doc. 1118, Doc. 1119, Doc. 1120, Doc. 1121, Doc. 1122, Doc. 1123, Doc. 1124, Doc. 1125, and Doc. 1126], 1624–1628 [Pgs. 1624–1628 include portions of Doc. 1127, Doc. 1128, Doc. 1129, Doc. 1130, and Doc. 1131]

Chile, 159 [Pg. 159 is part of Doc. 66], 677 [Pg. 677 includes portions of Doc. 404 and Doc. 405], 1511 [Pg. 1511 includes portions of Doc. 1046 and Doc. 1047]

China (see also Chinese subheadings under individual countries): British policy, 52–54 [Pgs. 52–54 include portions of Doc. 8 and Doc. 9], 613 [Pg. 613 is part of Doc. 354], 907 [Pg. 907 is part of Doc. 590]; Kuomintang, 1751 [Pg. 1751 is part of Doc. 1216]; political and military situation, 12 [Pg. 12 is part of Doc. 3], 53 [Pg. 53 is part of Doc. 8], 576 [Pg. 576 is part of Doc. 330], 613 [Pg. 613 is part of Doc. 354], 837 [Pg. 837 is part of Doc. 533], 1735 [Pg. 1735 is part of Doc. 1207]; U.S. military assistance, 45n [Pg. 45 includes portions of Doc. 4 and Doc. 5], 231 [Pg. 231 is part of Doc. 106], 233 [Pg. 233 includes portions of Doc. 106 and Doc. 107], 472 [Pg. 472 includes portions of Doc. 262 and Doc. 263], 576 [Pg. 576 is part of Doc. 330], 1586 [Pg. 1586 is part of Doc. 1110], 1616 [Pg. 1616 includes portions of Doc. 1122 and Doc. 1123]; U.S. policy, 53 [Pg. 53 is part of Doc. 8]

China Aid Act, 53 [Pg. 53 is part of Doc. 8]

Chinese Communists: Indian policy, 1751–1755 [Pgs. 1751–1755 include portions of Doc. 1216 and Doc. 1217]; Indian recognition, proposed, 1752 [Pg. 1752 includes portions of Doc. 1216 and Doc. 1217], 1755–1756 [Pg. 1755 is part of Doc. 1217]; political and military situation, 12 [Pg. 12 is part of Doc. 3], 53 [Pg. 53 is part of Doc. 8], 576 [Pg. 576 is part of Doc. 330]; Soviet cooperation and support, 53 [Pg. 53 is part of Doc. 8], 1752 [Pg. 1752 includes portions of Doc. 1216 and Doc. 1217], 1754–1756 [Pg. 1754 is part of Doc. 1217]; U.N. representation, question of, 1755–1756 [Pg. 1755 is part of Doc. 1217]

Chopra, I. S., 24 [Pg. 24 is part of Doc. 3]

Chouaib, Mohammad, 1779 [Pg. 1779 is part of Doc. 1234]

Chou En-lai, 1754 [Pg. 1754 is part of Doc. 1217]

Church World Service Committee, 840 [Pg. 840 is part of Doc. 533]

Churchill, Winston, 516n [Pg. 516 includes portions of Doc. 298 and Doc. 299], 592 [Pg. 592 includes portions of Doc. 339 and Doc. 340], 652 [Pg. 652 is part of Doc. 386], 1144 [Pg. 1144 includes portions of Doc. 768 and Doc. 769]

Chyle, Oldrich, 1718–1719 [Pgs. 1718–1719 include portions of Doc. 1193 and Doc. 1194]

Clapp, Gordon R., 67–68 [Pg. 67 is part of Doc. 12], 165 [Pg. 165 is part of Doc. 71], 167 [Pg. 167 includes portions of Doc. 71 and Doc. 72], 177–178 [Pgs. 177–178 include portions of Doc. 74 and Doc. 75], 1327 [Pg. 1327 includes portions of Doc. 919, Doc. 920, and Doc. 921], 1350–1353 [Pgs. 1350–1353 include portions of Doc. 936 and Doc. 937], 1358 [Pg. 1358 includes portions of Doc. 941, Doc. 942, and Doc. 943], 1366–1367 [Pgs. 1366–1367 include portions of Doc. 949, Doc. 950, and Doc. 951], 1369 [Pg. 1369 includes portions of Doc. 951 and Doc. 952], 1375 [Pg. 1375 includes portions of Doc. 956 and Doc. 957], 1382n [Pg. 1382 includes portions of Doc. 960 and Doc. 961], 1390 [Pg. 1390 includes portions of Doc. 966 and Doc. 967], 1393 [Pg. 1393 includes portions of Doc. 969 and Doc. 970], 1403 [Pg. 1403 includes portions of Doc. 975 and Doc. 976], 1408 [Pg. 1408 is part of Doc. 979], 1414–1417 [Pgs. 1414–1417 include portions of Doc. 983 and Doc. 984], 1423 [Pg. 1423 includes portions of Doc. 990 and Doc. 991], 1424n [Pg. 1424 is part of Doc. 992], 1425–1426 [Pgs. 1425–1426 include portions of Doc. 993 and Doc. 994], 1442–1444 [Pgs. 1442–1444 include portions of Doc. 998, Doc. 999, and Doc. 1000], 1450 [Pg. 1450 is part of Doc. 1006], 1452–1453 [Pgs. 1452–1453 include portions of Doc. 1007, Doc. 1008, and Doc. 1009], 1459 [Pg. 1459 includes portions of Doc. 1013 and Doc. 1014], 1463 [Pg. 1463 includes portions of Doc. 1017 and Doc. 1018], 1469–1472 [Pgs. 1469–1472 include portions of Doc. 1020, Doc. 1021, Doc. 1022, Doc. 1023, Doc. 1024, and Doc. 1025], 1477 [Pg. 1477 is part of Doc. 1026], 1479 [Pg. 1479 is part of Doc. 1026], 1481 [Pg. 1481 includes portions of Doc. 1026 and Doc. 1027], 1493 [Pg. 1493 includes portions of Doc. 1033 and Doc. 1034], 1505 [Pg. 1505 is part of Doc. 1041], 1522 [Pg. 1522 includes portions of Doc. 1057 and Doc. 1058], 1548 [Pg. 1548 includes portions of Doc. 1080 and Doc. 1081], 1563–1564 [Pgs. 1563–1564 include portions of Doc. 1092, Doc. 1093, and Doc. 1094]

Clark, Harlan B., 85–86 [Pg. 85 is part of Doc. 12], 91 [Pg. 91 is part of Doc. 14], 94–96 [Pgs. 94–96 include portions of Doc. 15, Doc. 16, and Doc. 17], 99–100 [Pgs. 99–100 include portions of Doc. 17 and Doc. 18], 105 [Pg. 105 includes portions of Doc. 20 and Doc. 21], 144 [Pg. 144 includes portions of Doc. 51 and Doc. 52], 181n [Pg. 181 includes portions of Doc. 76 and Doc. 77], 184 [Pg. 184 includes portions of Doc. 78 and Doc. 79], 789 [Pg. 789 includes portions of Doc. 503, Doc. 504, and Doc. 505], 792n [Pg. 792 is part of Doc. 505], 1310–1311 [Pgs. 1310–1311 include portions of Doc. 906 and Doc. 907], 1350–1354 [Pgs. 1350–1354 include portions of Doc. 936, Doc. 937, and Doc. 938], 1367–1368 [Pgs. 1367–1368 include portions of Doc. 950 and Doc. 951], 1440 [Pg. 1440 includes portions of Doc. 997 and Doc. 998], 1632–1633 [Pgs. 1632–1633 include portions of Doc. 1133, Doc. 1134, and Doc. 1135]

Clementis, Vladimir, 305n [Pg. 305 is part of Doc. 150], 334 [Pg. 334 is part of Doc. 166]

Clifford, Clark M., 602n [Pg. 602 includes portions of Doc. 348 and Doc. 349], 623n [Pg. 623 includes portions of Doc. 363 and Doc. 364], 628 [Pg. 628 is part of Doc. 367], 741n [Pg. 741 includes portions of Doc. 458 and Doc. 459], 1023 [Pg. 1023 includes portions of Doc. 666 and Doc. 667], 1115 [Pg. 1115 includes portions of Doc. 745, Doc. 746, and Doc. 747], 1291n [Pg. 1291 includes portions of Doc. 892 and Doc. 893], 1328n [Pg. 1328 includes portions of Doc. 921 and Doc. 922], 1522n [Pg. 1522 includes portions of Doc. 1057 and Doc. 1058]

Cloutier, Bernice, 1781 [Pg. 1781 is part of Doc. 1235]

Clutton, George L., 186n [Pg. 186 is part of Doc. 81], 197–198 [Pgs. 197–198 include portions of Doc. 89 and Doc. 90], 219–220 [Pgs. 219–220 include portions of Doc. 97, Doc. 98, and Doc. 99]

Cochran, J. Merle, 53 [Pg. 53 is part of Doc. 8]

Cohen, Benjamin V., 456 [Pg. 456 includes portions of Doc. 249, Doc. 250, and Doc. 251]

Colban, Erik, 1686 [Pg. 1686 is part of Doc. 1165], 1718 [Pg. 1718 is part of Doc. 1193], 1723–1724 [Pgs. 1723–1724 include portions of Doc. 1197, Doc. 1198, Doc. 1199, and Doc. 1200], 1769 [Pg. 1769 is part of Doc. 1225]

Collins, F.D., 1708–1710 [Pgs. 1708–1710 include portions of Doc. 1186, Doc. 1187, and Doc. 1188], 1742–1744 [Pgs. 1742–1744 include portions of Doc. 1210, Doc. 1211, and Doc. 1212]

Collins, Walter, 765 [Pg. 765 includes portions of Doc. 480 and Doc. 481]

Colombia, 1724 [Pg. 1724 includes portions of Doc. 1198, Doc. 1199, and Doc. 1200]

Comay, Michael, 842–843 [Pgs. 842–843 include portions of Doc. 533, Doc. 534, and Doc. 535], 905n [Pg. 905 includes portions of Doc. 588 and Doc. 589], 911–915 [Pgs. 911–915 include portions of Doc. 591 and Doc. 592], 923n [Pg. 923 is part of Doc. 600], 925 [Pg. 925 includes portions of Doc. 601 and Doc. 602], 955 [Pg. 955 is part of Doc. 615], 975 [Pg. 975 is part of Doc. 633], 1085 [Pg. 1085 includes portions of Doc. 719 and Doc. 720], 1125 [Pg. 1125 is part of Doc. 753], 1276 [Pg. 1276 includes portions of Doc. 879, Doc. 880, and Doc. 881], 1320 [Pg. 1320 is part of Doc. 913], 1367n [Pg. 1367 includes portions of Doc. 950 and Doc. 951], 1419–1420 [Pgs. 1419–1420 include portions of Doc. 986, Doc. 987, and Doc. 988], 1481–1482 [Pgs. 1481–1482 include portions of Doc. 1026, Doc. 1027, and Doc. 1028], 1504 [Pg. 1504 includes portions of Doc. 1039 and Doc. 1040], 1521 [Pg. 1521 is part of Doc. 1057]

Committee for Holy Land Appeal, 840 [Pg. 840 is part of Doc. 533]

Commonwealth, 11 [Pg. 11 is part of Doc. 3], 13 [Pg. 13 is part of Doc. 3], 22 [Pg. 22 is part of Doc. 3], 453 [Pg. 453 is part of Doc. 249], 694 [Pg. 694 includes portions of Doc. 419, Doc. 420, and Doc. 421], 836 [Pg. 836 is part of Doc. 533], 1759 [Pg. 1759 includes portions of Doc. 1218 and Doc. 1219]

Commonwealth Conference at Colombo, 1950, 1563 [Pg. 1563 includes portions of Doc. 1092 and Doc. 1093]

Commonwealth Conference at London, 1949, 1703 [Pg. 1703 includes portions of Doc. 1181 and Doc. 1182]

Communist Information Bureau (Cominform), 250–253 [Pgs. 250–253 include portions of Doc. 119, Doc. 120, and Doc. 121], 255 [Pg. 255 is part of Doc. 121], 257–258 [Pgs. 257–258 include portions of Doc. 122, Doc. 123, and Doc. 124], 261 [Pg. 261 is part of Doc. 126], 263n [Pg. 263 includes portions of Doc. 128 and Doc. 129], 264 [Pg. 264 is part of Doc. 129], 267–268 [Pgs. 267–268 include portions of Doc. 131 and Doc. 132], 276 [Pg. 276 is part of Doc. 133], 281 [Pg. 281 includes portions of Doc. 135 and Doc. 136], 287–288 [Pgs. 287–288 include portions of Doc. 138 and Doc. 139], 291–292 [Pgs. 291–292 include portions of Doc. 141, Doc. 142, and Doc. 143], 294 [Pg. 294 is part of Doc. 144], 313 [Pg. 313 is part of Doc. 153], 360n [Pg. 360 includes portions of Doc. 182, Doc. 183, and Doc. 184], 364 [Pg. 364 includes portions of Doc. 186 and Doc. 187], 366n [Pg. 366 includes portions of Doc. 188 and Doc. 189], 368–369 [Pgs. 368–369 include portions of Doc. 190 and Doc. 191], 375 [Pg. 375 is part of Doc. 194], 381 [Pg. 381 includes portions of Doc. 199 and Doc. 200], 393–394 [Pgs. 393–394 include portions of Doc. 207 and Doc. 208], 408 [Pg. 408 is part of Doc. 215], 410 [Pg. 410 is part of Doc. 216], 412 [Pg. 412 includes portions of Doc. 216, Doc. 217, and Doc. 218], 427 [Pg. 427 includes portions of Doc. 229 and Doc. 230], 459 [Pg. 459 is part of Doc. 253], 463 [Pg. 463 includes portions of Doc. 256 and Doc. 257], 467n [Pg. 467 is part of Doc. 260]

Congress, U.S. Chiang Kai-shek, support for, 53 [Pg. 53 is part of Doc. 8]

Consular representation abroad, 1569 [Pg. 1569 is part of Doc. 1096]

Greece, U.S. aid for, 229 [Pg. 229 is part of Doc. 105], 231–232 [Pg. 231 is part of Doc. 106], 234 [Pg. 234 is part of Doc. 107], 247 [Pg. 247 is part of Doc. 117], 271–272 [Pg. 271 is part of Doc. 133], 277 [Pg. 277 is part of Doc. 133], 281 [Pg. 281 includes portions of Doc. 135 and Doc. 136], 284 [Pg. 284 is part of Doc. 136], 313–314 [Pgs. 313–314 include portions of Doc. 153 and Doc. 154], 318 [Pg. 318 is part of Doc. 157], 331–332 [Pg. 331 is part of Doc. 165], 339 [Pg. 339 includes portions of Doc. 169 and Doc. 170], 359 [Pg. 359 includes portions of Doc. 181 and Doc. 182], 362 [Pg. 362 is part of Doc. 185], 379 [Pg. 379 includes portions of Doc. 198 and Doc. 199], 431 [Pg. 431 is part of Doc. 234], 462 [Pg. 462 includes portions of Doc. 255 and Doc. 256]

Greek-Turkish aid program, 1649 [Pg. 1649 is part of Doc. 1146], 1661 [Pg. 1661 is part of Doc. 1152]

House Appropriations Committee, 247 [Pg. 247 is part of Doc. 117]

House Foreign Affairs Committee, 379 [Pg. 379 includes portions of Doc. 198 and Doc. 199], 839 [Pg. 839 is part of Doc. 533]

House of Representatives, 830 [Pg. 830 is part of Doc. 533], 839 [Pg. 839 is part of Doc. 533]

House Rules Committee, 839 [Pg. 839 is part of Doc. 533]

Iran, U.S. economic and military assistance for, 472 [Pg. 472 includes portions of Doc. 262 and Doc. 263], 487n [Pg. 487 includes portions of Doc. 274 and Doc. 275], 503–504 [Pgs. 503–504 include portions of Doc. 286, Doc. 287, and Doc. 288], 506 [Pg. 506 is part of Doc. 290], 517–518 [Pgs. 517–518 include portions of Doc. 299, Doc. 300, and Doc. 301], 521 [Pg. 521 is part of Doc. 302], 523–525 [Pgs. 523–525 include portions of Doc. 303 and Doc. 304], 547 [Pg. 547 is part of Doc. 315], 552 [Pg. 552 is part of Doc. 316], 556 [Pg. 556 is part of Doc. 317], 558–560 [Pgs. 558–560 include portions of Doc. 319 and Doc. 320], 562 [Pg. 562 includes portions of Doc. 321 and Doc. 322], 567 [Pg. 567 includes portions of Doc. 325 and Doc. 326], 570 [Pg. 570 is part of Doc. 328], 573 [Pg. 573 is part of Doc. 329], 576 [Pg. 576 is part of Doc. 330], 584 [Pg. 584 is part of Doc. 335], 593 [Pg. 593 is part of Doc. 340]

Military assistance program, 281n [Pg. 281 includes portions of Doc. 135 and Doc. 136], 292n [Pg. 292 includes portions of Doc. 142 and Doc. 143], 376 [Pg. 376 includes portions of Doc. 194 and Doc. 195], 378–379 [Pgs. 378–379 include portions of Doc. 195, Doc. 196, Doc. 197, Doc. 198, and Doc. 199], 558 [Pg. 558 includes portions of Doc. 319 and Doc. 320], 560 [Pg. 560 is part of Doc. 320], 573 [Pg. 573 is part of Doc. 329], 576 [Pg. 576 is part of Doc. 330], 959 [Pg. 959 includes portions of Doc. 618 and Doc. 619], 1030 [Pg. 1030 includes portions of Doc. 670 and Doc. 671], 1586 [Pg. 1586 is part of Doc. 1110], 1601 [Pg. 1601 is part of Doc. 1118], 1615–1616 [Pgs. 1615–1616 include portions of Doc. 1121, Doc. 1122, and Doc. 1123], 1622 [Pg. 1622 includes portions of Doc. 1125 and Doc. 1126], 1658 [Pg. 1658 is part of Doc. 1150]

North Atlantic Treaty, 1651 [Pg. 1651 is part of Doc. 1146]

Palestine question, 68 [Pg. 68 is part of Doc. 12], 672 [Pg. 672 is part of Doc. 402]

Palestinian refugees, 640 [Pg. 640 includes portions of Doc. 375 and Doc. 376], 643 [Pg. 643 includes portions of Doc. 379 and Doc. 380], 663 [Pg. 663 includes portions of Doc. 393 and Doc. 394], 665 [Pg. 665 includes portions of Doc. 394 and Doc. 395], 677 [Pg. 677 includes portions of Doc. 404 and Doc. 405], 697–698 [Pgs. 697–698 include portions of Doc. 423, Doc. 424, and Doc. 425], 762 [Pg. 762 is part of Doc. 479], 805–806 [Pgs. 805–806 include portions of Doc. 514 and Doc. 515], 830 [Pg. 830 is part of Doc. 533], 838–839 [Pg. 838 is part of Doc. 533], 841 [Pg. 841 is part of Doc. 533], 858 [Pg. 858 is part of Doc. 546], 862 [Pg. 862 includes portions of Doc. 548 and Doc. 549], 893 [Pg. 893 is part of Doc. 577], 899 [Pg. 899 includes portions of Doc. 583, Doc. 584, and Doc. 585], 907 [Pg. 907 is part of Doc. 590], 909 [Pg. 909 is part of Doc. 590], 939 [Pg. 939 is part of Doc. 608], 941 [Pg. 941 is part of Doc. 608], 964–965 [Pgs. 964–965 include portions of Doc. 622, Doc. 623, Doc. 624, and Doc. 625], 983 [Pg. 983 includes portions of Doc. 639 and Doc. 640], 987 [Pg. 987 is part of Doc. 640], 1014 [Pg. 1014 is part of Doc. 660], 1033 [Pg. 1033 is part of Doc. 672], 1038 [Pg. 1038 includes portions of Doc. 675 and Doc. 676], 1047–1048 [Pgs. 1047–1048 include portions of Doc. 685, Doc. 686, and Doc. 687], 1056 [Pg. 1056 includes portions of Doc. 691, Doc. 692, and Doc. 693], 1070 [Pg. 1070 is part of Doc. 703], 1087n [Pg. 1087 includes portions of Doc. 721 and Doc. 722], 1108 [Pg. 1108 includes portions of Doc. 738 and Doc. 739], 1138–1139 [Pg. 1138 is part of Doc. 763], 1156 [Pg. 1156 includes portions of Doc. 776 and Doc. 777], 1203 [Pg. 1203 includes portions of Doc. 812 and Doc. 813], 1209–1211 [Pgs. 1209–1211 include portions of Doc. 817 and Doc. 818], 1214 [Pg. 1214 includes portions of Doc. 821 and Doc. 822], 1220 [Pg. 1220 is part of Doc. 826], 1237 [Pg. 1237 includes portions of Doc. 839 and Doc. 840], 1260 [Pg. 1260 includes portions of Doc. 863 and Doc. 864], 1282 [Pg. 1282 includes portions of Doc. 884 and Doc. 885], 1333 [Pg. 1333 is part of Doc. 925], 1353 [Pg. 1353 is part of Doc. 937], 1357 [Pg. 1357 includes portions of Doc. 940 and Doc. 941], 1459–1460 [Pgs. 1459–1460 include portions of Doc. 1013, Doc. 1014, and Doc. 1015], 1463–1464 [Pgs. 1463–1464 include portions of Doc. 1017 and Doc. 1018], 1480 [Pg. 1480 is part of Doc. 1026], 1506 [Pg. 1506 includes portions of Doc. 1041 and Doc. 1042], 1557–1558 [Pgs. 1557–1558 include portions of Doc. 1086, Doc. 1087, and Doc. 1088], 1564 [Pg. 1564 includes portions of Doc. 1093 and Doc. 1094]

Point Four program, 559 [Pg. 559 is part of Doc. 320], 593 [Pg. 593 is part of Doc. 340]

Saudi Arabia, U.S. policy toward, 20 [Pg. 20 is part of Doc. 3], 47–48 [Pgs. 47–48 include portions of Doc. 5, Doc. 6, and Doc. 7], 172 [Pg. 172 is part of Doc. 73], 1575 [Pg. 1575 is part of Doc. 1101], 1577 [Pg. 1577 includes portions of Doc. 1102 and Doc. 1103], 1579 [Pg. 1579 includes portions of Doc. 1104 and Doc. 1105], 1584 [Pg. 1584 includes portions of Doc. 1109 and Doc. 1110], 1601 [Pg. 1601 is part of Doc. 1118], 1615–1616 [Pgs. 1615–1616 include portions of Doc. 1121, Doc. 1122, and Doc. 1123]

Senate, 376 [Pg. 376 includes portions of Doc. 194 and Doc. 195], 830 [Pg. 830 is part of Doc. 533], 839 [Pg. 839 is part of Doc. 533], 1651 [Pg. 1651 is part of Doc. 1146]

Senate Foreign Relations Committee, 506 [Pg. 506 is part of Doc. 290], 648 [Pg. 648 is part of Doc. 383], 672 [Pg. 672 is part of Doc. 402], 838–839 [Pg. 838 is part of Doc. 533]

Turkey, U.S. economic and military aid for, 271–272 [Pg. 271 is part of Doc. 133], 277 [Pg. 277 is part of Doc. 133], 1643 [Pg. 1643 includes portions of Doc. 1142 and Doc. 1143], 1651 [Pg. 1651 is part of Doc. 1146], 1657–1658 [Pgs. 1657–1658 include portions of Doc. 1149 and Doc. 1150], 1671 [Pg. 1671 includes portions of Doc. 1153 and Doc. 1154]

Vandenberg resolution, June 11, 1948, 45 [Pg. 45 includes portions of Doc. 4 and Doc. 5]

War powers, 530–551 [Pgs. 530–551 include portions of Doc. 310, Doc. 311, Doc. 312, Doc. 313, Doc. 314, and Doc. 315]

Connally, Tom, 517–518 [Pgs. 517–518 include portions of Doc. 299, Doc. 300, and Doc. 301], 697n [Pg. 697 includes portions of Doc. 423 and Doc. 424], 839 [Pg. 839 is part of Doc. 533], 1048 [Pg. 1048 includes portions of Doc. 686 and Doc. 687], 1210 [Pg. 1210 is part of Doc. 818], 1333 [Pg. 1333 is part of Doc. 925]

Connelly, Matthew J., 727n [Pg. 727 includes portions of Doc. 450 and Doc. 451], 878n [Pg. 878 includes portions of Doc. 563 and Doc. 564], 1083n [Pg. 1083 is part of Doc. 717], 1166 [Pg. 1166 includes portions of Doc. 785 and Doc. 786], 1261 [Pg. 1261 includes portions of Doc. 865 and Doc. 866], 1522 [Pg. 1522 includes portions of Doc. 1057 and Doc. 1058]

Conolly, Rear A dm. Richard L., 166–167 [Pgs. 166–167 include portions of Doc. 71 and Doc. 72], 188–192 [Pgs. 188–192 include portions of Doc. 83, Doc. 84, Doc. 85, Doc. 86, and Doc. 87], 194–195 [Pgs. 194–195 include portions of Doc. 87, Doc. 88, and Doc. 89], 195 [Pg. 195 includes portions of Doc. 88 and Doc. 89], 203–207 [Pgs. 203–207 include portions of Doc. 92, Doc. 93, Doc. 94, and Doc. 95], 1640–1642 [Pgs. 1640–1642 include portions of Doc. 1140, Doc. 1141, and Doc. 1142], 1681 [Pg. 1681 is part of Doc. 1160]

Conover, Carroll F., 195–197 [Pgs. 195–197 include portions of Doc. 88, Doc. 89, and Doc. 90]

Conscientious objectors, treatment of, 259–260 [Pgs. 259–260 include portions of Doc. 124, Doc. 125, and Doc. 126]

Consolidated Refineries, Ltd., 137n [Pg. 137 includes portions of Doc. 46, Doc. 47, and Doc. 48], 142 [Pg. 142 includes portions of Doc. 50 and Doc. 51], 145n [Pg. 145 includes portions of Doc. 52 and Doc. 53]

Cordier, Andrew, 1144 [Pg. 1144 includes portions of Doc. 768 and Doc. 769], 1465 [Pg. 1465 includes portions of Doc. 1018 and Doc. 1019], 1471–1472 [Pgs. 1471–1472 include portions of Doc. 1023, Doc. 1024, and Doc. 1025]

Corfu incident, 343 [Pg. 343 is part of Doc. 171], 345 [Pg. 345 includes portions of Doc. 172 and Doc. 173]

Costa Rica, 159 [Pg. 159 is part of Doc. 66]

Council of Foreign Ministers, 265n [Pg. 265 includes portions of Doc. 130 and Doc. 131], 289 [Pg. 289 is part of Doc. 140], 293 [Pg. 293 is part of Doc. 143], 299 [Pg. 299 is part of Doc. 147], 302 [Pg. 302 is part of Doc. 149], 320 [Pg. 320 includes portions of Doc. 158 and Doc. 159], 322–325 [Pgs. 322–325 include portions of Doc. 159, Doc. 160, Doc. 161, Doc. 162, and Doc. 163], 333n [Pg. 333 includes portions of Doc. 165 and Doc. 166], 334–335 [Pg. 334 is part of Doc. 166], 338 [Pg. 338 is part of Doc. 169], 345–346 [Pgs. 345–346 include portions of Doc. 172 and Doc. 173], 350n [Pg. 350 is part of Doc. 176], 352n [Pg. 352 is part of Doc. 177], 366 [Pg. 366 includes portions of Doc. 188 and Doc. 189], 375 [Pg. 375 is part of Doc. 194], 415 [Pg. 415 is part of Doc. 219]

Council of Western Europe, 35 [Pg. 35 is part of Doc. 4], 1671 [Pg. 1671 includes portions of Doc. 1153 and Doc. 1154]

Cox, G.E., 1490 [Pg. 1490 includes portions of Doc. 1031 and Doc. 1032]

Cripps, Sir Stafford, 53 [Pg. 53 is part of Doc. 8]

Crocker, Edward S., 121 [Pg. 121 includes portions of Doc. 30 and Doc. 31], 157n [Pg. 157 includes portions of Doc. 65 and Doc. 66], 368 [Pg. 368 is part of Doc. 190], 180 [Pg. 180 is part of Doc. 76], 846n [Pg. 846 includes portions of Doc. 536 and Doc. 537], 994–995 [Pgs. 994–995 include portions of Doc. 645, Doc. 646, and Doc. 647]

Crocker, Gen. Sir John T., 200 [Pg. 200 is part of Doc. 91], 456 [Pg. 456 includes portions of Doc. 249, Doc. 250, and Doc. 251]

Cromie, Leonard J., 287–288 [Pgs. 287–288 include portions of Doc. 138 and Doc. 139], 298–299 [Pgs. 298–299 include portions of Doc. 146 and Doc. 147], 330–333 [Pgs. 330–333 include portions of Doc. 164, Doc. 165, and Doc. 166], 353n [Pg. 353 includes portions of Doc. 177 and Doc. 178], 356–357 [Pg. 356 is part of Doc. 180], 370n [Pg. 370 includes portions of Doc. 191 and Doc. 192], 373–376 [Pgs. 373–376 include portions of Doc. 194 and Doc. 195], 381–384 [Pgs. 381–384 include portions of Doc. 199 and Doc. 200], 412–414 [Pgs. 412–414 include portions of Doc. 216, Doc. 217, Doc. 218, and Doc. 219], 423n [Pg. 423 includes portions of Doc. 225 and Doc. 226], 434 [Pg. 434 includes portions of Doc. 236 and Doc. 237], 468n [Pg. 468 is part of Doc. 261]

Crossman, Richard, 742n [Pg. 742 includes portions of Doc. 459 and Doc. 460]

Crosthwaite, Ponsonby M., 382n [Pg. 382 is part of Doc. 200], 385–386 [Pgs. 385–386 include portions of Doc. 201 and Doc. 202]

Cuba, 1284 [Pg. 1284 includes portions of Doc. 886 and Doc. 887]

Curson, B. R., 1761 [Pg. 1761 is part of Doc. 1220]

Cyprus: British military forces, 220 [Pg. 220 includes portions of Doc. 98 and Doc. 99]; Communist activities, 167n [Pg. 167 includes portions of Doc. 71 and Doc. 72], 171 [Pg. 171 is part of Doc. 73]; Greek claim to, 171 [Pg. 171 is part of Doc. 73]; Jewish internees, release of, 673–674 [Pg. 673 is part of Doc. 402], 680–681 [Pgs. 680–681 include portions of Doc. 406, Doc. 407, and Doc. 408], 691–692 [Pgs. 691–692 include portions of Doc. 417 and Doc. 418], 711 [Pg. 711 includes portions of Doc. 434 and Doc. 435]; Soviet policy, 343 [Pg. 343 is part of Doc. 171]; Turkish claim to, 171 [Pg. 171 is part of Doc. 73]; U.S. access to British air facilities on, 32 [Pg. 32 is part of Doc. 4]; U.S. policy, 171 [Pg. 171 is part of Doc. 73], 345 [Pg. 345 includes portions of Doc. 172 and Doc. 173]

Cyrenaica. see under Libya.

Czechoslovakia, 15 [Pg. 15 is part of Doc. 3], 87 [Pg. 87 is part of Doc. 12], 267 [Pg. 267 includes portions of Doc. 131 and Doc. 132], 657 [Pg. 657 is part of Doc. 391], 1058 [Pg. 1058 includes portions of Doc. 695 and Doc. 696], 1636 [Pg. 1636 is part of Doc. 1137], 1697 [Pg. 1697 is part of Doc. 1175], 1724 [Pg. 1724 includes portions of Doc. 1198, Doc. 1199, and Doc. 1200]

Dalietos, Alexander, 258 [Pg. 258 includes portions of Doc. 123 and Doc. 124]

Davidson, Jo, 423 [Pg. 423 includes portions of Doc. 225 and Doc. 226]

Dayan, Col. Moshe, 598 [Pg. 598 includes portions of Doc. 344 and Doc. 345], 599n [Pg. 599 includes portions of Doc. 345 and Doc. 346], 630 [Pg. 630 includes portions of Doc. 369 and Doc. 370], 644 [Pg. 644 is part of Doc. 381], 661 [Pg. 661 includes portions of Doc. 392 and Doc. 393], 663 [Pg. 663 includes portions of Doc. 393 and Doc. 394], 665 [Pg. 665 includes portions of Doc. 394 and Doc. 395], 668–669 [Pgs. 668–669 include portions of Doc. 398, Doc. 399, and Doc. 400], 680n [Pg. 680 includes portions of Doc. 406 and Doc. 407], 683n [Pg. 683 includes portions of Doc. 408 and Doc. 409], 684 [Pg. 684 includes portions of Doc. 409 and Doc. 410], 685n [Pg. 685 includes portions of Doc. 410 and Doc. 411], 710–712 [Pgs. 710–712 include portions of Doc. 433, Doc. 434, Doc. 435, and Doc. 436], 729 [Pg. 729 includes portions of Doc. 451 and Doc. 452], 733 [Pg. 733 is part of Doc. 455], 747 [Pg. 747 includes portions of Doc. 464 and Doc. 465], 808 [Pg. 808 is part of Doc. 516], 817 [Pg. 817 includes portions of Doc. 522, Doc. 523, and Doc. 524], 851–852 [Pgs. 851–852 include portions of Doc. 541 and Doc. 542], 860–861 [Pgs. 860–861 include portions of Doc. 547 and Doc. 548], 867 [Pg. 867 is part of Doc. 554], 873 [Pg. 873 includes portions of Doc. 560 and Doc. 561], 912 [Pg. 912 is part of Doc. 592], 922 [Pg. 922 is part of Doc. 599], 960–961 [Pgs. 960–961 include portions of Doc. 619, Doc. 620, and Doc. 621], 978 [Pg. 978 includes portions of Doc. 634 and Doc. 635], 1039–1042 [Pgs. 1039–1042 include portions of Doc. 676, Doc. 677, Doc. 678, Doc. 679, and Doc. 680], 1049 [Pg. 1049 includes portions of Doc. 687 and Doc. 688], 1114 [Pg. 1114 includes portions of Doc. 744 and Doc. 745], 1131 [Pg. 1131 includes portions of Doc. 757 and Doc. 758], 1147 [Pg. 1147 is part of Doc. 771], 1162–1163 [Pgs. 1162–1163 include portions of Doc. 781, Doc. 782, and Doc. 783], 1166 [Pg. 1166 includes portions of Doc. 785 and Doc. 786], 1182 [Pg. 1182 includes portions of Doc. 794 and Doc. 795], 1184 [Pg. 1184 includes portions of Doc. 795 and Doc. 796], 1193 [Pg. 1193 includes portions of Doc. 804 and Doc. 805], 1206 [Pg. 1206 includes portions of Doc. 814 and Doc. 815], 1314 [Pg. 1314 includes portions of Doc. 908 and Doc. 909], 1421 [Pg. 1421 is part of Doc. 988], 1502–1503 [Pgs. 1502–1503 include portions of Doc. 1038 and Doc. 1039], 1560 [Pg. 1560 is part of Doc. 1089], 1562 [Pg. 1562 is part of Doc. 1091]

Daynac, M., 195–197 [Pgs. 195–197 include portions of Doc. 88, Doc. 89, and Doc. 90]

Debbas, Hashem, 1040n [Pg. 1040 is part of Doc. 678]

Defense, U.S. Department of: Egypt: Anglo-American military staff talks, proposed participation in, 204 [Pg. 204 is part of Doc. 92], 207 [Pg. 207 includes portions of Doc. 94 and Doc. 95]; training in the United States of military officers, proposed, 1116 [Pg. 1116 is part of Doc. 747]

Greece: British troops, proposed withdrawal of, 447 [Pg. 447 includes portions of Doc. 244, Doc. 245, and Doc. 246]; Greek armed forces, size of, 300 [Pg. 300 is part of Doc. 148], 467 [Pg. 467 is part of Doc. 260]

Iran: U.S. military assistance, 555–559 [Pgs. 555–559 include portions of Doc. 316, Doc. 317, Doc. 318, Doc. 319, and Doc. 320], 563 [Pg. 563 includes portions of Doc. 322 and Doc. 323], 582n [Pg. 582 includes portions of Doc. 333 and Doc. 334], 589–591 [Pgs. 589–591 include portions of Doc. 337, Doc. 338, and Doc. 339]; U.S. military mission, 568 [Pg. 568 includes portions of Doc. 326 and Doc. 327]

Iraq-Syrian union, proposed, 182 [Pg. 182 includes portions of Doc. 77 and Doc. 78]

Israel: U.S. military technical assistance, request for, 898 [Pg. 898 includes portions of Doc. 582 and Doc. 583], 1088 [Pg. 1088 is part of Doc. 722], 1116 [Pg. 1116 is part of Doc. 747], 1524 [Pg. 1524 includes portions of Doc. 1059 and Doc. 1060]; U.S. policy, 1339 [Pg. 1339 includes portions of Doc. 930 and Doc. 931]

Kashmir dispute, 1687–1688 [Pgs. 1687–1688 include portions of Doc. 1165 and Doc. 1166]

Military assistance program, 225 [Pg. 225 is part of Doc. 104], 1492 [Pg. 1492 is part of Doc. 1033], 1524 [Pg. 1524 includes portions of Doc. 1059 and Doc. 1060]

Near and Middle East, U.S. policy in, 1203 [Pg. 1203 includes portions of Doc. 812 and Doc. 813]

Palestinian refugees, relief for, 697 [Pg. 697 includes portions of Doc. 423 and Doc. 424], 1134 [Pg. 1134 is part of Doc. 760], 1558 [Pg. 1558 includes portions of Doc. 1086, Doc. 1087, and Doc. 1088]

Saudi Arabia: Dhahran airbase agreement, negotiations concerning renewal of, 1575 [Pg. 1575 is part of Doc. 1101], 1579 [Pg. 1579 includes portions of Doc. 1104 and Doc. 1105], 1583 [Pg. 1583 includes portions of Doc. 1108 and Doc. 1109], 1592–1593 [Pg. 1592 is part of Doc. 1111], 1600–1601 [Pgs. 1600–1601 include portions of Doc. 1117 and Doc. 1118], 1604n [Pg. 1604 is part of Doc. 1119]; U.S. military assistance, 1580 [Pg. 1580 includes portions of Doc. 1105 and Doc. 1106], 1596 [Pg. 1596 includes portions of Doc. 1113 and Doc. 1114], 1599–1600 [Pgs. 1599–1600 include portions of Doc. 1116, Doc. 1117, and Doc. 1118], 1602 [Pg. 1602 includes portions of Doc. 1118 and Doc. 1119], 1618 [Pg. 1618 is part of Doc. 1124], 1624–1625 [Pgs. 1624–1625 include portions of Doc. 1127, Doc. 1128, and Doc. 1129]; U.S. policy, 1585–1586 [Pg. 1585 is part of Doc. 1110]

Tripoli, U.S. airbase rights in, 59–60 [Pgs. 59–60 include portions of Doc. 10, Doc. 11, and Doc. 12]

U.N. military observers for Palestine, 800–801 [Pgs. 800–801 include portions of Doc. 509 and Doc. 510], 864–865 [Pgs. 864–865 include portions of Doc. 551 and Doc. 552]

U.N. Special Committee on the Balkans, logistic support for, 312 [Pg. 312 includes portions of Doc. 152 and Doc. 153]

Deimel, Henry L., 542–545 [Pgs. 542–545 include portions of Doc. 313, Doc. 314, and Doc. 315]

De Kock, Dr., 1808–1809 [Pg. 1808 is part of Doc. 1242]

De la Tour du Pin Verclause, 777 [Pg. 777 is part of Doc. 493], 999 [Pg. 999 includes portions of Doc. 649 and Doc. 650], 1300 [Pg. 1300 is part of Doc. 899], 1465 [Pg. 1465 includes portions of Doc. 1018 and Doc. 1019]

Delvoie, Lt. Gen. Maurice, 1686 [Pg. 1686 is part of Doc. 1165], 1688 [Pg. 1688 is part of Doc. 1166], 1720 [Pg. 1720 includes portions of Doc. 1194 and Doc. 1195], 1723–1724 [Pgs. 1723–1724 include portions of Doc. 1197, Doc. 1198, Doc. 1199, and Doc. 1200], 1761 [Pg. 1761 is part of Doc. 1220]

Dendramis, Vassili G., 227–233 [Pgs. 227–233 include portions of Doc. 105, Doc. 106, and Doc. 107], 239 [Pg. 239 is part of Doc. 112], 253 [Pg. 253 includes portions of Doc. 119, Doc. 120, and Doc. 121], 258–261 [Pgs. 258–261 include portions of Doc. 123, Doc. 124, Doc. 125, and Doc. 126], 287–288 [Pgs. 287–288 include portions of Doc. 138 and Doc. 139], 299 [Pg. 299 is part of Doc. 147], 315 [Pg. 315 includes portions of Doc. 154 and Doc. 155], 317 [Pg. 317 is part of Doc. 156], 320 [Pg. 320 includes portions of Doc. 158 and Doc. 159], 322–326 [Pgs. 322–326 include portions of Doc. 159, Doc. 160, Doc. 161, Doc. 162, and Doc. 163], 330–333 [Pgs. 330–333 include portions of Doc. 164, Doc. 165, and Doc. 166], 347 [Pg. 347 includes portions of Doc. 173 and Doc. 174], 355n [Pg. 355 includes portions of Doc. 178 and Doc. 179], 370n [Pg. 370 includes portions of Doc. 191 and Doc. 192], 373–376 [Pgs. 373–376 include portions of Doc. 194 and Doc. 195], 385–386 [Pgs. 385–386 include portions of Doc. 201 and Doc. 202], 389–392 [Pgs. 389–392 include portions of Doc. 204, Doc. 205, Doc. 206, and Doc. 207], 401–404 [Pgs. 401–404 include portions of Doc. 213, Doc. 214, and Doc. 215], 409 [Pg. 409 includes portions of Doc. 215 and Doc. 216], 419 [Pg. 419 includes portions of Doc. 222 and Doc. 223], 425 [Pg. 425 includes portions of Doc. 227 and Doc. 228], 436 [Pg. 436 includes portions of Doc. 237 and Doc. 238], 447 [Pg. 447 includes portions of Doc. 244, Doc. 245, and Doc. 246], 449 [Pg. 449 is part of Doc. 246], 460 [Pg. 460 includes portions of Doc. 253 and Doc. 254], 1683n [Pg. 1683 is part of Doc. 1161]

Dening, Maberly E., 54 [Pg. 54 includes portions of Doc. 8 and Doc. 9], 1376 [Pg. 1376 includes portions of Doc. 957 and Doc. 958], 1742–1747 [Pgs. 1742–1747 include portions of Doc. 1210, Doc. 1211, Doc. 1212, Doc. 1213, and Doc. 1214]

Denmark, 453 [Pg. 453 is part of Doc. 249]

De Visscher, Charles, 1080 [Pg. 1080 includes portions of Doc. 713 and Doc. 714], 1094 [Pg. 1094 includes portions of Doc. 728 and Doc. 729]

Dickerson, Charles B., 1802 [Pg. 1802 includes portions of Doc. 1238 and Doc. 1239]

Dimitrov, Georgi, 268 [Pg. 268 is part of Doc. 132]

Diomedes, Alexander, 241 [Pg. 241 is part of Doc. 114], 245n [Pg. 245 includes portions of Doc. 115, Doc. 116, and Doc. 117], 246 [Pg. 246 is part of Doc. 117], 249 [Pg. 249 is part of Doc. 118], 283 [Pg. 283 is part of Doc. 136], 310 [Pg. 310 is part of Doc. 151], 322n [Pg. 322 includes portions of Doc. 159 and Doc. 160], 347 [Pg. 347 includes portions of Doc. 173 and Doc. 174], 363n [Pg. 363 includes portions of Doc. 185 and Doc. 186], 371n [Pg. 371 includes portions of Doc. 192 and Doc. 193], 372 [Pg. 372 is part of Doc. 193], 377–378 [Pgs. 377–378 include portions of Doc. 195 and Doc. 196], 385–386 [Pgs. 385–386 include portions of Doc. 201 and Doc. 202], 388–389 [Pgs. 388–389 include portions of Doc. 204, Doc. 205, and Doc. 206], 416 [Pg. 416 includes portions of Doc. 219 and Doc. 220], 420n [Pg. 420 is part of Doc. 223], 428 [Pg. 428 includes portions of Doc. 230, Doc. 231, and Doc. 232], 440–442 [Pg. 440 is part of Doc. 242], 446 [Pg. 446 is part of Doc. 244], 450n [Pg. 450 is part of Doc. 247], 461n [Pg. 461 includes portions of Doc. 254 and Doc. 255], 465–466 [Pgs. 465–466 include portions of Doc. 257, Doc. 258, and Doc. 259]

Dixon, Ben Franklin, 412 [Pg. 412 includes portions of Doc. 216, Doc. 217, and Doc. 218], 435–436 [Pgs. 435–436 include portions of Doc. 235, Doc. 236, Doc. 237, and Doc. 238], 458 [Pg. 458 includes portions of Doc. 252 and Doc. 253], 459n [Pg. 459 is part of Doc. 253]

Dodge, Bayard, 806 [Pg. 806 is part of Doc. 515], 835–836 [Pg. 835 is part of Doc. 533], 840 [Pg. 840 is part of Doc. 533]

Donovan, Howard, 1748–1749 [Pgs. 1748–1749 include portions of Doc. 1214 and Doc. 1215]

Donovan, Maj, Gen. William J., 967 [Pg. 967 includes portions of Doc. 626 and Doc. 627]

Doolittle, Hooker A., 1703–1704 [Pgs. 1703–1704 include portions of Doc. 1181 and Doc. 1182], 1714–1715 [Pgs. 1714–1715 include portions of Doc. 1189, Doc. 1190, and Doc. 1191], 1725 [Pg. 1725 includes portions of Doc. 1200 and Doc. 1201]

Dori, Maj. Gen. Yaakov, 632–683 [Pgs. 632–683 include portions of Doc. 370, Doc. 371, Doc. 372, Doc. 373, Doc. 374, Doc. 375, Doc. 376, Doc. 377, Doc. 378, Doc. 379, Doc. 380, Doc. 381, Doc. 382, Doc. 383, Doc. 384, Doc. 385, Doc. 386, Doc. 387, Doc. 388, Doc. 389, Doc. 390, Doc. 391, Doc. 392, Doc. 393, Doc. 394, Doc. 395, Doc. 396, Doc. 397, Doc. 398, Doc. 399, Doc. 400, Doc. 401, Doc. 402, Doc. 403, Doc. 404, Doc. 405, Doc. 406, Doc. 407, Doc. 408, and Doc. 409]

Dorr, Russell H., 1639–1640 [Pgs. 1639–1640 include portions of Doc. 1140 and Doc. 1141], 1659–1660 [Pgs. 1659–1660 include portions of Doc. 1150, Doc. 1151, and Doc. 1152], 1673n [Pg. 1673 is part of Doc. 1155], 1674 [Pg. 1674 includes portions of Doc. 1155 and Doc. 1156]

Dorsz, Edmund J., 118–119 [Pgs. 118–119 include portions of Doc. 27, Doc. 28, and Doc. 29], 756–758 [Pgs. 756–758 include portions of Doc. 472, Doc. 473, Doc. 474, and Doc. 475], 803n [Pg. 803 includes portions of Doc. 511, Doc. 512, and Doc. 513], 819n [Pg. 819 includes portions of Doc. 526 and Doc. 527]

Dort, Dallas W., 1312 [Pg. 1312 is part of Doc. 907]

Douglas, Lewis W., 142–144 [Pgs. 142–144 include portions of Doc. 50, Doc. 51, and Doc. 52], 150 [Pg. 150 includes portions of Doc. 57 and Doc. 58], 197–202 [Pgs. 197–202 include portions of Doc. 89, Doc. 90, and Doc. 91], 205–207 [Pgs. 205–207 include portions of Doc. 92, Doc. 93, Doc. 94, and Doc. 95], 219–220 [Pgs. 219–220 include portions of Doc. 97, Doc. 98, and Doc. 99], 262 [Pg. 262 is part of Doc. 127], 370–371 [Pgs. 370–371 include portions of Doc. 191, Doc. 192, and Doc. 193], 609n [Pg. 609 includes portions of Doc. 352 and Doc. 353], 658 [Pg. 658 includes portions of Doc. 391 and Doc. 392], 679n [Pg. 679 is part of Doc. 405], 742n [Pg. 742 includes portions of Doc. 459 and Doc. 460], 835 [Pg. 835 is part of Doc. 533], 850 [Pg. 850 is part of Doc. 540], 868 [Pg. 868 includes portions of Doc. 555 and Doc. 556], 969–970 [Pgs. 969–970 include portions of Doc. 628, Doc. 629, and Doc. 630], 1285–1286 [Pgs. 1285–1286 include portions of Doc. 887, Doc. 888, and Doc. 889], 1376 [Pg. 1376 includes portions of Doc. 957 and Doc. 958], 1378 [Pg. 1378 is part of Doc. 958], 1462–1463 [Pgs. 1462–1463 include portions of Doc. 1016, Doc. 1017, and Doc. 1018], 1482 [Pg. 1482 includes portions of Doc. 1027 and Doc. 1028], 1570–1572 [Pgs. 1570–1572 include portions of Doc. 1096, Doc. 1097, and Doc. 1098], 1670–1671 [Pgs. 1670–1671 include portions of Doc. 1152, Doc. 1153, and Doc. 1154]

Douglas, William O., 1238 [Pg. 1238 includes portions of Doc. 840, Doc. 841, and Doc. 842]

Dow, Sir Hugh, 669–670 [Pgs. 669–670 include portions of Doc. 399, Doc. 400, and Doc. 401], 978 [Pg. 978 includes portions of Doc. 634 and Doc. 635]

Down, Maj. Gen. Ernest E., 245n [Pg. 245 includes portions of Doc. 115, Doc. 116, and Doc. 117], 246 [Pg. 246 is part of Doc. 117], 291 [Pg. 291 includes portions of Doc. 141 and Doc. 142]

Drew, Gerald A., 253–255 [Pgs. 253–255 include portions of Doc. 119, Doc. 120, and Doc. 121], 258–259 [Pgs. 258–259 include portions of Doc. 123, Doc. 124, and Doc. 125], 294n [Pg. 294 is part of Doc. 144], 312–314 [Pgs. 312–314 include portions of Doc. 152, Doc. 153, and Doc. 154]; 339–241 [Pgs. 339–341 include portions of Doc. 169, Doc. 170, and Doc. 171], 348 [Pg. 348 is part of Doc. 175], 353 [Pg. 353 includes portions of Doc. 177 and Doc. 178]; 356–357 [Pg. 356 is part of Doc. 180], 366–367 [Pgs. 366–367 include portions of Doc. 188 and Doc. 189], 373 [Pg. 373 is part of Doc. 194], 375n [Pg. 375 is part of Doc. 194], 394–397 [Pgs. 394–397 include portions of Doc. 208, Doc. 209, and Doc. 210] , 401n [Pg. 401 includes portions of Doc. 213 and Doc. 214], 405 [Pg. 405 is part of Doc. 215], 412 [Pg. 412 includes portions of Doc. 216, Doc. 217, and Doc. 218], 414 [Pg. 414 includes portions of Doc. 218 and Doc. 219], 421 [Pg. 421 is part of Doc. 223]

Dreyfus, Louis G., 1778 [Pg. 1778 includes portions of Doc. 1232 and Doc. 1233]

Drury, Col. Frederick W., 484 [Pg. 484 includes portions of Doc. 271 and Doc. 272], 488 [Pg. 488 includes portions of Doc. 275 and Doc. 276], 495 [Pg. 495 includes portions of Doc. 279 and Doc. 280], 436n [Pg. 436 includes portions of Doc. 237 and Doc. 238]

Duce, James Terry, 96 [Pg. 96 is part of Doc. 17], 99 [Pg. 99 is part of Doc. 17], 153 [Pg. 153 includes portions of Doc. 60 and Doc. 61], 806 [Pg. 806 is part of Doc. 515], 840 [Pg. 840 is part of Doc. 533]

Dulles, John Foster, 333n [Pg. 333 includes portions of Doc. 165 and Doc. 166], 1149 [Pg. 1149 is part of Doc. 772]

Dunn, W. Clyde, 96 [Pg. 96 is part of Doc. 17], 98 [Pg. 98 is part of Doc. 17], 100–102 [Pg. 100 is part of Doc. 18], 105–106 [Pgs. 105–106 include portions of Doc. 20 and Doc. 21], 488n [Pg. 488 includes portions of Doc. 275 and Doc. 276], 489n [Pg. 489 includes portions of Doc. 276 and Doc. 277], 531 [Pg. 531 is part of Doc. 311], 533 [Pg. 533 is part of Doc. 311], 536n [Pg. 536 is part of Doc. 312], 542 [Pg. 542 includes portions of Doc. 313 and Doc. 314]

Duval, Gen., 1787 [Pg. 1787 is part of Doc. 1235]

Eakens, Robert H., 96 [Pg. 96 is part of Doc. 17], 99–101 [Pgs. 99–101 include portions of Doc. 17 and Doc. 18], 105 [Pg. 105 includes portions of Doc. 20 and Doc. 21], 111n [Pg. 111 includes portions of Doc. 24 and Doc. 25], 144–145 [Pgs. 144–145 include portions of Doc. 51, Doc. 52, and Doc. 53]

Eastern Mediterranean: Economic development of, 1640 [Pg. 1640 includes portions of Doc. 1140 and Doc. 1141]; U.S. security interests in, 31 [Pg. 31 includes portions of Doc. 3 and Doc. 4], 39–42 [Pg. 39 is part of Doc. 4], 56–59 [Pgs. 56–59 include portions of Doc. 10 and Doc. 11], 208 [Pg. 208 is part of Doc. 96], 271 [Pg. 271 is part of Doc. 133], 278 [Pg. 278 is part of Doc. 133], 279n [Pg. 279 includes portions of Doc. 133 and Doc. 134], 454 [Pg. 454 is part of Doc. 249], 456n [Pg. 456 includes portions of Doc. 249, Doc. 250, and Doc. 251], 546 [Pg. 546 is part of Doc. 315], 1011–1012 [Pg. 1011 is part of Doc. 659], 1340 [Pg. 1340 is part of Doc. 931], 1436–1437 [Pg. 1436 is part of Doc. 997]

Eban, Aubrey S., 596 [Pg. 596 includes portions of Doc. 342 and Doc. 343], 643n [Pg. 643 includes portions of Doc. 379 and Doc. 380], 645–647 [Pgs. 645–647 include portions of Doc. 382 and Doc. 383], 727 [Pg. 727 includes portions of Doc. 450 and Doc. 451], 730 [Pg. 730 is part of Doc. 453], 748–749 [Pgs. 748–749 include portions of Doc. 465, Doc. 466, and Doc. 467], 752 [Pg. 752 includes portions of Doc. 468 and Doc. 469], 756 [Pg. 756 includes portions of Doc. 472, Doc. 473, and Doc. 474], 766 [Pg. 766 includes portions of Doc. 481, Doc. 482, Doc. 483, and Doc. 484], 809 [Pg. 809 is part of Doc. 517], 817–818 [Pgs. 817–818 include portions of Doc. 522, Doc. 523, Doc. 524, Doc. 525, and Doc. 526], 981 [Pg. 981 is part of Doc. 638], 944–947 [Pgs. 944–947 include portions of Doc. 609, Doc. 610, and Doc. 611], 954 [Pg. 954 includes portions of Doc. 613 and Doc. 614], 975 [Pg. 975 is part of Doc. 633], 979 [Pg. 979 is part of Doc. 636], 996 [Pg. 996 includes portions of Doc. 647 and Doc. 648], 1000 [Pg. 1000 includes portions of Doc. 650 and Doc. 651], 1006 [Pg. 1006 is part of Doc. 656], 1015 [Pg. 1015 includes portions of Doc. 660 and Doc. 661], 1017 [Pg. 1017 includes portions of Doc. 661 and Doc. 662], 1021 [Pg. 1021 includes portions of Doc. 664 and Doc. 665], 1096n [Pg. 1096 includes portions of Doc. 730 and Doc. 731], 1103 [Pg. 1103 is part of Doc. 736], 1106 [Pg. 1106 is part of Doc. 736], 1113 [Pg. 1113 is part of Doc. 744], 1116n [Pg. 1116 is part of Doc. 747], 1129 [Pg. 1129 is part of Doc. 756], 1132–1133 [Pgs. 1132–1133 include portions of Doc. 758 and Doc. 759], 1148–1152 [Pg. 1148 is part of Doc. 772], 1161 [Pg. 1161 is part of Doc. 781], 1163 [Pg. 1163 includes portions of Doc. 782 and Doc. 783], 1166–1167 [Pgs. 1166–1167 include portions of Doc. 785, Doc. 786, and Doc. 787], 1173 [Pg. 1173 includes portions of Doc. 788 and Doc. 789], 1176–1177 [Pgs. 1176–1177 include portions of Doc. 790 and Doc. 791], 1208–1209 [Pgs. 1208–1209 include portions of Doc. 816 and Doc. 817], 1213–1214 [Pgs. 1213–1214 include portions of Doc. 820, Doc. 821, and Doc. 822], 1216 [Pg. 1216 is part of Doc. 823]; 1253 [Pg. 1253 includes portions of Doc. 856 and Doc. 857], 1254n [Pg. 1254 includes portions of Doc. 857 and Doc. 858], 1265 [Pg. 1265 is part of Doc. 868], 1274 [Pg. 1274 includes portions of Doc. 877 and Doc. 878], 1279–1280 [Pgs. 1279–1280 include portions of Doc. 882 and Doc. 883], 1291 [Pg. 1291 includes portions of Doc. 892 and Doc. 893], 1324 [Pg. 1324 is part of Doc. 918], 1358 [Pg. 1358 includes portions of Doc. 941, Doc. 942, and Doc. 943], 1409 [Pg. 1409 includes portions of Doc. 980 and Doc. 981], 1411–1412 [Pg. 1411 is part of Doc. 981], 1441 [Pg. 1441 is part of Doc. 998], 1481 [Pg. 1481 includes portions of Doc. 1026 and Doc. 1027], 1495–1498 [Pgs. 1495–1498 include portions of Doc. 1035, Doc. 1036, and Doc. 1037], 1536–1538 [Pgs. 1536–1538 include portions of Doc. 1070, Doc. 1071, and Doc. 1072], 1543 [Pg. 1543 is part of Doc. 1078]

Ebtehaj, Abol Hassan, 477–479 [Pgs. 477–479 include portions of Doc. 267, Doc. 268, and Doc. 269], 483 [Pg. 483 is part of Doc. 271], 536–539 [Pg. 536 is part of Doc. 312], 541–542 [Pgs. 541–542 include portions of Doc. 313 and Doc. 314], 561–562 [Pgs. 561–562 include portions of Doc. 320, Doc. 321, and Doc. 322], 564 [Pg. 564 is part of Doc. 323], 567 [Pg. 567 includes portions of Doc. 325 and Doc. 326]

Economic Commission for Asia and the Far East, 17 [Pg. 17 is part of Doc. 3], 20 [Pg. 20 is part of Doc. 3]

Economic Cooperation Administration, 156 [Pg. 156 includes portions of Doc. 63, Doc. 64, and Doc. 65], 163 [Pg. 163 is part of Doc. 70], 230 [Pg. 230 is part of Doc. 105], 235 [Pg. 235 includes portions of Doc. 107, Doc. 108, and Doc. 109], 237n [Pg. 237 is part of Doc. 111], 257 [Pg. 257 includes portions of Doc. 122 and Doc. 123], 272–273 [Pg. 272 is part of Doc. 133], 283 [Pg. 283 is part of Doc. 136], 309 [Pg. 309 includes portions of Doc. 150 and Doc. 151], 359 [Pg. 359 includes portions of Doc. 181 and Doc. 182], 431 [Pg. 431 is part of Doc. 234], 441 [Pg. 441 is part of Doc. 242], 443–444 [Pg. 443 is part of Doc. 243], 462 [Pg. 462 includes portions of Doc. 255 and Doc. 256], 464 [Pg. 464 is part of Doc. 257], 524 [Pg. 524 is part of Doc. 304], 563 [Pg. 563 includes portions of Doc. 322 and Doc. 323], 575–576 [Pg. 575 is part of Doc. 330], 1643–1644 [Pgs. 1643–1644 include portions of Doc. 1142, Doc. 1143, and Doc. 1144], 1653 [Pg. 1653 includes portions of Doc. 1146 and Doc. 1147], 1658–1659 [Pgs. 1658–1659 include portions of Doc. 1150 and Doc. 1151], 1663–1666 [Pg. 1663 is part of Doc. 1152], 1670 [Pg. 1670 includes portions of Doc. 1152 and Doc. 1153], 1673–1676 [Pgs. 1673–1676 include portions of Doc. 1155, Doc. 1156, Doc. 1157, and Doc. 1158], 1678 [Pg. 1678 is part of Doc. 1158], 1792–1793 [Pg. 1792 is part of Doc. 1236], 1795–1796 [Pg. 1795 is part of Doc. 1236]

Economou-Gouras, Paul, 298–299 [Pgs. 298–299 include portions of Doc. 146 and Doc. 147], 317n [Pg. 317 is part of Doc. 156], 320n [Pg. 320 includes portions of Doc. 158 and Doc. 159], 330 [Pg. 330 includes portions of Doc. 164 and Doc. 165], 333 [Pg. 333 includes portions of Doc. 165 and Doc. 166], 355n [Pg. 355 includes portions of Doc. 178 and Doc. 179], 370n [Pg. 370 includes portions of Doc. 191 and Doc. 192], 468n [Pg. 468 is part of Doc. 261]

Ecuador, 457 [Pg. 457 is part of Doc. 251], 469 [Pg. 469 is part of Doc. 261]

Eddy, Col., 840 [Pg. 840 is part of Doc. 533]

Eden, Anthony, 652 [Pg. 652 is part of Doc. 386], 672 [Pg. 672 is part of Doc. 402]

Edmonds, Cecil J., 1422 [Pg. 1422 is part of Doc. 989], 1476 [Pg. 1476 includes portions of Doc. 1025 and Doc. 1026]

Egypt (see also Egyptian subheadings under Palestine question and under United Nations: Security Council): Anglo-American military staff talks in Egypt, proposed, 188–194 [Pgs. 188–194 include portions of Doc. 83, Doc. 84, Doc. 85, Doc. 86, Doc. 87, and Doc. 88], 198 [Pg. 198 is part of Doc. 90], 203–207 [Pgs. 203–207 include portions of Doc. 92, Doc. 93, Doc. 94, and Doc. 95], 219 [Pg. 219 includes portions of Doc. 97 and Doc. 98]

Anglo-Egyptian military staff talks, 197–202 [Pgs. 197–202 include portions of Doc. 89, Doc. 90, and Doc. 91], 204–206 [Pgs. 204–206 include portions of Doc. 92, Doc. 93, and Doc. 94], 217–223 [Pgs. 217–223 include portions of Doc. 96, Doc. 97, Doc. 98, Doc. 99, Doc. 100, Doc. 101, Doc. 102, and Doc. 103], 953 [Pg. 953 is part of Doc. 613], 958 [Pg. 958 is part of Doc. 618], 1018 [Pg. 1018 includes portions of Doc. 662 and Doc. 663], 1057n [Pg. 1057 includes portions of Doc. 693, Doc. 694, and Doc. 695], 1077 [Pg. 1077 is part of Doc. 710]

Anglo-Egyptian treaty of 1936, proposed revision of, 186 [Pg. 186 is part of Doc. 81], 190–191 [Pgs. 190–191 include portions of Doc. 84 and Doc. 85], 193 [Pg. 193 is part of Doc. 87], 198 [Pg. 198 is part of Doc. 90], 208–209 [Pg. 208 is part of Doc. 96], 216 [Pg. 216 is part of Doc. 96], 222 [Pg. 222 includes portions of Doc. 100 and Doc. 101], 533 [Pg. 533 is part of Doc. 311]

Arab collective security pact, proposed, 70 [Pg. 70 is part of Doc. 12]

British armaments, request for, 188 [Pg. 188 is part of Doc. 83], 1018 [Pg. 1018 includes portions of Doc. 662 and Doc. 663], 1057–1058 [Pgs. 1057–1058 include portions of Doc. 693, Doc. 694, Doc. 695, and Doc. 696], 1077–1078 [Pgs. 1077–1078 include portions of Doc. 710 and Doc. 711], 1081 [Pg. 1081 is part of Doc. 715], 1092 [Pg. 1092 includes portions of Doc. 726 and Doc. 727], 1141 [Pg. 1141 includes portions of Doc. 764 and Doc. 765], 1153n [Pg. 1153 includes portions of Doc. 772 and Doc. 773], 1254n [Pg. 1254 includes portions of Doc. 857 and Doc. 858], 1492 [Pg. 1492 is part of Doc. 1033]

British policy, 1377 [Pg. 1377 is part of Doc. 958], 1404–1405 [Pgs. 1404–1405 include portions of Doc. 976, Doc. 977, and Doc. 978]

British troops, proposed evacuation of, 222 [Pg. 222 includes portions of Doc. 100 and Doc. 101]

Communist activities, 213–215 [Pg. 213 is part of Doc. 96], 1595 [Pg. 1595 is part of Doc. 1113]

Czechoslovakia, relations with, 215 [Pg. 215 is part of Doc. 96]

Economic development, 51 [Pg. 51 is part of Doc. 8], 78 [Pg. 78 is part of Doc. 12]

Frontier with Cyrenaica, 74 [Pg. 74 is part of Doc. 12]

Fulbright agreement with the United States, negotiations concerning, 210 [Pg. 210 is part of Doc. 96]

Kuwait, policy toward, 1571 [Pg. 1571 is part of Doc. 1097]

Near East defense, question of Egyptian participation in Anglo-American military staff talks concerning, 186 [Pg. 186 is part of Doc. 81], 193–195 [Pgs. 193–195 include portions of Doc. 87, Doc. 88, and Doc. 89], 203–207 [Pgs. 203–207 include portions of Doc. 92, Doc. 93, Doc. 94, and Doc. 95], 222 [Pg. 222 includes portions of Doc. 100 and Doc. 101]

Palestinian refugees, 829 [Pg. 829 is part of Doc. 533], 876–877 [Pg. 876 is part of Doc. 563], 908 [Pg. 908 is part of Doc. 590], 935–937 [Pg. 935 is part of Doc. 608], 969 [Pg. 969 includes portions of Doc. 628 and Doc. 629], 1034 [Pg. 1034 is part of Doc. 673], 1045 [Pg. 1045 is part of Doc. 683], 1192 [Pg. 1192 is part of Doc. 804], 1267 [Pg. 1267 is part of Doc. 870], 1337 [Pg. 1337 includes portions of Doc. 928 and Doc. 929], 1415 [Pg. 1415 is part of Doc. 984]

Political situation, 187 [Pg. 187 is part of Doc. 82], 222 [Pg. 222 includes portions of Doc. 100 and Doc. 101]

Soviet policy, 656 [Pg. 656 includes portions of Doc. 390 and Doc. 391]

Soviet Union, relations with, 214–215 [Pg. 214 is part of Doc. 96]

Suez Canal, closure of to Israeli bound shipping, 80–81 [Pg. 80 is part of Doc. 12], 141n [Pg. 141 includes portions of Doc. 49 and Doc. 50], 142 [Pg. 142 includes portions of Doc. 50 and Doc. 51], 145–149 [Pgs. 145–149 include portions of Doc. 52, Doc. 53, Doc. 54, Doc. 55, Doc. 56, and Doc. 57], 156 [Pg. 156 includes portions of Doc. 63, Doc. 64, and Doc. 65], 157n [Pg. 157 includes portions of Doc. 65 and Doc. 66], 217 [Pg. 217 includes portions of Doc. 96 and Doc. 97], 224 [Pg. 224 includes portions of Doc. 103 and Doc. 104], 226 [Pg. 226 is part of Doc. 104], 1171 [Pg. 1171 is part of Doc. 788], 1253–1254 [Pgs. 1253–1254 include portions of Doc. 856, Doc. 857, and Doc. 858], 1304n [Pg. 1304 is part of Doc. 903], 1323 [Pg. 1323 includes portions of Doc. 916, Doc. 917, and Doc. 918], 1328 [Pg. 1328 includes portions of Doc. 921 and Doc. 922], 1358 [Pg. 1358 includes portions of Doc. 941, Doc. 942, and Doc. 943], 1368 [Pg. 1368 is part of Doc. 951], 1369n [Pg. 1369 includes portions of Doc. 951 and Doc. 952], 1373–1374 [Pgs. 1373–1374 include portions of Doc. 954 and Doc. 955], 1404–1405 [Pgs. 1404–1405 include portions of Doc. 976, Doc. 977, and Doc. 978], 1493 [Pg. 1493 includes portions of Doc. 1033 and Doc. 1034], 1516 [Pg. 1516 includes portions of Doc. 1051, Doc. 1052, and Doc. 1053]

Suez Canal Company, agreement with, 195–197 [Pgs. 195–197 include portions of Doc. 88, Doc. 89, and Doc. 90]

U.S. airfields in Cairo–Suez area, proposed construction of, 205 [Pg. 205 includes portions of Doc. 92, Doc. 93, and Doc. 94]

U.S. arms and aircraft shipments, 226 [Pg. 226 is part of Doc. 104], 1418 [Pg. 1418 includes portions of Doc. 984, Doc. 985, and Doc. 986]

U.S. cotton import quota, 212 [Pg. 212 is part of Doc. 96], 727 [Pg. 727 includes portions of Doc. 450 and Doc. 451]

U.S. economic assistance, proposed, 765 [Pg. 765 includes portions of Doc. 480 and Doc. 481]

U.S. military air transit rights, negotiations concerning, 216 [Pg. 216 is part of Doc. 96]

U.S. military training program for Egyptian officers, proposed, 1116 [Pg. 1116 is part of Doc. 747], 1492 [Pg. 1492 is part of Doc. 1033]

U.S. policy, 31 [Pg. 31 includes portions of Doc. 3 and Doc. 4], 33 [Pg. 33 is part of Doc. 4], 208–217 [Pgs. 208–217 include portions of Doc. 96 and Doc. 97], 224–226 [Pgs. 224–226 include portions of Doc. 103 and Doc. 104]

Yugoslavia, relations with, 215 [Pg. 215 is part of Doc. 96]

Ehrenburg, Ilya Grigoryevich, 657 [Pg. 657 is part of Doc. 391]

Eilts, Herman F., 152 [Pg. 152 is part of Doc. 60], 154 [Pg. 154 includes portions of Doc. 62 and Doc. 63]

Eisenhower, General of the Army Dwight D., 1688 [Pg. 1688 is part of Doc. 1166]

Elath (also Eilat or Epstein), Eliahu, 633–635 [Pgs. 633–635 include portions of Doc. 371 and Doc. 372], 645–647 [Pgs. 645–647 include portions of Doc. 382 and Doc. 383], 653 [Pg. 653 includes portions of Doc. 387 and Doc. 388], 670 [Pg. 670 includes portions of Doc. 400 and Doc. 401], 694–695 [Pgs. 694–695 include portions of Doc. 419, Doc. 420, Doc. 421, and Doc. 422], 701 [Pg. 701 is part of Doc. 427], 705–706 [Pgs. 705–706 include portions of Doc. 429 and Doc. 430], 708–709 [Pgs. 708–709 include portions of Doc. 431 and Doc. 432], 713–715 [Pgs. 713–715 include portions of Doc. 436, Doc. 437, Doc. 438, Doc. 439, and Doc. 440], 724 [Pg. 724 is part of Doc. 448], 727–730 [Pgs. 727–730 include portions of Doc. 450, Doc. 451, Doc. 452, and Doc. 453], 749 [Pg. 749 includes portions of Doc. 466 and Doc. 467], 769 [Pg. 769 includes portions of Doc. 486 and Doc. 487], 811 [Pg. 811 is part of Doc. 518], 822 [Pg. 822 is part of Doc. 529], 824 [Pg. 824 includes portions of Doc. 530 and Doc. 531], 837 [Pg. 837 is part of Doc. 533], 853 [Pg. 853 includes portions of Doc. 543 and Doc. 544], 943–944 [Pgs. 943–944 include portions of Doc. 608, Doc. 609, and Doc. 610], 947 [Pg. 947 includes portions of Doc. 610 and Doc. 611], 954 [Pg. 954 includes portions of Doc. 613 and Doc. 614], 956–957 [Pgs. 956–957 include portions of Doc. 615, Doc. 616, and Doc. 617], 959 [Pg. 959 includes portions of Doc. 618 and Doc. 619], 973–975 [Pgs. 973–975 include portions of Doc. 631, Doc. 632, and Doc. 633], 979 [Pg. 979 is part of Doc. 636], 996–998 [Pgs. 996–998 include portions of Doc. 647, Doc. 648, and Doc. 649], 1001 [Pg. 1001 includes portions of Doc. 651 and Doc. 652], 1005 [Pg. 1005 includes portions of Doc. 655 and Doc. 656], 1021–1022 [Pgs. 1021–1022 include portions of Doc. 664, Doc. 665, and Doc. 666], 1029 [Pg. 1029 includes portions of Doc. 668 and Doc. 669], 1035 [Pg. 1035 includes portions of Doc. 673 and Doc. 674], 1051 [Pg. 1051 includes portions of Doc. 688 and Doc. 689], 1059 [Pg. 1059 is part of Doc. 696], 1074 [Pg. 1074 includes portions of Doc. 705 and Doc. 706], 1087 [Pg. 1087 includes portions of Doc. 721 and Doc. 722], 1092 [Pg. 1092 includes portions of Doc. 726 and Doc. 727], 1151 [Pg. 1151 is part of Doc. 772], 1161 [Pg. 1161 is part of Doc. 781], 1177 [Pg. 1177 includes portions of Doc. 790 and Doc. 791], 1248 [Pg. 1248 is part of Doc. 852], 1250 [Pg. 1250 is part of Doc. 855], 1253 [Pg. 1253 includes portions of Doc. 856 and Doc. 857], 1261–1264 [Pgs. 1261–1264 include portions of Doc. 865, Doc. 866, and Doc. 867], 1272 [Pg. 1272 includes portions of Doc. 874 and Doc. 875], 1288 [Pg. 1288 is part of Doc. 890], 1297–1298 [Pgs. 1297–1298 include portions of Doc. 896, Doc. 897, and Doc. 898], 1305n [Pg. 1305 is part of Doc. 904], 1307 [Pg. 1307 is part of Doc. 904], 1323–1326 [Pgs. 1323–1326 include portions of Doc. 916, Doc. 917, Doc. 918, and Doc. 919], 1328–1332 [Pgs. 1328–1332 include portions of Doc. 921, Doc. 922, Doc. 923, and Doc. 924], 1367 [Pg. 1367 includes portions of Doc. 950 and Doc. 951], 1389 [Pg. 1389 includes portions of Doc. 965 and Doc. 966], 1396–1397 [Pgs. 1396–1397 include portions of Doc. 972 and Doc. 973], 1409 [Pg. 1409 includes portions of Doc. 980 and Doc. 981], 1419 [Pg. 1419 includes portions of Doc. 986 and Doc. 987], 1440–1442 [Pgs. 1440–1442 include portions of Doc. 997, Doc. 998, and Doc. 999], 1448 [Pg. 1448 includes portions of Doc. 1002, Doc. 1003, and Doc. 1004], 1471 [Pg. 1471 includes portions of Doc. 1023 and Doc. 1024], 1481 [Pg. 1481 includes portions of Doc. 1026 and Doc. 1027], 1495–1496 [Pgs. 1495–1496 include portions of Doc. 1035 and Doc. 1036], 1510 [Pg. 1510 includes portions of Doc. 1045 and Doc. 1046], 1524 [Pg. 1524 includes portions of Doc. 1059 and Doc. 1060], 1527 [Pg. 1527 includes portions of Doc. 1060 and Doc. 1061]

Elkins, Capt., 1580–1591 [Pgs. 1580–1591 include portions of Doc. 1105, Doc. 1106, Doc. 1107, Doc. 1108, Doc. 1109, Doc. 1110, and Doc. 1111]

Elliot, John C., 1490–1491 [Pgs. 1490–1491 include portions of Doc. 1031, Doc. 1032, and Doc. 1033]

Entezam, Nasrollah, 475n [Pg. 475 includes portions of Doc. 264 and Doc. 265], 497 [Pg. 497 is part of Doc. 281], 499 [Pg. 499 is part of Doc. 282], 503 [Pg. 503 includes portions of Doc. 286 and Doc. 287], 509 [Pg. 509 is part of Doc. 294], 517 [Pg. 517 includes portions of Doc. 299 and Doc. 300]

Epirus. see under Greece.

Epstein. see Elath.

Eqbal, Manuchehr, 480 [Pg. 480 includes portions of Doc. 269 and Doc. 270], 481n [Pg. 481 includes portions of Doc. 270 and Doc. 271]

Erasmus, F.C., 1805–1807 [Pgs. 1805–1807 include portions of Doc. 1240, Doc. 1241, and Doc. 1242]

Eritrea: Disposition of, 31 [Pg. 31 includes portions of Doc. 3 and Doc. 4], 72–74 [Pg. 72 is part of Doc. 12], 88 [Pg. 88 is part of Doc. 12]; U.S. communications center at Asmara, 32 [Pg. 32 is part of Doc. 4]

Erkin, Feridun C., 1642–1643 [Pgs. 1642–1643 include portions of Doc. 1141, Doc. 1142, and Doc. 1143], 1647 [Pg. 1647 is part of Doc. 1146], 1650n [Pg. 1650 is part of Doc. 1146], 1657 [Pg. 1657 includes portions of Doc. 1149 and Doc. 1150], 1659 [Pg. 1659 includes portions of Doc. 1150 and Doc. 1151], 1662–1663 [Pg. 1662 is part of Doc. 1152], 1675n [Pg. 1675 includes portions of Doc. 1156 and Doc. 1157], 1682–1685 [Pgs. 1682–1685 include portions of Doc. 1160, Doc. 1161, Doc. 1162, Doc. 1163, and Doc. 1164]

Ethiopia: Agreement with the United States respecting a mutual aid settlement, May 20, 1949, 1798 [Pg. 1798 is part of Doc. 1237]; arms purchases from Czechoslovakia, 87 [Pg. 87 is part of Doc. 12]; British policy, 1077 [Pg. 1077 is part of Doc. 710]; Eritrea, proposed annexation of, 72–74 [Pg. 72 is part of Doc. 12]; frontier with Italian Somaliland, 74 [Pg. 74 is part of Doc. 12], 1543 [Pg. 1543 is part of Doc. 1078]; political situation, 86–88 [Pg. 86 is part of Doc. 12]; U.N. Trusteeship Council, 1543 [Pg. 1543 is part of Doc. 1078]; U.S. military assistance, 87 [Pg. 87 is part of Doc. 12]; U.S. policy, 31 [Pg. 31 includes portions of Doc. 3 and Doc. 4]

Ethridge, Mark F., 140 [Pg. 140 includes portions of Doc. 48 and Doc. 49], 681 [Pg. 681 includes portions of Doc. 407 and Doc. 408], 692 [Pg. 692 is part of Doc. 418], 696 [Pg. 696 includes portions of Doc. 422 and Doc. 423], 703 [Pg. 703 includes portions of Doc. 428 and Doc. 429], 708–710 [Pgs. 708–710 include portions of Doc. 431, Doc. 432, and Doc. 433], 717–718 [Pgs. 717–718 include portions of Doc. 441, Doc. 442, Doc. 443, and Doc. 444], 724n [Pg. 724 is part of Doc. 448], 725 [Pg. 725 includes portions of Doc. 449 and Doc. 450], 729 [Pg. 729 includes portions of Doc. 451 and Doc. 452], 735–738 [Pgs. 735–738 include portions of Doc. 456 and Doc. 457], 740–741 [Pgs. 740–741 include portions of Doc. 458 and Doc. 459], 744–752 [Pgs. 744–752 include portions of Doc. 461, Doc. 462, Doc. 463, Doc. 464, Doc. 465, Doc. 466, Doc. 467, Doc. 468, and Doc. 469], 755–758 [Pgs. 755–758 include portions of Doc. 471, Doc. 472, Doc. 473, Doc. 474, and Doc. 475], 766–767 [Pgs. 766–767 include portions of Doc. 481, Doc. 482, Doc. 483, Doc. 484, and Doc. 485], 771–772 [Pgs. 771–772 include portions of Doc. 488, Doc. 489, and Doc. 490], 775–783 [Pgs. 775–783 include portions of Doc. 491, Doc. 492, Doc. 493, Doc. 494, Doc. 495, Doc. 496, and Doc. 497], 796–801 [Pgs. 796–801 include portions of Doc. 506, Doc. 507, Doc. 508, Doc. 509, and Doc. 510], 803n [Pg. 803 includes portions of Doc. 511, Doc. 512, and Doc. 513], 805 [Pg. 805 includes portions of Doc. 514 and Doc. 515], 806n [Pg. 806 is part of Doc. 515], 811n [Pg. 811 is part of Doc. 518], 818 [Pg. 818 includes portions of Doc. 524, Doc. 525, and Doc. 526], 825–826 [Pgs. 825–826 include portions of Doc. 531 and Doc. 532], 842–843 [Pgs. 842–843 include portions of Doc. 533, Doc. 534, and Doc. 535], 848–849 [Pgs. 848–849 include portions of Doc. 537, Doc. 538, and Doc. 539], 850n [Pg. 850 is part of Doc. 540], 853n [Pg. 853 includes portions of Doc. 543 and Doc. 544], 855–859 [Pgs. 855–859 include portions of Doc. 544, Doc. 545, Doc. 546, and Doc. 547], 864 [Pg. 864 includes portions of Doc. 551 and Doc. 552], 870 [Pg. 870 is part of Doc. 557], 876–880 [Pgs. 876–880 include portions of Doc. 563, Doc. 564, Doc. 565, and Doc. 566], 883–884 [Pgs. 883–884 include portions of Doc. 568, Doc. 569, and Doc. 570], 887–888 [Pgs. 887–888 include portions of Doc. 573, Doc. 574, and Doc. 575], 893–897 [Pgs. 893–897 include portions of Doc. 577, Doc. 578, Doc. 579, Doc. 580, Doc. 581, and Doc. 582], 899–900 [Pgs. 899–900 include portions of Doc. 583, Doc. 584, Doc. 585, and Doc. 586], 902–906 [Pgs. 902–906 include portions of Doc. 586, Doc. 587, Doc. 588, Doc. 589, and Doc. 590], 908 [Pg. 908 is part of Doc. 590], 910–916 [Pgs. 910–916 include portions of Doc. 590, Doc. 591, Doc. 592, Doc. 593, and Doc. 594], 920–921 [Pgs. 920–921 include portions of Doc. 597 and Doc. 598], 923–927 [Pgs. 923–927 include portions of Doc. 600, Doc. 601, Doc. 602, and Doc. 603], 932 [Pg. 932 includes portions of Doc. 605 and Doc. 606], 946 [Pg. 946 is part of Doc. 610], 949 [Pg. 949 is part of Doc. 612], 952 [Pg. 952 includes portions of Doc. 612 and Doc. 613], 955–957 [Pgs. 955–957 include portions of Doc. 615, Doc. 616, and Doc. 617], 962–965 [Pgs. 962–965 include portions of Doc. 621, Doc. 622, Doc. 623, Doc. 624, and Doc. 625], 969–970 [Pgs. 969–970 include portions of Doc. 628, Doc. 629, and Doc. 630], 974–977 [Pgs. 974–977 include portions of Doc. 632, Doc. 633, and Doc. 634], 979–980 [Pgs. 979–980 include portions of Doc. 636, Doc. 637, and Doc. 638], 983n [Pg. 983 includes portions of Doc. 639 and Doc. 640], 988–989 [Pg. 988 is part of Doc. 641], 992–995 [Pgs. 992–995 include portions of Doc. 643, Doc. 644, Doc. 645, Doc. 646, and Doc. 647], 998–999 [Pgs. 998–999 include portions of Doc. 648, Doc. 649, and Doc. 650], 1008n [Pg. 1008 includes portions of Doc. 657 and Doc. 658], 1013–1015 [Pgs. 1013–1015 include portions of Doc. 660 and Doc. 661], 1017–1020 [Pgs. 1017–1020 include portions of Doc. 661, Doc. 662, Doc. 663, and Doc. 664], 1022–1023 [Pgs. 1022–1023 include portions of Doc. 665, Doc. 666, and Doc. 667], 1028–1029 [Pgs. 1028–1029 include portions of Doc. 667, Doc. 668, and Doc. 669], 1032–1033 [Pgs. 1032–1033 include portions of Doc. 671 and Doc. 672], 1035–1038 [Pgs. 1035–1038 include portions of Doc. 673, Doc. 674, Doc. 675, and Doc. 676], 1041n [Pg. 1041 is part of Doc. 678], 1043–1044 [Pgs. 1043–1044 include portions of Doc. 680, Doc. 681, Doc. 682, and Doc. 683], 1046–1047 [Pgs. 1046–1047 include portions of Doc. 684, Doc. 685, and Doc. 686], 1051 [Pg. 1051 includes portions of Doc. 688 and Doc. 689], 1058–1063 [Pgs. 1058–1063 include portions of Doc. 695, Doc. 696, Doc. 697, and Doc. 698], 1065–1072 [Pgs. 1065–1072 include portions of Doc. 699, Doc. 700, Doc. 701, Doc. 702, Doc. 703, Doc. 704, and Doc. 705], 1076 [Pg. 1076 includes portions of Doc. 708 and Doc. 709], 1078 [Pg. 1078 includes portions of Doc. 710 and Doc. 711], 1082 [Pg. 1082 includes portions of Doc. 716 and Doc. 717], 1085–1087 [Pgs. 1085–1087 include portions of Doc. 719, Doc. 720, Doc. 721, and Doc. 722], 1090 [Pg. 1090 includes portions of Doc. 723 and Doc. 724], 1091n [Pg. 1091 includes portions of Doc. 724 and Doc. 725], 1094–1097 [Pgs. 1094–1097 include portions of Doc. 728, Doc. 729, Doc. 730, Doc. 731, and Doc. 732], 1099–1100 [Pgs. 1099–1100 include portions of Doc. 733, Doc. 734, and Doc. 735], 1104 [Pg. 1104 is part of Doc. 736], 1108–1109 [Pgs. 1108–1109 include portions of Doc. 738, Doc. 739, and Doc. 740], 1111–1114 [Pgs. 1111–1114 include portions of Doc. 742, Doc. 743, Doc. 744, and Doc. 745], 1116n [Pg. 1116 is part of Doc. 747], 1123–1127 [Pgs. 1123–1127 include portions of Doc. 751, Doc. 752, Doc. 753, Doc. 754, and Doc. 755], 1129 [Pg. 1129 is part of Doc. 756], 1136–1140 [Pgs. 1136–1140 include portions of Doc. 761, Doc. 762, Doc. 763, and Doc. 764], 1143–1144 [Pgs. 1143–1144 include portions of Doc. 767, Doc. 768, and Doc. 769], 1146 [Pg. 1146 includes portions of Doc. 769 and Doc. 770], 1148 [Pg. 1148 is part of Doc. 772], 1150–1151 [Pg. 1150 is part of Doc. 772], 1155 [Pg. 1155 includes portions of Doc. 774 and Doc. 775], 1161n [Pg. 1161 is part of Doc. 781], 1175 [Pg. 1175 is part of Doc. 790], 1185 [Pg. 1185 includes portions of Doc. 797 and Doc. 798], 1195n [Pg. 1195 includes portions of Doc. 806 and Doc. 807], 1235 [Pg. 1235 includes portions of Doc. 838 and Doc. 839], 1310–1312 [Pgs. 1310–1312 include portions of Doc. 906 and Doc. 907], 1135 [Pg. 1135 includes portions of Doc. 760 and Doc. 761], 1325 [Pg. 1325 is part of Doc. 918], 1338 [Pg. 1338 includes portions of Doc. 929 and Doc. 930], 1357 [Pg. 1357 includes portions of Doc. 940 and Doc. 941], 1489 [Pg. 1489 is part of Doc. 1031]

Europe, 14 [Pg. 14 is part of Doc. 3], 17 [Pg. 17 is part of Doc. 3], 21 [Pg. 21 is part of Doc. 3], 30 [Pg. 30 is part of Doc. 3], 50 [Pg. 50 is part of Doc. 8], 52 [Pg. 52 is part of Doc. 8], 58 [Pg. 58 is part of Doc. 10], 62 [Pg. 62 is part of Doc. 12], 80 [Pg. 80 is part of Doc. 12], 157n [Pg. 157 includes portions of Doc. 65 and Doc. 66], 199 [Pg. 199 is part of Doc. 91], 271 [Pg. 271 is part of Doc. 133], 277 [Pg. 277 is part of Doc. 133], 308 [Pg. 308 is part of Doc. 150], 338 [Pg. 338 is part of Doc. 169], 448 [Pg. 448 is part of Doc. 246], 456n [Pg. 456 includes portions of Doc. 249, Doc. 250, and Doc. 251], 467n [Pg. 467 is part of Doc. 260], 539 [Pg. 539 is part of Doc. 312], 556 [Pg. 556 is part of Doc. 317], 573–574 [Pgs. 573–574 include portions of Doc. 329 and Doc. 330], 1639–1640 [Pgs. 1639–1640 include portions of Doc. 1140 and Doc. 1141], 1651 [Pg. 1651 is part of Doc. 1146]

European Recovery Program, 2 [Pg. 2 is part of Doc. 1], 4 [Pg. 4 is part of Doc. 1], 14 [Pg. 14 is part of Doc. 3], 17 [Pg. 17 is part of Doc. 3], 52 [Pg. 52 is part of Doc. 8], 177 [Pg. 177 is part of Doc. 74], 179 [Pg. 179 is part of Doc. 75], 229 [Pg. 229 is part of Doc. 105], 243 [Pg. 243 is part of Doc. 115], 257 [Pg. 257 includes portions of Doc. 122 and Doc. 123], 262 [Pg. 262 is part of Doc. 127], 341 [Pg. 341 includes portions of Doc. 170 and Doc. 171], 377 [Pg. 377 is part of Doc. 195], 441 [Pg. 441 is part of Doc. 242], 549 [Pg. 549 is part of Doc. 315], 556 [Pg. 556 is part of Doc. 317], 574 [Pg. 574 includes portions of Doc. 329 and Doc. 330], 577 [Pg. 577 is part of Doc. 330], 765 [Pg. 765 includes portions of Doc. 480 and Doc. 481], 898 [Pg. 898 includes portions of Doc. 582 and Doc. 583], 1649 [Pg. 1649 is part of Doc. 1146], 1651 [Pg. 1651 is part of Doc. 1146], 1658 [Pg. 1658 is part of Doc. 1150], 1663–1664 [Pg. 1663 is part of Doc. 1152], 1666 [Pg. 1666 is part of Doc. 1152], 1670 [Pg. 1670 includes portions of Doc. 1152 and Doc. 1153], 1676 [Pg. 1676 is part of Doc. 1158], 1754 [Pg. 1754 is part of Doc. 1217]

Evans, Trefor, 1476 [Pg. 1476 includes portions of Doc. 1025 and Doc. 1026], 1563 [Pg. 1563 includes portions of Doc. 1092 and Doc. 1093]

Evans, Maj. Gen. Vernon, 484 [Pg. 484 includes portions of Doc. 271 and Doc. 272], 505 [Pg. 505 includes portions of Doc. 288 and Doc. 289], 526–527 [Pgs. 526–527 include portions of Doc. 305, Doc. 306, and Doc. 307], 530 [Pg. 530 is part of Doc. 310], 537–539 [Pg. 537 is part of Doc. 312], 543–544 [Pg. 543 is part of Doc. 314], 553–558 [Pgs. 553–558 include portions of Doc. 316, Doc. 317, Doc. 318, Doc. 319, and Doc. 320], 562 [Pg. 562 includes portions of Doc. 321 and Doc. 322], 564–565 [Pgs. 564–565 include portions of Doc. 323, Doc. 324, and Doc. 325], 582n [Pg. 582 includes portions of Doc. 333 and Doc. 334], 589 [Pg. 589 includes portions of Doc. 337 and Doc. 338], 591 [Pg. 591 is part of Doc. 339]

Evatt, Herbert V., 254–255 [Pg. 254 is part of Doc. 121], 258 [Pg. 258 includes portions of Doc. 123 and Doc. 124], 264 [Pg. 264 is part of Doc. 129], 280 [Pg. 280 includes portions of Doc. 134 and Doc. 135], 294 [Pg. 294 is part of Doc. 144], 298–299 [Pgs. 298–299 include portions of Doc. 146 and Doc. 147], 305n [Pg. 305 is part of Doc. 150], 307 [Pg. 307 is part of Doc. 150], 315–317 [Pgs. 315–317 include portions of Doc. 154, Doc. 155, and Doc. 156], 319–322 [Pgs. 319–322 include portions of Doc. 158, Doc. 159, and Doc. 160], 331 [Pg. 331 is part of Doc. 165], 333–335 [Pgs. 333–335 include portions of Doc. 165 and Doc. 166], 341 [Pg. 341 includes portions of Doc. 170 and Doc. 171], 343 [Pg. 343 is part of Doc. 171], 352 [Pg. 352 is part of Doc. 177], 357 [Pg. 357 is part of Doc. 180], 387 [Pg. 387 is part of Doc. 203], 391 [Pg. 391 is part of Doc. 206], 408 [Pg. 408 is part of Doc. 215], 411 [Pg. 411 is part of Doc. 216], 416 [Pg. 416 includes portions of Doc. 219 and Doc. 220]

Exintaris, George, 458–459 [Pgs. 458–459 include portions of Doc. 252 and Doc. 253]

Export-Import Bank of Washington, 4 [Pg. 4 is part of Doc. 1], 7 [Pg. 7 is part of Doc. 1], 20 [Pg. 20 is part of Doc. 3], 214 [Pg. 214 is part of Doc. 96], 524 [Pg. 524 is part of Doc. 304], 578 [Pg. 578 is part of Doc. 330], 584 [Pg. 584 is part of Doc. 335], 587–588 [Pgs. 587–588 include portions of Doc. 336 and Doc. 337], 615 [Pg. 615 includes portions of Doc. 355 and Doc. 356], 647 [Pg. 647 includes portions of Doc. 382 and Doc. 383], 681 [Pg. 681 includes portions of Doc. 407 and Doc. 408], 788 [Pg. 788 is part of Doc. 503], 807 [Pg. 807 is part of Doc. 515], 859 [Pg. 859 includes portions of Doc. 546 and Doc. 547], 939 [Pg. 939 is part of Doc. 608], 941 [Pg. 941 is part of Doc. 608], 943 [Pg. 943 includes portions of Doc. 608 and Doc. 609], 964–965 [Pgs. 964–965 include portions of Doc. 622, Doc. 623, Doc. 624, and Doc. 625], 967 [Pg. 967 includes portions of Doc. 626 and Doc. 627], 972 [Pg. 972 is part of Doc. 631], 983–984 [Pgs. 983–984 include portions of Doc. 639 and Doc. 640], 986 [Pg. 986 is part of Doc. 640], 1023n [Pg. 1023 includes portions of Doc. 666 and Doc. 667], 1062 [Pg. 1062 is part of Doc. 697], 1110 [Pg. 1110 includes portions of Doc. 741 and Doc. 742], 1311–1313 [Pgs. 1311–1313 include portions of Doc. 906, Doc. 907, and Doc. 908], 1329–1330 [Pg. 1329 is part of Doc. 922], 1332 [Pg. 1332 is part of Doc. 924], 1375 [Pg. 1375 includes portions of Doc. 956 and Doc. 957], 1388–1389 [Pgs. 1388–1389 include portions of Doc. 963, Doc. 964, Doc. 965, and Doc. 966], 1433 [Pg. 1433 is part of Doc. 997], 1439 [Pg. 1439 is part of Doc. 997], 1455–1456 [Pgs. 1455–1456 include portions of Doc. 1011, Doc. 1012, and Doc. 1013], 1480 [Pg. 1480 is part of Doc. 1026], 1587 [Pg. 1587 is part of Doc. 1110], 1654n [Pg. 1654 includes portions of Doc. 1147 and Doc. 1148], 1666 [Pg. 1666 is part of Doc. 1152], 1680 [Pg. 1680 is part of Doc. 1159], 1713 [Pg. 1713 is part of Doc. 1189], 1779–1802 [Pgs. 1779–1802 include portions of Doc. 1234, Doc. 1235, Doc. 1236, Doc. 1237, Doc. 1238, and Doc. 1239], 1804 [Pg. 1804 is part of Doc. 1240], 1807–1808 [Pgs. 1807–1808 include portions of Doc. 1241 and Doc. 1242]

Eytan Walter, 649 [Pg. 649 includes portions of Doc. 383 and Doc. 384], 689 [Pg. 689 includes portions of Doc. 415 and Doc. 416], 699 [Pg. 699 includes portions of Doc. 425 and Doc. 426], 760 [Pg. 760 includes portions of Doc. 477 and Doc. 478], 802n [Pg. 802 is part of Doc. 511], 815 [Pg. 815 includes portions of Doc. 520 and Doc. 521], 818 [Pg. 818 includes portions of Doc. 524, Doc. 525, and Doc. 526], 860 [Pg. 860 is part of Doc. 547], 867 [Pg. 867 is part of Doc. 554], 889 [Pg. 889 includes portions of Doc. 575 and Doc. 576], 896–897 [Pgs. 896–897 include portions of Doc. 580, Doc. 581, and Doc. 582], 922 [Pg. 922 is part of Doc. 599], 969 [Pg. 969 includes portions of Doc. 628 and Doc. 629], 975–976 [Pg. 975 is part of Doc. 633], 988–989 [Pg. 988 is part of Doc. 641], 993 [Pg. 993 includes portions of Doc. 644 and Doc. 645], 1003 [Pg. 1003 includes portions of Doc. 652, Doc. 653, and Doc. 654], 1019–1020 [Pgs. 1019–1020 include portions of Doc. 663 and Doc. 664], 1036–1038 [Pgs. 1036–1038 include portions of Doc. 675 and Doc. 676], 1051–1052 [Pgs. 1051–1052 include portions of Doc. 688 and Doc. 689], 1058 [Pg. 1058 includes portions of Doc. 695 and Doc. 696], 1065–1073 [Pgs. 1065–1073 include portions of Doc. 699, Doc. 700, Doc. 701, Doc. 702, Doc. 703, Doc. 704, and Doc. 705], 1076 [Pg. 1076 includes portions of Doc. 708 and Doc. 709], 1085–1086 [Pgs. 1085–1086 include portions of Doc. 719, Doc. 720, and Doc. 721], 1094 [Pg. 1094 includes portions of Doc. 728 and Doc. 729], 1096 [Pg. 1096 includes portions of Doc. 730 and Doc. 731], 1104 [Pg. 1104 is part of Doc. 736], 1106 [Pg. 1106 is part of Doc. 736], 1111–1114 [Pgs. 1111–1114 include portions of Doc. 742, Doc. 743, Doc. 744, and Doc. 745], 1122–1124 [Pgs. 1122–1124 include portions of Doc. 751, Doc. 752, and Doc. 753], 1128 [Pg. 1128 is part of Doc. 756], 1135–1136 [Pgs. 1135–1136 include portions of Doc. 760 and Doc. 761], 1138 [Pg. 1138 is part of Doc. 763], 1142 [Pg. 1142 includes portions of Doc. 765, Doc. 766, and Doc. 767], 1152 [Pg. 1152 is part of Doc. 772], 1155n [Pg. 1155 includes portions of Doc. 774 and Doc. 775], 1161–1162 [Pgs. 1161–1162 include portions of Doc. 781 and Doc. 782], 1237n [Pg. 1237 includes portions of Doc. 839 and Doc. 840], 1238 [Pg. 1238 includes portions of Doc. 840, Doc. 841, and Doc. 842], 1367n [Pg. 1367 includes portions of Doc. 950 and Doc. 951], 1398 [Pg. 1398 is part of Doc. 974], 1484 [Pg. 1484 is part of Doc. 1029], 1504 [Pg. 1504 includes portions of Doc. 1039 and Doc. 1040], 1509–1510 [Pgs. 1509–1510 include portions of Doc. 1043, Doc. 1044, Doc. 1045, and Doc. 1046], 1521 [Pg. 1521 is part of Doc. 1057], 1532–1535 [Pgs. 1532–1535 include portions of Doc. 1066, Doc. 1067, Doc. 1068, Doc. 1069, and Doc. 1070], 1541 [Pg. 1541 includes portions of Doc. 1074, Doc. 1075, and Doc. 1076], 1565 [Pg. 1565 is part of Doc. 1095]

Faisal, Amir of Hejaz, 772 [Pg. 772 includes portions of Doc. 489 and Doc. 490]

Faisal II, King of Iraq, 181 [Pg. 181 includes portions of Doc. 76 and Doc. 77]

Faisal (also Feisal), Prince, 127 [Pg. 127 includes portions of Doc. 34 and Doc. 35], 152–153 [Pgs. 152–153 include portions of Doc. 60 and Doc. 61], 161 [Pg. 161 includes portions of Doc. 67 and Doc. 68], 756–757 [Pgs. 756–757 include portions of Doc. 472, Doc. 473, Doc. 474, and Doc. 475], 1577 [Pg. 1577 includes portions of Doc. 1102 and Doc. 1103], 1580–1581 [Pgs. 1580–1581 include portions of Doc. 1105, Doc. 1106, and Doc. 1107], 1595 [Pg. 1595 is part of Doc. 1113], 1620–1621 [Pgs. 1620–1621 include portions of Doc. 1124 and Doc. 1125], 1626 [Pg. 1626 is part of Doc. 1129]

Faiz Bey, 1486 [Pg. 1486 includes portions of Doc. 1029 and Doc. 1030], 1493–1494 [Pgs. 1493–1494 include portions of Doc. 1033, Doc. 1034, and Doc. 1035]

Far East, 30 [Pg. 30 is part of Doc. 3], 53 [Pg. 53 is part of Doc. 8], 573 [Pg. 573 is part of Doc. 329]

Far Eastern Commission, 53 [Pg. 53 is part of Doc. 8], 58 [Pg. 58 is part of Doc. 10]

Farhan, Hamad, 980 [Pg. 980 includes portions of Doc. 637 and Doc. 638]

Farouk, King of. Egypt, 147–148 [Pgs. 147–148 include portions of Doc. 54 and Doc. 55], 183 [Pg. 183 is part of Doc. 78], 186–187 [Pgs. 186–187 include portions of Doc. 81 and Doc. 82], 189–190 [Pg. 189 is part of Doc. 84], 193 [Pg. 193 is part of Doc. 87], 195 [Pg. 195 includes portions of Doc. 88 and Doc. 89], 197n [Pg. 197 includes portions of Doc. 89 and Doc. 90], 198–200 [Pgs. 198–200 include portions of Doc. 90 and Doc. 91], 202–206 [Pgs. 202–206 include portions of Doc. 91, Doc. 92, Doc. 93, and Doc. 94], 221–226 [Pgs. 221–226 include portions of Doc. 100, Doc. 101, Doc. 102, Doc. 103, and Doc. 104], 602–603 [Pgs. 602–603 include portions of Doc. 348, Doc. 349, and Doc. 350], 617–620 [Pgs. 617–620 include portions of Doc. 357, Doc. 358, Doc. 359, and Doc. 360], 760 [Pg. 760 includes portions of Doc. 477 and Doc. 478], 917 [Pg. 917 is part of Doc. 594], 927 [Pg. 927 includes portions of Doc. 602 and Doc. 603], 966 [Pg. 966 includes portions of Doc. 625 and Doc. 626], 1018 [Pg. 1018 includes portions of Doc. 662 and Doc. 663], 1373–1374 [Pgs. 1373–1374 include portions of Doc. 954 and Doc. 955], 1419n [Pg. 1419 includes portions of Doc. 986 and Doc. 987], 1491–1493 [Pgs. 1491–1493 include portions of Doc. 1032, Doc. 1033, and Doc. 1034], 1508–1509 [Pgs. 1508–1509 include portions of Doc. 1042, Doc. 1043, Doc. 1044, and Doc. 1045]

Farrell, James A., 1803 [Pg. 1803 includes portions of Doc. 1239 and Doc. 1240]

Farsi Island, 156 [Pg. 156 includes portions of Doc. 63, Doc. 64, and Doc. 65]

Fassi, Allal al, 1784 [Pg. 1784 is part of Doc. 1235]

Fawcett, James, 531–532 [Pg. 531 is part of Doc. 311]

Fawzi Bey, Mahmoud, 623–625 [Pgs. 623–625 include portions of Doc. 363, Doc. 364, and Doc. 365], 636n [Pg. 636 is part of Doc. 373], 756 [Pg. 756 includes portions of Doc. 472, Doc. 473, and Doc. 474], 1454 [Pg. 1454 includes portions of Doc. 1009 and Doc. 1010]

Feisal. see Faisal.

Ferguson, C. Vaughan, 434 [Pg. 434 includes portions of Doc. 236 and Doc. 237], 569n [Pg. 569 includes portions of Doc. 327 and Doc. 328], 588–589 [Pgs. 588–589 include portions of Doc. 336, Doc. 337, and Doc. 338]

Fezzan: Disposition of, 76 [Pg. 76 is part of Doc. 12]; French claim to, 76 [Pg. 76 is part of Doc. 12], 1778 [Pg. 1778 includes portions of Doc. 1232 and Doc. 1233]

Fischer, Maurice, 666 [Pg. 666 includes portions of Doc. 396 and Doc. 397]

Fisher, Adrian S., 1272n [Pg. 1272 includes portions of Doc. 874 and Doc. 875]

Fletcher, G. Paul, 1780 [Pg. 1780 is part of Doc. 1235]

Food and Agriculture Organization, 525–526 [Pgs. 525–526 include portions of Doc. 304, Doc. 305, and Doc. 306], 858 [Pg. 858 is part of Doc. 546], 910 [Pg. 910 includes portions of Doc. 590 and Doc. 591], 1352 [Pg. 1352 is part of Doc. 937], 1502 [Pg. 1502 includes portions of Doc. 1038 and Doc. 1039], 1687 [Pg. 1687 includes portions of Doc. 1165 and Doc. 1166]

Ford, Richard, 966 [Pg. 966 includes portions of Doc. 625 and Doc. 626], 1074 [Pg. 1074 includes portions of Doc. 705 and Doc. 706], 1111 [Pg. 1111 is part of Doc. 742], 1165 [Pg. 1165 includes portions of Doc. 784 and Doc. 785], 1184 [Pg. 1184 includes portions of Doc. 795 and Doc. 796], 1188n [Pg. 1188 includes portions of Doc. 800 and Doc. 801], 1189 [Pg. 1189 includes portions of Doc. 801 and Doc. 802], 1197 [Pg. 1197 is part of Doc. 809], 1215 [Pg. 1215 includes portions of Doc. 822 and Doc. 823], 1238 [Pg. 1238 includes portions of Doc. 840, Doc. 841, and Doc. 842], 1265 [Pg. 1265 is part of Doc. 868], 1292 [Pg. 1292 is part of Doc. 894], 1335 [Pg. 1335 is part of Doc. 927], 1392n [Pg. 1392 includes portions of Doc. 967 and Doc. 968], 1393n [Pg. 1393 includes portions of Doc. 969 and Doc. 970], 1444–1445 [Pgs. 1444–1445 include portions of Doc. 999 and Doc. 1000], 1481–1482 [Pgs. 1481–1482 include portions of Doc. 1026, Doc. 1027, and Doc. 1028], 1504 [Pg. 1504 includes portions of Doc. 1039 and Doc. 1040], 1509–1510 [Pgs. 1509–1510 include portions of Doc. 1043, Doc. 1044, Doc. 1045, and Doc. 1046], 1521 [Pg. 1521 is part of Doc. 1057], 1532 [Pg. 1532 includes portions of Doc. 1066 and Doc. 1067], 1561 [Pg. 1561 includes portions of Doc. 1089 and Doc. 1090]

Foreign Assistance Correlation Committee, 30 [Pg. 30 is part of Doc. 3], 277 [Pg. 277 is part of Doc. 133], 548 [Pg. 548 is part of Doc. 315], 564 [Pg. 564 is part of Doc. 323], 1088 [Pg. 1088 is part of Doc. 722]

Foreign Assistance Steering Committee, 277 [Pg. 277 is part of Doc. 133]

Forrestal, James, 677 [Pg. 677 includes portions of Doc. 404 and Doc. 405], 697–698 [Pgs. 697–698 include portions of Doc. 423, Doc. 424, and Doc. 425], 800 [Pg. 800 includes portions of Doc. 509 and Doc. 510], 801n [Pg. 801 is part of Doc. 510], 833 [Pg. 833 is part of Doc. 533], 864–865 [Pgs. 864–865 include portions of Doc. 551 and Doc. 552], 971 [Pg. 971 is part of Doc. 631], 1557 [Pg. 1557 is part of Doc. 1086], 1579–1580 [Pgs. 1579–1580 include portions of Doc. 1104, Doc. 1105, and Doc. 1106], 1596 [Pg. 1596 includes portions of Doc. 1113 and Doc. 1114], 1672 [Pg. 1672 is part of Doc. 1154], 1686 [Pg. 1686 is part of Doc. 1165], 1687n [Pg. 1687 includes portions of Doc. 1165 and Doc. 1166], 1688 [Pg. 1688 is part of Doc. 1166], 1691 [Pg. 1691 includes portions of Doc. 1169, Doc. 1170, and Doc. 1171]

France (see also French subheadings under individual countries), 63 [Pg. 63 is part of Doc. 12], 69 [Pg. 69 is part of Doc. 12], 183 [Pg. 183 is part of Doc. 78], 277 [Pg. 277 is part of Doc. 133], 338 [Pg. 338 is part of Doc. 169], 453 [Pg. 453 is part of Doc. 249], 1651 [Pg. 1651 is part of Doc. 1146], 1671 [Pg. 1671 includes portions of Doc. 1153 and Doc. 1154]

Franks, Sir Oliver, 50 [Pg. 50 is part of Doc. 8], 188 [Pg. 188 is part of Doc. 83], 190–192 [Pgs. 190–192 include portions of Doc. 84, Doc. 85, Doc. 86, and Doc. 87], 194 [Pg. 194 includes portions of Doc. 87 and Doc. 88], 300 [Pg. 300 is part of Doc. 148], 324 [Pg. 324 includes portions of Doc. 162 and Doc. 163], 331 [Pg. 331 is part of Doc. 165], 414 [Pg. 414 includes portions of Doc. 218 and Doc. 219], 611–613 [Pg. 611 is part of Doc. 354], 652 [Pg. 652 is part of Doc. 386], 658–660 [Pgs. 658–660 include portions of Doc. 391 and Doc. 392], 671–675 [Pgs. 671–675 include portions of Doc. 401, Doc. 402, and Doc. 403], 677–679 [Pgs. 677–679 include portions of Doc. 404 and Doc. 405], 695–696 [Pgs. 695–696 include portions of Doc. 421, Doc. 422, and Doc. 423], 812–814 [Pgs. 812–814 include portions of Doc. 518, Doc. 519, and Doc. 520], 952n [Pg. 952 includes portions of Doc. 612 and Doc. 613], 958–959 [Pgs. 958–959 include portions of Doc. 618 and Doc. 619], 1017 [Pg. 1017 includes portions of Doc. 661 and Doc. 662], 1030 [Pg. 1030 includes portions of Doc. 670 and Doc. 671], 1696–1698 [Pgs. 1696–1698 include portions of Doc. 1174, Doc. 1175, Doc. 1176, and Doc. 1177], 1745 [Pg. 1745 includes portions of Doc. 1212 and Doc. 1213], 1759 [Pg. 1759 includes portions of Doc. 1218 and Doc. 1219]

Frazer, Sir William, 125–127 [Pgs. 125–127 include portions of Doc. 33, Doc. 34, and Doc. 35]

French North Africa: Algeria: Communist movement, 1787 [Pg. 1787 is part of Doc. 1235], 1790–1791 [Pg. 1790 is part of Doc. 1236]; French policy, 1783 [Pg. 1783 is part of Doc. 1235]; labor movement, 1790 [Pg. 1790 is part of Doc. 1236]; U.S. investments, 1795 [Pg. 1795 is part of Doc. 1236]

Communist movement, 1785–1786 [Pg. 1785 is part of Doc. 1235]

French policy, 76 [Pg. 76 is part of Doc. 12], 1648 [Pg. 1648 is part of Doc. 1146], 1781–1783 [Pg. 1781 is part of Doc. 1235], 1785 [Pg. 1785 is part of Doc. 1235], 1792 [Pg. 1792 is part of Doc. 1236], 1794–1795 [Pg. 1794 is part of Doc. 1236]

Labor problems, 1788–1792 [Pgs. 1788–1792 include portions of Doc. 1235 and Doc. 1236]

Morocco: Communist movement, 1786 [Pg. 1786 is part of Doc. 1235], 1790 [Pg. 1790 is part of Doc. 1236]; French policy, 1782–1783 [Pg. 1782 is part of Doc. 1235]; independence, 1786 [Pg. 1786 is part of Doc. 1235]; Istiqlal party, 1786 [Pg. 1786 is part of Doc. 1235]; labor movement, 1790 [Pg. 1790 is part of Doc. 1236]; U.S. investments, 1794 [Pg. 1794 is part of Doc. 1236]

Tunisia: Communist movement, 1787–1788 [Pgs. 1787–1788 include portions of Doc. 1235 and Doc. 1236], 1791 [Pg. 1791 is part of Doc. 1236]; French policy, 1782–1783 [Pg. 1782 is part of Doc. 1235], 1785 [Pg. 1785 is part of Doc. 1235]; labor movement, 1791 [Pg. 1791 is part of Doc. 1236]; U.S. investments, 1794–1795 [Pg. 1794 is part of Doc. 1236]

U.S. information and cultural exchange program, 1792–1793 [Pg. 1792 is part of Doc. 1236], 1796 [Pg. 1796 is part of Doc. 1236]

French Union, 1782 [Pg. 1782 is part of Doc. 1235], 1786–1787 [Pg. 1786 is part of Doc. 1235]

Fritzlan, A. David, 168 [Pg. 168 includes portions of Doc. 72 and Doc. 73], 1426n [Pg. 1426 includes portions of Doc. 993 and Doc. 994], 1461–1462 [Pgs. 1461–1462 include portions of Doc. 1015, Doc. 1016, and Doc. 1017], 1468–1469 [Pgs. 1468–1469 include portions of Doc. 1019, Doc. 1020, and Doc. 1021], 1482n [Pg. 1482 includes portions of Doc. 1027 and Doc. 1028], 1483–1486 [Pgs. 1483–1486 include portions of Doc. 1028, Doc. 1029, and Doc. 1030], 1494–1495 [Pgs. 1494–1495 include portions of Doc. 1034, Doc. 1035, and Doc. 1036], 1533–1534 [Pgs. 1533–1534 include portions of Doc. 1067, Doc. 1068, and Doc. 1069], 1545–1547 [Pgs. 1545–1547 include portions of Doc. 1079 and Doc. 1080], 1558–1559 [Pgs. 1558–1559 include portions of Doc. 1086, Doc. 1087, and Doc. 1088], 1562 [Pg. 1562 is part of Doc. 1091]

Fuad Bey Hamza, 124 [Pg. 124 is part of Doc. 32], 128 [Pg. 128 includes portions of Doc. 36 and Doc. 37], 133 [Pg. 133 is part of Doc. 42], 161 [Pg. 161 includes portions of Doc. 67 and Doc. 68], 756 [Pg. 756 includes portions of Doc. 472, Doc. 473, and Doc. 474], 1423 [Pg. 1423 includes portions of Doc. 990 and Doc. 991], 1424 [Pg. 1424 is part of Doc. 992], 1584 [Pg. 1584 includes portions of Doc. 1109 and Doc. 1110], 1589 [Pg. 1589 includes portions of Doc. 1110 and Doc. 1111], 1590 [Pg. 1590 is part of Doc. 1111], 1591 [Pg. 1591 is part of Doc. 1111], 1593 [Pg. 1593 is part of Doc. 1111], 1594 [Pg. 1594 includes portions of Doc. 1111 and Doc. 1112], 1595 [Pg. 1595 is part of Doc. 1113], 1603 [Pg. 1603 is part of Doc. 1119], 1604 [Pg. 1604 is part of Doc. 1119], 1605 [Pg. 1605 is part of Doc. 1119], 1606 [Pg. 1606 is part of Doc. 1119], 1613 [Pg. 1613 includes portions of Doc. 1119 and Doc. 1120], 1620 [Pg. 1620 includes portions of Doc. 1124 and Doc. 1125], 1623n [Pg. 1623 includes portions of Doc. 1126 and Doc. 1127]

Fulbright Act, 510 [Pg. 510 includes portions of Doc. 294 and Doc. 295], 559 [Pg. 559 is part of Doc. 320], 1663 [Pg. 1663 is part of Doc. 1152]

Funkhouser, Richard, 83–85 [Pg. 83 is part of Doc. 12], 111 [Pg. 111 includes portions of Doc. 24 and Doc. 25], 151n [Pg. 151 is part of Doc. 59]

Furlonge, G.W., 1540–1541 [Pgs. 1540–1541 include portions of Doc. 1073, Doc. 1074, Doc. 1075, and Doc. 1076], 1556 [Pg. 1556 is part of Doc. 1085]

Furman, John P., 91 [Pg. 91 is part of Doc. 14], 96 [Pg. 96 is part of Doc. 17], 100 [Pg. 100 is part of Doc. 18], 102 [Pg. 102 is part of Doc. 18], 105 [Pg. 105 includes portions of Doc. 20 and Doc. 21], 111n [Pg. 111 includes portions of Doc. 24 and Doc. 25]

Gardiner, Arthur Z., 1350 [Pg. 1350 includes portions of Doc. 936 and Doc. 937], 1407n [Pg. 1407 includes portions of Doc. 978 and Doc. 979], 1470 [Pg. 1470 includes portions of Doc. 1021 and Doc. 1022], 1472 [Pg. 1472 includes portions of Doc. 1024 and Doc. 1025], 1476–1481 [Pgs. 1476–1481 include portions of Doc. 1025, Doc. 1026, and Doc. 1027], 1506n [Pg. 1506 includes portions of Doc. 1041 and Doc. 1042]

Gargani, Khalid Bey, 1604 [Pg. 1604 is part of Doc. 1119]

Garner, Robert L., 1644 [Pg. 1644 includes portions of Doc. 1143 and Doc. 1144], 1680 [Pg. 1680 is part of Doc. 1159]

Garreau, Roger, 1555 [Pg. 1555 includes portions of Doc. 1083 and Doc. 1084]

Gass, Oscar, 1329–1330 [Pg. 1329 is part of Doc. 922]

Gaston, Herbert E., 1807 [Pg. 1807 includes portions of Doc. 1241 and Doc. 1242]

Gazarine, Ibrahim Hasan, 221 [Pg. 221 is part of Doc. 100]

Geib, Horace V., 567 [Pg. 567 includes portions of Doc. 325 and Doc. 326]

Germany, 285 [Pg. 285 includes portions of Doc. 136 and Doc. 137], 338 [Pg. 338 is part of Doc. 169], 345 [Pg. 345 includes portions of Doc. 172 and Doc. 173], 1652 [Pg. 1652 is part of Doc. 1146], 1664–1665 [Pg. 1664 is part of Doc. 1152]

Ghani, Ghassem, 1642–1643 [Pgs. 1642–1643 include portions of Doc. 1141, Doc. 1142, and Doc. 1143]

Glendenning, C. Dillon, 376 [Pg. 376 includes portions of Doc. 194 and Doc. 195], 1675 [Pg. 1675 includes portions of Doc. 1156 and Doc. 1157]

Glubb, Maj. Gen. John Bagot, 630–632 [Pgs. 630–632 include portions of Doc. 369, Doc. 370, and Doc. 371], 780 [Pg. 780 includes portions of Doc. 494 and Doc. 495], 808 [Pg. 808 is part of Doc. 516], 823 [Pg. 823 includes portions of Doc. 529 and Doc. 530], 852 [Pg. 852 is part of Doc. 542], 1446 [Pg. 1446 is part of Doc. 1001]

Gökay, Fehrettin Kerim, 1685 [Pg. 1685 includes portions of Doc. 1162, Doc. 1163, and Doc. 1164]

Gökcen, H. C., 1472 [Pg. 1472 includes portions of Doc. 1024 and Doc. 1025]

Goldmann, Nahum, 138 [Pg. 138 is part of Doc. 48]

Gonzalez Fernandez, Alberto, 1336n [Pg. 1336 is part of Doc. 928]

Gowen, Franklin C., 1308–1309 [Pgs. 1308–1309 include portions of Doc. 904 and Doc. 905], 1348 [Pg. 1348 includes portions of Doc. 934 and Doc. 935]

Grady, Henry F., 167–168 [Pgs. 167–168 include portions of Doc. 71, Doc. 72, and Doc. 73], 233–238 [Pgs. 233–238 include portions of Doc. 106, Doc. 107, Doc. 108, Doc. 109, Doc. 110, Doc. 111, and Doc. 112], 240–242 [Pgs. 240–242 include portions of Doc. 113, Doc. 114, and Doc. 115], 245–249 [Pgs. 245–249 include portions of Doc. 115, Doc. 116, Doc. 117, and Doc. 118], 252n [Pg. 252 is part of Doc. 119], 263n [Pg. 263 includes portions of Doc. 128 and Doc. 129], 267–268 [Pgs. 267–268 include portions of Doc. 131 and Doc. 132], 275 [Pg. 275 is part of Doc. 133], 280–285 [Pgs. 280–285 include portions of Doc. 134, Doc. 135, Doc. 136, and Doc. 137], 289–292 [Pgs. 289–292 include portions of Doc. 140, Doc. 141, Doc. 142, and Doc. 143], 295–296 [Pgs. 295–296 include portions of Doc. 144 and Doc. 145], 309–811 [Pgs. 309–811 include portions of Doc. 150, Doc. 151, Doc. 152, Doc. 153, Doc. 154, Doc. 155, Doc. 156, Doc. 157, Doc. 158, Doc. 159, Doc. 160, Doc. 161, Doc. 162, Doc. 163, Doc. 164, Doc. 165, Doc. 166, Doc. 167, Doc. 168, Doc. 169, Doc. 170, Doc. 171, Doc. 172, Doc. 173, Doc. 174, Doc. 175, Doc. 176, Doc. 177, Doc. 178, Doc. 179, Doc. 180, Doc. 181, Doc. 182, Doc. 183, Doc. 184, Doc. 185, Doc. 186, Doc. 187, Doc. 188, Doc. 189, Doc. 190, Doc. 191, Doc. 192, Doc. 193, Doc. 194, Doc. 195, Doc. 196, Doc. 197, Doc. 198, Doc. 199, Doc. 200, Doc. 201, Doc. 202, Doc. 203, Doc. 204, Doc. 205, Doc. 206, Doc. 207, Doc. 208, Doc. 209, Doc. 210, Doc. 211, Doc. 212, Doc. 213, Doc. 214, Doc. 215, Doc. 216, Doc. 217, Doc. 218, Doc. 219, Doc. 220, Doc. 221, Doc. 222, Doc. 223, Doc. 224, Doc. 225, Doc. 226, Doc. 227, Doc. 228, Doc. 229, Doc. 230, Doc. 231, Doc. 232, Doc. 233, Doc. 234, Doc. 235, Doc. 236, Doc. 237, Doc. 238, Doc. 239, Doc. 240, Doc. 241, Doc. 242, Doc. 243, Doc. 244, Doc. 245, Doc. 246, Doc. 247, Doc. 248, Doc. 249, Doc. 250, Doc. 251, Doc. 252, Doc. 253, Doc. 254, Doc. 255, Doc. 256, Doc. 257, Doc. 258, Doc. 259, Doc. 260, Doc. 261, Doc. 262, Doc. 263, Doc. 264, Doc. 265, Doc. 266, Doc. 267, Doc. 268, Doc. 269, Doc. 270, Doc. 271, Doc. 272, Doc. 273, Doc. 274, Doc. 275, Doc. 276, Doc. 277, Doc. 278, Doc. 279, Doc. 280, Doc. 281, Doc. 282, Doc. 283, Doc. 284, Doc. 285, Doc. 286, Doc. 287, Doc. 288, Doc. 289, Doc. 290, Doc. 291, Doc. 292, Doc. 293, Doc. 294, Doc. 295, Doc. 296, Doc. 297, Doc. 298, Doc. 299, Doc. 300, Doc. 301, Doc. 302, Doc. 303, Doc. 304, Doc. 305, Doc. 306, Doc. 307, Doc. 308, Doc. 309, Doc. 310, Doc. 311, Doc. 312, Doc. 313, Doc. 314, Doc. 315, Doc. 316, Doc. 317, Doc. 318, Doc. 319, Doc. 320, Doc. 321, Doc. 322, Doc. 323, Doc. 324, Doc. 325, Doc. 326, Doc. 327, Doc. 328, Doc. 329, Doc. 330, Doc. 331, Doc. 332, Doc. 333, Doc. 334, Doc. 335, Doc. 336, Doc. 337, Doc. 338, Doc. 339, Doc. 340, Doc. 341, Doc. 342, Doc. 343, Doc. 344, Doc. 345, Doc. 346, Doc. 347, Doc. 348, Doc. 349, Doc. 350, Doc. 351, Doc. 352, Doc. 353, Doc. 354, Doc. 355, Doc. 356, Doc. 357, Doc. 358, Doc. 359, Doc. 360, Doc. 361, Doc. 362, Doc. 363, Doc. 364, Doc. 365, Doc. 366, Doc. 367, Doc. 368, Doc. 369, Doc. 370, Doc. 371, Doc. 372, Doc. 373, Doc. 374, Doc. 375, Doc. 376, Doc. 377, Doc. 378, Doc. 379, Doc. 380, Doc. 381, Doc. 382, Doc. 383, Doc. 384, Doc. 385, Doc. 386, Doc. 387, Doc. 388, Doc. 389, Doc. 390, Doc. 391, Doc. 392, Doc. 393, Doc. 394, Doc. 395, Doc. 396, Doc. 397, Doc. 398, Doc. 399, Doc. 400, Doc. 401, Doc. 402, Doc. 403, Doc. 404, Doc. 405, Doc. 406, Doc. 407, Doc. 408, Doc. 409, Doc. 410, Doc. 411, Doc. 412, Doc. 413, Doc. 414, Doc. 415, Doc. 416, Doc. 417, Doc. 418, Doc. 419, Doc. 420, Doc. 421, Doc. 422, Doc. 423, Doc. 424, Doc. 425, Doc. 426, Doc. 427, Doc. 428, Doc. 429, Doc. 430, Doc. 431, Doc. 432, Doc. 433, Doc. 434, Doc. 435, Doc. 436, Doc. 437, Doc. 438, Doc. 439, Doc. 440, Doc. 441, Doc. 442, Doc. 443, Doc. 444, Doc. 445, Doc. 446, Doc. 447, Doc. 448, Doc. 449, Doc. 450, Doc. 451, Doc. 452, Doc. 453, Doc. 454, Doc. 455, Doc. 456, Doc. 457, Doc. 458, Doc. 459, Doc. 460, Doc. 461, Doc. 462, Doc. 463, Doc. 464, Doc. 465, Doc. 466, Doc. 467, Doc. 468, Doc. 469, Doc. 470, Doc. 471, Doc. 472, Doc. 473, Doc. 474, Doc. 475, Doc. 476, Doc. 477, Doc. 478, Doc. 479, Doc. 480, Doc. 481, Doc. 482, Doc. 483, Doc. 484, Doc. 485, Doc. 486, Doc. 487, Doc. 488, Doc. 489, Doc. 490, Doc. 491, Doc. 492, Doc. 493, Doc. 494, Doc. 495, Doc. 496, Doc. 497, Doc. 498, Doc. 499, Doc. 500, Doc. 501, Doc. 502, Doc. 503, Doc. 504, Doc. 505, Doc. 506, Doc. 507, Doc. 508, Doc. 509, Doc. 510, Doc. 511, Doc. 512, Doc. 513, Doc. 514, Doc. 515, Doc. 516, Doc. 517, and Doc. 518], 315 [Pg. 315 includes portions of Doc. 154 and Doc. 155], 318 [Pg. 318 is part of Doc. 157], 323 [Pg. 323 includes portions of Doc. 161 and Doc. 162], 345–349 [Pgs. 345–349 include portions of Doc. 172, Doc. 173, Doc. 174, and Doc. 175], 351 [Pg. 351 is part of Doc. 177], 353–855 [Pgs. 353–855 include portions of Doc. 177, Doc. 178, Doc. 179, Doc. 180, Doc. 181, Doc. 182, Doc. 183, Doc. 184, Doc. 185, Doc. 186, Doc. 187, Doc. 188, Doc. 189, Doc. 190, Doc. 191, Doc. 192, Doc. 193, Doc. 194, Doc. 195, Doc. 196, Doc. 197, Doc. 198, Doc. 199, Doc. 200, Doc. 201, Doc. 202, Doc. 203, Doc. 204, Doc. 205, Doc. 206, Doc. 207, Doc. 208, Doc. 209, Doc. 210, Doc. 211, Doc. 212, Doc. 213, Doc. 214, Doc. 215, Doc. 216, Doc. 217, Doc. 218, Doc. 219, Doc. 220, Doc. 221, Doc. 222, Doc. 223, Doc. 224, Doc. 225, Doc. 226, Doc. 227, Doc. 228, Doc. 229, Doc. 230, Doc. 231, Doc. 232, Doc. 233, Doc. 234, Doc. 235, Doc. 236, Doc. 237, Doc. 238, Doc. 239, Doc. 240, Doc. 241, Doc. 242, Doc. 243, Doc. 244, Doc. 245, Doc. 246, Doc. 247, Doc. 248, Doc. 249, Doc. 250, Doc. 251, Doc. 252, Doc. 253, Doc. 254, Doc. 255, Doc. 256, Doc. 257, Doc. 258, Doc. 259, Doc. 260, Doc. 261, Doc. 262, Doc. 263, Doc. 264, Doc. 265, Doc. 266, Doc. 267, Doc. 268, Doc. 269, Doc. 270, Doc. 271, Doc. 272, Doc. 273, Doc. 274, Doc. 275, Doc. 276, Doc. 277, Doc. 278, Doc. 279, Doc. 280, Doc. 281, Doc. 282, Doc. 283, Doc. 284, Doc. 285, Doc. 286, Doc. 287, Doc. 288, Doc. 289, Doc. 290, Doc. 291, Doc. 292, Doc. 293, Doc. 294, Doc. 295, Doc. 296, Doc. 297, Doc. 298, Doc. 299, Doc. 300, Doc. 301, Doc. 302, Doc. 303, Doc. 304, Doc. 305, Doc. 306, Doc. 307, Doc. 308, Doc. 309, Doc. 310, Doc. 311, Doc. 312, Doc. 313, Doc. 314, Doc. 315, Doc. 316, Doc. 317, Doc. 318, Doc. 319, Doc. 320, Doc. 321, Doc. 322, Doc. 323, Doc. 324, Doc. 325, Doc. 326, Doc. 327, Doc. 328, Doc. 329, Doc. 330, Doc. 331, Doc. 332, Doc. 333, Doc. 334, Doc. 335, Doc. 336, Doc. 337, Doc. 338, Doc. 339, Doc. 340, Doc. 341, Doc. 342, Doc. 343, Doc. 344, Doc. 345, Doc. 346, Doc. 347, Doc. 348, Doc. 349, Doc. 350, Doc. 351, Doc. 352, Doc. 353, Doc. 354, Doc. 355, Doc. 356, Doc. 357, Doc. 358, Doc. 359, Doc. 360, Doc. 361, Doc. 362, Doc. 363, Doc. 364, Doc. 365, Doc. 366, Doc. 367, Doc. 368, Doc. 369, Doc. 370, Doc. 371, Doc. 372, Doc. 373, Doc. 374, Doc. 375, Doc. 376, Doc. 377, Doc. 378, Doc. 379, Doc. 380, Doc. 381, Doc. 382, Doc. 383, Doc. 384, Doc. 385, Doc. 386, Doc. 387, Doc. 388, Doc. 389, Doc. 390, Doc. 391, Doc. 392, Doc. 393, Doc. 394, Doc. 395, Doc. 396, Doc. 397, Doc. 398, Doc. 399, Doc. 400, Doc. 401, Doc. 402, Doc. 403, Doc. 404, Doc. 405, Doc. 406, Doc. 407, Doc. 408, Doc. 409, Doc. 410, Doc. 411, Doc. 412, Doc. 413, Doc. 414, Doc. 415, Doc. 416, Doc. 417, Doc. 418, Doc. 419, Doc. 420, Doc. 421, Doc. 422, Doc. 423, Doc. 424, Doc. 425, Doc. 426, Doc. 427, Doc. 428, Doc. 429, Doc. 430, Doc. 431, Doc. 432, Doc. 433, Doc. 434, Doc. 435, Doc. 436, Doc. 437, Doc. 438, Doc. 439, Doc. 440, Doc. 441, Doc. 442, Doc. 443, Doc. 444, Doc. 445, Doc. 446, Doc. 447, Doc. 448, Doc. 449, Doc. 450, Doc. 451, Doc. 452, Doc. 453, Doc. 454, Doc. 455, Doc. 456, Doc. 457, Doc. 458, Doc. 459, Doc. 460, Doc. 461, Doc. 462, Doc. 463, Doc. 464, Doc. 465, Doc. 466, Doc. 467, Doc. 468, Doc. 469, Doc. 470, Doc. 471, Doc. 472, Doc. 473, Doc. 474, Doc. 475, Doc. 476, Doc. 477, Doc. 478, Doc. 479, Doc. 480, Doc. 481, Doc. 482, Doc. 483, Doc. 484, Doc. 485, Doc. 486, Doc. 487, Doc. 488, Doc. 489, Doc. 490, Doc. 491, Doc. 492, Doc. 493, Doc. 494, Doc. 495, Doc. 496, Doc. 497, Doc. 498, Doc. 499, Doc. 500, Doc. 501, Doc. 502, Doc. 503, Doc. 504, Doc. 505, Doc. 506, Doc. 507, Doc. 508, Doc. 509, Doc. 510, Doc. 511, Doc. 512, Doc. 513, Doc. 514, Doc. 515, Doc. 516, Doc. 517, Doc. 518, Doc. 519, Doc. 520, Doc. 521, Doc. 522, Doc. 523, Doc. 524, Doc. 525, Doc. 526, Doc. 527, Doc. 528, Doc. 529, Doc. 530, Doc. 531, Doc. 532, Doc. 533, Doc. 534, Doc. 535, Doc. 536, Doc. 537, Doc. 538, Doc. 539, Doc. 540, Doc. 541, Doc. 542, Doc. 543, and Doc. 544], 359–862 [Pgs. 359–862 include portions of Doc. 181, Doc. 182, Doc. 183, Doc. 184, Doc. 185, Doc. 186, Doc. 187, Doc. 188, Doc. 189, Doc. 190, Doc. 191, Doc. 192, Doc. 193, Doc. 194, Doc. 195, Doc. 196, Doc. 197, Doc. 198, Doc. 199, Doc. 200, Doc. 201, Doc. 202, Doc. 203, Doc. 204, Doc. 205, Doc. 206, Doc. 207, Doc. 208, Doc. 209, Doc. 210, Doc. 211, Doc. 212, Doc. 213, Doc. 214, Doc. 215, Doc. 216, Doc. 217, Doc. 218, Doc. 219, Doc. 220, Doc. 221, Doc. 222, Doc. 223, Doc. 224, Doc. 225, Doc. 226, Doc. 227, Doc. 228, Doc. 229, Doc. 230, Doc. 231, Doc. 232, Doc. 233, Doc. 234, Doc. 235, Doc. 236, Doc. 237, Doc. 238, Doc. 239, Doc. 240, Doc. 241, Doc. 242, Doc. 243, Doc. 244, Doc. 245, Doc. 246, Doc. 247, Doc. 248, Doc. 249, Doc. 250, Doc. 251, Doc. 252, Doc. 253, Doc. 254, Doc. 255, Doc. 256, Doc. 257, Doc. 258, Doc. 259, Doc. 260, Doc. 261, Doc. 262, Doc. 263, Doc. 264, Doc. 265, Doc. 266, Doc. 267, Doc. 268, Doc. 269, Doc. 270, Doc. 271, Doc. 272, Doc. 273, Doc. 274, Doc. 275, Doc. 276, Doc. 277, Doc. 278, Doc. 279, Doc. 280, Doc. 281, Doc. 282, Doc. 283, Doc. 284, Doc. 285, Doc. 286, Doc. 287, Doc. 288, Doc. 289, Doc. 290, Doc. 291, Doc. 292, Doc. 293, Doc. 294, Doc. 295, Doc. 296, Doc. 297, Doc. 298, Doc. 299, Doc. 300, Doc. 301, Doc. 302, Doc. 303, Doc. 304, Doc. 305, Doc. 306, Doc. 307, Doc. 308, Doc. 309, Doc. 310, Doc. 311, Doc. 312, Doc. 313, Doc. 314, Doc. 315, Doc. 316, Doc. 317, Doc. 318, Doc. 319, Doc. 320, Doc. 321, Doc. 322, Doc. 323, Doc. 324, Doc. 325, Doc. 326, Doc. 327, Doc. 328, Doc. 329, Doc. 330, Doc. 331, Doc. 332, Doc. 333, Doc. 334, Doc. 335, Doc. 336, Doc. 337, Doc. 338, Doc. 339, Doc. 340, Doc. 341, Doc. 342, Doc. 343, Doc. 344, Doc. 345, Doc. 346, Doc. 347, Doc. 348, Doc. 349, Doc. 350, Doc. 351, Doc. 352, Doc. 353, Doc. 354, Doc. 355, Doc. 356, Doc. 357, Doc. 358, Doc. 359, Doc. 360, Doc. 361, Doc. 362, Doc. 363, Doc. 364, Doc. 365, Doc. 366, Doc. 367, Doc. 368, Doc. 369, Doc. 370, Doc. 371, Doc. 372, Doc. 373, Doc. 374, Doc. 375, Doc. 376, Doc. 377, Doc. 378, Doc. 379, Doc. 380, Doc. 381, Doc. 382, Doc. 383, Doc. 384, Doc. 385, Doc. 386, Doc. 387, Doc. 388, Doc. 389, Doc. 390, Doc. 391, Doc. 392, Doc. 393, Doc. 394, Doc. 395, Doc. 396, Doc. 397, Doc. 398, Doc. 399, Doc. 400, Doc. 401, Doc. 402, Doc. 403, Doc. 404, Doc. 405, Doc. 406, Doc. 407, Doc. 408, Doc. 409, Doc. 410, Doc. 411, Doc. 412, Doc. 413, Doc. 414, Doc. 415, Doc. 416, Doc. 417, Doc. 418, Doc. 419, Doc. 420, Doc. 421, Doc. 422, Doc. 423, Doc. 424, Doc. 425, Doc. 426, Doc. 427, Doc. 428, Doc. 429, Doc. 430, Doc. 431, Doc. 432, Doc. 433, Doc. 434, Doc. 435, Doc. 436, Doc. 437, Doc. 438, Doc. 439, Doc. 440, Doc. 441, Doc. 442, Doc. 443, Doc. 444, Doc. 445, Doc. 446, Doc. 447, Doc. 448, Doc. 449, Doc. 450, Doc. 451, Doc. 452, Doc. 453, Doc. 454, Doc. 455, Doc. 456, Doc. 457, Doc. 458, Doc. 459, Doc. 460, Doc. 461, Doc. 462, Doc. 463, Doc. 464, Doc. 465, Doc. 466, Doc. 467, Doc. 468, Doc. 469, Doc. 470, Doc. 471, Doc. 472, Doc. 473, Doc. 474, Doc. 475, Doc. 476, Doc. 477, Doc. 478, Doc. 479, Doc. 480, Doc. 481, Doc. 482, Doc. 483, Doc. 484, Doc. 485, Doc. 486, Doc. 487, Doc. 488, Doc. 489, Doc. 490, Doc. 491, Doc. 492, Doc. 493, Doc. 494, Doc. 495, Doc. 496, Doc. 497, Doc. 498, Doc. 499, Doc. 500, Doc. 501, Doc. 502, Doc. 503, Doc. 504, Doc. 505, Doc. 506, Doc. 507, Doc. 508, Doc. 509, Doc. 510, Doc. 511, Doc. 512, Doc. 513, Doc. 514, Doc. 515, Doc. 516, Doc. 517, Doc. 518, Doc. 519, Doc. 520, Doc. 521, Doc. 522, Doc. 523, Doc. 524, Doc. 525, Doc. 526, Doc. 527, Doc. 528, Doc. 529, Doc. 530, Doc. 531, Doc. 532, Doc. 533, Doc. 534, Doc. 535, Doc. 536, Doc. 537, Doc. 538, Doc. 539, Doc. 540, Doc. 541, Doc. 542, Doc. 543, Doc. 544, Doc. 545, Doc. 546, Doc. 547, Doc. 548, and Doc. 549], 363n [Pg. 363 includes portions of Doc. 185 and Doc. 186], 370n [Pg. 370 includes portions of Doc. 191 and Doc. 192], 371–879 [Pgs. 371–879 include portions of Doc. 192, Doc. 193, Doc. 194, Doc. 195, Doc. 196, Doc. 197, Doc. 198, Doc. 199, Doc. 200, Doc. 201, Doc. 202, Doc. 203, Doc. 204, Doc. 205, Doc. 206, Doc. 207, Doc. 208, Doc. 209, Doc. 210, Doc. 211, Doc. 212, Doc. 213, Doc. 214, Doc. 215, Doc. 216, Doc. 217, Doc. 218, Doc. 219, Doc. 220, Doc. 221, Doc. 222, Doc. 223, Doc. 224, Doc. 225, Doc. 226, Doc. 227, Doc. 228, Doc. 229, Doc. 230, Doc. 231, Doc. 232, Doc. 233, Doc. 234, Doc. 235, Doc. 236, Doc. 237, Doc. 238, Doc. 239, Doc. 240, Doc. 241, Doc. 242, Doc. 243, Doc. 244, Doc. 245, Doc. 246, Doc. 247, Doc. 248, Doc. 249, Doc. 250, Doc. 251, Doc. 252, Doc. 253, Doc. 254, Doc. 255, Doc. 256, Doc. 257, Doc. 258, Doc. 259, Doc. 260, Doc. 261, Doc. 262, Doc. 263, Doc. 264, Doc. 265, Doc. 266, Doc. 267, Doc. 268, Doc. 269, Doc. 270, Doc. 271, Doc. 272, Doc. 273, Doc. 274, Doc. 275, Doc. 276, Doc. 277, Doc. 278, Doc. 279, Doc. 280, Doc. 281, Doc. 282, Doc. 283, Doc. 284, Doc. 285, Doc. 286, Doc. 287, Doc. 288, Doc. 289, Doc. 290, Doc. 291, Doc. 292, Doc. 293, Doc. 294, Doc. 295, Doc. 296, Doc. 297, Doc. 298, Doc. 299, Doc. 300, Doc. 301, Doc. 302, Doc. 303, Doc. 304, Doc. 305, Doc. 306, Doc. 307, Doc. 308, Doc. 309, Doc. 310, Doc. 311, Doc. 312, Doc. 313, Doc. 314, Doc. 315, Doc. 316, Doc. 317, Doc. 318, Doc. 319, Doc. 320, Doc. 321, Doc. 322, Doc. 323, Doc. 324, Doc. 325, Doc. 326, Doc. 327, Doc. 328, Doc. 329, Doc. 330, Doc. 331, Doc. 332, Doc. 333, Doc. 334, Doc. 335, Doc. 336, Doc. 337, Doc. 338, Doc. 339, Doc. 340, Doc. 341, Doc. 342, Doc. 343, Doc. 344, Doc. 345, Doc. 346, Doc. 347, Doc. 348, Doc. 349, Doc. 350, Doc. 351, Doc. 352, Doc. 353, Doc. 354, Doc. 355, Doc. 356, Doc. 357, Doc. 358, Doc. 359, Doc. 360, Doc. 361, Doc. 362, Doc. 363, Doc. 364, Doc. 365, Doc. 366, Doc. 367, Doc. 368, Doc. 369, Doc. 370, Doc. 371, Doc. 372, Doc. 373, Doc. 374, Doc. 375, Doc. 376, Doc. 377, Doc. 378, Doc. 379, Doc. 380, Doc. 381, Doc. 382, Doc. 383, Doc. 384, Doc. 385, Doc. 386, Doc. 387, Doc. 388, Doc. 389, Doc. 390, Doc. 391, Doc. 392, Doc. 393, Doc. 394, Doc. 395, Doc. 396, Doc. 397, Doc. 398, Doc. 399, Doc. 400, Doc. 401, Doc. 402, Doc. 403, Doc. 404, Doc. 405, Doc. 406, Doc. 407, Doc. 408, Doc. 409, Doc. 410, Doc. 411, Doc. 412, Doc. 413, Doc. 414, Doc. 415, Doc. 416, Doc. 417, Doc. 418, Doc. 419, Doc. 420, Doc. 421, Doc. 422, Doc. 423, Doc. 424, Doc. 425, Doc. 426, Doc. 427, Doc. 428, Doc. 429, Doc. 430, Doc. 431, Doc. 432, Doc. 433, Doc. 434, Doc. 435, Doc. 436, Doc. 437, Doc. 438, Doc. 439, Doc. 440, Doc. 441, Doc. 442, Doc. 443, Doc. 444, Doc. 445, Doc. 446, Doc. 447, Doc. 448, Doc. 449, Doc. 450, Doc. 451, Doc. 452, Doc. 453, Doc. 454, Doc. 455, Doc. 456, Doc. 457, Doc. 458, Doc. 459, Doc. 460, Doc. 461, Doc. 462, Doc. 463, Doc. 464, Doc. 465, Doc. 466, Doc. 467, Doc. 468, Doc. 469, Doc. 470, Doc. 471, Doc. 472, Doc. 473, Doc. 474, Doc. 475, Doc. 476, Doc. 477, Doc. 478, Doc. 479, Doc. 480, Doc. 481, Doc. 482, Doc. 483, Doc. 484, Doc. 485, Doc. 486, Doc. 487, Doc. 488, Doc. 489, Doc. 490, Doc. 491, Doc. 492, Doc. 493, Doc. 494, Doc. 495, Doc. 496, Doc. 497, Doc. 498, Doc. 499, Doc. 500, Doc. 501, Doc. 502, Doc. 503, Doc. 504, Doc. 505, Doc. 506, Doc. 507, Doc. 508, Doc. 509, Doc. 510, Doc. 511, Doc. 512, Doc. 513, Doc. 514, Doc. 515, Doc. 516, Doc. 517, Doc. 518, Doc. 519, Doc. 520, Doc. 521, Doc. 522, Doc. 523, Doc. 524, Doc. 525, Doc. 526, Doc. 527, Doc. 528, Doc. 529, Doc. 530, Doc. 531, Doc. 532, Doc. 533, Doc. 534, Doc. 535, Doc. 536, Doc. 537, Doc. 538, Doc. 539, Doc. 540, Doc. 541, Doc. 542, Doc. 543, Doc. 544, Doc. 545, Doc. 546, Doc. 547, Doc. 548, Doc. 549, Doc. 550, Doc. 551, Doc. 552, Doc. 553, Doc. 554, Doc. 555, Doc. 556, Doc. 557, Doc. 558, Doc. 559, Doc. 560, Doc. 561, Doc. 562, Doc. 563, Doc. 564, and Doc. 565], 383–385 [Pgs. 383–385 include portions of Doc. 200 and Doc. 201], 389–390 [Pgs. 389–390 include portions of Doc. 204, Doc. 205, and Doc. 206], 393n [Pg. 393 is part of Doc. 207], 412 [Pg. 412 includes portions of Doc. 216, Doc. 217, and Doc. 218], 416 [Pg. 416 includes portions of Doc. 219 and Doc. 220], 418n [Pg. 418 includes portions of Doc. 221 and Doc. 222], 419–421 [Pgs. 419–421 include portions of Doc. 222 and Doc. 223], 424n [Pg. 424 is part of Doc. 227], 425–428 [Pgs. 425–428 include portions of Doc. 227, Doc. 228, Doc. 229, Doc. 230, Doc. 231, and Doc. 232], 431–433 [Pgs. 431–433 include portions of Doc. 234 and Doc. 235], 435–437 [Pgs. 435–437 include portions of Doc. 235, Doc. 236, Doc. 237, Doc. 238, and Doc. 239], 440–445 [Pgs. 440–445 include portions of Doc. 242, Doc. 243, and Doc. 244], 450–451 [Pgs. 450–451 include portions of Doc. 247 and Doc. 248], 460–461 [Pgs. 460–461 include portions of Doc. 253, Doc. 254, and Doc. 255], 462n [Pg. 462 includes portions of Doc. 255 and Doc. 256], 463–464 [Pgs. 463–464 include portions of Doc. 256 and Doc. 257], 466n [Pg. 466 is part of Doc. 259], 689–690 [Pgs. 689–690 include portions of Doc. 415 and Doc. 416]

Grady, Mrs. Henry F., 284n [Pg. 284 is part of Doc. 136]

Greater Syria, proposals concerning establishment of, 183 [Pg. 183 is part of Doc. 78], 649 [Pg. 649 includes portions of Doc. 383 and Doc. 384], 666 [Pg. 666 includes portions of Doc. 396 and Doc. 397], 882 [Pg. 882 is part of Doc. 567], 1456 [Pg. 1456 includes portions of Doc. 1012 and Doc. 1013], 1578–1581 [Pgs. 1578–1581 include portions of Doc. 1103, Doc. 1104, Doc. 1105, Doc. 1106, and Doc. 1107], 1595 [Pg. 1595 is part of Doc. 1113], 1618–1619 [Pg. 1618 is part of Doc. 1124]

Greece: Albanian position, 52 [Pg. 52 is part of Doc. 8], 256n [Pg. 256 includes portions of Doc. 121 and Doc. 122], 264 [Pg. 264 is part of Doc. 129], 268 [Pg. 268 is part of Doc. 132], 273–276 [Pg. 273 is part of Doc. 133], 288–289 [Pgs. 288–289 include portions of Doc. 139 and Doc. 140], 293–294 [Pgs. 293–294 include portions of Doc. 143 and Doc. 144], 299 [Pg. 299 is part of Doc. 147], 307 [Pg. 307 is part of Doc. 150], 819 [Pg. 819 includes portions of Doc. 526 and Doc. 527], 321–322 [Pg. 321 is part of Doc. 160], 328 [Pg. 328 is part of Doc. 163], 331 [Pg. 331 is part of Doc. 165], 334 [Pg. 334 is part of Doc. 166], 336–387 [Pgs. 336–387 include portions of Doc. 167, Doc. 168, Doc. 169, Doc. 170, Doc. 171, Doc. 172, Doc. 173, Doc. 174, Doc. 175, Doc. 176, Doc. 177, Doc. 178, Doc. 179, Doc. 180, Doc. 181, Doc. 182, Doc. 183, Doc. 184, Doc. 185, Doc. 186, Doc. 187, Doc. 188, Doc. 189, Doc. 190, Doc. 191, Doc. 192, Doc. 193, Doc. 194, Doc. 195, Doc. 196, Doc. 197, Doc. 198, Doc. 199, Doc. 200, Doc. 201, Doc. 202, and Doc. 203], 339–340 [Pgs. 339–340 include portions of Doc. 169 and Doc. 170], 344 [Pg. 344 includes portions of Doc. 171 and Doc. 172], 349 [Pg. 349 is part of Doc. 175], 353 [Pg. 353 includes portions of Doc. 177 and Doc. 178], 373–374 [Pg. 373 is part of Doc. 194], 379 [Pg. 379 includes portions of Doc. 198 and Doc. 199], 382 [Pg. 382 is part of Doc. 200], 384n [Pg. 384 is part of Doc. 200], 385 [Pg. 385 is part of Doc. 201], 386n [Pg. 386 includes portions of Doc. 201 and Doc. 202], 387 [Pg. 387 is part of Doc. 203], 389 [Pg. 389 includes portions of Doc. 204, Doc. 205, and Doc. 206], 391–400 [Pgs. 391–400 include portions of Doc. 206, Doc. 207, Doc. 208, Doc. 209, Doc. 210, Doc. 211, Doc. 212, and Doc. 213], 402–404 [Pgs. 402–404 include portions of Doc. 214 and Doc. 215], 408–409 [Pgs. 408–409 include portions of Doc. 215 and Doc. 216], 413 [Pg. 413 is part of Doc. 218], 422–423 [Pgs. 422–423 include portions of Doc. 224, Doc. 225, and Doc. 226], 431 [Pg. 431 is part of Doc. 234], 488 [Pg. 488 includes portions of Doc. 275 and Doc. 276], 447 [Pg. 447 includes portions of Doc. 244, Doc. 245, and Doc. 246], 454 [Pg. 454 is part of Doc. 249], 467n [Pg. 467 is part of Doc. 260]

Amnesty proposals, 305 [Pg. 305 is part of Doc. 150], 327 [Pg. 327 is part of Doc. 163], 332 [Pg. 332 is part of Doc. 165], 337–338 [Pgs. 337–338 include portions of Doc. 167, Doc. 168, and Doc. 169], 341–342 [Pgs. 341–342 include portions of Doc. 170 and Doc. 171], 346 [Pg. 346 is part of Doc. 173], 348–351 [Pgs. 348–351 include portions of Doc. 175, Doc. 176, and Doc. 177], 353 [Pg. 353 includes portions of Doc. 177 and Doc. 178], 356 [Pg. 356 is part of Doc. 180], 358 [Pg. 358 is part of Doc. 181], 388 [Pg. 388 is part of Doc. 204], 391 [Pg. 391 is part of Doc. 206], 397 [Pg. 397 includes portions of Doc. 209 and Doc. 210], 402n [Pg. 402 is part of Doc. 214], 416 [Pg. 416 includes portions of Doc. 219 and Doc. 220], 420 [Pg. 420 is part of Doc. 223], 424–425 [Pgs. 424–425 include portions of Doc. 227 and Doc. 228], 428 [Pg. 428 includes portions of Doc. 230, Doc. 231, and Doc. 232], 450–451 [Pgs. 450–451 include portions of Doc. 247 and Doc. 248], 461 [Pg. 461 includes portions of Doc. 254 and Doc. 255], 468n [Pg. 468 is part of Doc. 261], 469–470 [Pg. 469 is part of Doc. 261]

Anglo-American cooperation regarding policy toward, 256–257 [Pgs. 256–257 include portions of Doc. 121, Doc. 122, and Doc. 123], 324 [Pg. 324 includes portions of Doc. 162 and Doc. 163], 412 [Pg. 412 includes portions of Doc. 216, Doc. 217, and Doc. 218]

Balkan pact, proposals for, 447–449 [Pgs. 447–449 include portions of Doc. 244, Doc. 245, and Doc. 246], 460–461 [Pgs. 460–461 include portions of Doc. 253, Doc. 254, and Doc. 255], 1683 [Pg. 1683 is part of Doc. 1161]

British policy, 2 [Pg. 2 is part of Doc. 1], 8 [Pg. 8 includes portions of Doc. 1, Doc. 2, and Doc. 3], 235–236 [Pgs. 235–236 include portions of Doc. 107, Doc. 108, Doc. 109, and Doc. 110], 256–257 [Pgs. 256–257 include portions of Doc. 121, Doc. 122, and Doc. 123], 261 [Pg. 261 is part of Doc. 126], 273 [Pg. 273 is part of Doc. 133], 285 [Pg. 285 includes portions of Doc. 136 and Doc. 137], 320 [Pg. 320 includes portions of Doc. 158 and Doc. 159], 329–330 [Pgs. 329–330 include portions of Doc. 163, Doc. 164, and Doc. 165], 341–344 [Pgs. 341–344 include portions of Doc. 170, Doc. 171, and Doc. 172], 347 [Pg. 347 includes portions of Doc. 173 and Doc. 174], 350–352 [Pgs. 350–352 include portions of Doc. 176 and Doc. 177], 354–356 [Pgs. 354–356 include portions of Doc. 178, Doc. 179, and Doc. 180], 370–371 [Pgs. 370–371 include portions of Doc. 191, Doc. 192, and Doc. 193], 398–399 [Pgs. 398–399 include portions of Doc. 210, Doc. 211, and Doc. 212], 453n [Pg. 453 is part of Doc. 249], 455–456 [Pgs. 455–456 include portions of Doc. 249, Doc. 250, and Doc. 251], 467 [Pg. 467 is part of Doc. 260], 1057 [Pg. 1057 includes portions of Doc. 693, Doc. 694, and Doc. 695]

British troops, proposed withdrawal of, 435–437 [Pgs. 435–437 include portions of Doc. 235, Doc. 236, Doc. 237, Doc. 238, and Doc. 239], 443 [Pg. 443 is part of Doc. 243], 445–448 [Pgs. 445–448 include portions of Doc. 243, Doc. 244, Doc. 245, and Doc. 246]

Bulgarian position, 256n [Pg. 256 includes portions of Doc. 121 and Doc. 122], 262–264 [Pgs. 262–264 include portions of Doc. 127, Doc. 128, and Doc. 129], 268 [Pg. 268 is part of Doc. 132], 273–276 [Pg. 273 is part of Doc. 133], 280–281 [Pgs. 280–281 include portions of Doc. 134, Doc. 135, and Doc. 136], 290–291 [Pgs. 290–291 include portions of Doc. 140, Doc. 141, and Doc. 142], 293–294 [Pgs. 293–294 include portions of Doc. 143 and Doc. 144], 299 [Pg. 299 is part of Doc. 147], 319 [Pg. 319 is part of Doc. 158], 321–322 [Pg. 321 is part of Doc. 160], 328 [Pg. 328 is part of Doc. 163], 331 [Pg. 331 is part of Doc. 165], 334–335 [Pg. 334 is part of Doc. 166], 339 [Pg. 339 includes portions of Doc. 169 and Doc. 170], 353 [Pg. 353 includes portions of Doc. 177 and Doc. 178], 367 [Pg. 367 is part of Doc. 189], 373 [Pg. 373 is part of Doc. 194], 379 [Pg. 379 includes portions of Doc. 198 and Doc. 199], 387 [Pg. 387 is part of Doc. 203], 396–397 [Pgs. 396–397 include portions of Doc. 209 and Doc. 210], 400 [Pg. 400 includes portions of Doc. 212 and Doc. 213], 403 [Pg. 403 is part of Doc. 214], 409 [Pg. 409 includes portions of Doc. 215 and Doc. 216], 431 [Pg. 431 is part of Doc. 234], 454 [Pg. 454 is part of Doc. 249], 467n [Pg. 467 is part of Doc. 260]

Cease-fire proposals, 304–307 [Pg. 304 is part of Doc. 150], 327 [Pg. 327 is part of Doc. 163], 339–340 [Pgs. 339–340 include portions of Doc. 169 and Doc. 170], 344n [Pg. 344 includes portions of Doc. 171 and Doc. 172], 352 [Pg. 352 is part of Doc. 177], 358 [Pg. 358 is part of Doc. 181], 434 [Pg. 434 includes portions of Doc. 236 and Doc. 237], 436n [Pg. 436 includes portions of Doc. 237 and Doc. 238]

Communist activities, 2–4 [Pg. 2 is part of Doc. 1], 40 [Pg. 40 is part of Doc. 4], 56 [Pg. 56 is part of Doc. 10], 228 [Pg. 228 is part of Doc. 105], 251n [Pg. 251 is part of Doc. 119], 274 [Pg. 274 is part of Doc. 133], 278 [Pg. 278 is part of Doc. 133], 354 [Pg. 354 is part of Doc. 178], 359 [Pg. 359 includes portions of Doc. 181 and Doc. 182], 445 [Pg. 445 includes portions of Doc. 243 and Doc. 244], 450–451 [Pgs. 450–451 include portions of Doc. 247 and Doc. 248], 454 [Pg. 454 is part of Doc. 249], 464 [Pg. 464 is part of Doc. 257], 468n [Pg. 468 is part of Doc. 261]

Communist Party, 250 [Pg. 250 is part of Doc. 119], 259n [Pg. 259 includes portions of Doc. 124 and Doc. 125], 260 [Pg. 260 includes portions of Doc. 125 and Doc. 126], 261n [Pg. 261 is part of Doc. 126], 336 [Pg. 336 is part of Doc. 167], 338 [Pg. 338 is part of Doc. 169], 343 [Pg. 343 is part of Doc. 171], 346 [Pg. 346 is part of Doc. 173], 348 [Pg. 348 is part of Doc. 175], 350–351 [Pgs. 350–351 include portions of Doc. 176 and Doc. 177], 353 [Pg. 353 includes portions of Doc. 177 and Doc. 178], 356 [Pg. 356 is part of Doc. 180], 359 [Pg. 359 includes portions of Doc. 181 and Doc. 182], 368n [Pg. 368 is part of Doc. 190], 411 [Pg. 411 is part of Doc. 216], 413 [Pg. 413 is part of Doc. 218], 416 [Pg. 416 includes portions of Doc. 219 and Doc. 220], 420 [Pg. 420 is part of Doc. 223], 450 [Pg. 450 is part of Doc. 247]

Council of Western Europe, membership in the, 35 [Pg. 35 is part of Doc. 4]

Cyprus, claim to, 171 [Pg. 171 is part of Doc. 73]

Elections, proposals concerning new, 305–307 [Pg. 305 is part of Doc. 150], 321 [Pg. 321 includes portions of Doc. 160 and Doc. 161], 327 [Pg. 327 is part of Doc. 163], 329 [Pg. 329 includes portions of Doc. 163 and Doc. 164], 331 [Pg. 331 is part of Doc. 165], 336–337 [Pgs. 336–337 include portions of Doc. 167 and Doc. 168], 340–344 [Pgs. 340–344 include portions of Doc. 170, Doc. 171, and Doc. 172], 346–354 [Pgs. 346–354 include portions of Doc. 173, Doc. 174, Doc. 175, Doc. 176, Doc. 177, and Doc. 178], 356 [Pg. 356 is part of Doc. 180], 359 [Pg. 359 includes portions of Doc. 181 and Doc. 182], 391 [Pg. 391 is part of Doc. 206], 410–411 [Pg. 410 is part of Doc. 216], 413–414 [Pgs. 413–414 include portions of Doc. 218 and Doc. 219], 416 [Pg. 416 includes portions of Doc. 219 and Doc. 220], 419–420 [Pgs. 419–420 include portions of Doc. 222 and Doc. 223], 444 [Pg. 444 is part of Doc. 243], 459 [Pg. 459 is part of Doc. 253], 465 [Pg. 465 includes portions of Doc. 257, Doc. 258, and Doc. 259]

Epirus, claim to northern, 264 [Pg. 264 is part of Doc. 129], 280 [Pg. 280 includes portions of Doc. 134 and Doc. 135], 289–290 [Pgs. 289–290 include portions of Doc. 140 and Doc. 141], 293 [Pg. 293 is part of Doc. 143], 299 [Pg. 299 is part of Doc. 147], 316–317 [Pgs. 316–317 include portions of Doc. 155 and Doc. 156], 319 [Pg. 319 is part of Doc. 158], 350 [Pg. 350 is part of Doc. 176], 366 [Pg. 366 includes portions of Doc. 188 and Doc. 189], 375 [Pg. 375 is part of Doc. 194], 387 [Pg. 387 is part of Doc. 203], 392 [Pg. 392 includes portions of Doc. 206 and Doc. 207], 403 [Pg. 403 is part of Doc. 214], 410 [Pg. 410 is part of Doc. 216], 418 [Pg. 418 includes portions of Doc. 221 and Doc. 222], 439 [Pg. 439 includes portions of Doc. 240 and Doc. 241]

Frontier questions, 264 [Pg. 264 is part of Doc. 129], 275–276 [Pg. 275 is part of Doc. 133], 280–281 [Pgs. 280–281 include portions of Doc. 134, Doc. 135, and Doc. 136], 289–290 [Pgs. 289–290 include portions of Doc. 140 and Doc. 141], 293 [Pg. 293 is part of Doc. 143], 299 [Pg. 299 is part of Doc. 147], 306–307 [Pg. 306 is part of Doc. 150], 315–317 [Pgs. 315–317 include portions of Doc. 154, Doc. 155, and Doc. 156], 319–320 [Pgs. 319–320 include portions of Doc. 158 and Doc. 159], 326 [Pg. 326 is part of Doc. 163], 328–336 [Pgs. 328–336 include portions of Doc. 163, Doc. 164, Doc. 165, Doc. 166, and Doc. 167], 340 [Pg. 340 is part of Doc. 170], 350 [Pg. 350 is part of Doc. 176], 353–354 [Pgs. 353–354 include portions of Doc. 177 and Doc. 178], 366 [Pg. 366 includes portions of Doc. 188 and Doc. 189], 368–371 [Pgs. 368–371 include portions of Doc. 190, Doc. 191, Doc. 192, and Doc. 193], 375 [Pg. 375 is part of Doc. 194], 387 [Pg. 387 is part of Doc. 203], 390–392 [Pgs. 390–392 include portions of Doc. 206 and Doc. 207], 402n [Pg. 402 is part of Doc. 214], 403 [Pg. 403 is part of Doc. 214], 411 [Pg. 411 is part of Doc. 216], 416 [Pg. 416 includes portions of Doc. 219 and Doc. 220], 418 [Pg. 418 includes portions of Doc. 221 and Doc. 222], 421 [Pg. 421 is part of Doc. 223], 426–427 [Pgs. 426–427 include portions of Doc. 228, Doc. 229, and Doc. 230], 439 [Pg. 439 includes portions of Doc. 240 and Doc. 241].

Greek National Army, size of, 235 [Pg. 235 includes portions of Doc. 107, Doc. 108, and Doc. 109], 238–239 [Pgs. 238–239 include portions of Doc. 111 and Doc. 112], 243 [Pg. 243 is part of Doc. 115], 246–249 [Pgs. 246–249 include portions of Doc. 117 and Doc. 118], 275 [Pg. 275 is part of Doc. 133], 286–287 [Pgs. 286–287 include portions of Doc. 138 and Doc. 139], 290–292 [Pgs. 290–292 include portions of Doc. 140, Doc. 141, Doc. 142, and Doc. 143], 297–298 [Pgs. 297–298 include portions of Doc. 145, Doc. 146, and Doc. 147], 300–301 [Pgs. 300–301 include portions of Doc. 148 and Doc. 149], 359–361 [Pgs. 359–361 include portions of Doc. 181, Doc. 182, Doc. 183, and Doc. 184], 372 [Pg. 372 is part of Doc. 193], 375–376 [Pgs. 375–376 include portions of Doc. 194 and Doc. 195], 429 [Pg. 429 includes portions of Doc. 232 and Doc. 233], 431–433 [Pgs. 431–433 include portions of Doc. 234 and Doc. 235], 435 [Pg. 435 includes portions of Doc. 235 and Doc. 236], 440–443 [Pgs. 440–443 include portions of Doc. 242 and Doc. 243], 448 [Pg. 448 is part of Doc. 246], 454 [Pg. 454 is part of Doc. 249], 456n [Pg. 456 includes portions of Doc. 249, Doc. 250, and Doc. 251], 462–464 [Pgs. 462–464 include portions of Doc. 255, Doc. 256, and Doc. 257], 467 [Pg. 467 is part of Doc. 260]

Greek Provisional Democratic Government (guerrilla organization), 304–305 [Pg. 304 is part of Doc. 150], 434 [Pg. 434 includes portions of Doc. 236 and Doc. 237]

Greek refugee children, proposed return to Greece of, 254n [Pg. 254 is part of Doc. 121], 343 [Pg. 343 is part of Doc. 171], 353 [Pg. 353 includes portions of Doc. 177 and Doc. 178], 369 [Pg. 369 includes portions of Doc. 190 and Doc. 191], 379 [Pg. 379 includes portions of Doc. 198 and Doc. 199], 381 [Pg. 381 includes portions of Doc. 199 and Doc. 200], 396 [Pg. 396 is part of Doc. 209], 401 [Pg. 401 includes portions of Doc. 213 and Doc. 214], 407 [Pg. 407 is part of Doc. 215], 421 [Pg. 421 is part of Doc. 223], 427 [Pg. 427 includes portions of Doc. 229 and Doc. 230], 452 [Pg. 452 is part of Doc. 248], 456 [Pg. 456 includes portions of Doc. 249, Doc. 250, and Doc. 251], 458 [Pg. 458 includes portions of Doc. 252 and Doc. 253]

Guerrilla activities, 229 [Pg. 229 is part of Doc. 105], 232 [Pg. 232 is part of Doc. 106], 238 [Pg. 238 includes portions of Doc. 111 and Doc. 112], 246 [Pg. 246 is part of Doc. 117], 249–253 [Pgs. 249–253 include portions of Doc. 118, Doc. 119, Doc. 120, and Doc. 121], 256n [Pg. 256 includes portions of Doc. 121 and Doc. 122], 257–258 [Pgs. 257–258 include portions of Doc. 122, Doc. 123, and Doc. 124], 261–262 [Pgs. 261–262 include portions of Doc. 126 and Doc. 127], 263n [Pg. 263 includes portions of Doc. 128 and Doc. 129], 265 [Pg. 265 includes portions of Doc. 130 and Doc. 131], 267 [Pg. 267 includes portions of Doc. 131 and Doc. 132], 269–270 [Pg. 269 is part of Doc. 133], 273–274 [Pg. 273 is part of Doc. 133], 276 [Pg. 276 is part of Doc. 133], 279n [Pg. 279 includes portions of Doc. 133 and Doc. 134], 280n [Pg. 280 includes portions of Doc. 134 and Doc. 135], 281–282 [Pgs. 281–282 include portions of Doc. 135 and Doc. 136], 284–286 [Pgs. 284–286 include portions of Doc. 136, Doc. 137, and Doc. 138], 289–291 [Pgs. 289–291 include portions of Doc. 140, Doc. 141, and Doc. 142], 294 [Pg. 294 is part of Doc. 144], 300–301 [Pgs. 300–301 include portions of Doc. 148 and Doc. 149], 303–306 [Pgs. 303–306 include portions of Doc. 149 and Doc. 150], 326 [Pg. 326 is part of Doc. 163], 329 [Pg. 329 includes portions of Doc. 163 and Doc. 164], 331–333 [Pgs. 331–333 include portions of Doc. 165 and Doc. 166], 335–336 [Pgs. 335–336 include portions of Doc. 166 and Doc. 167], 339–340 [Pgs. 339–340 include portions of Doc. 169 and Doc. 170], 343 [Pg. 343 is part of Doc. 171], 346–347 [Pgs. 346–347 include portions of Doc. 173 and Doc. 174], 349 [Pg. 349 is part of Doc. 175], 351–355 [Pgs. 351–355 include portions of Doc. 177, Doc. 178, and Doc. 179], 358–361 [Pgs. 358–361 include portions of Doc. 181, Doc. 182, Doc. 183, and Doc. 184], 364–367 [Pgs. 364–367 include portions of Doc. 186, Doc. 187, Doc. 188, and Doc. 189], 368n [Pg. 368 is part of Doc. 190], 369 [Pg. 369 includes portions of Doc. 190 and Doc. 191], 373–376 [Pgs. 373–376 include portions of Doc. 194 and Doc. 195], 378–379 [Pgs. 378–379 include portions of Doc. 195, Doc. 196, Doc. 197, Doc. 198, and Doc. 199], 382–383 [Pg. 382 is part of Doc. 200], 384n [Pg. 384 is part of Doc. 200], 385–386 [Pgs. 385–386 include portions of Doc. 201 and Doc. 202], 390–397 [Pgs. 390–397 include portions of Doc. 206, Doc. 207, Doc. 208, Doc. 209, and Doc. 210], 401 [Pg. 401 includes portions of Doc. 213 and Doc. 214], 402n [Pg. 402 is part of Doc. 214], 403 [Pg. 403 is part of Doc. 214], 405–407 [Pg. 405 is part of Doc. 215], 410–411 [Pg. 410 is part of Doc. 216], 413 [Pg. 413 is part of Doc. 218], 415 [Pg. 415 is part of Doc. 219], 417 [Pg. 417 includes portions of Doc. 220 and Doc. 221], 418n [Pg. 418 includes portions of Doc. 221 and Doc. 222], 419–423 [Pgs. 419–423 include portions of Doc. 222, Doc. 223, Doc. 224, Doc. 225, and Doc. 226], 426–427 [Pgs. 426–427 include portions of Doc. 228, Doc. 229, and Doc. 230], 429n [Pg. 429 includes portions of Doc. 232 and Doc. 233], 431 [Pg. 431 is part of Doc. 234], 436 [Pg. 436 includes portions of Doc. 237 and Doc. 238], 438 [Pg. 438 is part of Doc. 240], 440–442 [Pg. 440 is part of Doc. 242], 450n [Pg. 450 is part of Doc. 247], 454 [Pg. 454 is part of Doc. 249], 457–458 [Pgs. 457–458 include portions of Doc. 251, Doc. 252, and Doc. 253], 461–465 [Pgs. 461–465 include portions of Doc. 254, Doc. 255, Doc. 256, Doc. 257, Doc. 258, and Doc. 259], 467 [Pg. 467 is part of Doc. 260], 1671 [Pg. 1671 includes portions of Doc. 1153 and Doc. 1154]

Macedonian state, opposition to proposed establishment of, 261 [Pg. 261 is part of Doc. 126], 263–264 [Pgs. 263–264 include portions of Doc. 128 and Doc. 129], 266 [Pg. 266 is part of Doc. 131], 280 [Pg. 280 includes portions of Doc. 134 and Doc. 135], 287 [Pg. 287 includes portions of Doc. 138 and Doc. 139], 381 [Pg. 381 includes portions of Doc. 199 and Doc. 200], 403 [Pg. 403 is part of Doc. 214]

Mediterranean pact, proposed, 230 [Pg. 230 is part of Doc. 105], 233 [Pg. 233 includes portions of Doc. 106 and Doc. 107], 376 [Pg. 376 includes portions of Doc. 194 and Doc. 195], 1011 [Pg. 1011 is part of Doc. 659]

Middle East pact, attitude toward proposed, 36–37 [Pg. 36 is part of Doc. 4]

Military situation, 230 [Pg. 230 is part of Doc. 105], 232 [Pg. 232 is part of Doc. 106], 242–244 [Pgs. 242–244 include portions of Doc. 114 and Doc. 115], 246 [Pg. 246 is part of Doc. 117], 282 [Pg. 282 is part of Doc. 136], 284 [Pg. 284 is part of Doc. 136], 286 [Pg. 286 is part of Doc. 138], 290–291 [Pgs. 290–291 include portions of Doc. 140, Doc. 141, and Doc. 142], 310 [Pg. 310 is part of Doc. 151], 314 [Pg. 314 includes portions of Doc. 153 and Doc. 154], 328 [Pg. 328 is part of Doc. 163], 334–335 [Pg. 334 is part of Doc. 166], 340 [Pg. 340 is part of Doc. 170], 346 [Pg. 346 is part of Doc. 173], 352 [Pg. 352 is part of Doc. 177], 354 [Pg. 354 is part of Doc. 178], 358 [Pg. 358 is part of Doc. 181], 361 [Pg. 361 is part of Doc. 184], 374 [Pg. 374 is part of Doc. 194], 392–393 [Pgs. 392–393 include portions of Doc. 206 and Doc. 207], 398 [Pg. 398 includes portions of Doc. 210 and Doc. 211], 402n [Pg. 402 is part of Doc. 214], 407–408 [Pg. 407 is part of Doc. 215], 411 [Pg. 411 is part of Doc. 216], 417 [Pg. 417 includes portions of Doc. 220 and Doc. 221], 419 [Pg. 419 includes portions of Doc. 222 and Doc. 223], 429n [Pg. 429 includes portions of Doc. 232 and Doc. 233], 431 [Pg. 431 is part of Doc. 234], 434–435 [Pg. 434 is part of Doc. 236], 437 [Pg. 437 is part of Doc. 239], 442 [Pg. 442 is part of Doc. 242], 450n [Pg. 450 is part of Doc. 247], 454–455 [Pg. 454 is part of Doc. 249], 457 [Pg. 457 is part of Doc. 251], 462–463 [Pgs. 462–463 include portions of Doc. 255, Doc. 256, and Doc. 257]

North Atlantic Treaty Organization, proposed membership in, 34–35 [Pg. 34 is part of Doc. 4], 233 [Pg. 233 includes portions of Doc. 106 and Doc. 107], 1662 [Pg. 1662 is part of Doc. 1152], 1669 [Pg. 1669 is part of Doc. 1152]

Palestine question, attitude toward, 36 [Pg. 36 is part of Doc. 4]

Political situation, 227 [Pg. 227 is part of Doc. 105], 233–237 [Pgs. 233–237 include portions of Doc. 106, Doc. 107, Doc. 108, Doc. 109, Doc. 110, and Doc. 111], 240 [Pg. 240 is part of Doc. 113], 242–245 [Pgs. 242–245 include portions of Doc. 114, Doc. 115, Doc. 116, and Doc. 117], 256–257 [Pgs. 256–257 include portions of Doc. 121, Doc. 122, and Doc. 123], 275 [Pg. 275 is part of Doc. 133], 283–284 [Pg. 283 is part of Doc. 136], 309–312 [Pgs. 309–312 include portions of Doc. 150, Doc. 151, Doc. 152, and Doc. 153], 314–315 [Pgs. 314–315 include portions of Doc. 153, Doc. 154, and Doc. 155], 362–363 [Pgs. 362–363 include portions of Doc. 185 and Doc. 186], 454 [Pg. 454 is part of Doc. 249], 458–461 [Pgs. 458–461 include portions of Doc. 252, Doc. 253, Doc. 254, and Doc. 255], 465–466 [Pgs. 465–466 include portions of Doc. 257, Doc. 258, and Doc. 259]

Refugee problem, 232 [Pg. 232 is part of Doc. 106], 242 [Pg. 242 includes portions of Doc. 114 and Doc. 115], 244 [Pg. 244 is part of Doc. 115], 254n [Pg. 254 is part of Doc. 121], 258 [Pg. 258 includes portions of Doc. 123 and Doc. 124], 357 [Pg. 357 is part of Doc. 180], 372 [Pg. 372 is part of Doc. 193], 379 [Pg. 379 includes portions of Doc. 198 and Doc. 199], 419–420 [Pgs. 419–420 include portions of Doc. 222 and Doc. 223], 427 [Pg. 427 includes portions of Doc. 229 and Doc. 230], 444 [Pg. 444 is part of Doc. 243], 454 [Pg. 454 is part of Doc. 249], 463 [Pg. 463 includes portions of Doc. 256 and Doc. 257]

Security of, 8 [Pg. 8 includes portions of Doc. 1, Doc. 2, and Doc. 3], 464 [Pg. 464 is part of Doc. 257], 495n [Pg. 495 includes portions of Doc. 279 and Doc. 280], 1683 [Pg. 1683 is part of Doc. 1161]

Soviet policy, 3 [Pg. 3 is part of Doc. 1], 39 [Pg. 39 is part of Doc. 4], 42 [Pg. 42 is part of Doc. 4], 262 [Pg. 262 is part of Doc. 127], 269–270 [Pg. 269 is part of Doc. 133], 275 [Pg. 275 is part of Doc. 133], 294 [Pg. 294 is part of Doc. 144], 302–309 [Pgs. 302–309 include portions of Doc. 149, Doc. 150, and Doc. 151], 320–321 [Pgs. 320–321 include portions of Doc. 158, Doc. 159, Doc. 160, and Doc. 161], 325–333 [Pgs. 325–333 include portions of Doc. 163, Doc. 164, Doc. 165, and Doc. 166], 336–344 [Pgs. 336–344 include portions of Doc. 167, Doc. 168, Doc. 169, Doc. 170, Doc. 171, and Doc. 172], 346 [Pg. 346 is part of Doc. 173], 348–350 [Pgs. 348–350 include portions of Doc. 175 and Doc. 176], 352–354 [Pgs. 352–354 include portions of Doc. 177 and Doc. 178], 358 [Pg. 358 is part of Doc. 181], 365 [Pg. 365 is part of Doc. 188], 374 [Pg. 374 is part of Doc. 194], 391 [Pg. 391 is part of Doc. 206], 402 [Pg. 402 is part of Doc. 214], 406 [Pg. 406 is part of Doc. 215], 408 [Pg. 408 is part of Doc. 215], 431 [Pg. 431 is part of Doc. 234], 450 [Pg. 450 is part of Doc. 247], 454–455 [Pg. 454 is part of Doc. 249], 461 [Pg. 461 includes portions of Doc. 254 and Doc. 255], 463–464 [Pgs. 463–464 include portions of Doc. 256 and Doc. 257], 466–467 [Pgs. 466–467 include portions of Doc. 259 and Doc. 260], 468n [Pg. 468 is part of Doc. 261], 554 [Pg. 554 is part of Doc. 316]

Territorial questions. see Frontier questions, supra.

Turkey, relations with, 1667 [Pg. 1667 is part of Doc. 1152]

U.N. Conciliation Committee, 254n [Pg. 254 is part of Doc. 121], 255 [Pg. 255 is part of Doc. 121], 275–276 [Pg. 275 is part of Doc. 133], 294–295 [Pgs. 294–295 include portions of Doc. 144 and Doc. 145], 298–299 [Pgs. 298–299 include portions of Doc. 146 and Doc. 147], 307 [Pg. 307 is part of Doc. 150], 315–317 [Pgs. 315–317 include portions of Doc. 154, Doc. 155, and Doc. 156], 319–322 [Pgs. 319–322 include portions of Doc. 158, Doc. 159, and Doc. 160], 331 [Pg. 331 is part of Doc. 165], 333–335 [Pgs. 333–335 include portions of Doc. 165 and Doc. 166], 343–344 [Pgs. 343–344 include portions of Doc. 171 and Doc. 172], 387 [Pg. 387 is part of Doc. 203], 391 [Pg. 391 is part of Doc. 206], 408 [Pg. 408 is part of Doc. 215], 411 [Pg. 411 is part of Doc. 216], 439 [Pg. 439 includes portions of Doc. 240 and Doc. 241], 445 [Pg. 445 includes portions of Doc. 243 and Doc. 244], 468–470 [Pg. 468 is part of Doc. 261]

U.N. General Assembly: Albanian participation in Committee hearings, 404–405 [Pgs. 404–405 include portions of Doc. 214 and Doc. 215]

Albanian problem, 402 [Pg. 402 is part of Doc. 214], 406–408 [Pg. 406 is part of Doc. 215], 410 [Pg. 410 is part of Doc. 216], 415 [Pg. 415 is part of Doc. 219], 418 [Pg. 418 includes portions of Doc. 221 and Doc. 222], 420–421 [Pg. 420 is part of Doc. 223], 425–426 [Pgs. 425–426 include portions of Doc. 227, Doc. 228, and Doc. 229], 439 [Pg. 439 includes portions of Doc. 240 and Doc. 241], 465 [Pg. 465 includes portions of Doc. 257, Doc. 258, and Doc. 259]

Australian position, 430 [Pg. 430 is part of Doc. 233], 445 [Pg. 445 includes portions of Doc. 243 and Doc. 244], 452 [Pg. 452 is part of Doc. 248], 456 [Pg. 456 includes portions of Doc. 249, Doc. 250, and Doc. 251]

British position, 412–417 [Pgs. 412–417 include portions of Doc. 216, Doc. 217, Doc. 218, Doc. 219, Doc. 220, and Doc. 221], 452 [Pg. 452 is part of Doc. 248], 456 [Pg. 456 includes portions of Doc. 249, Doc. 250, and Doc. 251]

Bulgarian participation in Committee hearings, 404–405 [Pgs. 404–405 include portions of Doc. 214 and Doc. 215]

Bulgarian position, 406–407 [Pg. 406 is part of Doc. 215], 410 [Pg. 410 is part of Doc. 216], 415 [Pg. 415 is part of Doc. 219], 420–421 [Pg. 420 is part of Doc. 223], 426 [Pg. 426 includes portions of Doc. 228 and Doc. 229], 439 [Pg. 439 includes portions of Doc. 240 and Doc. 241], 465 [Pg. 465 includes portions of Doc. 257, Doc. 258, and Doc. 259]

Byelorussian position, 430 [Pg. 430 is part of Doc. 233]

Chinese position, 452 [Pg. 452 is part of Doc. 248], 456 [Pg. 456 includes portions of Doc. 249, Doc. 250, and Doc. 251]

Conciliation efforts, 399–400 [Pgs. 399–400 include portions of Doc. 211, Doc. 212, and Doc. 213], 402 [Pg. 402 is part of Doc. 214], 405–411 [Pgs. 405–411 include portions of Doc. 215 and Doc. 216], 413 [Pg. 413 is part of Doc. 218], 416–417 [Pgs. 416–417 include portions of Doc. 219, Doc. 220, and Doc. 221], 419 [Pg. 419 includes portions of Doc. 222 and Doc. 223], 426 [Pg. 426 includes portions of Doc. 228 and Doc. 229], 430 [Pg. 430 is part of Doc. 233], 445 [Pg. 445 includes portions of Doc. 243 and Doc. 244], 468–470 [Pg. 468 is part of Doc. 261]

Ecuadoran position; 457 [Pg. 457 is part of Doc. 251], 469 [Pg. 469 is part of Doc. 261]

Greek position, 401–404 [Pgs. 401–404 include portions of Doc. 213, Doc. 214, and Doc. 215], 409–410 [Pgs. 409–410 include portions of Doc. 215 and Doc. 216], 415 [Pg. 415 is part of Doc. 219], 417 [Pg. 417 includes portions of Doc. 220 and Doc. 221], 419–421 [Pgs. 419–421 include portions of Doc. 222 and Doc. 223], 425–426 [Pgs. 425–426 include portions of Doc. 227, Doc. 228, and Doc. 229], 439 [Pg. 439 includes portions of Doc. 240 and Doc. 241], 450–451 [Pgs. 450–451 include portions of Doc. 247 and Doc. 248]

Greek question, 258–259 [Pgs. 258–259 include portions of Doc. 123, Doc. 124, and Doc. 125], 274 [Pg. 274 is part of Doc. 133], 299 [Pg. 299 is part of Doc. 147], 305n [Pg. 305 is part of Doc. 150], 313–314 [Pgs. 313–314 include portions of Doc. 153 and Doc. 154], 326 [Pg. 326 is part of Doc. 163], 341 [Pg. 341 includes portions of Doc. 170 and Doc. 171], 366 [Pg. 366 includes portions of Doc. 188 and Doc. 189], 374 [Pg. 374 is part of Doc. 194], 387 [Pg. 387 is part of Doc. 203], 389–392 [Pgs. 389–392 include portions of Doc. 204, Doc. 205, Doc. 206, and Doc. 207], 394 [Pg. 394 is part of Doc. 208], 396 [Pg. 396 is part of Doc. 209], 398 [Pg. 398 includes portions of Doc. 210 and Doc. 211], 401–410 [Pgs. 401–410 include portions of Doc. 213, Doc. 214, Doc. 215, and Doc. 216], 412–415 [Pgs. 412–415 include portions of Doc. 216, Doc. 217, Doc. 218, and Doc. 219], 429–430 [Pgs. 429–430 include portions of Doc. 232 and Doc. 233], 451–452 [Pgs. 451–452 include portions of Doc. 247 and Doc. 248], 456–457 [Pgs. 456–457 include portions of Doc. 249, Doc. 250, and Doc. 251]

Philippine position, 445 [Pg. 445 includes portions of Doc. 243 and Doc. 244]

Polish position, 430 [Pg. 430 is part of Doc. 233]

Resolution 193 (III) A., Nov. 27, 1948, regarding continuation of U.N. Special Committee on the Balkans, 254–255 [Pg. 254 is part of Doc. 121], 274 [Pg. 274 is part of Doc. 133], 341 [Pg. 341 includes portions of Doc. 170 and Doc. 171], 352 [Pg. 352 is part of Doc. 177], 381 [Pg. 381 includes portions of Doc. 199 and Doc. 200], 393 [Pg. 393 is part of Doc. 207], 406 [Pg. 406 is part of Doc. 215], 427 [Pg. 427 includes portions of Doc. 229 and Doc. 230]

Resolution 193 (III) B., Nov. 27, 1948, regarding renewal of diplomatic relations, conclusion of frontier conventions, and settlement of refugee problem, 254n [Pg. 254 is part of Doc. 121], 369 [Pg. 369 includes portions of Doc. 190 and Doc. 191], 381 [Pg. 381 includes portions of Doc. 199 and Doc. 200]

Resolution 193 (III) C., Nov. 27, 1948, recommending repatriation of Greek refugee children to Greece, 254n [Pg. 254 is part of Doc. 121], 369 [Pg. 369 includes portions of Doc. 190 and Doc. 191], 381 [Pg. 381 includes portions of Doc. 199 and Doc. 200], 401 [Pg. 401 includes portions of Doc. 213 and Doc. 214], 407 [Pg. 407 is part of Doc. 215]

Resolution 288 (IV) A., Nov. 18, 1949, regarding continuation of U.N. Special Committee on the Balkans, 456 [Pg. 456 includes portions of Doc. 249, Doc. 250, and Doc. 251], 458 [Pg. 458 includes portions of Doc. 252 and Doc. 253], 465 [Pg. 465 includes portions of Doc. 257, Doc. 258, and Doc. 259]

Resolution 288 (IV) B., Nov. 18, 1949, regarding repatriation of Greek children to Greece, 456 [Pg. 456 includes portions of Doc. 249, Doc. 250, and Doc. 251], 458 [Pg. 458 includes portions of Doc. 252 and Doc. 253]

Resolution 288 (IV) C., Dec. 5, 1949, regarding Greek executions of political prisoners, 457 [Pg. 457 is part of Doc. 251], 469 [Pg. 469 is part of Doc. 261]

Soviet position, 408–411 [Pgs. 408–411 include portions of Doc. 215 and Doc. 216], 413 [Pg. 413 is part of Doc. 218], 415 [Pg. 415 is part of Doc. 219], 417 [Pg. 417 includes portions of Doc. 220 and Doc. 221], 419 [Pg. 419 includes portions of Doc. 222 and Doc. 223], 421 [Pg. 421 is part of Doc. 223], 425–426 [Pgs. 425–426 include portions of Doc. 227, Doc. 228, and Doc. 229], 429 [Pg. 429 includes portions of Doc. 232 and Doc. 233], 451–452 [Pgs. 451–452 include portions of Doc. 247 and Doc. 248], 457 [Pg. 457 is part of Doc. 251]

U.N. Special Committee on the Balkans: Continuation of, 418 [Pg. 418 includes portions of Doc. 221 and Doc. 222], 426–427 [Pgs. 426–427 include portions of Doc. 228, Doc. 229, and Doc. 230], 445 [Pg. 445 includes portions of Doc. 243 and Doc. 244], 452 [Pg. 452 is part of Doc. 248], 456 [Pg. 456 includes portions of Doc. 249, Doc. 250, and Doc. 251]; reports and recommendations, 379 [Pg. 379 includes portions of Doc. 198 and Doc. 199], 387 [Pg. 387 is part of Doc. 203], 395 [Pg. 395 includes portions of Doc. 208 and Doc. 209], 404–406 [Pgs. 404–406 include portions of Doc. 214 and Doc. 215], 409 [Pg. 409 includes portions of Doc. 215 and Doc. 216], 419 [Pg. 419 includes portions of Doc. 222 and Doc. 223], 421 [Pg. 421 is part of Doc. 223]

U.S. position, 258–259 [Pgs. 258–259 include portions of Doc. 123, Doc. 124, and Doc. 125], 294–295 [Pgs. 294–295 include portions of Doc. 144 and Doc. 145], 400 [Pg. 400 includes portions of Doc. 212 and Doc. 213], 403–412 [Pgs. 403–412 include portions of Doc. 214, Doc. 215, Doc. 216, Doc. 217, and Doc. 218], 425–426 [Pgs. 425–426 include portions of Doc. 227, Doc. 228, and Doc. 229], 430 [Pg. 430 is part of Doc. 233], 450–452 [Pgs. 450–452 include portions of Doc. 247 and Doc. 248], 456 [Pg. 456 includes portions of Doc. 249, Doc. 250, and Doc. 251], 465 [Pg. 465 includes portions of Doc. 257, Doc. 258, and Doc. 259], 468–470 [Pg. 468 is part of Doc. 261]

Yugoslav position, 369 [Pg. 369 includes portions of Doc. 190 and Doc. 191], 415 [Pg. 415 is part of Doc. 219], 426–427 [Pgs. 426–427 include portions of Doc. 228, Doc. 229, and Doc. 230], 439 [Pg. 439 includes portions of Doc. 240 and Doc. 241], 458 [Pg. 458 includes portions of Doc. 252 and Doc. 253]

U.N. Security Council: French position, 273 [Pg. 273 is part of Doc. 133]; Greek question, 396 [Pg. 396 is part of Doc. 209], 403–404 [Pgs. 403–404 include portions of Doc. 214 and Doc. 215]; Polish position, 274 [Pg. 274 is part of Doc. 133]; Soviet position, 274 [Pg. 274 is part of Doc. 133], 404 [Pg. 404 includes portions of Doc. 214 and Doc. 215]; U.N. Commission of Investigation, 1946, 273–274 [Pg. 273 is part of Doc. 133]; U.S. position, 274 [Pg. 274 is part of Doc. 133], 400 [Pg. 400 includes portions of Doc. 212 and Doc. 213], 426 [Pg. 426 includes portions of Doc. 228 and Doc. 229]

U.N. Special Committee on the Balkans: Albanian position, 254n [Pg. 254 is part of Doc. 121], 274 [Pg. 274 is part of Doc. 133], 313 [Pg. 313 is part of Doc. 153], 343 [Pg. 343 is part of Doc. 171], 373–374 [Pg. 373 is part of Doc. 194], 393–396 [Pgs. 393–396 include portions of Doc. 207, Doc. 208, and Doc. 209], 400–401 [Pgs. 400–401 include portions of Doc. 212, Doc. 213, and Doc. 214], 419 [Pg. 419 includes portions of Doc. 222 and Doc. 223], 427 [Pg. 427 includes portions of Doc. 229 and Doc. 230], 458 [Pg. 458 includes portions of Doc. 252 and Doc. 253]

Australian position, 396–397 [Pgs. 396–397 include portions of Doc. 209 and Doc. 210], 401 [Pg. 401 includes portions of Doc. 213 and Doc. 214], 410 [Pg. 410 is part of Doc. 216], 413–414 [Pgs. 413–414 include portions of Doc. 218 and Doc. 219]

British position, 356–357 [Pg. 356 is part of Doc. 180], 413–414 [Pgs. 413–414 include portions of Doc. 218 and Doc. 219]

Bulgarian position, 254n [Pg. 254 is part of Doc. 121], 274 [Pg. 274 is part of Doc. 133], 313 [Pg. 313 is part of Doc. 153], 343 [Pg. 343 is part of Doc. 171], 400–401 [Pgs. 400–401 include portions of Doc. 212, Doc. 213, and Doc. 214], 427 [Pg. 427 includes portions of Doc. 229 and Doc. 230], 458 [Pg. 458 includes portions of Doc. 252 and Doc. 253]

Conciliation role, 253–255 [Pgs. 253–255 include portions of Doc. 119, Doc. 120, and Doc. 121], 257–258 [Pgs. 257–258 include portions of Doc. 122, Doc. 123, and Doc. 124], 264 [Pg. 264 is part of Doc. 129], 276 [Pg. 276 is part of Doc. 133], 289–290 [Pgs. 289–290 include portions of Doc. 140 and Doc. 141], 299 [Pg. 299 is part of Doc. 147], 320 [Pg. 320 includes portions of Doc. 158 and Doc. 159], 341 [Pg. 341 includes portions of Doc. 170 and Doc. 171], 344 [Pg. 344 includes portions of Doc. 171 and Doc. 172], 352 [Pg. 352 is part of Doc. 177], 356–357 [Pg. 356 is part of Doc. 180], 379 [Pg. 379 includes portions of Doc. 198 and Doc. 199], 407 [Pg. 407 is part of Doc. 215], 409 [Pg. 409 includes portions of Doc. 215 and Doc. 216]

Establishment and functions of, 174 [Pg. 174 is part of Doc. 73], 274 [Pg. 274 is part of Doc. 133], 331 [Pg. 331 is part of Doc. 165], 335 [Pg. 335 is part of Doc. 166], 341 [Pg. 341 includes portions of Doc. 170 and Doc. 171], 353 [Pg. 353 includes portions of Doc. 177 and Doc. 178], 407 [Pg. 407 is part of Doc. 215], 418 [Pg. 418 includes portions of Doc. 221 and Doc. 222], 426 [Pg. 426 includes portions of Doc. 228 and Doc. 229], 445 [Pg. 445 includes portions of Doc. 243 and Doc. 244]

French position, 255 [Pg. 255 is part of Doc. 121], 357 [Pg. 357 is part of Doc. 180]

Greek position, 253–255 [Pgs. 253–255 include portions of Doc. 119, Doc. 120, and Doc. 121], 258 [Pg. 258 includes portions of Doc. 123 and Doc. 124], 346 [Pg. 346 is part of Doc. 173], 348 [Pg. 348 is part of Doc. 175], 373 [Pg. 373 is part of Doc. 194], 389–391 [Pgs. 389–391 include portions of Doc. 204, Doc. 205, and Doc. 206], 397 [Pg. 397 includes portions of Doc. 209 and Doc. 210], 409 [Pg. 409 includes portions of Doc. 215 and Doc. 216]

Observation functions, 357 [Pg. 357 is part of Doc. 180], 400 [Pg. 400 includes portions of Doc. 212 and Doc. 213], 409 [Pg. 409 includes portions of Doc. 215 and Doc. 216]

Polish position, 274 [Pg. 274 is part of Doc. 133], 329 [Pg. 329 includes portions of Doc. 163 and Doc. 164], 340 [Pg. 340 is part of Doc. 170], 346 [Pg. 346 is part of Doc. 173], 348 [Pg. 348 is part of Doc. 175], 352 [Pg. 352 is part of Doc. 177]

Reports and recommendations, 259 [Pg. 259 includes portions of Doc. 124 and Doc. 125], 313 [Pg. 313 is part of Doc. 153], 321–322 [Pg. 321 is part of Doc. 160], 329 [Pg. 329 includes portions of Doc. 163 and Doc. 164], 356–357 [Pg. 356 is part of Doc. 180], 373–374 [Pg. 373 is part of Doc. 194], 379–380 [Pg. 379 is part of Doc. 198], 387 [Pg. 387 is part of Doc. 203], 393 [Pg. 393 is part of Doc. 207], 395 [Pg. 395 includes portions of Doc. 208 and Doc. 209], 397 [Pg. 397 includes portions of Doc. 209 and Doc. 210], 400–401 [Pgs. 400–401 include portions of Doc. 212, Doc. 213, and Doc. 214], 404–406 [Pgs. 404–406 include portions of Doc. 214 and Doc. 215], 409 [Pg. 409 includes portions of Doc. 215 and Doc. 216], 413 [Pg. 413 is part of Doc. 218], 418–419 [Pgs. 418–419 include portions of Doc. 221, Doc. 222, and Doc. 223], 421 [Pg. 421 is part of Doc. 223]

Soviet position, 274 [Pg. 274 is part of Doc. 133], 306 [Pg. 306 is part of Doc. 150], 329 [Pg. 329 includes portions of Doc. 163 and Doc. 164], 338–341 [Pgs. 338–341 include portions of Doc. 169, Doc. 170, and Doc. 171], 346 [Pg. 346 is part of Doc. 173], 348 [Pg. 348 is part of Doc. 175], 352 [Pg. 352 is part of Doc. 177], 418 [Pg. 418 includes portions of Doc. 221 and Doc. 222]

U.S. position, 253–255 [Pgs. 253–255 include portions of Doc. 119, Doc. 120, and Doc. 121], 257–258 [Pgs. 257–258 include portions of Doc. 122, Doc. 123, and Doc. 124], 304 [Pg. 304 is part of Doc. 150], 306 [Pg. 306 is part of Doc. 150], 312–314 [Pgs. 312–314 include portions of Doc. 152, Doc. 153, and Doc. 154], 352 [Pg. 352 is part of Doc. 177], 394–397 [Pgs. 394–397 include portions of Doc. 208, Doc. 209, and Doc. 210], 400–401 [Pgs. 400–401 include portions of Doc. 212, Doc. 213, and Doc. 214], 458 [Pg. 458 includes portions of Doc. 252 and Doc. 253]

Yugoslav position, 254n [Pg. 254 is part of Doc. 121], 274 [Pg. 274 is part of Doc. 133], 313 [Pg. 313 is part of Doc. 153], 343 [Pg. 343 is part of Doc. 171], 387n [Pg. 387 is part of Doc. 203], 427 [Pg. 427 includes portions of Doc. 229 and Doc. 230], 458 [Pg. 458 includes portions of Doc. 252 and Doc. 253]

U.S. economic and military assistance, 1–4 [Pg. 1 is part of Doc. 1], 42–43 [Pg. 42 is part of Doc. 4], 45n [Pg. 45 includes portions of Doc. 4 and Doc. 5], 56 [Pg. 56 is part of Doc. 10], 70 [Pg. 70 is part of Doc. 12], 176–177 [Pg. 176 is part of Doc. 74], 228–234 [Pgs. 228–234 include portions of Doc. 105, Doc. 106, and Doc. 107], 238n [Pg. 238 includes portions of Doc. 111 and Doc. 112], 239–240 [Pgs. 239–240 include portions of Doc. 112 and Doc. 113], 243–245 [Pgs. 243–245 include portions of Doc. 115, Doc. 116, and Doc. 117], 247 [Pg. 247 is part of Doc. 117], 249 [Pg. 249 is part of Doc. 118], 261n [Pg. 261 is part of Doc. 126], 270 [Pg. 270 is part of Doc. 133], 272–273 [Pg. 272 is part of Doc. 133], 275–278 [Pg. 275 is part of Doc. 133], 281–283 [Pgs. 281–283 include portions of Doc. 135 and Doc. 136], 291 [Pg. 291 includes portions of Doc. 141 and Doc. 142], 300n [Pg. 300 is part of Doc. 148], 303 [Pg. 303 includes portions of Doc. 149 and Doc. 150], 308 [Pg. 308 is part of Doc. 150], 311 [Pg. 311 includes portions of Doc. 151 and Doc. 152], 313–314 [Pgs. 313–314 include portions of Doc. 153 and Doc. 154], 329 [Pg. 329 includes portions of Doc. 163 and Doc. 164], 339 [Pg. 339 includes portions of Doc. 169 and Doc. 170], 341 [Pg. 341 includes portions of Doc. 170 and Doc. 171], 349 [Pg. 349 is part of Doc. 175], 358–359 [Pgs. 358–359 include portions of Doc. 181 and Doc. 182], 371–372 [Pgs. 371–372 include portions of Doc. 192 and Doc. 193], 375–379 [Pgs. 375–379 include portions of Doc. 194, Doc. 195, Doc. 196, Doc. 197, Doc. 198, and Doc. 199], 426 [Pg. 426 includes portions of Doc. 228 and Doc. 229], 428–429 [Pgs. 428–429 include portions of Doc. 230, Doc. 231, Doc. 232, and Doc. 233], 431 [Pg. 431 is part of Doc. 234], 434 [Pg. 434 includes portions of Doc. 236 and Doc. 237], 436 [Pg. 436 includes portions of Doc. 237 and Doc. 238], 440–441 [Pg. 440 is part of Doc. 242], 443 [Pg. 443 is part of Doc. 243], 448 [Pg. 448 is part of Doc. 246], 454 [Pg. 454 is part of Doc. 249], 461–464 [Pgs. 461–464 include portions of Doc. 254, Doc. 255, Doc. 256, and Doc. 257], 467 [Pg. 467 is part of Doc. 260], 472 [Pg. 472 includes portions of Doc. 262 and Doc. 263], 475 [Pg. 475 includes portions of Doc. 264 and Doc. 265], 503 [Pg. 503 includes portions of Doc. 286 and Doc. 287], 505 [Pg. 505 includes portions of Doc. 288 and Doc. 289], 526 [Pg. 526 includes portions of Doc. 305 and Doc. 306], 537 [Pg. 537 is part of Doc. 312], 547 [Pg. 547 is part of Doc. 315], 552 [Pg. 552 is part of Doc. 316], 558 [Pg. 558 includes portions of Doc. 319 and Doc. 320], 574 [Pg. 574 includes portions of Doc. 329 and Doc. 330], 587 [Pg. 587 is part of Doc. 336], 697 [Pg. 697 includes portions of Doc. 423 and Doc. 424], 1586 [Pg. 1586 is part of Doc. 1110], 1616 [Pg. 1616 includes portions of Doc. 1122 and Doc. 1123], 1645 [Pg. 1645 is part of Doc. 1144], 1649–1651 [Pg. 1649 is part of Doc. 1146], 1658 [Pg. 1658 is part of Doc. 1150], 1661n [Pg. 1661 is part of Doc. 1152]

U.S. military forces, proposal regarding need for, 235–236 [Pgs. 235–236 include portions of Doc. 107, Doc. 108, Doc. 109, and Doc. 110], 278 [Pg. 278 is part of Doc. 133]

U.S. policy, 8 [Pg. 8 includes portions of Doc. 1, Doc. 2, and Doc. 3], 31–32 [Pgs. 31–32 include portions of Doc. 3 and Doc. 4], 34 [Pg. 34 is part of Doc. 4], 39 [Pg. 39 is part of Doc. 4], 42–44 [Pg. 42 is part of Doc. 4], 56 [Pg. 56 is part of Doc. 10], 256–257 [Pgs. 256–257 include portions of Doc. 121, Doc. 122, and Doc. 123], 320 [Pg. 320 includes portions of Doc. 158 and Doc. 159], 323 [Pg. 323 includes portions of Doc. 161 and Doc. 162], 326–332 [Pgs. 326–332 include portions of Doc. 163, Doc. 164, and Doc. 165], 336–337 [Pgs. 336–337 include portions of Doc. 167 and Doc. 168], 341–342 [Pgs. 341–342 include portions of Doc. 170 and Doc. 171], 344–345 [Pgs. 344–345 include portions of Doc. 171, Doc. 172, and Doc. 173], 347–355 [Pgs. 347–355 include portions of Doc. 173, Doc. 174, Doc. 175, Doc. 176, Doc. 177, Doc. 178, and Doc. 179], 358–359 [Pgs. 358–359 include portions of Doc. 181 and Doc. 182], 365–366 [Pgs. 365–366 include portions of Doc. 188 and Doc. 189], 424–426 [Pgs. 424–426 include portions of Doc. 227, Doc. 228, and Doc. 229], 455 [Pg. 455 is part of Doc. 249], 495n [Pg. 495 includes portions of Doc. 279 and Doc. 280], 500 [Pg. 500 includes portions of Doc. 282, Doc. 283, and Doc. 284], 502 [Pg. 502 is part of Doc. 286], 519 [Pg. 519 includes portions of Doc. 301 and Doc. 302], 618 [Pg. 618 is part of Doc. 359], 1657 [Pg. 1657 includes portions of Doc. 1149 and Doc. 1150]

U.S. security interests in, 40–41 [Pg. 40 is part of Doc. 4], 56–57 [Pg. 56 is part of Doc. 10], 245 [Pg. 245 includes portions of Doc. 115, Doc. 116, and Doc. 117], 278 [Pg. 278 is part of Doc. 133], 453–455 [Pg. 453 is part of Doc. 249], 462 [Pg. 462 includes portions of Doc. 255 and Doc. 256], 1650n [Pg. 1650 is part of Doc. 1146]

Varkiza accord, 450 [Pg. 450 is part of Doc. 247]

Visit by Secretary of the Treasury Snyder, July 22–24, 1949, 371–372 [Pgs. 371–372 include portions of Doc. 192 and Doc. 193], 376–378 [Pgs. 376–378 include portions of Doc. 194, Doc. 195, and Doc. 196]

War Council, 245–248 [Pgs. 245–248 include portions of Doc. 115, Doc. 116, Doc. 117, and Doc. 118]

Yugoslav policy, 250 [Pg. 250 is part of Doc. 119], 252–254 [Pgs. 252–254 include portions of Doc. 119, Doc. 120, and Doc. 121], 256n [Pg. 256 includes portions of Doc. 121 and Doc. 122], 257–258 [Pgs. 257–258 include portions of Doc. 122, Doc. 123, and Doc. 124], 264–265 [Pgs. 264–265 include portions of Doc. 129, Doc. 130, and Doc. 131], 267–268 [Pgs. 267–268 include portions of Doc. 131 and Doc. 132], 273–276 [Pg. 273 is part of Doc. 133], 285–286 [Pgs. 285–286 include portions of Doc. 136, Doc. 137, and Doc. 138], 293–294 [Pgs. 293–294 include portions of Doc. 143 and Doc. 144], 299 [Pg. 299 is part of Doc. 147], 321–322 [Pg. 321 is part of Doc. 160], 334–335 [Pg. 334 is part of Doc. 166], 340 [Pg. 340 is part of Doc. 170], 344 [Pg. 344 includes portions of Doc. 171 and Doc. 172], 346 [Pg. 346 is part of Doc. 173], 355 [Pg. 355 includes portions of Doc. 178 and Doc. 179], 360 [Pg. 360 includes portions of Doc. 182, Doc. 183, and Doc. 184], 363–364 [Pgs. 363–364 include portions of Doc. 185, Doc. 186, and Doc. 187], 365n [Pg. 365 is part of Doc. 188], 366–371 [Pgs. 366–371 include portions of Doc. 188, Doc. 189, Doc. 190, Doc. 191, Doc. 192, and Doc. 193], 373–374 [Pg. 373 is part of Doc. 194], 380 [Pg. 380 includes portions of Doc. 196, Doc. 197, and Doc. 198], 387 [Pg. 387 is part of Doc. 203], 391 [Pg. 391 is part of Doc. 206], 396–397 [Pgs. 396–397 include portions of Doc. 209 and Doc. 210], 403 [Pg. 403 is part of Doc. 214], 407–409 [Pgs. 407–409 include portions of Doc. 215 and Doc. 216], 418–419 [Pgs. 418–419 include portions of Doc. 221, Doc. 222, and Doc. 223], 431 [Pg. 431 is part of Doc. 234], 438 [Pg. 438 is part of Doc. 240], 454 [Pg. 454 is part of Doc. 249]

Greek-Turkish Assistance Act of 1948, 272 [Pg. 272 is part of Doc. 133]

Greenhill, Denis A., 85 [Pg. 85 is part of Doc. 12], 158n [Pg. 158 is part of Doc. 66], 1426 [Pg. 1426 includes portions of Doc. 993 and Doc. 994], 1451n [Pg. 1451 includes portions of Doc. 1006 and Doc. 1007], 1452n [Pg. 1452 includes portions of Doc. 1007 and Doc. 1008], 1512 [Pg. 1512 includes portions of Doc. 1047, Doc. 1048, and Doc. 1049], 1518 [Pg. 1518 includes portions of Doc. 1053, Doc. 1054, and Doc. 1055], 1523–1524 [Pgs. 1523–1524 include portions of Doc. 1058, Doc. 1059, and Doc. 1060]

Griffis, Stanton, 609 [Pg. 609 includes portions of Doc. 352 and Doc. 353], 618–620 [Pgs. 618–620 include portions of Doc. 359 and Doc. 360], 642 [Pg. 642 includes portions of Doc. 378 and Doc. 379], 664–665 [Pgs. 664–665 include portions of Doc. 394 and Doc. 395], 677 [Pg. 677 includes portions of Doc. 404 and Doc. 405], 698 [Pg. 698 includes portions of Doc. 424 and Doc. 425], 747–748 [Pgs. 747–748 include portions of Doc. 464, Doc. 465, and Doc. 466], 762 [Pg. 762 is part of Doc. 479], 771 [Pg. 771 includes portions of Doc. 488 and Doc. 489], 772n [Pg. 772 includes portions of Doc. 489 and Doc. 490], 786 [Pg. 786 includes portions of Doc. 500 and Doc. 501], 818 [Pg. 818 includes portions of Doc. 524, Doc. 525, and Doc. 526], 830 [Pg. 830 is part of Doc. 533], 834 [Pg. 834 is part of Doc. 533], 836–837 [Pg. 836 is part of Doc. 533], 856 [Pg. 856 includes portions of Doc. 544 and Doc. 545], 870n [Pg. 870 is part of Doc. 557], 1140 [Pg. 1140 is part of Doc. 764], 1157 [Pg. 1157 includes portions of Doc. 777 and Doc. 778], 1220 [Pg. 1220 is part of Doc. 826], 1234 [Pg. 1234 is part of Doc. 838]

Grivas-Gardikiotis, Theodoras, 323–324 [Pgs. 323–324 include portions of Doc. 161, Doc. 162, and Doc. 163]

Gromyko, Andrey Andreyevich, 301–309 [Pgs. 301–309 include portions of Doc. 148, Doc. 149, Doc. 150, and Doc. 151], 320–326 [Pgs. 320–326 include portions of Doc. 158, Doc. 159, Doc. 160, Doc. 161, Doc. 162, and Doc. 163], 328–333 [Pgs. 328–333 include portions of Doc. 163, Doc. 164, Doc. 165, and Doc. 166], 336 [Pg. 336 is part of Doc. 167], 338 [Pg. 338 is part of Doc. 169], 341 [Pg. 341 includes portions of Doc. 170 and Doc. 171], 343–344 [Pgs. 343–344 include portions of Doc. 171 and Doc. 172], 350 [Pg. 350 is part of Doc. 176], 352n [Pg. 352 is part of Doc. 177], 355 [Pg. 355 includes portions of Doc. 178 and Doc. 179], 390 [Pg. 390 is part of Doc. 206], 408 [Pg. 408 is part of Doc. 215]

Gross, Ernest A., 47 [Pg. 47 includes portions of Doc. 5 and Doc. 6], 48n [Pg. 48 includes portions of Doc. 6 and Doc. 7], 1048–1049 [Pgs. 1048–1049 include portions of Doc. 686, Doc. 687, and Doc. 688], 1210–1211 [Pg. 1210 is part of Doc. 818], 1272n [Pg. 1272 includes portions of Doc. 874 and Doc. 875], 1333 [Pg. 1333 is part of Doc. 925], 1357 [Pg. 1357 includes portions of Doc. 940 and Doc. 941], 1768–1775 [Pgs. 1768–1775 include portions of Doc. 1224, Doc. 1225, Doc. 1226, Doc. 1227, Doc. 1228, Doc. 1229, Doc. 1230, and Doc. 1231]

Gruenther, Maj. Gen. Alfred M., 445–447 [Pgs. 445–447 include portions of Doc. 243, Doc. 244, Doc. 245, and Doc. 246]

Gulf Oil Corporation, 94n [Pg. 94 includes portions of Doc. 15 and Doc. 16], 109 [Pg. 109 includes portions of Doc. 23 and Doc. 24], 839 [Pg. 839 is part of Doc. 533], 1567 [Pg. 1567 is part of Doc. 1096], 1569 [Pg. 1569 is part of Doc. 1096], 1795 [Pg. 1795 is part of Doc. 1236]

Günaltay, Semsettin, 1677 [Pg. 1677 is part of Doc. 1158], 1680 [Pg. 1680 is part of Doc. 1159]

Gurmani, Mushtaq Ahmad, 1695 [Pg. 1695 is part of Doc. 1173]

Hadawi, Sami, 1365 [Pg. 1365 includes portions of Doc. 947 and Doc. 948]

Hadi Pasha, Ibrahim Abdul, 186 [Pg. 186 is part of Doc. 81], 189 [Pg. 189 is part of Doc. 84], 199–202 [Pg. 199 is part of Doc. 91], 220–222 [Pgs. 220–222 include portions of Doc. 98, Doc. 99, Doc. 100, and Doc. 101], 599 [Pg. 599 includes portions of Doc. 345 and Doc. 346], 622 [Pg. 622 includes portions of Doc. 360, Doc. 361, Doc. 362, and Doc. 363], 629n [Pg. 629 includes portions of Doc. 368 and Doc. 369], 633n [Pg. 633 includes portions of Doc. 371 and Doc. 372], 667 [Pg. 667 includes portions of Doc. 397 and Doc. 398], 695 [Pg. 695 includes portions of Doc. 421 and Doc. 422], 706n [Pg. 706 is part of Doc. 430], 713 [Pg. 713 includes portions of Doc. 436, Doc. 437, and Doc. 438], 750–752 [Pgs. 750–752 include portions of Doc. 467, Doc. 468, and Doc. 469], 761 [Pg. 761 includes portions of Doc. 478 and Doc. 479], 764–765 [Pgs. 764–765 include portions of Doc. 479, Doc. 480, and Doc. 481], 781 [Pg. 781 includes portions of Doc. 495 and Doc. 496], 966n [Pg. 966 includes portions of Doc. 625 and Doc. 626], 1189 [Pg. 1189 includes portions of Doc. 801 and Doc. 802]

Hadj, Messali, 1787 [Pg. 1787 is part of Doc. 1235]

Haikal, Yousef (also Yussef, Yusuf), 769 [Pg. 769 includes portions of Doc. 486 and Doc. 487], 1080 [Pg. 1080 includes portions of Doc. 713 and Doc. 714], 1206 [Pg. 1206 includes portions of Doc. 814 and Doc. 815], 1350 [Pg. 1350 includes portions of Doc. 936 and Doc. 937]

Haile Selassie, Emperor of Ethiopia, 73 [Pg. 73 is part of Doc. 12], 87 [Pg. 87 is part of Doc. 12]

Hakimi, Ibrahim, 480 [Pg. 480 includes portions of Doc. 269 and Doc. 270], 481n [Pg. 481 includes portions of Doc. 270 and Doc. 271], 509n [Pg. 509 is part of Doc. 294]

Halderman, John W., 599 [Pg. 599 includes portions of Doc. 345 and Doc. 346], 654 [Pg. 654 includes portions of Doc. 388 and Doc. 389], 793–795 [Pg. 793 is part of Doc. 506], 904n [Pg. 904 is part of Doc. 587], 911–912 [Pgs. 911–912 include portions of Doc. 591 and Doc. 592], 923 [Pg. 923 is part of Doc. 600], 1370–1372 [Pg. 1370 is part of Doc. 953], 1399–1403 [Pgs. 1399–1403 include portions of Doc. 974, Doc. 975, and Doc. 976], 1465 [Pg. 1465 includes portions of Doc. 1018 and Doc. 1019]

Hamade, Mohamed Ali, 955 [Pg. 955 is part of Doc. 615]

Hamilton, C.W., 109n [Pg. 109 includes portions of Doc. 23 and Doc. 24]

Hamza Bey. see Fuad Bey Hamza.

Hankey, H.A.A., 1476 [Pg. 1476 includes portions of Doc. 1025 and Doc. 1026]

Hare, Raymond A., 1 [Pg. 1 is part of Doc. 1], 60–61 [Pgs. 60–61 include portions of Doc. 11 and Doc. 12], 66 [Pg. 66 is part of Doc. 12], 82–84 [Pg. 82 is part of Doc. 12], 86–88 [Pg. 86 is part of Doc. 12], 89 [Pg. 89 includes portions of Doc. 12 and Doc. 13], 91–92 [Pg. 91 is part of Doc. 14], 96 [Pg. 96 is part of Doc. 17], 98–103 [Pgs. 98–103 include portions of Doc. 17 and Doc. 18], 105–107 [Pgs. 105–107 include portions of Doc. 20, Doc. 21, and Doc. 22], 111n [Pg. 111 includes portions of Doc. 24 and Doc. 25], 137 [Pg. 137 includes portions of Doc. 46, Doc. 47, and Doc. 48], 157–160 [Pgs. 157–160 include portions of Doc. 65, Doc. 66, and Doc. 67], 184 [Pg. 184 includes portions of Doc. 78 and Doc. 79], 194n [Pg. 194 includes portions of Doc. 87 and Doc. 88], 207 [Pg. 207 includes portions of Doc. 94 and Doc. 95], 434 [Pg. 434 includes portions of Doc. 236 and Doc. 237], 445–446 [Pgs. 445–446 include portions of Doc. 243 and Doc. 244], 460–461 [Pgs. 460–461 include portions of Doc. 253, Doc. 254, and Doc. 255], 588n [Pg. 588 includes portions of Doc. 336 and Doc. 337], 671 [Pg. 671 includes portions of Doc. 401 and Doc. 402], 674 [Pg. 674 is part of Doc. 402], 774n [Pg. 774 includes portions of Doc. 490 and Doc. 491], 900n [Pg. 900 includes portions of Doc. 585 and Doc. 586], 999 [Pg. 999 includes portions of Doc. 649 and Doc. 650], 1057n [Pg. 1057 includes portions of Doc. 693, Doc. 694, and Doc. 695], 1063n [Pg. 1063 includes portions of Doc. 697 and Doc. 698], 1093n [Pg. 1093 is part of Doc. 728], 1095 [Pg. 1095 includes portions of Doc. 729 and Doc. 730], 1098n [Pg. 1098 is part of Doc. 732], 1100 [Pg. 1100 includes portions of Doc. 733, Doc. 734, and Doc. 735], 1112n [Pg. 1112 includes portions of Doc. 742, Doc. 743, and Doc. 744], 1122–1123 [Pgs. 1122–1123 include portions of Doc. 751 and Doc. 752], 1127–1131 [Pgs. 1127–1131 include portions of Doc. 754, Doc. 755, Doc. 756, Doc. 757, and Doc. 758], 1135–1138 [Pgs. 1135–1138 include portions of Doc. 760, Doc. 761, Doc. 762, and Doc. 763], 1142–1143 [Pgs. 1142–1143 include portions of Doc. 765, Doc. 766, Doc. 767, and Doc. 768], 1154–1155 [Pgs. 1154–1155 include portions of Doc. 773, Doc. 774, and Doc. 775], 1161 [Pg. 1161 is part of Doc. 781], 1162n [Pg. 1162 includes portions of Doc. 781 and Doc. 782], 1164 [Pg. 1164 includes portions of Doc. 783 and Doc. 784], 1186–1187 [Pgs. 1186–1187 include portions of Doc. 798, Doc. 799, and Doc. 800], 1195n [Pg. 1195 includes portions of Doc. 806 and Doc. 807], 1208–1209 [Pgs. 1208–1209 include portions of Doc. 816 and Doc. 817], 1310 [Pg. 1310 is part of Doc. 906], 1312 [Pg. 1312 is part of Doc. 907], 1328–1331 [Pgs. 1328–1331 include portions of Doc. 921, Doc. 922, and Doc. 923], 1350 [Pg. 1350 includes portions of Doc. 936 and Doc. 937], 1366–1367 [Pgs. 1366–1367 include portions of Doc. 949, Doc. 950, and Doc. 951], 1409n [Pg. 1409 includes portions of Doc. 980 and Doc. 981], 1470 [Pg. 1470 includes portions of Doc. 1021 and Doc. 1022], 1500 [Pg. 1500 is part of Doc. 1038], 1507n [Pg. 1507 is part of Doc. 1042], 1510n [Pg. 1510 includes portions of Doc. 1045 and Doc. 1046], 1511 [Pg. 1511 includes portions of Doc. 1046 and Doc. 1047], 1515–1516 [Pgs. 1515–1516 include portions of Doc. 1051, Doc. 1052, and Doc. 1053], 1523–1524 [Pgs. 1523–1524 include portions of Doc. 1058, Doc. 1059, and Doc. 1060], 1527n [Pg. 1527 includes portions of Doc. 1060 and Doc. 1061], 1543–1544 [Pg. 1543 is part of Doc. 1078], 1547–1548 [Pgs. 1547–1548 include portions of Doc. 1079, Doc. 1080, and Doc. 1081], 1585n [Pg. 1585 is part of Doc. 1110], 1623 [Pg. 1623 includes portions of Doc. 1126 and Doc. 1127], 1679 [Pg. 1679 includes portions of Doc. 1158 and Doc. 1159], 1683n [Pg. 1683 is part of Doc. 1161], 1742 [Pg. 1742 includes portions of Doc. 1210 and Doc. 1211], 1745 [Pg. 1745 includes portions of Doc. 1212 and Doc. 1213]

Harkus Island, 156 [Pg. 156 includes portions of Doc. 63, Doc. 64, and Doc. 65]

Harper, Maj. Gen. Arthur McK., 1640n [Pg. 1640 includes portions of Doc. 1140 and Doc. 1141]

Harriman, W. Averell, 237–238 [Pgs. 237–238 include portions of Doc. 111 and Doc. 112], 257 [Pg. 257 includes portions of Doc. 122 and Doc. 123], 1013 [Pg. 1013 is part of Doc. 660], 1638–1640 [Pgs. 1638–1640 include portions of Doc. 1139, Doc. 1140, and Doc. 1141], 1643–1644 [Pgs. 1643–1644 include portions of Doc. 1142, Doc. 1143, and Doc. 1144]

Harriman, Mrs. W. Averell, 237 [Pg. 237 is part of Doc. 111], 238n [Pg. 238 includes portions of Doc. 111 and Doc. 112]

Hassouna Pasha, 169n [Pg. 169 is part of Doc. 73], 996 [Pg. 996 includes portions of Doc. 647 and Doc. 648], 1181 [Pg. 1181 is part of Doc. 794], 1195n [Pg. 1195 includes portions of Doc. 806 and Doc. 807], 1322 [Pg. 1322 includes portions of Doc. 915 and Doc. 916], 1327–1328 [Pgs. 1327–1328 include portions of Doc. 919, Doc. 920, Doc. 921, and Doc. 922], 1373 [Pg. 1373 is part of Doc. 954]

Hatch, Carl A., 1689 [Pg. 1689 includes portions of Doc. 1166, Doc. 1167, and Doc. 1168]

Hatzwasileiou, Khrysa, 250–251 [Pg. 250 is part of Doc. 119]

Havenga, N.C., 1807–1808 [Pgs. 1807–1808 include portions of Doc. 1241 and Doc. 1242]

Hawk, Paul, 1781 [Pg. 1781 is part of Doc. 1235]

Hawrani, Akram, 1634 [Pg. 1634 includes portions of Doc. 1135 and Doc. 1136]

Hay, Lt. Col. Sir Rupert, 129n [Pg. 129 includes portions of Doc. 37 and Doc. 38]

Heath, Donald R., 336–337 [Pgs. 336–337 include portions of Doc. 167 and Doc. 168], 393n [Pg. 393 is part of Doc. 207], 403 [Pg. 403 is part of Doc. 214]

Hekmat, Ali Asqhar, 480–481 [Pgs. 480–481 include portions of Doc. 269, Doc. 270, and Doc. 271], 490 [Pg. 490 is part of Doc. 277], 496n [Pg. 496 includes portions of Doc. 280 and Doc. 281], 500n [Pg. 500 includes portions of Doc. 282, Doc. 283, and Doc. 284], 501 [Pg. 501 includes portions of Doc. 284, Doc. 285, and Doc. 286], 505 [Pg. 505 includes portions of Doc. 288 and Doc. 289], 507 [Pg. 507 includes portions of Doc. 291, Doc. 292, and Doc. 293], 509–510 [Pgs. 509–510 include portions of Doc. 294 and Doc. 295], 515 [Pg. 515 is part of Doc. 298], 526 [Pg. 526 includes portions of Doc. 305 and Doc. 306], 528 [Pg. 528 includes portions of Doc. 308 and Doc. 309], 537 [Pg. 537 is part of Doc. 312], 540 [Pg. 540 is part of Doc. 313], 542 [Pg. 542 includes portions of Doc. 313 and Doc. 314]

Helmis, Dimitrios, 310 [Pg. 310 is part of Doc. 151], 378 [Pg. 378 includes portions of Doc. 195 and Doc. 196]

Henderson, Loy W., 1690–1691 [Pgs. 1690–1691 include portions of Doc. 1168, Doc. 1169, Doc. 1170, and Doc. 1171], 1693–1695 [Pgs. 1693–1695 include portions of Doc. 1171, Doc. 1172, and Doc. 1173], 1698–1703 [Pgs. 1698–1703 include portions of Doc. 1175, Doc. 1176, Doc. 1177, Doc. 1178, Doc. 1179, Doc. 1180, Doc. 1181, and Doc. 1182], 1707–1708 [Pgs. 1707–1708 include portions of Doc. 1185, Doc. 1186, and Doc. 1187], 1713n [Pg. 1713 is part of Doc. 1189], 1716–1721 [Pgs. 1716–1721 include portions of Doc. 1191, Doc. 1192, Doc. 1193, Doc. 1194, Doc. 1195, and Doc. 1196], 1724 [Pg. 1724 includes portions of Doc. 1198, Doc. 1199, and Doc. 1200], 1726–1728 [Pgs. 1726–1728 include portions of Doc. 1202 and Doc. 1203], 1731n [Pg. 1731 is part of Doc. 1204], 1732–1733 [Pgs. 1732–1733 include portions of Doc. 1205 and Doc. 1206], 1736–1740 [Pgs. 1736–1740 include portions of Doc. 1207, Doc. 1208, Doc. 1209, and Doc. 1210], 1766–1768 [Pgs. 1766–1768 include portions of Doc. 1223, Doc. 1224, and Doc. 1225], 1770–1771 [Pgs. 1770–1771 include portions of Doc. 1225, Doc. 1226, and Doc. 1227]

Hensel, Capt. Karl G., 1613 [Pg. 1613 includes portions of Doc. 1119 and Doc. 1120]

Herlitz, Esther, 721 [Pg. 721 is part of Doc. 446], 1076 [Pg. 1076 includes portions of Doc. 708 and Doc. 709], 1085 [Pg. 1085 includes portions of Doc. 719 and Doc. 720], 1111 [Pg. 1111 is part of Doc. 742], 1151n [Pg. 1151 is part of Doc. 772], 1154n [Pg. 1154 includes portions of Doc. 773 and Doc. 774], 1163 [Pg. 1163 includes portions of Doc. 782 and Doc. 783], 1184 [Pg. 1184 includes portions of Doc. 795 and Doc. 796], 1188n [Pg. 1188 includes portions of Doc. 800 and Doc. 801], 1189–1190 [Pgs. 1189–1190 include portions of Doc. 801 and Doc. 802], 1196 [Pg. 1196 is part of Doc. 808], 1206 [Pg. 1206 includes portions of Doc. 814 and Doc. 815], 1238 [Pg. 1238 includes portions of Doc. 840, Doc. 841, and Doc. 842], 1543–1544 [Pg. 1543 is part of Doc. 1078], 1561 [Pg. 1561 includes portions of Doc. 1089 and Doc. 1090]

Herriot, Edouard, 357 [Pg. 357 is part of Doc. 180]

Hettinger, Converse, 1781 [Pg. 1781 is part of Doc. 1235]

Heyd, Uriel, 680 [Pg. 680 includes portions of Doc. 406 and Doc. 407], 1074n [Pg. 1074 includes portions of Doc. 705 and Doc. 706], 1148 [Pg. 1148 is part of Doc. 772], 1177–1178 [Pgs. 1177–1178 include portions of Doc. 790, Doc. 791, and Doc. 792], 1189–1190 [Pgs. 1189–1190 include portions of Doc. 801 and Doc. 802], 1195–1196 [Pgs. 1195–1196 include portions of Doc. 806, Doc. 807, and Doc. 808], 1208 [Pg. 1208 includes portions of Doc. 816 and Doc. 817], 1261–1262 [Pgs. 1261–1262 include portions of Doc. 865 and Doc. 866], 1323 [Pg. 1323 includes portions of Doc. 916, Doc. 917, and Doc. 918]

Hickerson, John D., 487 [Pg. 487 includes portions of Doc. 274 and Doc. 275], 958 [Pg. 958 is part of Doc. 618], 1803–1805 [Pgs. 1803–1805 include portions of Doc. 1239, Doc. 1240, and Doc. 1241]

Hill, Heyward G., 152–155 [Pgs. 152–155 include portions of Doc. 60, Doc. 61, Doc. 62, and Doc. 63], 1424 [Pg. 1424 is part of Doc. 992], 1613–1614 [Pgs. 1613–1614 include portions of Doc. 1119, Doc. 1120, and Doc. 1121], 1622 [Pg. 1622 includes portions of Doc. 1125 and Doc. 1126]

Hilldring, Maj. Gen. John H., 1249–1252 [Pgs. 1249–1252 include portions of Doc. 852, Doc. 853, Doc. 854, Doc. 855, and Doc. 856]

Hinnawi, Col. Sami, 1399 [Pg. 1399 includes portions of Doc. 974 and Doc. 975], 1420–1421 [Pgs. 1420–1421 include portions of Doc. 987 and Doc. 988], 1635 [Pg. 1635 includes portions of Doc. 1136 and Doc. 1137], 1637n [Pg. 1637 is part of Doc. 1138]

Hirsch, Gershan, 955 [Pg. 955 is part of Doc. 615], 1142 [Pg. 1142 includes portions of Doc. 765, Doc. 766, and Doc. 767], 1239 [Pg. 1239 includes portions of Doc. 842, Doc. 843, and Doc. 844], 1260 [Pg. 1260 includes portions of Doc. 863 and Doc. 864]

Hitler, Adolf, 335 [Pg. 335 is part of Doc. 166], 903 [Pg. 903 is part of Doc. 587], 1172 [Pg. 1172 is part of Doc. 788]

Hoag, Gen. Earl S., 1679 [Pg. 1679 includes portions of Doc. 1158 and Doc. 1159]

Hoffman, Paul G., 257 [Pg. 257 includes portions of Doc. 122 and Doc. 123], 277 [Pg. 277 is part of Doc. 133], 389 [Pg. 389 includes portions of Doc. 204, Doc. 205, and Doc. 206], 1638 [Pg. 1638 includes portions of Doc. 1139 and Doc. 1140]

Holloway, John Edward, 1801–1802 [Pgs. 1801–1802 include portions of Doc. 1238 and Doc. 1239], 1808 [Pg. 1808 is part of Doc. 1242]

Holmes, Julius C., 93–94 [Pgs. 93–94 include portions of Doc. 14, Doc. 15, and Doc. 16], 107–108 [Pgs. 107–108 include portions of Doc. 21, Doc. 22, and Doc. 23], 134–135 [Pgs. 134–135 include portions of Doc. 43, Doc. 44, and Doc. 45], 147–148 [Pgs. 147–148 include portions of Doc. 54 and Doc. 55], 162 [Pg. 162 includes portions of Doc. 69 and Doc. 70], 187 [Pg. 187 is part of Doc. 82], 223 [Pg. 223 includes portions of Doc. 102 and Doc. 103], 398–399 [Pgs. 398–399 include portions of Doc. 210, Doc. 211, and Doc. 212], 416–417 [Pgs. 416–417 include portions of Doc. 219, Doc. 220, and Doc. 221], 607–609 [Pgs. 607–609 include portions of Doc. 351, Doc. 352, and Doc. 353], 613n [Pg. 613 is part of Doc. 354], 627–628 [Pgs. 627–628 include portions of Doc. 366 and Doc. 367], 677–679 [Pgs. 677–679 include portions of Doc. 404 and Doc. 405], 684–685 [Pgs. 684–685 include portions of Doc. 409, Doc. 410, and Doc. 411], 694 [Pg. 694 includes portions of Doc. 419, Doc. 420, and Doc. 421], 711 [Pg. 711 includes portions of Doc. 434 and Doc. 435], 714–715 [Pgs. 714–715 include portions of Doc. 438, Doc. 439, and Doc. 440], 1090n [Pg. 1090 includes portions of Doc. 723 and Doc. 724], 1099–1100 [Pgs. 1099–1100 include portions of Doc. 733, Doc. 734, and Doc. 735], 1375–1376 [Pgs. 1375–1376 include portions of Doc. 956, Doc. 957, and Doc. 958], 1540–1541 [Pgs. 1540–1541 include portions of Doc. 1073, Doc. 1074, Doc. 1075, and Doc. 1076], 1556 [Pg. 1556 is part of Doc. 1085], 1563 [Pg. 1563 includes portions of Doc. 1092 and Doc. 1093], 1689–1690 [Pgs. 1689–1690 include portions of Doc. 1166, Doc. 1167, Doc. 1168, and Doc. 1169]

Homsi, Edmond, 1234 [Pg. 1234 is part of Doc. 838]

Hong Kong, 52 [Pg. 52 is part of Doc. 8], 350n [Pg. 350 is part of Doc. 176], 435 [Pg. 435 includes portions of Doc. 235 and Doc. 236]

Hooker, Robert G., 487 [Pg. 487 includes portions of Doc. 274 and Doc. 275]

Hope, Mary E., 1367–1369 [Pgs. 1367–1369 include portions of Doc. 950, Doc. 951, and Doc. 952], 1408n [Pg. 1408 is part of Doc. 979], 1409n [Pg. 1409 includes portions of Doc. 980 and Doc. 981]

Hopkins, Garland, 840 [Pg. 840 is part of Doc. 533]

Hopkins, J. H., 1761 [Pg. 1761 is part of Doc. 1220]

Horowitz, David, 1425 [Pg. 1425 is part of Doc. 993]

Hoskins, Harold, 840 [Pg. 840 is part of Doc. 533]

Howard, George C., 195 [Pg. 195 includes portions of Doc. 88 and Doc. 89]

Howard, Harry N., 295 [Pg. 295 includes portions of Doc. 144 and Doc. 145], 298–299 [Pgs. 298–299 include portions of Doc. 146 and Doc. 147], 387 [Pg. 387 is part of Doc. 203], 424 [Pg. 424 is part of Doc. 227], 425n [Pg. 425 includes portions of Doc. 227 and Doc. 228]

Hoxha, Gen. Enver, 288 [Pg. 288 is part of Doc. 139], 365n [Pg. 365 is part of Doc. 188], 383–384 [Pg. 383 is part of Doc. 200], 393 [Pg. 393 is part of Doc. 207], 397–398 [Pgs. 397–398 include portions of Doc. 209, Doc. 210, and Doc. 211], 415 [Pg. 415 is part of Doc. 219], 438 [Pg. 438 is part of Doc. 240]

Hoyer Millar, Sir Derick, 76 [Pg. 76 is part of Doc. 12], 300n [Pg. 300 is part of Doc. 148], 324–325 [Pgs. 324–325 include portions of Doc. 162 and Doc. 163], 338n [Pg. 338 is part of Doc. 169], 341–342 [Pgs. 341–342 include portions of Doc. 170 and Doc. 171], 343n [Pg. 343 is part of Doc. 171], 344n [Pg. 344 includes portions of Doc. 171 and Doc. 172], 348n [Pg. 348 is part of Doc. 175], 350n [Pg. 350 is part of Doc. 176], 356–357 [Pg. 356 is part of Doc. 180], 363n [Pg. 363 includes portions of Doc. 185 and Doc. 186], 365n [Pg. 365 is part of Doc. 188], 435 [Pg. 435 includes portions of Doc. 235 and Doc. 236], 438n [Pg. 438 is part of Doc. 240], 446 [Pg. 446 is part of Doc. 244]

Huddle, Jerome K., 26 [Pg. 26 is part of Doc. 3], 1687–1689 [Pgs. 1687–1689 include portions of Doc. 1165, Doc. 1166, Doc. 1167, and Doc. 1168], 1704 [Pg. 1704 is part of Doc. 1182], 1706 [Pg. 1706 includes portions of Doc. 1183 and Doc. 1184]

Hudson, Manley, 95–104 [Pgs. 95–104 include portions of Doc. 16, Doc. 17, Doc. 18, Doc. 19, and Doc. 20], 111–112 [Pgs. 111–112 include portions of Doc. 24 and Doc. 25], 120 [Pg. 120 includes portions of Doc. 29 and Doc. 30], 152–156 [Pgs. 152–156 include portions of Doc. 60, Doc. 61, Doc. 62, Doc. 63, Doc. 64, and Doc. 65]

Humelsine, Carlisle H., 189 [Pg. 189 is part of Doc. 84], 875 [Pg. 875 is part of Doc. 562], 918 [Pg. 918 includes portions of Doc. 595 and Doc. 596], 1653n [Pg. 1653 includes portions of Doc. 1146 and Doc. 1147]

Hungary, 15 [Pg. 15 is part of Doc. 3], 266 [Pg. 266 is part of Doc. 131], 328 [Pg. 328 is part of Doc. 163], 342 [Pg. 342 is part of Doc. 171], 355 [Pg. 355 includes portions of Doc. 178 and Doc. 179], 775 [Pg. 775 includes portions of Doc. 491 and Doc. 492], 1668 [Pg. 1668 is part of Doc. 1152]

Husseini, Musa Bey, 668 [Pg. 668 includes portions of Doc. 398 and Doc. 399], 798 [Pg. 798 includes portions of Doc. 507 and Doc. 508]

Hutchinson, Lt. Col. Thomas E., 582 [Pg. 582 includes portions of Doc. 333 and Doc. 334]

Ibn Sand, Abdul Aziz, King of Saudi Arabia, 46–47 [Pgs. 46–47 include portions of Doc. 5 and Doc. 6], 88 [Pg. 88 is part of Doc. 12], 95 [Pg. 95 is part of Doc. 16], 106 [Pg. 106 is part of Doc. 21], 108n [Pg. 108 includes portions of Doc. 22 and Doc. 23], 118n [Pg. 118 includes portions of Doc. 27 and Doc. 28], 124 [Pg. 124 is part of Doc. 32], 133 [Pg. 133 is part of Doc. 42], 137n [Pg. 137 includes portions of Doc. 46, Doc. 47, and Doc. 48], 152–154 [Pgs. 152–154 include portions of Doc. 60, Doc. 61, Doc. 62, and Doc. 63], 155n [Pg. 155 is part of Doc. 63], 161n [Pg. 161 includes portions of Doc. 67 and Doc. 68], 169–170 [Pg. 169 is part of Doc. 73], 172 [Pg. 172 is part of Doc. 73], 183 [Pg. 183 is part of Doc. 78], 620–621 [Pgs. 620–621 include portions of Doc. 359 and Doc. 360], 625–626 [Pgs. 625–626 include portions of Doc. 364 and Doc. 365], 712n [Pg. 712 includes portions of Doc. 435 and Doc. 436], 720 [Pg. 720 includes portions of Doc. 444 and Doc. 445], 756–757 [Pgs. 756–757 include portions of Doc. 472, Doc. 473, Doc. 474, and Doc. 475], 1352 [Pg. 1352 is part of Doc. 937], 1506n [Pg. 1506 includes portions of Doc. 1041 and Doc. 1042], 1573 [Pg. 1573 is part of Doc. 1099], 1574n [Pg. 1574 includes portions of Doc. 1099 and Doc. 1100], 1577–1588 [Pgs. 1577–1588 include portions of Doc. 1102, Doc. 1103, Doc. 1104, Doc. 1105, Doc. 1106, Doc. 1107, Doc. 1108, Doc. 1109, and Doc. 1110], 1590–1596 [Pgs. 1590–1596 include portions of Doc. 1111, Doc. 1112, Doc. 1113, and Doc. 1114], 1598–1600 [Pgs. 1598–1600 include portions of Doc. 1116, Doc. 1117, and Doc. 1118], 1603–1604 [Pg. 1603 is part of Doc. 1119], 1606 [Pg. 1606 is part of Doc. 1119], 1613–1614 [Pgs. 1613–1614 include portions of Doc. 1119, Doc. 1120, and Doc. 1121], 1616n [Pg. 1616 includes portions of Doc. 1122 and Doc. 1123], 1618–1624 [Pgs. 1618–1624 include portions of Doc. 1124, Doc. 1125, Doc. 1126, Doc. 1127, and Doc. 1128], 1626–1629 [Pgs. 1626–1629 include portions of Doc. 1129, Doc. 1130, and Doc. 1131], 1632–1633 [Pgs. 1632–1633 include portions of Doc. 1133, Doc. 1134, and Doc. 1135]

Iceland, 233 [Pg. 233 includes portions of Doc. 106 and Doc. 107]

Ignatieff, George, 1490–1491 [Pgs. 1490–1491 include portions of Doc. 1031, Doc. 1032, and Doc. 1033]

India (see also Kashmir dispute between India and Pakistan): Asian Conference on Indonesia at New Delhi, 12 [Pg. 12 is part of Doc. 3]; British arms, request for, 1697–1698 [Pgs. 1697–1698 include portions of Doc. 1175, Doc. 1176, and Doc. 1177]; British policy, 51–52 [Pg. 51 is part of Doc. 8], 1621 [Pg. 1621 is part of Doc. 1125]; Communist movement, 15–16 [Pg. 15 is part of Doc. 3], 1752–1753 [Pgs. 1752–1753 include portions of Doc. 1216 and Doc. 1217]; Czechoslovak technical mission, 15 [Pg. 15 is part of Doc. 3]; independence, 11 [Pg. 11 is part of Doc. 3]; International Bank credit, 581 [Pg. 581 includes portions of Doc. 332 and Doc. 333]; International Monetary Fund quota, drawing against, 18 [Pg. 18 is part of Doc. 3]; Israel, policy toward, 694 [Pg. 694 includes portions of Doc. 419, Doc. 420, and Doc. 421]; Middle East pact, question of inclusion in, 37 [Pg. 37 is part of Doc. 4]; military forces, 21–22 [Pg. 21 is part of Doc. 3]; refugee problems, 836 [Pg. 836 is part of Doc. 533]; regional cooperation with Afghanistan, Iran, and Pakistan, proposed, 6 [Pg. 6 is part of Doc. 1]; Soviet policy, 14–15 [Pg. 14 is part of Doc. 3]; Soviet Union, Indian policy toward, 1752–1754 [Pgs. 1752–1754 include portions of Doc. 1216 and Doc. 1217]; trade deficit, 18 [Pg. 18 is part of Doc. 3]; U.S. economic assistance, 1727 [Pg. 1727 is part of Doc. 1202], 1751 [Pg. 1751 is part of Doc. 1216]; U.S. military assistance, 23–25 [Pg. 23 is part of Doc. 3], 28 [Pg. 28 is part of Doc. 3], 46–47 [Pgs. 46–47 include portions of Doc. 5 and Doc. 6], 1691 [Pg. 1691 includes portions of Doc. 1169, Doc. 1170, and Doc. 1171], 1727 [Pg. 1727 is part of Doc. 1202]; U.S. policy, 12–13 [Pg. 12 is part of Doc. 3], 17 [Pg. 17 is part of Doc. 3], 29 [Pg. 29 is part of Doc. 3], 31 [Pg. 31 includes portions of Doc. 3 and Doc. 4], 46 [Pg. 46 is part of Doc. 5], 53 [Pg. 53 is part of Doc. 8]; visit to the United States by Prime Minister Nehru, 1686 [Pg. 1686 is part of Doc. 1165], 1726 [Pg. 1726 is part of Doc. 1202], 1733 [Pg. 1733 includes portions of Doc. 1205 and Doc. 1206], 1746 [Pg. 1746 is part of Doc. 1213], 1750–1752 [Pgs. 1750–1752 include portions of Doc. 1216 and Doc. 1217]

Indochina, 16 [Pg. 16 is part of Doc. 3], 656 [Pg. 656 includes portions of Doc. 390 and Doc. 391], 1782–1783 [Pg. 1782 is part of Doc. 1235]

Indonesia: Asian Conference at New Delhi, 12 [Pg. 12 is part of Doc. 3]; British policy, 51–52 [Pg. 51 is part of Doc. 8], 714 [Pg. 714 includes portions of Doc. 438 and Doc. 439]; Netherlands position and role, 51 [Pg. 51 is part of Doc. 8], 53 [Pg. 53 is part of Doc. 8]; Soviet policy, 656 [Pg. 656 includes portions of Doc. 390 and Doc. 391]; U.S. policy, 16 [Pg. 16 is part of Doc. 3], 53 [Pg. 53 is part of Doc. 8], 1687 [Pg. 1687 includes portions of Doc. 1165 and Doc. 1166]

Innes, William C., 488–489 [Pgs. 488–489 include portions of Doc. 275, Doc. 276, and Doc. 277]

Inönü, Ismet, 1639–1642 [Pgs. 1639–1642 include portions of Doc. 1140, Doc. 1141, and Doc. 1142], 1646–1647 [Pgs. 1646–1647 include portions of Doc. 1144, Doc. 1145, and Doc. 1146], 1656–1657 [Pgs. 1656–1657 include portions of Doc. 1149 and Doc. 1150], 1668 [Pg. 1668 is part of Doc. 1152], 1675–1678 [Pgs. 1675–1678 include portions of Doc. 1156, Doc. 1157, and Doc. 1158], 1685 [Pg. 1685 includes portions of Doc. 1162, Doc. 1163, and Doc. 1164]

Institute of Inter-American Affairs, 78 [Pg. 78 is part of Doc. 12], 172 [Pg. 172 is part of Doc. 73]

Interior, U.S. Department of, 119 [Pg. 119 includes portions of Doc. 28 and Doc. 29], 1617 [Pg. 1617 is part of Doc. 1123]

International Bank for Reconstruction and Development, 4 [Pg. 4 is part of Doc. 1], 7 [Pg. 7 is part of Doc. 1], 20 [Pg. 20 is part of Doc. 3], 52 [Pg. 52 is part of Doc. 8], 79 [Pg. 79 is part of Doc. 12], 214 [Pg. 214 is part of Doc. 96], 515 [Pg. 515 is part of Doc. 298], 521 [Pg. 521 is part of Doc. 302], 523–525 [Pgs. 523–525 include portions of Doc. 303 and Doc. 304], 536 [Pg. 536 is part of Doc. 312], 542 [Pg. 542 includes portions of Doc. 313 and Doc. 314], 547 [Pg. 547 is part of Doc. 315], 560 [Pg. 560 is part of Doc. 320], 570 [Pg. 570 is part of Doc. 328], 577–578 [Pg. 577 is part of Doc. 330], 581 [Pg. 581 includes portions of Doc. 332 and Doc. 333], 584 [Pg. 584 is part of Doc. 335], 592 [Pg. 592 includes portions of Doc. 339 and Doc. 340], 697 [Pg. 697 includes portions of Doc. 423 and Doc. 424], 788 [Pg. 788 is part of Doc. 503], 792 [Pg. 792 is part of Doc. 505], 807 [Pg. 807 is part of Doc. 515], 858 [Pg. 858 is part of Doc. 546], 898 [Pg. 898 includes portions of Doc. 582 and Doc. 583], 909 [Pg. 909 is part of Doc. 590], 939–941 [Pg. 939 is part of Doc. 608], 943 [Pg. 943 includes portions of Doc. 608 and Doc. 609], 964–965 [Pgs. 964–965 include portions of Doc. 622, Doc. 623, Doc. 624, and Doc. 625], 972 [Pg. 972 is part of Doc. 631], 983–984 [Pgs. 983–984 include portions of Doc. 639 and Doc. 640], 986 [Pg. 986 is part of Doc. 640], 991 [Pg. 991 is part of Doc. 643], 1023n [Pg. 1023 includes portions of Doc. 666 and Doc. 667], 1038 [Pg. 1038 includes portions of Doc. 675 and Doc. 676], 1077 [Pg. 1077 is part of Doc. 710], 1439 [Pg. 1439 is part of Doc. 997], 1644 [Pg. 1644 includes portions of Doc. 1143 and Doc. 1144], 1653 [Pg. 1653 includes portions of Doc. 1146 and Doc. 1147], 1654n [Pg. 1654 includes portions of Doc. 1147 and Doc. 1148], 1665–1666 [Pg. 1665 is part of Doc. 1152], 1680 [Pg. 1680 is part of Doc. 1159], 1712–1713 [Pgs. 1712–1713 include portions of Doc. 1188 and Doc. 1189], 1808 [Pg. 1808 is part of Doc. 1242]

International Civil Aviation Organization, 525–526 [Pgs. 525–526 include portions of Doc. 304, Doc. 305, and Doc. 306]

International Committee of the Red Cross, 395–396 [Pgs. 395–396 include portions of Doc. 208 and Doc. 209], 401 [Pg. 401 includes portions of Doc. 213 and Doc. 214], 452 [Pg. 452 is part of Doc. 248], 665 [Pg. 665 includes portions of Doc. 394 and Doc. 395], 916 [Pg. 916 includes portions of Doc. 592, Doc. 593, and Doc. 594], 1143 [Pg. 1143 includes portions of Doc. 767 and Doc. 768], 1344 [Pg. 1344 is part of Doc. 933], 1500 [Pg. 1500 is part of Doc. 1038]

International Court of Justice, 159 [Pg. 159 is part of Doc. 66], 351 [Pg. 351 is part of Doc. 177], 396 [Pg. 396 is part of Doc. 209], 400 [Pg. 400 includes portions of Doc. 212 and Doc. 213], 532 [Pg. 532 is part of Doc. 311], 820 [Pg. 820 includes portions of Doc. 527 and Doc. 528], 849 [Pg. 849 is part of Doc. 539], 1025 [Pg. 1025 is part of Doc. 667], 1747 [Pg. 1747 includes portions of Doc. 1213 and Doc. 1214]

International Labor Organization, 525 [Pg. 525 is part of Doc. 304]

International Monetary Fund, 18 [Pg. 18 is part of Doc. 3], 525 [Pg. 525 is part of Doc. 304], 1712–1713 [Pgs. 1712–1713 include portions of Doc. 1188 and Doc. 1189]

International Refugee Organization, 613 [Pg. 613 is part of Doc. 354], 805 [Pg. 805 includes portions of Doc. 514 and Doc. 515], 1413 [Pg. 1413 is part of Doc. 982], 1422 [Pg. 1422 is part of Doc. 989], 1443 [Pg. 1443 is part of Doc. 999], 1500 [Pg. 1500 is part of Doc. 1038], 1502 [Pg. 1502 includes portions of Doc. 1038 and Doc. 1039], 1511 [Pg. 1511 includes portions of Doc. 1046 and Doc. 1047]

Intra-European Payments Plan, 300 [Pg. 300 is part of Doc. 148]

Inverchapel, Lord, 652 [Pg. 652 is part of Doc. 386]

Iran: Anglo-Iranian Oil Company concession contract, negotiations concerning revision of, 111 [Pg. 111 includes portions of Doc. 24 and Doc. 25], 125–127 [Pgs. 125–127 include portions of Doc. 33, Doc. 34, and Doc. 35], 141–142 [Pgs. 141–142 include portions of Doc. 49, Doc. 50, and Doc. 51], 149–150 [Pgs. 149–150 include portions of Doc. 55, Doc. 56, Doc. 57, and Doc. 58], 162 [Pg. 162 includes portions of Doc. 69 and Doc. 70], 483 [Pg. 483 is part of Doc. 271], 497 [Pg. 497 is part of Doc. 281], 536 [Pg. 536 is part of Doc. 312]

Assassination attempt on Shah, 478–479 [Pgs. 478–479 include portions of Doc. 267, Doc. 268, and Doc. 269], 481–482 [Pgs. 481–482 include portions of Doc. 270 and Doc. 271], 484–485 [Pgs. 484–485 include portions of Doc. 271 and Doc. 272], 489 [Pg. 489 includes portions of Doc. 276 and Doc. 277]

Azerbaijan, Soviet threat to, 354 [Pg. 354 is part of Doc. 178], 493–494 [Pgs. 493–494 include portions of Doc. 278 and Doc. 279], 496–498 [Pgs. 496–498 include portions of Doc. 280, Doc. 281, and Doc. 282], 516 [Pg. 516 includes portions of Doc. 298 and Doc. 299], 520n [Pg. 520 is part of Doc. 302], 551 [Pg. 551 is part of Doc. 315], 554–555 [Pgs. 554–555 include portions of Doc. 316 and Doc. 317], 792n [Pg. 792 is part of Doc. 505]

Boundary questions, 92 [Pg. 92 is part of Doc. 14]

British policy, 8 [Pg. 8 includes portions of Doc. 1, Doc. 2, and Doc. 3], 51 [Pg. 51 is part of Doc. 8], 483 [Pg. 483 is part of Doc. 271], 488–489 [Pgs. 488–489 include portions of Doc. 275, Doc. 276, and Doc. 277], 498–499 [Pg. 498 is part of Doc. 282], 508 [Pg. 508 is part of Doc. 293], 565 [Pg. 565 includes portions of Doc. 323, Doc. 324, and Doc. 325]

Communist threat, 170 [Pg. 170 is part of Doc. 73], 479 [Pg. 479 is part of Doc. 269], 482 [Pg. 482 is part of Doc. 271], 541 [Pg. 541 is part of Doc. 313], 548–549 [Pg. 548 is part of Doc. 315]

Constitutional reform, proposed, 475–476 [Pgs. 475–476 include portions of Doc. 264, Doc. 265, and Doc. 266], 479–486 [Pgs. 479–486 include portions of Doc. 269, Doc. 270, Doc. 271, Doc. 272, and Doc. 273], 507 [Pg. 507 includes portions of Doc. 291, Doc. 292, and Doc. 293], 519 [Pg. 519 includes portions of Doc. 301 and Doc. 302], 527 [Pg. 527 includes portions of Doc. 306 and Doc. 307]

Elections, 486 [Pg. 486 is part of Doc. 273]

Gendarmerie, proposed army absorption of, 518–519 [Pgs. 518–519 include portions of Doc. 300, Doc. 301, and Doc. 302], 522–523 [Pgs. 522–523 include portions of Doc. 302, Doc. 303, and Doc. 304], 527 [Pg. 527 includes portions of Doc. 306 and Doc. 307]

Helmand river waters: Development project for, 589 [Pg. 589 includes portions of Doc. 337 and Doc. 338]; dispute with Afghanistan regarding distribution of, 567–568 [Pgs. 567–568 include portions of Doc. 325, Doc. 326, and Doc. 327]

Imperial Bank of Iran, 483 [Pg. 483 is part of Doc. 271]

Iraq, relations with, 1512 [Pg. 1512 includes portions of Doc. 1047, Doc. 1048, and Doc. 1049]

Kuwait, policy toward, 1567 [Pg. 1567 is part of Doc. 1096]

Martial law, imposition of, 478n [Pg. 478 includes portions of Doc. 267, Doc. 268, and Doc. 269], 486 [Pg. 486 is part of Doc. 273], 519 [Pg. 519 includes portions of Doc. 301 and Doc. 302]

Mediterranean pact, question of inclusion in proposed, 588–589 [Pgs. 588–589 include portions of Doc. 336, Doc. 337, and Doc. 338], 1011 [Pg. 1011 is part of Doc. 659]

Middle East pact, proposed inclusion in, 37 [Pg. 37 is part of Doc. 4], 501 [Pg. 501 includes portions of Doc. 284, Doc. 285, and Doc. 286], 571 [Pg. 571 is part of Doc. 328]

Morrison-Knudson report, 477n [Pg. 477 is part of Doc. 267]

North Atlantic Treaty Organization, proposed membership in, 35 [Pg. 35 is part of Doc. 4], 473n [Pg. 473 is part of Doc. 263], 481n [Pg. 481 includes portions of Doc. 270 and Doc. 271], 1662 [Pg. 1662 is part of Doc. 1152]

Overseas Consultants, Inc., contract with, 477n [Pg. 477 is part of Doc. 267], 513 [Pg. 513 includes portions of Doc. 296 and Doc. 297], 521 [Pg. 521 is part of Doc. 302], 526 [Pg. 526 includes portions of Doc. 305 and Doc. 306], 566–567 [Pgs. 566–567 include portions of Doc. 325 and Doc. 326]

Persian Gulf territories and territorial waters, claims to, 100 [Pg. 100 is part of Doc. 18], 102 [Pg. 102 is part of Doc. 18], 118 [Pg. 118 includes portions of Doc. 27 and Doc. 28], 120–122 [Pgs. 120–122 include portions of Doc. 29, Doc. 30, Doc. 31, and Doc. 32], 128–132 [Pgs. 128–132 include portions of Doc. 36, Doc. 37, Doc. 38, Doc. 39, Doc. 40, and Doc. 41], 134–136 [Pgs. 134–136 include portions of Doc. 43, Doc. 44, Doc. 45, and Doc. 46], 159 [Pg. 159 is part of Doc. 66]

Petroleum agreement with the Soviet Union, 1947, 492–493 [Pgs. 492–493 include portions of Doc. 277 and Doc. 278], 508 [Pg. 508 is part of Doc. 293]

Petroleum resources, importance of, 479 [Pg. 479 is part of Doc. 269], 497 [Pg. 497 is part of Doc. 281], 549–550 [Pg. 549 is part of Doc. 315]

Political situation, 5 [Pg. 5 is part of Doc. 1], 475–476 [Pgs. 475–476 include portions of Doc. 264, Doc. 265, and Doc. 266], 478–484 [Pgs. 478–484 include portions of Doc. 267, Doc. 268, Doc. 269, Doc. 270, Doc. 271, and Doc. 272]

Regional cooperation with Afghanistan, India, and Pakistan, proposed, 6 [Pg. 6 is part of Doc. 1]

Security of, 8 [Pg. 8 includes portions of Doc. 1, Doc. 2, and Doc. 3], 471–472 [Pgs. 471–472 include portions of Doc. 262 and Doc. 263], 473n [Pg. 473 is part of Doc. 263], 474–475 [Pgs. 474–475 include portions of Doc. 264 and Doc. 265], 495n [Pg. 495 includes portions of Doc. 279 and Doc. 280], 510–511 [Pgs. 510–511 include portions of Doc. 294 and Doc. 295], 515 [Pg. 515 is part of Doc. 298], 538 [Pg. 538 is part of Doc. 312], 570–572 [Pgs. 570–572 include portions of Doc. 328 and Doc. 329], 579–581 [Pgs. 579–581 include portions of Doc. 330, Doc. 331, Doc. 332, and Doc. 333], 587–588 [Pgs. 587–588 include portions of Doc. 336 and Doc. 337]

Seven-year economic development plan, 476–477 [Pgs. 476–477 include portions of Doc. 265, Doc. 266, and Doc. 267], 479 [Pg. 479 is part of Doc. 269]; 483 [Pg. 483 is part of Doc. 271], 485 [Pg. 485 is part of Doc. 272], 494 [Pg. 494 includes portions of Doc. 278 and Doc. 279], 515–516 [Pgs. 515–516 include portions of Doc. 298 and Doc. 299], 521 [Pg. 521 is part of Doc. 302], 523–524 [Pgs. 523–524 include portions of Doc. 303 and Doc. 304], 526 [Pg. 526 includes portions of Doc. 305 and Doc. 306], 536n [Pg. 536 is part of Doc. 312], 541–542 [Pgs. 541–542 include portions of Doc. 313 and Doc. 314], 559–560 [Pg. 559 is part of Doc. 320], 566 [Pg. 566 is part of Doc. 325], 570 [Pg. 570 is part of Doc. 328], 573 [Pg. 573 is part of Doc. 329], 577–578 [Pg. 577 is part of Doc. 330], 586 [Pg. 586 is part of Doc. 336], 592 [Pg. 592 includes portions of Doc. 339 and Doc. 340], 697 [Pg. 697 includes portions of Doc. 423 and Doc. 424]

Southeast Asian pact, question of inclusion in proposed, 37 [Pg. 37 is part of Doc. 4]

Soviet border incidents, 495–496 [Pgs. 495–496 include portions of Doc. 279, Doc. 280, and Doc. 281], 500–501 [Pgs. 500–501 include portions of Doc. 282, Doc. 283, Doc. 284, Doc. 285, and Doc. 286]

Soviet consulates, closure of, 496n [Pg. 496 includes portions of Doc. 280 and Doc. 281], 498–499 [Pg. 498 is part of Doc. 282]

Soviet-Iranian treaty of 1921, interpretation of, 491 [Pg. 491 is part of Doc. 277], 493 [Pg. 493 is part of Doc. 278], 498–500 [Pgs. 498–500 include portions of Doc. 282, Doc. 283, and Doc. 284], 503–505 [Pgs. 503–505 include portions of Doc. 286, Doc. 287, Doc. 288, and Doc. 289], 507–510 [Pgs. 507–510 include portions of Doc. 291, Doc. 292, Doc. 293, Doc. 294, and Doc. 295], 513–514 [Pgs. 513–514 include portions of Doc. 296, Doc. 297, and Doc. 298], 517 [Pg. 517 includes portions of Doc. 299 and Doc. 300], 531–535 [Pg. 531 is part of Doc. 311], 551 [Pg. 551 is part of Doc. 315], 554 [Pg. 554 is part of Doc. 316]

Soviet policy, 4–7 [Pg. 4 is part of Doc. 1], 39 [Pg. 39 is part of Doc. 4], 471 [Pg. 471 is part of Doc. 262], 473n [Pg. 473 is part of Doc. 263], 474–475 [Pgs. 474–475 include portions of Doc. 264 and Doc. 265], 480–481 [Pgs. 480–481 include portions of Doc. 269, Doc. 270, and Doc. 271], 484–485 [Pgs. 484–485 include portions of Doc. 271 and Doc. 272], 487 [Pg. 487 includes portions of Doc. 274 and Doc. 275], 489–502 [Pgs. 489–502 include portions of Doc. 276, Doc. 277, Doc. 278, Doc. 279, Doc. 280, Doc. 281, Doc. 282, Doc. 283, Doc. 284, Doc. 285, and Doc. 286], 516–517 [Pgs. 516–517 include portions of Doc. 298, Doc. 299, and Doc. 300], 519 [Pg. 519 includes portions of Doc. 301 and Doc. 302], 522–524 [Pgs. 522–524 include portions of Doc. 302, Doc. 303, and Doc. 304], 543 [Pg. 543 is part of Doc. 314], 545–551 [Pgs. 545–551 include portions of Doc. 314 and Doc. 315], 553–555 [Pgs. 553–555 include portions of Doc. 316 and Doc. 317], 572 [Pg. 572 is part of Doc. 329], 581 [Pg. 581 includes portions of Doc. 332 and Doc. 333], 590 [Pg. 590 is part of Doc. 339], 1655 [Pg. 1655 is part of Doc. 1148]

Tudeh Party (Communist), outlawry of, 478n [Pg. 478 includes portions of Doc. 267, Doc. 268, and Doc. 269], 481n [Pg. 481 includes portions of Doc. 270 and Doc. 271], 482 [Pg. 482 is part of Doc. 271], 486 [Pg. 486 is part of Doc. 273], 489 [Pg. 489 includes portions of Doc. 276 and Doc. 277], 490n [Pg. 490 is part of Doc. 277], 549 [Pg. 549 is part of Doc. 315]

Turkey, relations with, 502 [Pg. 502 is part of Doc. 286], 507 [Pg. 507 includes portions of Doc. 291, Doc. 292, and Doc. 293], 575–576 [Pg. 575 is part of Doc. 330], 579 [Pg. 579 includes portions of Doc. 330 and Doc. 331], 1642–1643 [Pgs. 1642–1643 include portions of Doc. 1141, Doc. 1142, and Doc. 1143], 1667–1668 [Pg. 1667 is part of Doc. 1152], 1684 [Pg. 1684 is part of Doc. 1162]

U.N. General Assembly, Iranian question, 550–551 [Pg. 550 is part of Doc. 315]

U.N. Security Council: Iranian question, 475–476 [Pgs. 475–476 include portions of Doc. 264, Doc. 265, and Doc. 266], 481n [Pg. 481 includes portions of Doc. 270 and Doc. 271], 487 [Pg. 487 includes portions of Doc. 274 and Doc. 275], 490 [Pg. 490 is part of Doc. 277], 498–501 [Pgs. 498–501 include portions of Doc. 282, Doc. 283, Doc. 284, Doc. 285, and Doc. 286], 503 [Pg. 503 includes portions of Doc. 286 and Doc. 287], 509–510 [Pgs. 509–510 include portions of Doc. 294 and Doc. 295], 516–517 [Pgs. 516–517 include portions of Doc. 298, Doc. 299, and Doc. 300], 520–521 [Pg. 520 is part of Doc. 302], 531–535 [Pg. 531 is part of Doc. 311], 547 [Pg. 547 is part of Doc. 315], 550–551 [Pg. 550 is part of Doc. 315]; Soviet position, 498 [Pg. 498 is part of Doc. 282], 550–551 [Pg. 550 is part of Doc. 315]; U.S. position, 547 [Pg. 547 is part of Doc. 315]

U.S. Commission for Cultural Exchange between the United States and Iran, agreement establishing the, Sept. 1, 1949, 559 [Pg. 559 is part of Doc. 320]

U.S. economic and military assistance, 1–2 [Pg. 1 is part of Doc. 1], 4–5 [Pg. 4 is part of Doc. 1], 43 [Pg. 43 is part of Doc. 4], 45n [Pg. 45 includes portions of Doc. 4 and Doc. 5], 57 [Pg. 57 is part of Doc. 10], 70 [Pg. 70 is part of Doc. 12], 176 [Pg. 176 is part of Doc. 74], 471–474 [Pgs. 471–474 include portions of Doc. 262, Doc. 263, and Doc. 264], 475 [Pg. 475 includes portions of Doc. 264 and Doc. 265], 487–489 [Pgs. 487–489 include portions of Doc. 274, Doc. 275, Doc. 276, and Doc. 277], 492 [Pg. 492 includes portions of Doc. 277 and Doc. 278], 497 [Pg. 497 is part of Doc. 281], 501–506 [Pgs. 501–506 include portions of Doc. 284, Doc. 285, Doc. 286, Doc. 287, Doc. 288, Doc. 289, and Doc. 290], 511–512 [Pgs. 511–512 include portions of Doc. 295 and Doc. 296], 514–518 [Pgs. 514–518 include portions of Doc. 297, Doc. 298, Doc. 299, Doc. 300, and Doc. 301], 521 [Pg. 521 is part of Doc. 302], 523–526 [Pgs. 523–526 include portions of Doc. 303, Doc. 304, Doc. 305, and Doc. 306], 528 [Pg. 528 includes portions of Doc. 308 and Doc. 309], 536–545 [Pgs. 536–545 include portions of Doc. 312, Doc. 313, Doc. 314, and Doc. 315], 547–549 [Pg. 547 is part of Doc. 315], 552–567 [Pgs. 552–567 include portions of Doc. 316, Doc. 317, Doc. 318, Doc. 319, Doc. 320, Doc. 321, Doc. 322, Doc. 323, Doc. 324, Doc. 325, and Doc. 326], 569–593 [Pgs. 569–593 include portions of Doc. 327, Doc. 328, Doc. 329, Doc. 330, Doc. 331, Doc. 332, Doc. 333, Doc. 334, Doc. 335, Doc. 336, Doc. 337, Doc. 338, Doc. 339, and Doc. 340], 1616 [Pg. 1616 includes portions of Doc. 1122 and Doc. 1123], 1651 [Pg. 1651 is part of Doc. 1146]

U.S. Joint State-Defense Survey Group, 582–583 [Pgs. 582–583 include portions of Doc. 333, Doc. 334, and Doc. 335]

U.S. military missions, 490n [Pg. 490 is part of Doc. 277], 491–495 [Pgs. 491–495 include portions of Doc. 277, Doc. 278, Doc. 279, and Doc. 280], 497 [Pg. 497 is part of Doc. 281], 502 [Pg. 502 is part of Doc. 286], 522 [Pg. 522 includes portions of Doc. 302 and Doc. 303], 527n [Pg. 527 includes portions of Doc. 306 and Doc. 307], 529–530 [Pgs. 529–530 include portions of Doc. 309 and Doc. 310], 547 [Pg. 547 is part of Doc. 315], 554 [Pg. 554 is part of Doc. 316], 558 [Pg. 558 includes portions of Doc. 319 and Doc. 320], 568–569 [Pgs. 568–569 include portions of Doc. 326, Doc. 327, and Doc. 328], 582 [Pg. 582 includes portions of Doc. 333 and Doc. 334]

U.S. policy, 8 [Pg. 8 includes portions of Doc. 1, Doc. 2, and Doc. 3], 31 [Pg. 31 includes portions of Doc. 3 and Doc. 4], 34 [Pg. 34 is part of Doc. 4], 39 [Pg. 39 is part of Doc. 4], 44 [Pg. 44 is part of Doc. 4], 56 [Pg. 56 is part of Doc. 10], 473n [Pg. 473 is part of Doc. 263], 474–475 [Pgs. 474–475 include portions of Doc. 264 and Doc. 265], 485 [Pg. 485 is part of Doc. 272], 491 [Pg. 491 is part of Doc. 277], 494–495 [Pgs. 494–495 include portions of Doc. 278, Doc. 279, and Doc. 280], 498–501 [Pgs. 498–501 include portions of Doc. 282, Doc. 283, Doc. 284, Doc. 285, and Doc. 286], 510 [Pg. 510 includes portions of Doc. 294 and Doc. 295], 515 [Pg. 515 is part of Doc. 298], 522–523 [Pgs. 522–523 include portions of Doc. 302, Doc. 303, and Doc. 304], 545–555 [Pgs. 545–555 include portions of Doc. 314, Doc. 315, Doc. 316, and Doc. 317], 570–571 [Pg. 570 is part of Doc. 328], 578–580 [Pgs. 578–580 include portions of Doc. 330, Doc. 331, and Doc. 332], 583–585 [Pgs. 583–585 include portions of Doc. 334, Doc. 335, and Doc. 336], 592–593 [Pgs. 592–593 include portions of Doc. 339 and Doc. 340], 697 [Pg. 697 includes portions of Doc. 423 and Doc. 424]

U.S. security interests in, 43 [Pg. 43 is part of Doc. 4], 56–57 [Pg. 56 is part of Doc. 10], 453 [Pg. 453 is part of Doc. 249], 474 [Pg. 474 is part of Doc. 264], 552–553 [Pg. 552 is part of Doc. 316], 1650n [Pg. 1650 is part of Doc. 1146]

Visit to the United States by the Shah, 55 [Pg. 55 is part of Doc. 9], 486n [Pg. 486 is part of Doc. 273], 552 [Pg. 552 is part of Doc. 316], 558 [Pg. 558 includes portions of Doc. 319 and Doc. 320], 563–564 [Pgs. 563–564 include portions of Doc. 322 and Doc. 323], 567–592 [Pgs. 567–592 include portions of Doc. 325, Doc. 326, Doc. 327, Doc. 328, Doc. 329, Doc. 330, Doc. 331, Doc. 332, Doc. 333, Doc. 334, Doc. 335, Doc. 336, Doc. 337, Doc. 338, Doc. 339, and Doc. 340]

Iraq (see also Iraqi subheadings under Palestine question): Boundary questions, 92 [Pg. 92 is part of Doc. 14], 121 [Pg. 121 includes portions of Doc. 30 and Doc. 31], 135 [Pg. 135 includes portions of Doc. 44 and Doc. 45]

British arms, request for, 1057n [Pg. 1057 includes portions of Doc. 693, Doc. 694, and Doc. 695], 1092 [Pg. 1092 includes portions of Doc. 726 and Doc. 727], 1141 [Pg. 1141 includes portions of Doc. 764 and Doc. 765]

British policy, 181 [Pg. 181 includes portions of Doc. 76 and Doc. 77], 909 [Pg. 909 is part of Doc. 590], 1595 [Pg. 1595 is part of Doc. 1113]

Economic development, 78 [Pg. 78 is part of Doc. 12], 697 [Pg. 697 includes portions of Doc. 423 and Doc. 424], 940 [Pg. 940 is part of Doc. 608], 995 [Pg. 995 includes portions of Doc. 646 and Doc. 647], 1008n [Pg. 1008 includes portions of Doc. 657 and Doc. 658]

Euphrates development scheme, 51–52 [Pg. 51 is part of Doc. 8]

Greater Syria, attitude toward, 1579 [Pg. 1579 includes portions of Doc. 1104 and Doc. 1105], 1595 [Pg. 1595 is part of Doc. 1113], 1618 [Pg. 1618 is part of Doc. 1124], 1021 [Pg. 1021 includes portions of Doc. 664 and Doc. 665], 1623 [Pg. 1623 includes portions of Doc. 1126 and Doc. 1127]

Iran, relations with, 1512 [Pg. 1512 includes portions of Doc. 1047, Doc. 1048, and Doc. 1049]

Iraq Petroleum Company, negotiations concerning, 118–119 [Pgs. 118–119 include portions of Doc. 27, Doc. 28, and Doc. 29], 140 [Pg. 140 includes portions of Doc. 48 and Doc. 49], 141n [Pg. 141 includes portions of Doc. 49 and Doc. 50], 150 [Pg. 150 includes portions of Doc. 57 and Doc. 58], 162 [Pg. 162 includes portions of Doc. 69 and Doc. 70]

Jews in Iraq, treatment of, 1527n [Pg. 1527 includes portions of Doc. 1060 and Doc. 1061]

Kurdish problem, 843n [Pg. 843 includes portions of Doc. 534 and Doc. 535], 953 [Pg. 953 is part of Doc. 613]

Kuwait, policy toward, 1567 [Pg. 1567 is part of Doc. 1096], 1571 [Pg. 1571 is part of Doc. 1097]

Palestinian refugees, 829 [Pg. 829 is part of Doc. 533], 842 [Pg. 842 includes portions of Doc. 533 and Doc. 534], 876 [Pg. 876 is part of Doc. 563], 907–908 [Pg. 907 is part of Doc. 590], 926 [Pg. 926 is part of Doc. 602], 935–936 [Pg. 935 is part of Doc. 608], 994–995 [Pgs. 994–995 include portions of Doc. 645, Doc. 646, and Doc. 647], 1008n [Pg. 1008 includes portions of Doc. 657 and Doc. 658], 1267 [Pg. 1267 is part of Doc. 870], 1376 [Pg. 1376 includes portions of Doc. 957 and Doc. 958], 1378 [Pg. 1378 is part of Doc. 958]

Petroleum pipeline concessions, 111 [Pg. 111 includes portions of Doc. 24 and Doc. 25]

Petroleum pipeline to Haifa, closure of, 80–81 [Pg. 80 is part of Doc. 12], 119 [Pg. 119 includes portions of Doc. 28 and Doc. 29], 137–140 [Pgs. 137–140 include portions of Doc. 46, Doc. 47, Doc. 48, and Doc. 49], 142–146 [Pgs. 142–146 include portions of Doc. 50, Doc. 51, Doc. 52, Doc. 53, and Doc. 54], 148–149 [Pgs. 148–149 include portions of Doc. 55, Doc. 56, and Doc. 57], 156 [Pg. 156 includes portions of Doc. 63, Doc. 64, and Doc. 65], 162–164 [Pgs. 162–164 include portions of Doc. 69 and Doc. 70], 1224 [Pg. 1224 is part of Doc. 828], 1346 [Pg. 1346 includes portions of Doc. 933 and Doc. 934], 1374 [Pg. 1374 includes portions of Doc. 954 and Doc. 955], 1377–1378 [Pg. 1377 is part of Doc. 958]

Soviet threat to, 474 [Pg. 474 is part of Doc. 264], 545 [Pg. 545 includes portions of Doc. 314 and Doc. 315]

Syria, proposed merger with, 55 [Pg. 55 is part of Doc. 9], 70 [Pg. 70 is part of Doc. 12], 166 [Pg. 166 is part of Doc. 71], 169n [Pg. 169 is part of Doc. 73], 174–175 [Pg. 174 is part of Doc. 73], 180–185 [Pgs. 180–185 include portions of Doc. 76, Doc. 77, Doc. 78, Doc. 79, and Doc. 80], 1440–1441 [Pgs. 1440–1441 include portions of Doc. 997 and Doc. 998], 1456 [Pg. 1456 includes portions of Doc. 1012 and Doc. 1013], 1482 [Pg. 1482 includes portions of Doc. 1027 and Doc. 1028], 1507n [Pg. 1507 is part of Doc. 1042], 1561 [Pg. 1561 includes portions of Doc. 1089 and Doc. 1090], 1619 [Pg. 1619 is part of Doc. 1124], 1621 [Pg. 1621 is part of Doc. 1125], 1627 [Pg. 1627 includes portions of Doc. 1129 and Doc. 1130]

Turkey, relations with, 1668 [Pg. 1668 is part of Doc. 1152], 1683 [Pg. 1683 is part of Doc. 1161]

U.S. policy, 31 [Pg. 31 includes portions of Doc. 3 and Doc. 4], 33 [Pg. 33 is part of Doc. 4]

U.S. technical assistance, proposed, 175 [Pg. 175 is part of Doc. 73]

Iraq Petroleum Company, 111 [Pg. 111 includes portions of Doc. 24 and Doc. 25], 118–119 [Pgs. 118–119 include portions of Doc. 27, Doc. 28, and Doc. 29], 137 [Pg. 137 includes portions of Doc. 46, Doc. 47, and Doc. 48], 139–140 [Pgs. 139–140 include portions of Doc. 48 and Doc. 49], 141n [Pg. 141 includes portions of Doc. 49 and Doc. 50], 142 [Pg. 142 includes portions of Doc. 50 and Doc. 51], 150 [Pg. 150 includes portions of Doc. 57 and Doc. 58], 162–163 [Pgs. 162–163 include portions of Doc. 69 and Doc. 70]

Ireland, 233 [Pg. 233 includes portions of Doc. 106 and Doc. 107]

Ireland, Philip W., 1781 [Pg. 1781 is part of Doc. 1235]

Ispahani, M.A.H., 1740 [Pg. 1740 includes portions of Doc. 1209 and Doc. 1210], 1744 [Pg. 1744 includes portions of Doc. 1211 and Doc. 1212], 1746 [Pg. 1746 is part of Doc. 1213]

Israel (see also Israeli subheadings under Palestine question): Australian policy, 694 [Pg. 694 includes portions of Doc. 419, Doc. 420, and Doc. 421]

Belgian policy, 694 [Pg. 694 includes portions of Doc. 419, Doc. 420, and Doc. 421]

British de facto recognition, 673–674 [Pg. 673 is part of Doc. 402], 676 [Pg. 676 is part of Doc. 403], 680 [Pg. 680 includes portions of Doc. 406 and Doc. 407], 691 [Pg. 691 includes portions of Doc. 417 and Doc. 418], 694–696 [Pgs. 694–696 include portions of Doc. 419, Doc. 420, Doc. 421, Doc. 422, and Doc. 423], 711–712 [Pgs. 711–712 include portions of Doc. 434, Doc. 435, and Doc. 436], 714 [Pg. 714 includes portions of Doc. 438 and Doc. 439]

British de jure recognition, 1058 [Pg. 1058 includes portions of Doc. 695 and Doc. 696]

British policy, 36 [Pg. 36 is part of Doc. 4], 680–681 [Pgs. 680–681 include portions of Doc. 406, Doc. 407, and Doc. 408], 684 [Pg. 684 includes portions of Doc. 409 and Doc. 410], 1011–1012 [Pg. 1011 is part of Doc. 659], 1523–1524 [Pgs. 1523–1524 include portions of Doc. 1058, Doc. 1059, and Doc. 1060]

Communist influence, 638 [Pg. 638 is part of Doc. 374], 657 [Pg. 657 is part of Doc. 391], 684 [Pg. 684 includes portions of Doc. 409 and Doc. 410], 722 [Pg. 722 includes portions of Doc. 446 and Doc. 447], 1011–1012 [Pg. 1011 is part of Doc. 659], 1194 [Pg. 1194 is part of Doc. 806], 1521–1522 [Pgs. 1521–1522 include portions of Doc. 1057 and Doc. 1058]

Elections, 614–615 [Pgs. 614–615 include portions of Doc. 355 and Doc. 356], 638 [Pg. 638 is part of Doc. 374], 645 [Pg. 645 is part of Doc. 382], 673–674 [Pg. 673 is part of Doc. 402], 681 [Pg. 681 includes portions of Doc. 407 and Doc. 408], 690 [Pg. 690 is part of Doc. 416], 702 [Pg. 702 includes portions of Doc. 427 and Doc. 428], 722 [Pg. 722 includes portions of Doc. 446 and Doc. 447], 759 [Pg. 759 includes portions of Doc. 476 and Doc. 477]

Export-Import Bank loan, 615 [Pg. 615 includes portions of Doc. 355 and Doc. 356], 647 [Pg. 647 includes portions of Doc. 382 and Doc. 383], 681 [Pg. 681 includes portions of Doc. 407 and Doc. 408], 693 [Pg. 693 is part of Doc. 419], 758 [Pg. 758 is part of Doc. 475], 964 [Pg. 964 includes portions of Doc. 622 and Doc. 623], 1062 [Pg. 1062 is part of Doc. 697], 1110 [Pg. 1110 includes portions of Doc. 741 and Doc. 742], 1236–1237 [Pgs. 1236–1237 include portions of Doc. 839 and Doc. 840], 1311–1313 [Pgs. 1311–1313 include portions of Doc. 906, Doc. 907, and Doc. 908], 1329–1330 [Pg. 1329 is part of Doc. 922], 1332 [Pg. 1332 is part of Doc. 924], 1375 [Pg. 1375 includes portions of Doc. 956 and Doc. 957], 1388–1389 [Pgs. 1388–1389 include portions of Doc. 963, Doc. 964, Doc. 965, and Doc. 966], 1433 [Pg. 1433 is part of Doc. 997], 1455–1456 [Pgs. 1455–1456 include portions of Doc. 1011, Doc. 1012, and Doc. 1013]

French de facto recognition, 691 [Pg. 691 includes portions of Doc. 417 and Doc. 418], 694–696 [Pgs. 694–696 include portions of Doc. 419, Doc. 420, Doc. 421, Doc. 422, and Doc. 423]

French policy, 1524 [Pg. 1524 includes portions of Doc. 1059 and Doc. 1060]

Indian policy, 694 [Pg. 694 includes portions of Doc. 419, Doc. 420, and Doc. 421]

Netherlands policy, 694 [Pg. 694 includes portions of Doc. 419, Doc. 420, and Doc. 421]

New Zealand policy, 694 [Pg. 694 includes portions of Doc. 419, Doc. 420, and Doc. 421]

Pakistan policy, 694 [Pg. 694 includes portions of Doc. 419, Doc. 420, and Doc. 421]

Security of, 598 [Pg. 598 includes portions of Doc. 344 and Doc. 345], 1074n [Pg. 1074 includes portions of Doc. 705 and Doc. 706], 1106 [Pg. 1106 is part of Doc. 736], 1124–1125 [Pgs. 1124–1125 include portions of Doc. 752 and Doc. 753], 1150 [Pg. 1150 is part of Doc. 772], 1153 [Pg. 1153 includes portions of Doc. 772 and Doc. 773], 1166 [Pg. 1166 includes portions of Doc. 785 and Doc. 786], 1172 [Pg. 1172 is part of Doc. 788], 1180 [Pg. 1180 is part of Doc. 793], 1208 [Pg. 1208 includes portions of Doc. 816 and Doc. 817], 1250–1251 [Pg. 1250 is part of Doc. 855], 1265 [Pg. 1265 is part of Doc. 868], 1281–1282 [Pgs. 1281–1282 include portions of Doc. 884 and Doc. 885], 1297 [Pg. 1297 includes portions of Doc. 896 and Doc. 897], 1308 [Pg. 1308 includes portions of Doc. 904 and Doc. 905], 1319 [Pg. 1319 includes portions of Doc. 912 and Doc. 913], 1325 [Pg. 1325 is part of Doc. 918], 1440 [Pg. 1440 includes portions of Doc. 997 and Doc. 998]

Soviet policy, 656–657 [Pgs. 656–657 include portions of Doc. 390 and Doc. 391], 1011 [Pg. 1011 is part of Doc. 659]

Soviet Union, relations with, 44 [Pg. 44 is part of Doc. 4], 1011–1012 [Pg. 1011 is part of Doc. 659]

Sri Lanka policy, 694 [Pg. 694 includes portions of Doc. 419, Doc. 420, and Doc. 421]

Turkish de facto recognition, 1668 [Pg. 1668 is part of Doc. 1152]

U.N. membership, 597 [Pg. 597 is part of Doc. 344], 758 [Pg. 758 is part of Doc. 475], 766 [Pg. 766 includes portions of Doc. 481, Doc. 482, Doc. 483, and Doc. 484], 774 [Pg. 774 includes portions of Doc. 490 and Doc. 491], 789 [Pg. 789 includes portions of Doc. 503, Doc. 504, and Doc. 505], 943–946 [Pgs. 943–946 include portions of Doc. 608, Doc. 609, and Doc. 610], 947n [Pg. 947 includes portions of Doc. 610 and Doc. 611], 954 [Pg. 954 includes portions of Doc. 613 and Doc. 614], 968 [Pg. 968 includes portions of Doc. 627 and Doc. 628], 973–974 [Pgs. 973–974 include portions of Doc. 631 and Doc. 632], 979n [Pg. 979 is part of Doc. 636], 988 [Pg. 988 is part of Doc. 641], 995–997 [Pgs. 995–997 include portions of Doc. 646, Doc. 647, and Doc. 648], 1003–1005 [Pgs. 1003–1005 include portions of Doc. 652, Doc. 653, Doc. 654, Doc. 655, and Doc. 656], 1008 [Pg. 1008 includes portions of Doc. 657 and Doc. 658], 1019 [Pg. 1019 is part of Doc. 663], 1021 [Pg. 1021 includes portions of Doc. 664 and Doc. 665], 1103 [Pg. 1103 is part of Doc. 736], 1113 [Pg. 1113 is part of Doc. 744], 1125 [Pg. 1125 is part of Doc. 753], 1129 [Pg. 1129 is part of Doc. 756], 1160–1161 [Pgs. 1160–1161 include portions of Doc. 780 and Doc. 781], 1176 [Pg. 1176 is part of Doc. 790], 1433 [Pg. 1433 is part of Doc. 997]

U.S. arms shipments, request for, 1527 [Pg. 1527 includes portions of Doc. 1060 and Doc. 1061]

U.S. de facto recognition, May 14, 1948, 703 [Pg. 703 includes portions of Doc. 428 and Doc. 429], 719 [Pg. 719 is part of Doc. 444], 759 [Pg. 759 includes portions of Doc. 476 and Doc. 477], 1009 [Pg. 1009 is part of Doc. 659], 1011 [Pg. 1011 is part of Doc. 659], 1432–1433 [Pg. 1432 is part of Doc. 997]

U.S. de jure recognition, 615 [Pg. 615 includes portions of Doc. 355 and Doc. 356], 648 [Pg. 648 is part of Doc. 383], 673–674 [Pg. 673 is part of Doc. 402], 693 [Pg. 693 is part of Doc. 419], 702–703 [Pgs. 702–703 include portions of Doc. 427, Doc. 428, and Doc. 429], 713 [Pg. 713 includes portions of Doc. 436, Doc. 437, and Doc. 438], 715n [Pg. 715 includes portions of Doc. 439 and Doc. 440], 758–759 [Pgs. 758–759 include portions of Doc. 475, Doc. 476, and Doc. 477], 769 [Pg. 769 includes portions of Doc. 486 and Doc. 487], 1009 [Pg. 1009 is part of Doc. 659]

U.S. economic and financial assistance, 615 [Pg. 615 includes portions of Doc. 355 and Doc. 356]

U.S. military assistance and training, 757 [Pg. 757 includes portions of Doc. 474 and Doc. 475], 856n [Pg. 856 includes portions of Doc. 544 and Doc. 545], 898–899 [Pgs. 898–899 include portions of Doc. 582, Doc. 583, Doc. 584, and Doc. 585], 1062 [Pg. 1062 is part of Doc. 697], 1087–1089 [Pgs. 1087–1089 include portions of Doc. 721 and Doc. 722], 1110 [Pg. 1110 includes portions of Doc. 741 and Doc. 742], 1116 [Pg. 1116 is part of Doc. 747], 1263 [Pg. 1263 is part of Doc. 866], 1523–1524 [Pgs. 1523–1524 include portions of Doc. 1058, Doc. 1059, and Doc. 1060]

U.S. policy, 31 [Pg. 31 includes portions of Doc. 3 and Doc. 4], 33–34 [Pg. 33 is part of Doc. 4], 36 [Pg. 36 is part of Doc. 4], 43–44 [Pg. 43 is part of Doc. 4], 55–58 [Pgs. 55–58 include portions of Doc. 9 and Doc. 10], 172 [Pg. 172 is part of Doc. 73], 758 [Pg. 758 is part of Doc. 475], 770 [Pg. 770 is part of Doc. 488], 798 [Pg. 798 includes portions of Doc. 507 and Doc. 508], 878 [Pg. 878 includes portions of Doc. 563 and Doc. 564], 880 [Pg. 880 is part of Doc. 566], 918 [Pg. 918 includes portions of Doc. 595 and Doc. 596], 1009 [Pg. 1009 is part of Doc. 659], 1052–1053 [Pgs. 1052–1053 include portions of Doc. 689 and Doc. 690], 1062–1063 [Pgs. 1062–1063 include portions of Doc. 697 and Doc. 698], 1073–1075 [Pgs. 1073–1075 include portions of Doc. 705, Doc. 706, and Doc. 707], 1077 [Pg. 1077 is part of Doc. 710], 1089 [Pg. 1089 is part of Doc. 722], 1095 [Pg. 1095 includes portions of Doc. 729 and Doc. 730], 1099 [Pg. 1099 is part of Doc. 733], 1107 [Pg. 1107 is part of Doc. 737], 1109–1110 [Pgs. 1109–1110 include portions of Doc. 739, Doc. 740, Doc. 741, and Doc. 742], 1115 [Pg. 1115 includes portions of Doc. 745, Doc. 746, and Doc. 747], 1121n [Pg. 1121 is part of Doc. 750], 1148 [Pg. 1148 is part of Doc. 772], 1166–1167 [Pgs. 1166–1167 include portions of Doc. 785, Doc. 786, and Doc. 787], 1176 [Pg. 1176 is part of Doc. 790], 1197 [Pg. 1197 is part of Doc. 809], 1204 [Pg. 1204 is part of Doc. 813], 1236 [Pg. 1236 is part of Doc. 839], 1272 [Pg. 1272 includes portions of Doc. 874 and Doc. 875], 1305–1308 [Pgs. 1305–1308 include portions of Doc. 904 and Doc. 905], 1310 [Pg. 1310 is part of Doc. 906], 1323 [Pg. 1323 includes portions of Doc. 916, Doc. 917, and Doc. 918], 1375 [Pg. 1375 includes portions of Doc. 956 and Doc. 957], 1430–1440 [Pgs. 1430–1440 include portions of Doc. 995, Doc. 996, Doc. 997, and Doc. 998], 1586 [Pg. 1586 is part of Doc. 1110], 1668n [Pg. 1668 is part of Doc. 1152]

U.S. strategic interests in, 1009–1012 [Pg. 1009 is part of Doc. 659]

World Health Organization membership, proposed, 147–148 [Pgs. 147–148 include portions of Doc. 54 and Doc. 55]

Italian colonies, disposition of former, 32 [Pg. 32 is part of Doc. 4], 55 [Pg. 55 is part of Doc. 9], 59 [Pg. 59 includes portions of Doc. 10 and Doc. 11], 71–76 [Pg. 71 is part of Doc. 12], 78 [Pg. 78 is part of Doc. 12], 209 [Pg. 209 is part of Doc. 96], 302 [Pg. 302 is part of Doc. 149], 331 [Pg. 331 is part of Doc. 165], 414n [Pg. 414 includes portions of Doc. 218 and Doc. 219]

Italian Somaliland, disposition of, 71–72 [Pg. 71 is part of Doc. 12], 74 [Pg. 74 is part of Doc. 12], 88 [Pg. 88 is part of Doc. 12]

Italy, 34 [Pg. 34 is part of Doc. 4], 39 [Pg. 39 is part of Doc. 4], 233 [Pg. 233 includes portions of Doc. 106 and Doc. 107], 277 [Pg. 277 is part of Doc. 133], 287 [Pg. 287 includes portions of Doc. 138 and Doc. 139], 338 [Pg. 338 is part of Doc. 169], 483 [Pg. 483 is part of Doc. 271], 447 [Pg. 447 includes portions of Doc. 244, Doc. 245, and Doc. 246], 453 [Pg. 453 is part of Doc. 249], 774 [Pg. 774 includes portions of Doc. 490 and Doc. 491], 1491 [Pg. 1491 includes portions of Doc. 1032 and Doc. 1033], 1648 [Pg. 1648 is part of Doc. 1146], 1651 [Pg. 1651 is part of Doc. 1146], 1669 [Pg. 1669 is part of Doc. 1152]

Jabbar, Ahmed Abdul, 1350 [Pg. 1350 includes portions of Doc. 936 and Doc. 937], 1352–1353 [Pg. 1352 is part of Doc. 937]

Jabr, Saleh, 143n [Pg. 143 is part of Doc. 51]

Japan, 52–53 [Pg. 52 is part of Doc. 8]

Japanese peace treaty, 53 [Pg. 53 is part of Doc. 8]

Jamali, Muhammad Fadil, 846n [Pg. 846 includes portions of Doc. 536 and Doc. 537], 873n [Pg. 873 includes portions of Doc. 560 and Doc. 561], 994 [Pg. 994 includes portions of Doc. 645 and Doc. 646]

Jebb, Sir Gladwyn, 414 [Pg. 414 includes portions of Doc. 218 and Doc. 219]

Jehovah’s Witnesses, 259–260 [Pgs. 259–260 include portions of Doc. 124, Doc. 125, and Doc. 126]

Jellicoe, Lord, 298n [Pg. 298 includes portions of Doc. 146 and Doc. 147], 356 [Pg. 356 is part of Doc. 180], 381–383 [Pgs. 381–383 include portions of Doc. 199 and Doc. 200], 412–414 [Pgs. 412–414 include portions of Doc. 216, Doc. 217, Doc. 218, and Doc. 219], 423n [Pg. 423 includes portions of Doc. 225 and Doc. 226], 1681–1682 [Pgs. 1681–1682 include portions of Doc. 1160 and Doc. 1161]

Jenkins, Maj. Gen. Reuben A., 373 [Pg. 373 is part of Doc. 194]

Jenkins, William L., 636 [Pg. 636 is part of Doc. 373], 693–694 [Pgs. 693–694 include portions of Doc. 419, Doc. 420, and Doc. 421]

Jernegan, John D., 1 [Pg. 1 is part of Doc. 1], 6n [Pg. 6 is part of Doc. 1], 122 [Pg. 122 includes portions of Doc. 31 and Doc. 32], 124 [Pg. 124 is part of Doc. 32], 260–261 [Pgs. 260–261 include portions of Doc. 125 and Doc. 126], 287 [Pg. 287 includes portions of Doc. 138 and Doc. 139], 389–392 [Pgs. 389–392 include portions of Doc. 204, Doc. 205, Doc. 206, and Doc. 207], 401–404 [Pgs. 401–404 include portions of Doc. 213, Doc. 214, and Doc. 215], 412 [Pg. 412 includes portions of Doc. 216, Doc. 217, and Doc. 218], 413n [Pg. 413 is part of Doc. 218], 414 [Pg. 414 includes portions of Doc. 218 and Doc. 219], 434–436 [Pgs. 434–436 include portions of Doc. 236, Doc. 237, and Doc. 238], 445–447 [Pgs. 445–447 include portions of Doc. 243, Doc. 244, Doc. 245, and Doc. 246], 472 [Pg. 472 includes portions of Doc. 262 and Doc. 263], 488 [Pg. 488 includes portions of Doc. 275 and Doc. 276], 504n [Pg. 504 includes portions of Doc. 287 and Doc. 288], 520n [Pg. 520 is part of Doc. 302], 529n [Pg. 529 includes portions of Doc. 309 and Doc. 310], 557n [Pg. 557 includes portions of Doc. 317 and Doc. 318], 562–563 [Pgs. 562–563 include portions of Doc. 321, Doc. 322, and Doc. 323], 574 [Pg. 574 includes portions of Doc. 329 and Doc. 330], 579–581 [Pgs. 579–581 include portions of Doc. 330, Doc. 331, Doc. 332, and Doc. 333], 588n [Pg. 588 includes portions of Doc. 336 and Doc. 337], 1681–1684 [Pgs. 1681–1684 include portions of Doc. 1160, Doc. 1161, and Doc. 1162]

Jessup, Philip C., 50 [Pg. 50 is part of Doc. 8], 301–302 [Pgs. 301–302 include portions of Doc. 148 and Doc. 149], 414 [Pg. 414 includes portions of Doc. 218 and Doc. 219], 416 [Pg. 416 includes portions of Doc. 219 and Doc. 220], 612 [Pg. 612 is part of Doc. 354], 623–625 [Pgs. 623–625 include portions of Doc. 363, Doc. 364, and Doc. 365], 659 [Pg. 659 is part of Doc. 392], 661 [Pg. 661 includes portions of Doc. 392 and Doc. 393], 712 [Pg. 712 includes portions of Doc. 435 and Doc. 436], 724 [Pg. 724 is part of Doc. 448], 727 [Pg. 727 includes portions of Doc. 450 and Doc. 451], 742 [Pg. 742 includes portions of Doc. 459 and Doc. 460], 770 [Pg. 770 is part of Doc. 488], 873 [Pg. 873 includes portions of Doc. 560 and Doc. 561], 878–881 [Pgs. 878–881 include portions of Doc. 563, Doc. 564, Doc. 565, and Doc. 566], 902 [Pg. 902 includes portions of Doc. 586 and Doc. 587], 962 [Pg. 962 includes portions of Doc. 621 and Doc. 622], 1081 [Pg. 1081 is part of Doc. 715], 1084 [Pg. 1084 includes portions of Doc. 718 and Doc. 719], 1144 [Pg. 1144 includes portions of Doc. 768 and Doc. 769], 1320 [Pg. 1320 is part of Doc. 913], 1326 [Pg. 1326 includes portions of Doc. 918 and Doc. 919], 1376 [Pg. 1376 includes portions of Doc. 957 and Doc. 958], 1448–1449 [Pgs. 1448–1449 include portions of Doc. 1002, Doc. 1003, Doc. 1004, and Doc. 1005], 1489 [Pg. 1489 is part of Doc. 1031], 1752 [Pg. 1752 includes portions of Doc. 1216 and Doc. 1217], 1754–1756 [Pg. 1754 is part of Doc. 1217]

Jewish Agency, 842 [Pg. 842 includes portions of Doc. 533 and Doc. 534], 981n [Pg. 981 is part of Doc. 638]

Joannides, Yiannis, 250 [Pg. 250 is part of Doc. 119], 252 [Pg. 252 is part of Doc. 119]

Johnson, Louis: Asia, U.S. policy toward, 11n [Pg. 11 is part of Doc. 3]

Egyptian participation in Anglo-American military staff talks, proposed, 194n [Pg. 194 includes portions of Doc. 87 and Doc. 88], 203 [Pg. 203 is part of Doc. 92], 205n [Pg. 205 includes portions of Doc. 92, Doc. 93, and Doc. 94], 206–207 [Pgs. 206–207 include portions of Doc. 94 and Doc. 95]

Greece: British troops, proposed withdrawal of, 447n [Pg. 447 includes portions of Doc. 244, Doc. 245, and Doc. 246]; U.S. military assistance, 277n [Pg. 277 is part of Doc. 133]

Israel: U.S. military technical assistance, request for, 898 [Pg. 898 includes portions of Doc. 582 and Doc. 583], 1087–1089 [Pgs. 1087–1089 include portions of Doc. 721 and Doc. 722]; U.S. policy, 1323 [Pg. 1323 includes portions of Doc. 916, Doc. 917, and Doc. 918]; U.S. strategic interests in, 1009 [Pg. 1009 is part of Doc. 659]

Mutual Defense Assistance Act of 1949, 48 [Pg. 48 includes portions of Doc. 6 and Doc. 7]

Palestine refugees, 971 [Pg. 971 is part of Doc. 631], 1134–1135 [Pgs. 1134–1135 include portions of Doc. 760 and Doc. 761], 1202 [Pg. 1202 includes portions of Doc. 810, Doc. 811, and Doc. 812], 1557 [Pg. 1557 is part of Doc. 1086]

Turkey: British-American aerial mapping mission, proposed, 1671–1672 [Pgs. 1671–1672 include portions of Doc. 1153 and Doc. 1154], 1681 [Pg. 1681 is part of Doc. 1160]; U.S. air facilities, 1645 [Pg. 1645 is part of Doc. 1144], 1655 [Pg. 1655 is part of Doc. 1148]; U.S. military assistance, 42 [Pg. 42 is part of Doc. 4], 277n [Pg. 277 is part of Doc. 133]

Joint Chiefs of Staff: Anglo-American military staff talks on the Middle East, proposed, 207 [Pg. 207 includes portions of Doc. 94 and Doc. 95]

Anglo-Egyptian military staff talks, 217–219 [Pgs. 217–219 include portions of Doc. 96, Doc. 97, and Doc. 98]

Arab states, U.S. policy toward, 1339 [Pg. 1339 includes portions of Doc. 930 and Doc. 931]

Eastern Mediterranean and Middle East, U.S. security interests in, 40–42 [Pg. 40 is part of Doc. 4], 270–271 [Pg. 270 is part of Doc. 133], 677 [Pg. 677 includes portions of Doc. 404 and Doc. 405], 1011–1012 [Pg. 1011 is part of Doc. 659]

Egypt, defense of, 204 [Pg. 204 is part of Doc. 92]

Greece: British troops, proposed withdrawal of, 437n [Pg. 437 is part of Doc. 239], 445–447 [Pgs. 445–447 include portions of Doc. 243, Doc. 244, Doc. 245, and Doc. 246]; Greek army, size of, 235 [Pg. 235 includes portions of Doc. 107, Doc. 108, and Doc. 109], 287 [Pg. 287 includes portions of Doc. 138 and Doc. 139], 290 [Pg. 290 includes portions of Doc. 140 and Doc. 141], 301 [Pg. 301 includes portions of Doc. 148 and Doc. 149]; U.S. military assistance, 42–43 [Pg. 42 is part of Doc. 4], 462 [Pg. 462 includes portions of Doc. 255 and Doc. 256], 464 [Pg. 464 is part of Doc. 257], 1638 [Pg. 1638 includes portions of Doc. 1139 and Doc. 1140]; U.S. strategic interests in, 245 [Pg. 245 includes portions of Doc. 115, Doc. 116, and Doc. 117], 271–272 [Pg. 271 is part of Doc. 133], 1638 [Pg. 1638 includes portions of Doc. 1139 and Doc. 1140]

Iran, U.S. military assistance for, 572 [Pg. 572 is part of Doc. 329], 581–582 [Pgs. 581–582 include portions of Doc. 332, Doc. 333, and Doc. 334], 584 [Pg. 584 is part of Doc. 335], 585n [Pg. 585 includes portions of Doc. 335 and Doc. 336], 590 [Pg. 590 is part of Doc. 339]

Israel: U.S. military technical assistance, 1087–1089 [Pgs. 1087–1089 include portions of Doc. 721 and Doc. 722]; U.S. policy, 43–44 [Pg. 43 is part of Doc. 4], 1339 [Pg. 1339 includes portions of Doc. 930 and Doc. 931]; U.S. strategic interests in, 1009–1012 [Pg. 1009 is part of Doc. 659]

Military assistance program, 277 [Pg. 277 is part of Doc. 133]

Palestinian refugees, problems concerning, 677 [Pg. 677 includes portions of Doc. 404 and Doc. 405], 698 [Pg. 698 includes portions of Doc. 424 and Doc. 425], 833 [Pg. 833 is part of Doc. 533], 971 [Pg. 971 is part of Doc. 631], 973 [Pg. 973 includes portions of Doc. 631 and Doc. 632], 1134 [Pg. 1134 is part of Doc. 760], 1557 [Pg. 1557 is part of Doc. 1086]

Saudi Arabia: Dhahran airbase agreement, 1579–1580 [Pgs. 1579–1580 include portions of Doc. 1104, Doc. 1105, and Doc. 1106], 1626 [Pg. 1626 is part of Doc. 1129]; U.S. policy, 43 [Pg. 43 is part of Doc. 4], 46 [Pg. 46 is part of Doc. 5]

South Asia, U.S. policy toward, 9 [Pg. 9 is part of Doc. 3], 12 [Pg. 12 is part of Doc. 3], 28–31 [Pgs. 28–31 include portions of Doc. 3 and Doc. 4], 41 [Pg. 41 is part of Doc. 4]

Surplus arms credit program, 558 [Pg. 558 includes portions of Doc. 319 and Doc. 320]

Turkey: U.S. air facilities and aviation gas stockpile, 1645 [Pg. 1645 is part of Doc. 1144], 1655 [Pg. 1655 is part of Doc. 1148]; U.S. military assistance, 42n [Pg. 42 is part of Doc. 4], 1638 [Pg. 1638 includes portions of Doc. 1139 and Doc. 1140], 1641 [Pg. 1641 is part of Doc. 1141]; U.S. strategic interests in, 245 [Pg. 245 includes portions of Doc. 115, Doc. 116, and Doc. 117], 271–272 [Pg. 271 is part of Doc. 133], 1638 [Pg. 1638 includes portions of Doc. 1139 and Doc. 1140]

U.N. observers in Palestine, U.S. support for, 865 [Pg. 865 is part of Doc. 552]

Jones, E. E., 120n [Pg. 120 includes portions of Doc. 29 and Doc. 30], 122–123 [Pgs. 122–123 include portions of Doc. 31 and Doc. 32], 139n [Pg. 139 is part of Doc. 48]

Jones, G. Lewis, 91 [Pg. 91 is part of Doc. 14], 195 [Pg. 195 includes portions of Doc. 88 and Doc. 89], 723n [Pg. 723 includes portions of Doc. 447 and Doc. 448], 742n [Pg. 742 includes portions of Doc. 459 and Doc. 460], 906–910 [Pgs. 906–910 include portions of Doc. 589, Doc. 590, and Doc. 591], 1057n [Pg. 1057 includes portions of Doc. 693, Doc. 694, and Doc. 695], 1063n [Pg. 1063 includes portions of Doc. 697 and Doc. 698], 1571 [Pg. 1571 is part of Doc. 1097]

Jones, Malcolm H., 567–568 [Pgs. 567–568 include portions of Doc. 325, Doc. 326, and Doc. 327]

Jordan (see also Jordanian subheadings under Palestine question): British arms shipments, 850 [Pg. 850 is part of Doc. 540], 1056 [Pg. 1056 includes portions of Doc. 691, Doc. 692, and Doc. 693], 1057n [Pg. 1057 includes portions of Doc. 693, Doc. 694, and Doc. 695], 1078 [Pg. 1078 includes portions of Doc. 710 and Doc. 711], 1081 [Pg. 1081 is part of Doc. 715], 1092 [Pg. 1092 includes portions of Doc. 726 and Doc. 727], 1099 [Pg. 1099 is part of Doc. 733], 1141 [Pg. 1141 includes portions of Doc. 764 and Doc. 765], 1143–1144 [Pgs. 1143–1144 include portions of Doc. 767, Doc. 768, and Doc. 769], 1153 [Pg. 1153 includes portions of Doc. 772 and Doc. 773]

British controlled air facilities, 32 [Pg. 32 is part of Doc. 4]

British loan, 68 [Pg. 68 is part of Doc. 12], 907–908 [Pg. 907 is part of Doc. 590], 910 [Pg. 910 includes portions of Doc. 590 and Doc. 591], 940 [Pg. 940 is part of Doc. 608], 991 [Pg. 991 is part of Doc. 643], 1416 [Pg. 1416 is part of Doc. 984], 1563 [Pg. 1563 includes portions of Doc. 1092 and Doc. 1093]

British policy, 51 [Pg. 51 is part of Doc. 8], 180 [Pg. 180 is part of Doc. 76], 807 [Pg. 807 is part of Doc. 515], 832 [Pg. 832 is part of Doc. 533], 1595 [Pg. 1595 is part of Doc. 1113]

British troops at Aqaba, 220 [Pg. 220 includes portions of Doc. 98 and Doc. 99], 613 [Pg. 613 is part of Doc. 354], 633–634 [Pgs. 633–634 include portions of Doc. 371 and Doc. 372], 637 [Pg. 637 includes portions of Doc. 373 and Doc. 374], 639 [Pg. 639 includes portions of Doc. 374 and Doc. 375], 645–646 [Pg. 645 is part of Doc. 382], 648 [Pg. 648 is part of Doc. 383], 659 [Pg. 659 is part of Doc. 392], 687 [Pg. 687 includes portions of Doc. 413 and Doc. 414], 722 [Pg. 722 includes portions of Doc. 446 and Doc. 447], 752 [Pg. 752 includes portions of Doc. 468 and Doc. 469], 812–813 [Pgs. 812–813 include portions of Doc. 518 and Doc. 519], 822–823 [Pgs. 822–823 include portions of Doc. 529 and Doc. 530], 854–855 [Pg. 854 is part of Doc. 544], 868–869 [Pgs. 868–869 include portions of Doc. 555 and Doc. 556]

Economic development, 78 [Pg. 78 is part of Doc. 12]

Greater Syria, attitude toward, 183n [Pg. 183 is part of Doc. 78], 649 [Pg. 649 includes portions of Doc. 383 and Doc. 384], 666 [Pg. 666 includes portions of Doc. 396 and Doc. 397], 882 [Pg. 882 is part of Doc. 567], 1456 [Pg. 1456 includes portions of Doc. 1012 and Doc. 1013], 1578n [Pg. 1578 includes portions of Doc. 1103 and Doc. 1104], 1579 [Pg. 1579 includes portions of Doc. 1104 and Doc. 1105], 1595 [Pg. 1595 is part of Doc. 1113], 1618 [Pg. 1618 is part of Doc. 1124], 1621 [Pg. 1621 is part of Doc. 1125], 1623 [Pg. 1623 includes portions of Doc. 1126 and Doc. 1127]

Palestinian refugees, 51 [Pg. 51 is part of Doc. 8], 829 [Pg. 829 is part of Doc. 533], 837 [Pg. 837 is part of Doc. 533], 841–842 [Pgs. 841–842 include portions of Doc. 533 and Doc. 534], 857 [Pg. 857 includes portions of Doc. 545 and Doc. 546], 897 [Pg. 897 includes portions of Doc. 581 and Doc. 582], 907–908 [Pg. 907 is part of Doc. 590], 935–938 [Pg. 935 is part of Doc. 608] 963 [Pg. 963 is part of Doc. 622], 964n [Pg. 964 includes portions of Doc. 622 and Doc. 623], 969 [Pg. 969 includes portions of Doc. 628 and Doc. 629], 984–985 [Pg. 984 is part of Doc. 640], 1007 [Pg. 1007 includes portions of Doc. 656 and Doc. 657], 1008n [Pg. 1008 includes portions of Doc. 657 and Doc. 658], 1014 [Pg. 1014 is part of Doc. 660], 1186n [Pg. 1186 includes portions of Doc. 798 and Doc. 799], 1206–1207 [Pgs. 1206–1207 include portions of Doc. 814, Doc. 815, and Doc. 816], 1231n [Pg. 1231 includes portions of Doc. 834 and Doc. 835], 1247–1248 [Pgs. 1247–1248 include portions of Doc. 851 and Doc. 852], 1267 [Pg. 1267 is part of Doc. 870], 1317 [Pg. 1317 is part of Doc. 911], 1337 [Pg. 1337 includes portions of Doc. 928 and Doc. 929], 1354 [Pg. 1354 includes portions of Doc. 937 and Doc. 938], 1416 [Pg. 1416 is part of Doc. 984], 1425 [Pg. 1425 is part of Doc. 993], 1464 [Pg. 1464 is part of Doc. 1018], 1474 [Pg. 1474 is part of Doc. 1025], 1503 [Pg. 1503 is part of Doc. 1039]

Turkey, relations with, 1668 [Pg. 1668 is part of Doc. 1152]

U.N. membership, proposed, 676 [Pg. 676 is part of Doc. 403], 774 [Pg. 774 includes portions of Doc. 490 and Doc. 491]

U.S. Air Force, overflights, 33 [Pg. 33 is part of Doc. 4]

U.S. policy, 31 [Pg. 31 includes portions of Doc. 3 and Doc. 4], 1284–1285 [Pgs. 1284–1285 include portions of Doc. 886, Doc. 887, and Doc. 888]

U.S. recognition, 648 [Pg. 648 is part of Doc. 383], 673 [Pg. 673 is part of Doc. 402], 676 [Pg. 676 is part of Doc. 403], 702–703 [Pgs. 702–703 include portions of Doc. 427, Doc. 428, and Doc. 429], 713 [Pg. 713 includes portions of Doc. 436, Doc. 437, and Doc. 438], 722 [Pg. 722 includes portions of Doc. 446 and Doc. 447], 769 [Pg. 769 includes portions of Doc. 486 and Doc. 487]

Jundi, Col. Ahmed Sidgi el-, 785n [Pg. 785 includes portions of Doc. 499 and Doc. 500], 817 [Pg. 817 includes portions of Doc. 522, Doc. 523, and Doc. 524]

Kamel Bey, 636–637 [Pgs. 636–637 include portions of Doc. 373 and Doc. 374], 706 [Pg. 706 is part of Doc. 430], 709 [Pg. 709 is part of Doc. 432], 1115–1117 [Pgs. 1115–1117 include portions of Doc. 745, Doc. 746, Doc. 747, and Doc. 748], 1179–1180 [Pgs. 1179–1180 include portions of Doc. 792 and Doc. 793]

Kanellopoulos, Panayotis, 233 [Pg. 233 includes portions of Doc. 106 and Doc. 107], 241n [Pg. 241 is part of Doc. 114], 245n [Pg. 245 includes portions of Doc. 115, Doc. 116, and Doc. 117], 246–247 [Pg. 246 is part of Doc. 117], 259–260 [Pgs. 259–260 include portions of Doc. 124, Doc. 125, and Doc. 126], 310 [Pg. 310 is part of Doc. 151], 358–359 [Pgs. 358–359 include portions of Doc. 181 and Doc. 182], 382 [Pg. 382 is part of Doc. 200], 385–386 [Pgs. 385–386 include portions of Doc. 201 and Doc. 202], 418n [Pg. 418 includes portions of Doc. 221 and Doc. 222], 428 [Pg. 428 includes portions of Doc. 230, Doc. 231, and Doc. 232]

Kaplan, Eliezer, 967 [Pg. 967 includes portions of Doc. 626 and Doc. 627], 1425 [Pg. 1425 is part of Doc. 993]

Kardelj, Edvard, 355 [Pg. 355 includes portions of Doc. 178 and Doc. 179], 363 [Pg. 363 includes portions of Doc. 185 and Doc. 186], 368–369 [Pgs. 368–369 include portions of Doc. 190 and Doc. 191]

Kashmir dispute between India and Pakistan: British position, 1688 [Pg. 1688 is part of Doc. 1166], 1690–1691 [Pgs. 1690–1691 include portions of Doc. 1168, Doc. 1169, Doc. 1170, and Doc. 1171], 1708–1710 [Pgs. 1708–1710 include portions of Doc. 1186, Doc. 1187, and Doc. 1188], 1720 [Pg. 1720 includes portions of Doc. 1194 and Doc. 1195], 1722 [Pg. 1722 includes portions of Doc. 1196 and Doc. 1197], 1725 [Pg. 1725 includes portions of Doc. 1200 and Doc. 1201], 1742–1747 [Pgs. 1742–1747 include portions of Doc. 1210, Doc. 1211, Doc. 1212, Doc. 1213, and Doc. 1214], 1759–1761 [Pgs. 1759–1761 include portions of Doc. 1218, Doc. 1219, and Doc. 1220]

Canadian position, 1688 [Pg. 1688 is part of Doc. 1166]

Independence for Kashmir, proposed, 1718 [Pg. 1718 is part of Doc. 1193]

Partition of Kashmir between India and Pakistan, proposed, 1759–1760 [Pgs. 1759–1760 include portions of Doc. 1218, Doc. 1219, and Doc. 1220]

Plebiscite administrator, 1688–1694 [Pgs. 1688–1694 include portions of Doc. 1166, Doc. 1167, Doc. 1168, Doc. 1169, Doc. 1170, Doc. 1171, and Doc. 1172], 1702–1705 [Pgs. 1702–1705 include portions of Doc. 1180, Doc. 1181, Doc. 1182, and Doc. 1183], 1707 [Pg. 1707 is part of Doc. 1185], 1709–1710 [Pgs. 1709–1710 include portions of Doc. 1187 and Doc. 1188], 1714–1716 [Pgs. 1714–1716 include portions of Doc. 1189, Doc. 1190, Doc. 1191, and Doc. 1192], 1718 [Pg. 1718 is part of Doc. 1193], 1720–1723 [Pgs. 1720–1723 include portions of Doc. 1194, Doc. 1195, Doc. 1196, Doc. 1197, and Doc. 1198], 1748–1749 [Pgs. 1748–1749 include portions of Doc. 1214 and Doc. 1215], 1760 [Pg. 1760 includes portions of Doc. 1219 and Doc. 1220], 1763–1764 [Pgs. 1763–1764 include portions of Doc. 1221, Doc. 1222, and Doc. 1223], 1766 [Pg. 1766 includes portions of Doc. 1223 and Doc. 1224], 1772 [Pg. 1772 is part of Doc. 1227]

U.N. Commission for India and Pakistan: Arbitration proposals, 1733–1746 [Pgs. 1733–1746 include portions of Doc. 1205, Doc. 1206, Doc. 1207, Doc. 1208, Doc. 1209, Doc. 1210, Doc. 1211, Doc. 1212, and Doc. 1213], 1748–1749 [Pgs. 1748–1749 include portions of Doc. 1214 and Doc. 1215], 1757–1759 [Pgs. 1757–1759 include portions of Doc. 1218 and Doc. 1219], 1761 [Pg. 1761 is part of Doc. 1220], 1763 [Pg. 1763 includes portions of Doc. 1221 and Doc. 1222], 1771 [Pg. 1771 includes portions of Doc. 1226 and Doc. 1227]

Argentine position, 1724 [Pg. 1724 includes portions of Doc. 1198, Doc. 1199, and Doc. 1200]

Azad Kashmir forces, problems concerning disposition of, 1690 [Pg. 1690 includes portions of Doc. 1168 and Doc. 1169], 1692–1695 [Pgs. 1692–1695 include portions of Doc. 1171, Doc. 1172, and Doc. 1173], 1698–1701 [Pgs. 1698–1701 include portions of Doc. 1175, Doc. 1176, Doc. 1177, Doc. 1178, Doc. 1179, and Doc. 1180], 1703 [Pg. 1703 includes portions of Doc. 1181 and Doc. 1182], 1707 [Pg. 1707 is part of Doc. 1185], 1710–1712 [Pgs. 1710–1712 include portions of Doc. 1187 and Doc. 1188], 1714 [Pg. 1714 includes portions of Doc. 1189 and Doc. 1190], 1716–1717 [Pgs. 1716–1717 include portions of Doc. 1191, Doc. 1192, and Doc. 1193], 1720 [Pg. 1720 includes portions of Doc. 1194 and Doc. 1195], 1722 [Pg. 1722 includes portions of Doc. 1196 and Doc. 1197], 1731 [Pg. 1731 is part of Doc. 1204], 1737–1739 [Pgs. 1737–1739 include portions of Doc. 1208 and Doc. 1209], 1760n [Pg. 1760 includes portions of Doc. 1219 and Doc. 1220], 1761–1763 [Pgs. 1761–1763 include portions of Doc. 1220, Doc. 1221, and Doc. 1222], 1765 [Pg. 1765 is part of Doc. 1223], 1767–1769 [Pgs. 1767–1769 include portions of Doc. 1224 and Doc. 1225], 1774 [Pg. 1774 includes portions of Doc. 1228 and Doc. 1229]

Belgian position, 1683 [Pg. 1683 is part of Doc. 1161], 1724 [Pg. 1724 includes portions of Doc. 1198, Doc. 1199, and Doc. 1200]

Cease-fire line, 1686 [Pg. 1686 is part of Doc. 1165], 1688 [Pg. 1688 is part of Doc. 1166], 1690 [Pg. 1690 includes portions of Doc. 1168 and Doc. 1169], 1694 [Pg. 1694 is part of Doc. 1172], 1697–1699 [Pgs. 1697–1699 include portions of Doc. 1175, Doc. 1176, Doc. 1177, and Doc. 1178], 1703–1704 [Pgs. 1703–1704 include portions of Doc. 1181 and Doc. 1182], 1711 [Pg. 1711 is part of Doc. 1188], 1713–1714 [Pgs. 1713–1714 include portions of Doc. 1189 and Doc. 1190], 1717 [Pg. 1717 includes portions of Doc. 1192 and Doc. 1193], 1720–1721 [Pgs. 1720–1721 include portions of Doc. 1194, Doc. 1195, and Doc. 1196], 1724–1725 [Pgs. 1724–1725 include portions of Doc. 1198, Doc. 1199, Doc. 1200, and Doc. 1201], 1727–1731 [Pgs. 1727–1731 include portions of Doc. 1202, Doc. 1203, and Doc. 1204], 1739 [Pg. 1739 is part of Doc. 1209], 1747 [Pg. 1747 includes portions of Doc. 1213 and Doc. 1214], 1757–1758 [Pg. 1757 is part of Doc. 1218]

Colombian position, 1724 [Pg. 1724 includes portions of Doc. 1198, Doc. 1199, and Doc. 1200]

Czechoslovak position, 1724 [Pg. 1724 includes portions of Doc. 1198, Doc. 1199, and Doc. 1200]

Indian position, 1688–1690 [Pgs. 1688–1690 include portions of Doc. 1166, Doc. 1167, Doc. 1168, and Doc. 1169], 1692–1695 [Pgs. 1692–1695 include portions of Doc. 1171, Doc. 1172, and Doc. 1173], 1699–1700 [Pgs. 1699–1700 include portions of Doc. 1178 and Doc. 1179], 1704 [Pg. 1704 is part of Doc. 1182], 1707–1708 [Pgs. 1707–1708 include portions of Doc. 1185, Doc. 1186, and Doc. 1187], 1710–1712 [Pgs. 1710–1712 include portions of Doc. 1187 and Doc. 1188], 1714 [Pg. 1714 includes portions of Doc. 1189 and Doc. 1190], 1716–1720 [Pgs. 1716–1720 include portions of Doc. 1191, Doc. 1192, Doc. 1193, Doc. 1194, and Doc. 1195], 1724–1728 [Pgs. 1724–1728 include portions of Doc. 1198, Doc. 1199, Doc. 1200, Doc. 1201, Doc. 1202, and Doc. 1203], 1730–1733 [Pgs. 1730–1733 include portions of Doc. 1204, Doc. 1205, and Doc. 1206], 1736–1746 [Pgs. 1736–1746 include portions of Doc. 1207, Doc. 1208, Doc. 1209, Doc. 1210, Doc. 1211, Doc. 1212, and Doc. 1213], 1748–1749 [Pgs. 1748–1749 include portions of Doc. 1214 and Doc. 1215], 1751 [Pg. 1751 is part of Doc. 1216], 1757–1758 [Pg. 1757 is part of Doc. 1218], 1764 [Pg. 1764 includes portions of Doc. 1222 and Doc. 1223], 1769–1770 [Pgs. 1769–1770 include portions of Doc. 1225 and Doc. 1226]

Military adviser, 1688 [Pg. 1688 is part of Doc. 1166], 1698 [Pg. 1698 includes portions of Doc. 1175, Doc. 1176, and Doc. 1177], 1724 [Pg. 1724 includes portions of Doc. 1198, Doc. 1199, and Doc. 1200]

Pakistan position, 1688–1690 [Pgs. 1688–1690 include portions of Doc. 1166, Doc. 1167, Doc. 1168, and Doc. 1169], 1692–1695 [Pgs. 1692–1695 include portions of Doc. 1171, Doc. 1172, and Doc. 1173], 1699–1701 [Pgs. 1699–1701 include portions of Doc. 1178, Doc. 1179, and Doc. 1180], 1703–1704 [Pgs. 1703–1704 include portions of Doc. 1181 and Doc. 1182], 1708 [Pg. 1708 includes portions of Doc. 1186 and Doc. 1187], 1714–1717 [Pgs. 1714–1717 include portions of Doc. 1189, Doc. 1190, Doc. 1191, Doc. 1192, and Doc. 1193], 1721–1723 [Pgs. 1721–1723 include portions of Doc. 1195, Doc. 1196, Doc. 1197, and Doc. 1198], 1727 [Pg. 1727 is part of Doc. 1202], 1737 [Pg. 1737 is part of Doc. 1208], 1739–1742 [Pgs. 1739–1742 include portions of Doc. 1209, Doc. 1210, and Doc. 1211], 1744–1746 [Pgs. 1744–1746 include portions of Doc. 1211, Doc. 1212, and Doc. 1213], 1748 [Pg. 1748 includes portions of Doc. 1214 and Doc. 1215], 1757–1759 [Pgs. 1757–1759 include portions of Doc. 1218 and Doc. 1219], 1764 [Pg. 1764 includes portions of Doc. 1222 and Doc. 1223]

Plebiscite proposals, 1686 [Pg. 1686 is part of Doc. 1165], 1688–1689 [Pgs. 1688–1689 include portions of Doc. 1166, Doc. 1167, and Doc. 1168], 1691–1695 [Pgs. 1691–1695 include portions of Doc. 1169, Doc. 1170, Doc. 1171, Doc. 1172, and Doc. 1173], 1704 [Pg. 1704 is part of Doc. 1182], 1707–1710 [Pgs. 1707–1710 include portions of Doc. 1185, Doc. 1186, Doc. 1187, and Doc. 1188], 1712 [Pg. 1712 is part of Doc. 1188], 1714 [Pg. 1714 includes portions of Doc. 1189 and Doc. 1190], 1718–1720 [Pgs. 1718–1720 include portions of Doc. 1193, Doc. 1194, and Doc. 1195], 1722–1723 [Pgs. 1722–1723 include portions of Doc. 1196, Doc. 1197, and Doc. 1198], 1726 [Pg. 1726 is part of Doc. 1202], 1731–1732 [Pgs. 1731–1732 include portions of Doc. 1204 and Doc. 1205], 1738 [Pg. 1738 includes portions of Doc. 1208 and Doc. 1209], 1741 [Pg. 1741 is part of Doc. 1210], 1748–1749 [Pgs. 1748–1749 include portions of Doc. 1214 and Doc. 1215], 1757–1760 [Pgs. 1757–1760 include portions of Doc. 1218, Doc. 1219, and Doc. 1220], 1766 [Pg. 1766 includes portions of Doc. 1223 and Doc. 1224]

Reports, 1691 [Pg. 1691 includes portions of Doc. 1169, Doc. 1170, and Doc. 1171], 1743 [Pg. 1743 is part of Doc. 1211], 1746–1748 [Pgs. 1746–1748 include portions of Doc. 1213, Doc. 1214, and Doc. 1215], 1757 [Pg. 1757 is part of Doc. 1218], 1759–1761 [Pgs. 1759–1761 include portions of Doc. 1218, Doc. 1219, and Doc. 1220]

Truce proposals, 1686 [Pg. 1686 is part of Doc. 1165], 1688 [Pg. 1688 is part of Doc. 1166], 1690–1695 [Pgs. 1690–1695 include portions of Doc. 1168, Doc. 1169, Doc. 1170, Doc. 1171, Doc. 1172, and Doc. 1173], 1698–1710 [Pgs. 1698–1710 include portions of Doc. 1175, Doc. 1176, Doc. 1177, Doc. 1178, Doc. 1179, Doc. 1180, Doc. 1181, Doc. 1182, Doc. 1183, Doc. 1184, Doc. 1185, Doc. 1186, Doc. 1187, and Doc. 1188], 1712 [Pg. 1712 is part of Doc. 1188], 1714–1728 [Pgs. 1714–1728 include portions of Doc. 1189, Doc. 1190, Doc. 1191, Doc. 1192, Doc. 1193, Doc. 1194, Doc. 1195, Doc. 1196, Doc. 1197, Doc. 1198, Doc. 1199, Doc. 1200, Doc. 1201, Doc. 1202, and Doc. 1203], 1730–1731 [Pg. 1730 is part of Doc. 1204], 1733–1735 [Pgs. 1733–1735 include portions of Doc. 1205, Doc. 1206, and Doc. 1207], 1737 [Pg. 1737 is part of Doc. 1208], 1739–1742 [Pgs. 1739–1742 include portions of Doc. 1209, Doc. 1210, and Doc. 1211], 1749 [Pg. 1749 is part of Doc. 1215], 1759 [Pg. 1759 includes portions of Doc. 1218 and Doc. 1219]

U.N. military observers, 1686–1688 [Pgs. 1686–1688 include portions of Doc. 1165 and Doc. 1166], 1698 [Pg. 1698 includes portions of Doc. 1175, Doc. 1176, and Doc. 1177], 1765 [Pg. 1765 is part of Doc. 1223]

U.S. position, 1692–1693 [Pgs. 1692–1693 include portions of Doc. 1171 and Doc. 1172], 1698 [Pg. 1698 includes portions of Doc. 1175, Doc. 1176, and Doc. 1177], 1701–1706 [Pgs. 1701–1706 include portions of Doc. 1179, Doc. 1180, Doc. 1181, Doc. 1182, Doc. 1183, and Doc. 1184], 1711 [Pg. 1711 is part of Doc. 1188], 1713–1725 [Pgs. 1713–1725 include portions of Doc. 1189, Doc. 1190, Doc. 1191, Doc. 1192, Doc. 1193, Doc. 1194, Doc. 1195, Doc. 1196, Doc. 1197, Doc. 1198, Doc. 1199, Doc. 1200, and Doc. 1201], 1728–1734 [Pgs. 1728–1734 include portions of Doc. 1202, Doc. 1203, Doc. 1204, Doc. 1205, and Doc. 1206], 1747–1748 [Pgs. 1747–1748 include portions of Doc. 1213, Doc. 1214, and Doc. 1215], 1757–1759 [Pgs. 1757–1759 include portions of Doc. 1218 and Doc. 1219]

U.N. Security Council: British position, 1774 [Pg. 1774 includes portions of Doc. 1228 and Doc. 1229]

Canadian position, 1759–1762 [Pgs. 1759–1762 include portions of Doc. 1218, Doc. 1219, Doc. 1220, and Doc. 1221], 1764–1766 [Pgs. 1764–1766 include portions of Doc. 1222, Doc. 1223, and Doc. 1224], 1773 [Pg. 1773 includes portions of Doc. 1227 and Doc. 1228]

Cease-fire line, 1747 [Pg. 1747 includes portions of Doc. 1213 and Doc. 1214], 1757 [Pg. 1757 is part of Doc. 1218], 1763–1766 [Pgs. 1763–1766 include portions of Doc. 1221, Doc. 1222, Doc. 1223, and Doc. 1224], 1772 [Pg. 1772 is part of Doc. 1227]

Demilitarization proposals, 1760 [Pg. 1760 includes portions of Doc. 1219 and Doc. 1220], 1762–1769 [Pgs. 1762–1769 include portions of Doc. 1221, Doc. 1222, Doc. 1223, Doc. 1224, and Doc. 1225], 1771–1772 [Pgs. 1771–1772 include portions of Doc. 1226 and Doc. 1227], 1774–1775 [Pgs. 1774–1775 include portions of Doc. 1228, Doc. 1229, Doc. 1230, and Doc. 1231]

French position, 1774 [Pg. 1774 includes portions of Doc. 1228 and Doc. 1229]

Indian position, 1747 [Pg. 1747 includes portions of Doc. 1213 and Doc. 1214], 1759–1763 [Pgs. 1759–1763 include portions of Doc. 1218, Doc. 1219, Doc. 1220, Doc. 1221, and Doc. 1222], 1765–1771 [Pgs. 1765–1771 include portions of Doc. 1223, Doc. 1224, Doc. 1225, Doc. 1226, and Doc. 1227], 1773–1775 [Pgs. 1773–1775 include portions of Doc. 1227, Doc. 1228, Doc. 1229, Doc. 1230, and Doc. 1231]

Norwegian position, 1762n [Pg. 1762 is part of Doc. 1221]

Pakistan position, 1759–1766 [Pgs. 1759–1766 include portions of Doc. 1218, Doc. 1219, Doc. 1220, Doc. 1221, Doc. 1222, Doc. 1223, and Doc. 1224], 1771–1773 [Pgs. 1771–1773 include portions of Doc. 1226, Doc. 1227, and Doc. 1228]

Partition proposals, 1760–1761 [Pgs. 1760–1761 include portions of Doc. 1219 and Doc. 1220], 1771 [Pg. 1771 includes portions of Doc. 1226 and Doc. 1227]

Plebiscite proposals, 1760–1766 [Pgs. 1760–1766 include portions of Doc. 1219, Doc. 1220, Doc. 1221, Doc. 1222, Doc. 1223, and Doc. 1224], 1771–1772 [Pgs. 1771–1772 include portions of Doc. 1226 and Doc. 1227]

Resolution of Jan. 20, 1948, 1759 [Pg. 1759 includes portions of Doc. 1218 and Doc. 1219]

Resolution of Apr. 21, 1948, 1757 [Pg. 1757 is part of Doc. 1218], 1759 [Pg. 1759 includes portions of Doc. 1218 and Doc. 1219], 1772 [Pg. 1772 is part of Doc. 1227]

Resolution of Dec. 17, 1949, 1773–1774 [Pgs. 1773–1774 include portions of Doc. 1227, Doc. 1228, and Doc. 1229]

Soviet position, 1773–1774 [Pgs. 1773–1774 include portions of Doc. 1227, Doc. 1228, and Doc. 1229], 1776 [Pg. 1776 is part of Doc. 1231]

U.N. Commission for India and Pakistan, report of, 1759–1761 [Pgs. 1759–1761 include portions of Doc. 1218, Doc. 1219, and Doc. 1220]

U.S. position, 1747–1748 [Pgs. 1747–1748 include portions of Doc. 1213, Doc. 1214, and Doc. 1215], 1757–1759 [Pgs. 1757–1759 include portions of Doc. 1218 and Doc. 1219]

U.S. arms embargo against India and Pakistan, lifting of, 1689–1691 [Pgs. 1689–1691 include portions of Doc. 1166, Doc. 1167, Doc. 1168, Doc. 1169, Doc. 1170, and Doc. 1171], 1696 [Pg. 1696 includes portions of Doc. 1174 and Doc. 1175], 1727 [Pg. 1727 is part of Doc. 1202]

U.S. policy, 8n [Pg. 8 includes portions of Doc. 1, Doc. 2, and Doc. 3], 13 [Pg. 13 is part of Doc. 3], 23–25 [Pg. 23 is part of Doc. 3], 1686–1689 [Pgs. 1686–1689 include portions of Doc. 1165, Doc. 1166, Doc. 1167, and Doc. 1168]

Katz-Suchy, Julius, 332 [Pg. 332 is part of Doc. 165]

Kaul, Col., 23–24 [Pg. 23 is part of Doc. 3]

Kaul, T. N., 1735 [Pg. 1735 is part of Doc. 1207]

Kee, John, 1506n [Pg. 1506 includes portions of Doc. 1041 and Doc. 1042]

Keeley, James H., 109 [Pg. 109 includes portions of Doc. 23 and Doc. 24], 168 [Pg. 168 includes portions of Doc. 72 and Doc. 73], 637–639 [Pgs. 637–639 include portions of Doc. 373, Doc. 374, and Doc. 375], 742–743 [Pgs. 742–743 include portions of Doc. 459, Doc. 460, and Doc. 461], 770 [Pg. 770 is part of Doc. 488], 796–799 [Pgs. 796–799 include portions of Doc. 506, Doc. 507, Doc. 508, and Doc. 509], 817 [Pg. 817 includes portions of Doc. 522, Doc. 523, and Doc. 524], 851n [Pg. 851 includes portions of Doc. 541 and Doc. 542], 961–962 [Pgs. 961–962 include portions of Doc. 620, Doc. 621, and Doc. 622], 965–966 [Pgs. 965–966 include portions of Doc. 623, Doc. 624, Doc. 625, and Doc. 626], 980 [Pg. 980 includes portions of Doc. 637 and Doc. 638], 989 [Pg. 989 is part of Doc. 641], 1008 [Pg. 1008 includes portions of Doc. 657 and Doc. 658], 1030–1032 [Pgs. 1030–1032 include portions of Doc. 670, Doc. 671, and Doc. 672], 1102n [Pg. 1102 includes portions of Doc. 735 and Doc. 736], 1119–1120 [Pgs. 1119–1120 include portions of Doc. 748 and Doc. 749], 1156n [Pg. 1156 includes portions of Doc. 776 and Doc. 777], 1226–1228 [Pgs. 1226–1228 include portions of Doc. 830, Doc. 831, and Doc. 832], 1233–1235 [Pgs. 1233–1235 include portions of Doc. 836, Doc. 837, Doc. 838, and Doc. 839], 1246n [Pg. 1246 is part of Doc. 850], 1271 [Pg. 1271 includes portions of Doc. 872, Doc. 873, and Doc. 874], 1390n [Pg. 1390 includes portions of Doc. 966 and Doc. 967], 1393 [Pg. 1393 includes portions of Doc. 969 and Doc. 970], 1416 [Pg. 1416 is part of Doc. 984], 1493 [Pg. 1493 includes portions of Doc. 1033 and Doc. 1034], 1633n [Pg. 1633 includes portions of Doc. 1134 and Doc. 1135]

Keenan, Joseph B., 599 [Pg. 599 includes portions of Doc. 345 and Doc. 346], 612–613 [Pg. 612 is part of Doc. 354], 638 [Pg. 638 is part of Doc. 374], 654 [Pg. 654 includes portions of Doc. 388 and Doc. 389], 668 [Pg. 668 includes portions of Doc. 398 and Doc. 399], 681n [Pg. 681 includes portions of Doc. 407 and Doc. 408], 1235 [Pg. 1235 includes portions of Doc. 838 and Doc. 839], 1301 [Pg. 1301 includes portions of Doc. 899 and Doc. 900]

Kennan, George F., 918 [Pg. 918 includes portions of Doc. 595 and Doc. 596], 1332 [Pg. 1332 is part of Doc. 924]

Kennedy, Commander, 91–92 [Pg. 91 is part of Doc. 14]

Kennedy, D. D., 1742 [Pg. 1742 includes portions of Doc. 1210 and Doc. 1211]

Kennedy, John R., 1781 [Pg. 1781 is part of Doc. 1235]

Kent, Necdet, 1654n [Pg. 1654 includes portions of Doc. 1147 and Doc. 1148]

Keren, Moshe, 1536 [Pg. 1536 includes portions of Doc. 1070 and Doc. 1071], 1543–1544 [Pg. 1543 is part of Doc. 1078]

Khairradin Bey, 155 [Pg. 155 is part of Doc. 63]

Khalil, Ahmad Bey el, 853 [Pg. 853 includes portions of Doc. 543 and Doc. 544], 917n [Pg. 917 is part of Doc. 594], 980 [Pg. 980 includes portions of Doc. 637 and Doc. 638]

Khashaba, Ahmed Mohamed, 193 [Pg. 193 is part of Doc. 87], 199n [Pg. 199 is part of Doc. 91], 222 [Pg. 222 includes portions of Doc. 100 and Doc. 101], 615–616 [Pgs. 615–616 include portions of Doc. 355, Doc. 356, and Doc. 357], 643 [Pg. 643 includes portions of Doc. 379 and Doc. 380], 667 [Pg. 667 includes portions of Doc. 397 and Doc. 398], 706 [Pg. 706 is part of Doc. 430], 718–720 [Pgs. 718–720 include portions of Doc. 443, Doc. 444, and Doc. 445], 750 [Pg. 750 includes portions of Doc. 467 and Doc. 468], 751n [Pg. 751 is part of Doc. 468], 760 [Pg. 760 includes portions of Doc. 477 and Doc. 478], 1034 [Pg. 1034 is part of Doc. 673], 1045 [Pg. 1045 is part of Doc. 683], 1117n [Pg. 1117 includes portions of Doc. 747 and Doc. 748], 1180–1181 [Pgs. 1180–1181 include portions of Doc. 793 and Doc. 794], 1188–1189 [Pgs. 1188–1189 include portions of Doc. 800, Doc. 801, and Doc. 802], 1191 [Pg. 1191 includes portions of Doc. 803 and Doc. 804], 1195n [Pg. 1195 includes portions of Doc. 806 and Doc. 807], 1243n [Pg. 1243 includes portions of Doc. 847 and Doc. 848], 1390n [Pg. 1390 includes portions of Doc. 966 and Doc. 967]

Khoury, Fais el-, 1172 [Pg. 1172 is part of Doc. 788], 1310–1311 [Pgs. 1310–1311 include portions of Doc. 906 and Doc. 907], 1632–1634 [Pgs. 1632–1634 include portions of Doc. 1133, Doc. 1134, Doc. 1135, and Doc. 1136]

Kidd, Philip, 96 [Pg. 96 is part of Doc. 17], 100 [Pg. 100 is part of Doc. 18], 105 [Pg. 105 includes portions of Doc. 20 and Doc. 21]

Kirchwey, Freda, 838 [Pg. 838 is part of Doc. 533]

Kirk, Alan G., 365–366 [Pgs. 365–366 include portions of Doc. 188 and Doc. 189], 397–398 [Pgs. 397–398 include portions of Doc. 209, Doc. 210, and Doc. 211], 417–418 [Pgs. 417–418 include portions of Doc. 220, Doc. 221, and Doc. 222], 467 [Pg. 467 is part of Doc. 260]

Kirkbride, Sir Alec, 608 [Pg. 608 is part of Doc. 352], 631n [Pg. 631 is part of Doc. 370], 663 [Pg. 663 includes portions of Doc. 393 and Doc. 394], 780 [Pg. 780 includes portions of Doc. 494 and Doc. 495], 825n [Pg. 825 includes portions of Doc. 531 and Doc. 532], 922n [Pg. 922 is part of Doc. 599], 1056 [Pg. 1056 includes portions of Doc. 691, Doc. 692, and Doc. 693], 1099 [Pg. 1099 is part of Doc. 733], 1426n [Pg. 1426 includes portions of Doc. 993 and Doc. 994], 1468–1469 [Pgs. 1468–1469 include portions of Doc. 1019, Doc. 1020, and Doc. 1021], 1486n [Pg. 1486 includes portions of Doc. 1029 and Doc. 1030], 1510n [Pg. 1510 includes portions of Doc. 1045 and Doc. 1046], 1512–1514 [Pgs. 1512–1514 include portions of Doc. 1047, Doc. 1048, Doc. 1049, and Doc. 1050], 1518–1520 [Pgs. 1518–1520 include portions of Doc. 1053, Doc. 1054, Doc. 1055, and Doc. 1056], 1540 [Pg. 1540 includes portions of Doc. 1073 and Doc. 1074], 1556 [Pg. 1556 is part of Doc. 1085], 1559 [Pg. 1559 is part of Doc. 1088]

Kitchen, Jeffrey C., 91 [Pg. 91 is part of Doc. 14], 96 [Pg. 96 is part of Doc. 17], 100 [Pg. 100 is part of Doc. 18], 120n [Pg. 120 includes portions of Doc. 29 and Doc. 30]

Kitrilakis, Lt. Gen. Stylianos, 449 [Pg. 449 is part of Doc. 246]

Klaestad, Helge, 1094 [Pg. 1094 includes portions of Doc. 728 and Doc. 729]

Knapp, J. Burke, 1023n [Pg. 1023 includes portions of Doc. 666 and Doc. 667]

Knight, Ridgway B., 1780–1781 [Pg. 1780 is part of Doc. 1235]

Knox, Charles F., 594 [Pg. 594 is part of Doc. 341], 632 [Pg. 632 includes portions of Doc. 370 and Doc. 371], 700 [Pg. 700 includes portions of Doc. 426 and Doc. 427], 732 [Pg. 732 includes portions of Doc. 454 and Doc. 455], 734–735 [Pgs. 734–735 include portions of Doc. 455, Doc. 456, and Doc. 457], 752 [Pg. 752 includes portions of Doc. 468 and Doc. 469], 802 [Pg. 802 is part of Doc. 511], 821 [Pg. 821 includes portions of Doc. 528 and Doc. 529]

Kohler, Foy D., 264n [Pg. 264 is part of Doc. 129], 338–339 [Pgs. 338–339 include portions of Doc. 169 and Doc. 170], 352n [Pg. 352 is part of Doc. 177], 656–658 [Pgs. 656–658 include portions of Doc. 390, Doc. 391, and Doc. 392], 1194–1195 [Pgs. 1194–1195 include portions of Doc. 806 and Doc. 807]

Kohn, Leo, 1111 [Pg. 1111 is part of Doc. 742]

Kolarov, Vasil, 290 [Pg. 290 includes portions of Doc. 140 and Doc. 141]

Kopper, Samuel K.C., 59 [Pg. 59 includes portions of Doc. 10 and Doc. 11], 623–625 [Pgs. 623–625 include portions of Doc. 363, Doc. 364, and Doc. 365], 703–705 [Pgs. 703–705 include portions of Doc. 428, Doc. 429, and Doc. 430], 1057n [Pg. 1057 includes portions of Doc. 693, Doc. 694, and Doc. 695], 1063n [Pg. 1063 includes portions of Doc. 697 and Doc. 698], 1190 [Pg. 1190 is part of Doc. 802], 1742 [Pg. 1742 includes portions of Doc. 1210 and Doc. 1211]

Korbel, Josef, 1769 [Pg. 1769 is part of Doc. 1225]

Korea, Republic of, U.S. military assistance for, 45n [Pg. 45 includes portions of Doc. 4 and Doc. 5], 539 [Pg. 539 is part of Doc. 312], 552 [Pg. 552 is part of Doc. 316], 573 [Pg. 573 is part of Doc. 329], 1616 [Pg. 1616 includes portions of Doc. 1122 and Doc. 1123]

Kosanović, Sava N., 364 [Pg. 364 includes portions of Doc. 186 and Doc. 187], 368 [Pg. 368 is part of Doc. 190]

Kosman, Lt. Gen. Georgios, 386 [Pg. 386 includes portions of Doc. 201 and Doc. 202]

Kouny, Mohamed el, 753 [Pg. 753 includes portions of Doc. 469 and Doc. 470], 1367–1369 [Pgs. 1367–1369 include portions of Doc. 950, Doc. 951, and Doc. 952]

Krim, Abdel, 1783–1784 [Pg. 1783 is part of Doc. 1235]

Kubbar Island, 94 [Pg. 94 includes portions of Doc. 15 and Doc. 16]

Kunde, Herbert, 1276 [Pg. 1276 includes portions of Doc. 879, Doc. 880, and Doc. 881]

Kuwait: Boundary of, 83 [Pg. 83 is part of Doc. 12], 92 [Pg. 92 is part of Doc. 14], 129n [Pg. 129 includes portions of Doc. 37 and Doc. 38], 133–135 [Pgs. 133–135 include portions of Doc. 42, Doc. 43, Doc. 44, and Doc. 45], 155n [Pg. 155 is part of Doc. 63]; British position, 1566–1567 [Pg. 1566 is part of Doc. 1096], 1570–1572 [Pgs. 1570–1572 include portions of Doc. 1096, Doc. 1097, and Doc. 1098]; Egyptian policy, 1571 [Pg. 1571 is part of Doc. 1097]; Iranian policy, 1567 [Pg. 1567 is part of Doc. 1096]; Iraqi policy, 1567 [Pg. 1567 is part of Doc. 1096], 1571 [Pg. 1571 is part of Doc. 1097]; offshore oil concessions, questions concerning, 93 [Pg. 93 includes portions of Doc. 14 and Doc. 15], 108–109 [Pgs. 108–109 include portions of Doc. 22, Doc. 23, and Doc. 24], 118 [Pg. 118 includes portions of Doc. 27 and Doc. 28], 121 [Pg. 121 includes portions of Doc. 30 and Doc. 31], 129n [Pg. 129 includes portions of Doc. 37 and Doc. 38], 133 [Pg. 133 is part of Doc. 42]; Saudi Arabian policy, 1567 [Pg. 1567 is part of Doc. 1096]; Soviet policy, 1567 [Pg. 1567 is part of Doc. 1096]; U.S. consulate, proposed establishment of, 85–86 [Pg. 85 is part of Doc. 12], 1566–1572 [Pgs. 1566–1572 include portions of Doc. 1096, Doc. 1097, and Doc. 1098]

Kuwait Neutral Zone, 83–84 [Pg. 83 is part of Doc. 12], 92 [Pg. 92 is part of Doc. 14], 94n [Pg. 94 includes portions of Doc. 15 and Doc. 16], 95 [Pg. 95 is part of Doc. 16] 97 [Pg. 97 is part of Doc. 17], 101 [Pg. 101 is part of Doc. 18], 104–105 [Pgs. 104–105 include portions of Doc. 19, Doc. 20, and Doc. 21], 1567 [Pg. 1567 is part of Doc. 1096], 1569 [Pg. 1569 is part of Doc. 1096]

Kuwait Oil Company, 94 [Pg. 94 includes portions of Doc. 15 and Doc. 16], 109–110 [Pgs. 109–110 include portions of Doc. 23 and Doc. 24], 1567 [Pg. 1567 is part of Doc. 1096], 1569 [Pg. 1569 is part of Doc. 1096], 1572 [Pg. 1572 includes portions of Doc. 1097 and Doc. 1098]

Kuwatly, Shukri al-(also Quwatly), 109 [Pg. 109 includes portions of Doc. 23 and Doc. 24], 642 [Pg. 642 includes portions of Doc. 378 and Doc. 379], 797–798 [Pgs. 797–798 include portions of Doc. 507 and Doc. 508], 901 [Pg. 901 is part of Doc. 586], 1630 [Pg. 1630 is part of Doc. 1132]

Kyrou, Alexis, 259 [Pg. 259 includes portions of Doc. 124 and Doc. 125], 299 [Pg. 299 is part of Doc. 147], 469 [Pg. 469 is part of Doc. 261]

Labab, Abdel Chafey el, 955 [Pg. 955 is part of Doc. 615]

Labbane, Abdel Chafi el-, 1298 [Pg. 1298 includes portions of Doc. 897 and Doc. 898]

Labone, Eric, 1444 [Pg. 1444 includes portions of Doc. 999 and Doc. 1000], 1472 [Pg. 1472 includes portions of Doc. 1024 and Doc. 1025]

La Follette, Robert M., 1688 [Pg. 1688 is part of Doc. 1166]

Latin American states, 1525 [Pg. 1525 is part of Doc. 1060]

Lawford, Valentine G., 149–150 [Pgs. 149–150 include portions of Doc. 55, Doc. 56, Doc. 57, and Doc. 58]

Leach, Richard S., 1 [Pg. 1 is part of Doc. 1], 1777–1779 [Pgs. 1777–1779 include portions of Doc. 1232, Doc. 1233, and Doc. 1234]

League of Nations, 763 [Pg. 763 is part of Doc. 479]

League of Red Cross Societies, 665 [Pg. 665 includes portions of Doc. 394 and Doc. 395], 1344 [Pg. 1344 is part of Doc. 933], 1472 [Pg. 1472 includes portions of Doc. 1024 and Doc. 1025], 1500 [Pg. 1500 is part of Doc. 1038]

Leavett, Alan, 162 [Pg. 162 includes portions of Doc. 69 and Doc. 70]

Lebanon (see also Lebanese subheadings under Palestine question): Economic development, 78 [Pg. 78 is part of Doc. 12]; foreign policy, 641–642 [Pgs. 641–642 include portions of Doc. 377, Doc. 378, and Doc. 379]; France, policy toward, 642 [Pg. 642 includes portions of Doc. 378 and Doc. 379]; Iraqi-Syrian union, attitude toward proposed, 183 [Pg. 183 is part of Doc. 78]: Palestinian refugees, 829 [Pg. 829 is part of Doc. 533], 842 [Pg. 842 includes portions of Doc. 533 and Doc. 534], 908 [Pg. 908 is part of Doc. 590], 935–938 [Pg. 935 is part of Doc. 608], 966n [Pg. 966 includes portions of Doc. 625 and Doc. 626], 969 [Pg. 969 includes portions of Doc. 628 and Doc. 629], 982 [Pg. 982 includes portions of Doc. 638 and Doc. 639], 983n [Pg. 983 includes portions of Doc. 639 and Doc. 640], 984–985 [Pg. 984 is part of Doc. 640], 1008n [Pg. 1008 includes portions of Doc. 657 and Doc. 658], 1212 [Pg. 1212 includes portions of Doc. 819 and Doc. 820], 1267 [Pg. 1267 is part of Doc. 870], 1337 [Pg. 1337 includes portions of Doc. 928 and Doc. 929]; petroleum boycott against Israel, 80 [Pg. 80 is part of Doc. 12], 156–157 [Pgs. 156–157 include portions of Doc. 63, Doc. 64, Doc. 65, and Doc. 66], 164 [Pg. 164 is part of Doc. 70]; security of, 792n [Pg. 792 is part of Doc. 505]; Turkey, relations with, 1668 [Pg. 1668 is part of Doc. 1152]; United Kingdom, attitude toward, 641 [Pg. 641 includes portions of Doc. 377 and Doc. 378]; U.S. policy, 31 [Pg. 31 includes portions of Doc. 3 and Doc. 4], 33 [Pg. 33 is part of Doc. 4], 642n [Pg. 642 includes portions of Doc. 378 and Doc. 379], 789–792 [Pgs. 789–792 include portions of Doc. 503, Doc. 504, and Doc. 505]

Leguizamón, Carlos A., 1698 [Pg. 1698 includes portions of Doc. 1175, Doc. 1176, and Doc. 1177], 1701 [Pg. 1701 includes portions of Doc. 1179 and Doc. 1180], 1769 [Pg. 1769 is part of Doc. 1225]

Lemnitzer, Maj. Gen. L. L., 557 [Pg. 557 includes portions of Doc. 317 and Doc. 318], 590 [Pg. 590 is part of Doc. 339]

Lend-Lease Act, 574 [Pg. 574 includes portions of Doc. 329 and Doc. 330]

Le Rougetel, Sir John H., 121 [Pg. 121 includes portions of Doc. 30 and Doc. 31], 125–126 [Pgs. 125–126 include portions of Doc. 33 and Doc. 34], 131–132 [Pgs. 131–132 include portions of Doc. 40 and Doc. 41], 135 [Pg. 135 includes portions of Doc. 44 and Doc. 45], 149 [Pg. 149 includes portions of Doc. 55, Doc. 56, and Doc. 57], 476–480 [Pgs. 476–480 include portions of Doc. 265, Doc. 266, Doc. 267, Doc. 268, Doc. 269, and Doc. 270], 481n [Pg. 481 includes portions of Doc. 270 and Doc. 271], 482–485 [Pgs. 482–485 include portions of Doc. 271 and Doc. 272], 488 [Pg. 488 includes portions of Doc. 275 and Doc. 276], 498 [Pg. 498 is part of Doc. 282], 500n [Pg. 500 includes portions of Doc. 282, Doc. 283, and Doc. 284], 508 [Pg. 508 is part of Doc. 293], 523 [Pg. 523 includes portions of Doc. 303 and Doc. 304], 565 [Pg. 565 includes portions of Doc. 323, Doc. 324, and Doc. 325]

Le Roy, Jean, 146 [Pg. 146 includes portions of Doc. 53 and Doc. 54]

Levidis, Dimitrios, 311 [Pg. 311 includes portions of Doc. 151 and Doc. 152]

Levy, Walter J., 123 [Pg. 123 is part of Doc. 32]

Lewis, Arthur R., 1803 [Pg. 1803 includes portions of Doc. 1239 and Doc. 1240]

Lewis, James H., 1799 [Pg. 1799 is part of Doc. 1238]

Liaquat Ali Khan, 1483 [Pg. 1483 includes portions of Doc. 1028 and Doc. 1029], 1689 [Pg. 1689 includes portions of Doc. 1166, Doc. 1167, and Doc. 1168], 1704–1705 [Pgs. 1704–1705 include portions of Doc. 1182 and Doc. 1183], 1725 [Pg. 1725 includes portions of Doc. 1200 and Doc. 1201], 1733–1734 [Pgs. 1733–1734 include portions of Doc. 1205 and Doc. 1206], 1740–1742 [Pgs. 1740–1742 include portions of Doc. 1209, Doc. 1210, and Doc. 1211], 1746 [Pg. 1746 is part of Doc. 1213], 1759–1760 [Pgs. 1759–1760 include portions of Doc. 1218, Doc. 1219, and Doc. 1220]

Libya: Cyrenaica: British-controlled air facilities, 32 [Pg. 32 is part of Doc. 4]; British military forces, 220 [Pg. 220 includes portions of Doc. 98 and Doc. 99]; British policy, 1057 [Pg. 1057 includes portions of Doc. 693, Doc. 694, and Doc. 695]; British trusteeship, proposed, 209 [Pg. 209 is part of Doc. 96]; frontier with Egypt, 74 [Pg. 74 is part of Doc. 12], 209 [Pg. 209 is part of Doc. 96]; frontier with Tripolitania, 74 [Pg. 74 is part of Doc. 12]; independence, proposed, 74–76 [Pg. 74 is part of Doc. 12], 1783 [Pg. 1783 is part of Doc. 1235]; water needs, 77–78 [Pg. 77 is part of Doc. 12]

Disposition of, 73–76 [Pg. 73 is part of Doc. 12], 209 [Pg. 209 is part of Doc. 96], 1783–1784 [Pg. 1783 is part of Doc. 1235]

French claim to Fezzan, 76 [Pg. 76 is part of Doc. 12], 1784 [Pg. 1784 is part of Doc. 1235]

Tripolitania: French policy, 1784–1785 [Pg. 1784 is part of Doc. 1235]; frontier with Cyrenaica, 74 [Pg. 74 is part of Doc. 12]; independence, proposed, 75 [Pg. 75 is part of Doc. 12], 1785 [Pg. 1785 is part of Doc. 1235]; Mellaha airfield, U.S. access to, 32 [Pg. 32 is part of Doc. 4], 59–60 [Pgs. 59–60 include portions of Doc. 10, Doc. 11, and Doc. 12], 75 [Pg. 75 is part of Doc. 12]; U.S. military requirements in, 59–60 [Pgs. 59–60 include portions of Doc. 10, Doc. 11, and Doc. 12]; water needs, 77–78 [Pg. 77 is part of Doc. 12]

U.S. policy, 56 [Pg. 56 is part of Doc. 10], 59 [Pg. 59 includes portions of Doc. 10 and Doc. 11]

Lie, Trygve (see also United Nations: Secretary-General), 298n [Pg. 298 includes portions of Doc. 146 and Doc. 147], 301 [Pg. 301 includes portions of Doc. 148 and Doc. 149], 304 [Pg. 304 is part of Doc. 150], 308 [Pg. 308 is part of Doc. 150], 319 [Pg. 319 is part of Doc. 158], 322 [Pg. 322 includes portions of Doc. 159 and Doc. 160], 330 [Pg. 330 includes portions of Doc. 164 and Doc. 165], 439 [Pg. 439 includes portions of Doc. 240 and Doc. 241], 680–687 [Pgs. 680–687 include portions of Doc. 406, Doc. 407, Doc. 408, Doc. 409, Doc. 410, Doc. 411, Doc. 412, Doc. 413, and Doc. 414], 691 [Pg. 691 includes portions of Doc. 417 and Doc. 418], 700n [Pg. 700 includes portions of Doc. 426 and Doc. 427], 707 [Pg. 707 is part of Doc. 431], 716n [Pg. 716 includes portions of Doc. 440 and Doc. 441], 719n [Pg. 719 is part of Doc. 444], 766 [Pg. 766 includes portions of Doc. 481, Doc. 482, Doc. 483, and Doc. 484], 775 [Pg. 775 includes portions of Doc. 491 and Doc. 492], 834 [Pg. 834 is part of Doc. 533], 851n [Pg. 851 includes portions of Doc. 541 and Doc. 542], 868 [Pg. 868 includes portions of Doc. 555 and Doc. 556], 931 [Pg. 931 is part of Doc. 605], 1165n [Pg. 1165 includes portions of Doc. 784 and Doc. 785], 1196 [Pg. 1196 is part of Doc. 808], 1334n [Pg. 1334 is part of Doc. 926], 1352 [Pg. 1352 is part of Doc. 937], 1382n [Pg. 1382 includes portions of Doc. 960 and Doc. 961], 1461n [Pg. 1461 includes portions of Doc. 1015 and Doc. 1016], 1472 [Pg. 1472 includes portions of Doc. 1024 and Doc. 1025], 1630 [Pg. 1630 is part of Doc. 1132], 1686n [Pg. 1686 is part of Doc. 1165]

Lifshitz, 842 [Pg. 842 includes portions of Doc. 533 and Doc. 534], 911 [Pg. 911 includes portions of Doc. 591 and Doc. 592], 1125 [Pg. 1125 is part of Doc. 753]

Linton, I. J., 711 [Pg. 711 includes portions of Doc. 434 and Doc. 435]

Loftus, John A., 123 [Pg. 123 is part of Doc. 32]

Looney, Warren F., 106 [Pg. 106 is part of Doc. 21], 158n [Pg. 158 is part of Doc. 66]

Loper, Brig. Gen. Herbert B., 1671–1672 [Pgs. 1671–1672 include portions of Doc. 1153 and Doc. 1154], 1681n [Pg. 1681 is part of Doc. 1160]

Lourie, Arthur, 1250–1251 [Pg. 1250 is part of Doc. 855]

Louw, Eric, 1803–1805 [Pgs. 1803–1805 include portions of Doc. 1239, Doc. 1240, and Doc. 1241]

Lovett, Robert A., 25n [Pg. 25 is part of Doc. 3], 227–233 [Pgs. 227–233 include portions of Doc. 105, Doc. 106, and Doc. 107], 235–236 [Pgs. 235–236 include portions of Doc. 107, Doc. 108, Doc. 109, and Doc. 110], 238–240 [Pgs. 238–240 include portions of Doc. 111, Doc. 112, and Doc. 113], 266 [Pg. 266 is part of Doc. 131], 473n [Pg. 473 is part of Doc. 263], 546n [Pg. 546 is part of Doc. 315], 594–598 [Pgs. 594–598 include portions of Doc. 341, Doc. 342, Doc. 343, Doc. 344, and Doc. 345], 600n [Pg. 600 is part of Doc. 347], 601–605 [Pgs. 601–605 include portions of Doc. 347, Doc. 348, Doc. 349, Doc. 350, and Doc. 351], 607 [Pg. 607 includes portions of Doc. 351 and Doc. 352], 609 [Pg. 609 includes portions of Doc. 352 and Doc. 353], 610n [Pg. 610 is part of Doc. 353], 611–617 [Pgs. 611–617 include portions of Doc. 354, Doc. 355, Doc. 356, Doc. 357, Doc. 358, and Doc. 359], 620 [Pg. 620 includes portions of Doc. 359 and Doc. 360], 622–623 [Pgs. 622–623 include portions of Doc. 360, Doc. 361, Doc. 362, Doc. 363, and Doc. 364], 625 [Pg. 625 includes portions of Doc. 364 and Doc. 365], 627–630 [Pgs. 627–630 include portions of Doc. 366, Doc. 367, Doc. 368, Doc. 369, and Doc. 370], 632 [Pg. 632 includes portions of Doc. 370 and Doc. 371], 635n [Pg. 635 is part of Doc. 372], 637 [Pg. 637 includes portions of Doc. 373 and Doc. 374], 639 [Pg. 639 includes portions of Doc. 374 and Doc. 375], 642–643 [Pgs. 642–643 include portions of Doc. 378, Doc. 379, and Doc. 380], 645–650 [Pgs. 645–650 include portions of Doc. 382, Doc. 383, Doc. 384, and Doc. 385], 652–653 [Pgs. 652–653 include portions of Doc. 386, Doc. 387, and Doc. 388], 654n [Pg. 654 includes portions of Doc. 388 and Doc. 389], 658–661 [Pgs. 658–661 include portions of Doc. 391, Doc. 392, and Doc. 393], 663–666 [Pgs. 663–666 include portions of Doc. 393, Doc. 394, Doc. 395, Doc. 396, and Doc. 397], 668–669 [Pgs. 668–669 include portions of Doc. 398, Doc. 399, and Doc. 400], 670n [Pg. 670 includes portions of Doc. 400 and Doc. 401], 671–678 [Pgs. 671–678 include portions of Doc. 401, Doc. 402, Doc. 403, Doc. 404, and Doc. 405], 680–684 [Pgs. 680–684 include portions of Doc. 406, Doc. 407, Doc. 408, Doc. 409, and Doc. 410], 747 [Pg. 747 includes portions of Doc. 464 and Doc. 465], 766 [Pg. 766 includes portions of Doc. 481, Doc. 482, Doc. 483, and Doc. 484], 1235 [Pg. 1235 includes portions of Doc. 838 and Doc. 839], 1575–1576 [Pgs. 1575–1576 include portions of Doc. 1101 and Doc. 1102], 1638 [Pg. 1638 includes portions of Doc. 1139 and Doc. 1140], 1686–1689 [Pgs. 1686–1689 include portions of Doc. 1165, Doc. 1166, Doc. 1167, and Doc. 1168]

Lozano, Alfredo, 1695 [Pg. 1695 is part of Doc. 1173], 1698–1699 [Pgs. 1698–1699 include portions of Doc. 1175, Doc. 1176, Doc. 1177, and Doc. 1178], 1701 [Pg. 1701 includes portions of Doc. 1179 and Doc. 1180], 1703 [Pg. 1703 includes portions of Doc. 1181 and Doc. 1182], 1720–1721 [Pgs. 1720–1721 include portions of Doc. 1194, Doc. 1195, and Doc. 1196], 1738 [Pg. 1738 includes portions of Doc. 1208 and Doc. 1209], 1769 [Pg. 1769 is part of Doc. 1225]

Lunde, Ivar, 1290 [Pg. 1290 includes portions of Doc. 891 and Doc. 892]

Lutheran World Relief, 840 [Pg. 840 is part of Doc. 533]

Luxembourg, 926 [Pg. 926 is part of Doc. 602]

MacArthur, General of the Army Douglas, 53 [Pg. 53 is part of Doc. 8]

Macatee, Robert B., 1701 [Pg. 1701 includes portions of Doc. 1179 and Doc. 1180], 1706 [Pg. 1706 includes portions of Doc. 1183 and Doc. 1184], 1715–1717 [Pgs. 1715–1717 include portions of Doc. 1190, Doc. 1191, Doc. 1192, and Doc. 1193], 1725 [Pg. 1725 includes portions of Doc. 1200 and Doc. 1201], 1728–1729 [Pgs. 1728–1729 include portions of Doc. 1202, Doc. 1203, and Doc. 1204], 1757 [Pg. 1757 is part of Doc. 1218]

Macedonia, proposed establishment of an autonomous state of, 261–264 [Pgs. 261–264 include portions of Doc. 126, Doc. 127, Doc. 128, and Doc. 129], 266 [Pg. 266 is part of Doc. 131], 279–281 [Pgs. 279–281 include portions of Doc. 133, Doc. 134, Doc. 135, and Doc. 136], 287–288 [Pgs. 287–288 include portions of Doc. 138 and Doc. 139], 291–294 [Pgs. 291–294 include portions of Doc. 141, Doc. 142, Doc. 143, and Doc. 144], 299 [Pg. 299 is part of Doc. 147], 306 [Pg. 306 is part of Doc. 150], 308 [Pg. 308 is part of Doc. 150], 328 [Pg. 328 is part of Doc. 163], 332–333 [Pgs. 332–333 include portions of Doc. 165 and Doc. 166], 341 [Pg. 341 includes portions of Doc. 170 and Doc. 171], 355 [Pg. 355 includes portions of Doc. 178 and Doc. 179], 380n [Pg. 380 includes portions of Doc. 196, Doc. 197, and Doc. 198], 381 [Pg. 381 includes portions of Doc. 199 and Doc. 200], 403 [Pg. 403 is part of Doc. 214]

Mack, Sir Henry, 121 [Pg. 121 includes portions of Doc. 30 and Doc. 31], 135 [Pg. 135 includes portions of Doc. 44 and Doc. 45], 757n [Pg. 757 includes portions of Doc. 474 and Doc. 475], 780 [Pg. 780 includes portions of Doc. 494 and Doc. 495]

MacKenzie King, William Lyon, 357 [Pg. 357 is part of Doc. 180]

MacLean, Donald D., 201n [Pg. 201 is part of Doc. 91], 202n [Pg. 202 is part of Doc. 91]

Maclean, Fitzroy, 265 [Pg. 265 includes portions of Doc. 130 and Doc. 131], 363–364 [Pgs. 363–364 include portions of Doc. 185, Doc. 186, and Doc. 187]

Maitland, A. G., 223 [Pg. 223 includes portions of Doc. 102 and Doc. 103], 906 [Pg. 906 includes portions of Doc. 589 and Doc. 590]

Majid Khan, Abdul, 1778 [Pg. 1778 includes portions of Doc. 1232 and Doc. 1233]

Makins, Sir Roger, 54 [Pg. 54 includes portions of Doc. 8 and Doc. 9], 414 [Pg. 414 includes portions of Doc. 218 and Doc. 219]

Makleff, Alouf, 919 [Pg. 919 includes portions of Doc. 596 and Doc. 597]

Makris, Fotios, 389 [Pg. 389 includes portions of Doc. 204, Doc. 205, and Doc. 206]

Malaya, 51–52 [Pg. 51 is part of Doc. 8]

Malenbaum, Wilfred, 1023n [Pg. 1023 includes portions of Doc. 666 and Doc. 667], 1654n [Pg. 1654 includes portions of Doc. 1147 and Doc. 1148]

Malik, Charles, 789–792 [Pgs. 789–792 include portions of Doc. 503, Doc. 504, and Doc. 505], 1212 [Pg. 1212 includes portions of Doc. 819 and Doc. 820], 1350–1354 [Pgs. 1350–1354 include portions of Doc. 936, Doc. 937, and Doc. 938], 1382n [Pg. 1382 includes portions of Doc. 960 and Doc. 961], 1411 [Pg. 1411 is part of Doc. 981]

Malik, Yakov Aleksandrovich, 301–302 [Pgs. 301–302 include portions of Doc. 148 and Doc. 149], 332 [Pg. 332 is part of Doc. 165], 1754 [Pg. 1754 is part of Doc. 1217], 1776 [Pg. 1776 is part of Doc. 1231]

Malony, Maj. Gen. Harry J., 1723 [Pg. 1723 includes portions of Doc. 1197 and Doc. 1198]

Mangano, Philip A., 298 [Pg. 298 includes portions of Doc. 146 and Doc. 147], 531–533 [Pg. 531 is part of Doc. 311]

Mansour, Ali, 480 [Pg. 480 includes portions of Doc. 269 and Doc. 270]

Mansour, Prince, 1584 [Pg. 1584 includes portions of Doc. 1109 and Doc. 1110], 1605 [Pg. 1605 is part of Doc. 1119], 1619 [Pg. 1619 is part of Doc. 1124]

Mao Tse-tung, 1754 [Pg. 1754 is part of Doc. 1217]

Marcy, Carl, 48n [Pg. 48 includes portions of Doc. 6 and Doc. 7]

Margrave, Robert N., 1490–1491 [Pgs. 1490–1491 include portions of Doc. 1031, Doc. 1032, and Doc. 1033]

Markezinis, Spyridon, 234 [Pg. 234 is part of Doc. 107], 237n [Pg. 237 is part of Doc. 111], 238 [Pg. 238 includes portions of Doc. 111 and Doc. 112], 240–241 [Pgs. 240–241 include portions of Doc. 113 and Doc. 114], 247 [Pg. 247 is part of Doc. 117], 295–297 [Pgs. 295–297 include portions of Doc. 144, Doc. 145, and Doc. 146], 309–311 [Pgs. 309–311 include portions of Doc. 150, Doc. 151, and Doc. 152], 314 [Pg. 314 includes portions of Doc. 153 and Doc. 154], 458 [Pg. 458 includes portions of Doc. 252 and Doc. 253], 459n [Pg. 459 is part of Doc. 253], 466n [Pg. 466 is part of Doc. 259]

Markos, Vafiades, 250–253 [Pgs. 250–253 include portions of Doc. 119, Doc. 120, and Doc. 121], 255 [Pg. 255 is part of Doc. 121], 257 [Pg. 257 includes portions of Doc. 122 and Doc. 123], 261 [Pg. 261 is part of Doc. 126], 262 [Pg. 262 is part of Doc. 127], 265 [Pg. 265 includes portions of Doc. 130 and Doc. 131], 267 [Pg. 267 includes portions of Doc. 131 and Doc. 132], 281 [Pg. 281 includes portions of Doc. 135 and Doc. 136], 293n [Pg. 293 is part of Doc. 143], 304 [Pg. 304 is part of Doc. 150]

Marriott, Cyril, 628 [Pg. 628 is part of Doc. 367], 633 [Pg. 633 includes portions of Doc. 371 and Doc. 372], 711 [Pg. 711 includes portions of Doc. 434 and Doc. 435], 812–813 [Pgs. 812–813 include portions of Doc. 518 and Doc. 519]

Marshall, George C., 24n [Pg. 24 is part of Doc. 3], 227 [Pg. 227 is part of Doc. 105], 232 [Pg. 232 is part of Doc. 106], 239n [Pg. 239 is part of Doc. 112], 246 [Pg. 246 is part of Doc. 117], 277 [Pg. 277 is part of Doc. 133], 372 [Pg. 372 is part of Doc. 193], 576 [Pg. 576 is part of Doc. 330], 623–624 [Pgs. 623–624 include portions of Doc. 363 and Doc. 364], 697 [Pg. 697 includes portions of Doc. 423 and Doc. 424], 747 [Pg. 747 includes portions of Doc. 464 and Doc. 465], 800 [Pg. 800 includes portions of Doc. 509 and Doc. 510], 875 [Pg. 875 is part of Doc. 562], 1649 [Pg. 1649 is part of Doc. 1146], 1680n [Pg. 1680 is part of Doc. 1159]

Martin, William McChesney, 376 [Pg. 376 includes portions of Doc. 194 and Doc. 195], 1676n [Pg. 1676 is part of Doc. 1158], 1678 [Pg. 1678 is part of Doc. 1158]

Martinović, Veselin, 268 [Pg. 268 is part of Doc. 132]

Masoud, Mohamed, 1593 [Pg. 1593 is part of Doc. 1111]

Mater, Omar Pasha, 853 [Pg. 853 includes portions of Doc. 543 and Doc. 544]

Mathews, 1422 [Pg. 1422 is part of Doc. 989]

Mathews, E.G., 1708 [Pg. 1708 includes portions of Doc. 1186 and Doc. 1187], 1710–1712 [Pgs. 1710–1712 include portions of Doc. 1187 and Doc. 1188], 1742 [Pg. 1742 includes portions of Doc. 1210 and Doc. 1211], 1744–1746 [Pgs. 1744–1746 include portions of Doc. 1211, Doc. 1212, and Doc. 1213], 1779 [Pg. 1779 is part of Doc. 1234]

Mavras, George, 296–297 [Pgs. 296–297 include portions of Doc. 145 and Doc. 146], 378 [Pg. 378 includes portions of Doc. 195 and Doc. 196]

Mayhew, Christopher, 834–835 [Pg. 834 is part of Doc. 533]

Mayta, Lt. Col. Mohammed, 917 [Pg. 917 is part of Doc. 594]

Mazhari, Brig. Gen. Mohammad, 471 [Pg. 471 is part of Doc. 262], 473 [Pg. 473 is part of Doc. 263], 488 [Pg. 488 includes portions of Doc. 275 and Doc. 276], 501 [Pg. 501 includes portions of Doc. 284, Doc. 285, and Doc. 286], 519n [Pg. 519 includes portions of Doc. 301 and Doc. 302], 522–523 [Pgs. 522–523 include portions of Doc. 302, Doc. 303, and Doc. 304], 527 [Pg. 527 includes portions of Doc. 306 and Doc. 307], 557n [Pg. 557 includes portions of Doc. 317 and Doc. 318], 561 [Pg. 561 includes portions of Doc. 320 and Doc. 321], 581 [Pg. 581 includes portions of Doc. 332 and Doc. 333]

McBride, Maj. Gen. Horace L., 1639 [Pg. 1639 is part of Doc. 1140], 1641 [Pg. 1641 is part of Doc. 1141], 1673n [Pg. 1673 is part of Doc. 1155]

McClintock, Robert M., 610n [Pg. 610 is part of Doc. 353], 611 [Pg. 611 is part of Doc. 354], 640 [Pg. 640 includes portions of Doc. 375 and Doc. 376], 651–652 [Pgs. 651–652 include portions of Doc. 385 and Doc. 386], 671 [Pg. 671 includes portions of Doc. 401 and Doc. 402], 674 [Pg. 674 is part of Doc. 402], 708–709 [Pgs. 708–709 include portions of Doc. 431 and Doc. 432], 723–724 [Pgs. 723–724 include portions of Doc. 447 and Doc. 448], 741n [Pg. 741 includes portions of Doc. 458 and Doc. 459], 742n [Pg. 742 includes portions of Doc. 459 and Doc. 460], 755–756 [Pgs. 755–756 include portions of Doc. 471, Doc. 472, Doc. 473, and Doc. 474], 758n [Pg. 758 is part of Doc. 475], 774–775 [Pgs. 774–775 include portions of Doc. 490, Doc. 491, and Doc. 492], 842n [Pg. 842 includes portions of Doc. 533 and Doc. 534], 851n [Pg. 851 includes portions of Doc. 541 and Doc. 542], 868–869 [Pgs. 868–869 include portions of Doc. 555 and Doc. 556], 870n [Pg. 870 is part of Doc. 557], 927 [Pg. 927 includes portions of Doc. 602 and Doc. 603]

McCloy, J. J., 906 [Pg. 906 includes portions of Doc. 589 and Doc. 590], 909–910 [Pgs. 909–910 include portions of Doc. 590 and Doc. 591], 1013 [Pg. 1013 is part of Doc. 660]

McCormick, Anne O’Hare, 257 [Pg. 257 includes portions of Doc. 122 and Doc. 123]

McDermott, Michael J., 297n [Pg. 297 includes portions of Doc. 145 and Doc. 146]

McDonald, James G., 168 [Pg. 168 includes portions of Doc. 72 and Doc. 73], 594–598 [Pgs. 594–598 include portions of Doc. 341, Doc. 342, Doc. 343, Doc. 344, and Doc. 345], 600–602 [Pgs. 600–602 include portions of Doc. 347, Doc. 348, and Doc. 349], 605–607 [Pgs. 605–607 include portions of Doc. 351 and Doc. 352], 614–616 [Pgs. 614–616 include portions of Doc. 355, Doc. 356, and Doc. 357], 627 [Pg. 627 includes portions of Doc. 366 and Doc. 367], 629–630 [Pgs. 629–630 include portions of Doc. 368, Doc. 369, and Doc. 370], 632–633 [Pgs. 632–633 include portions of Doc. 370, Doc. 371, and Doc. 372], 639–640 [Pgs. 639–640 include portions of Doc. 374, Doc. 375, and Doc. 376], 643 [Pg. 643 includes portions of Doc. 379 and Doc. 380], 652n [Pg. 652 is part of Doc. 386], 670 [Pg. 670 includes portions of Doc. 400 and Doc. 401], 694 [Pg. 694 includes portions of Doc. 419, Doc. 420, and Doc. 421], 700–703 [Pgs. 700–703 include portions of Doc. 426, Doc. 427, Doc. 428, and Doc. 429], 715–717 [Pgs. 715–717 include portions of Doc. 439, Doc. 440, Doc. 441, Doc. 442, and Doc. 443], 721–722 [Pgs. 721–722 include portions of Doc. 446 and Doc. 447], 724n [Pg. 724 is part of Doc. 448], 730–731 [Pgs. 730–731 include portions of Doc. 453 and Doc. 454], 734–735 [Pgs. 734–735 include portions of Doc. 455, Doc. 456, and Doc. 457], 739–740 [Pg. 739 is part of Doc. 458], 741n [Pg. 741 includes portions of Doc. 458 and Doc. 459], 748–750 [Pgs. 748–750 include portions of Doc. 465, Doc. 466, Doc. 467, and Doc. 468], 752–754 [Pgs. 752–754 include portions of Doc. 468, Doc. 469, Doc. 470, and Doc. 471], 755n [Pg. 755 includes portions of Doc. 471 and Doc. 472], 759–764 [Pgs. 759–764 include portions of Doc. 476, Doc. 477, Doc. 478, Doc. 479, and Doc. 480], 769 [Pg. 769 includes portions of Doc. 486 and Doc. 487], 785n [Pg. 785 includes portions of Doc. 499 and Doc. 500], 787n [Pg. 787 includes portions of Doc. 501 and Doc. 502], 802–804 [Pgs. 802–804 include portions of Doc. 511, Doc. 512, Doc. 513, and Doc. 514], 805n [Pg. 805 includes portions of Doc. 514 and Doc. 515], 811n [Pg. 811 is part of Doc. 518], 815–816 [Pgs. 815–816 include portions of Doc. 520, Doc. 521, and Doc. 522], 818 [Pg. 818 includes portions of Doc. 524, Doc. 525, and Doc. 526], 821–823 [Pgs. 821–823 include portions of Doc. 528, Doc. 529, and Doc. 530], 894n [Pg. 894 includes portions of Doc. 577 and Doc. 578], 899–900 [Pgs. 899–900 include portions of Doc. 583, Doc. 584, Doc. 585, and Doc. 586], 926 [Pg. 926 is part of Doc. 602], 962 [Pg. 962 includes portions of Doc. 621 and Doc. 622], 966–967 [Pgs. 966–967 include portions of Doc. 625, Doc. 626, and Doc. 627], 975 [Pg. 975 is part of Doc. 633], 977–978 [Pgs. 977–978 include portions of Doc. 633, Doc. 634, and Doc. 635], 990n [Pg. 990 includes portions of Doc. 642 and Doc. 643], 1031n [Pg. 1031 is part of Doc. 671], 1074–1076 [Pgs. 1074–1076 include portions of Doc. 705, Doc. 706, Doc. 707, Doc. 708, and Doc. 709], 1085 [Pg. 1085 includes portions of Doc. 719 and Doc. 720], 1100 [Pg. 1100 includes portions of Doc. 733, Doc. 734, and Doc. 735], 1102 [Pg. 1102 includes portions of Doc. 735 and Doc. 736], 1107 [Pg. 1107 is part of Doc. 737], 1110–1112 [Pgs. 1110–1112 include portions of Doc. 741, Doc. 742, Doc. 743, and Doc. 744], 1115 [Pg. 1115 includes portions of Doc. 745, Doc. 746, and Doc. 747], 1125n [Pg. 1125 is part of Doc. 753], 1140–1141 [Pgs. 1140–1141 include portions of Doc. 764 and Doc. 765], 1144 [Pg. 1144 includes portions of Doc. 768 and Doc. 769], 1154n [Pg. 1154 includes portions of Doc. 773 and Doc. 774], 1163–1167 [Pgs. 1163–1167 include portions of Doc. 782, Doc. 783, Doc. 784, Doc. 785, Doc. 786, and Doc. 787], 1171 [Pg. 1171 is part of Doc. 788], 1174 [Pg. 1174 includes portions of Doc. 789 and Doc. 790], 1184 [Pg. 1184 includes portions of Doc. 795 and Doc. 796], 1188n [Pg. 1188 includes portions of Doc. 800 and Doc. 801], 1189–1190 [Pgs. 1189–1190 include portions of Doc. 801 and Doc. 802], 1196n [Pg. 1196 is part of Doc. 808], 1197 [Pg. 1197 is part of Doc. 809], 1202 [Pg. 1202 includes portions of Doc. 810, Doc. 811, and Doc. 812], 1206 [Pg. 1206 includes portions of Doc. 814 and Doc. 815], 1215–1216 [Pgs. 1215–1216 include portions of Doc. 822 and Doc. 823], 1221–1223 [Pgs. 1221–1223 include portions of Doc. 826, Doc. 827, and Doc. 828], 1237–1238 [Pgs. 1237–1238 include portions of Doc. 839, Doc. 840, Doc. 841, and Doc. 842], 1245n [Pg. 1245 includes portions of Doc. 849 and Doc. 850], 1260 [Pg. 1260 includes portions of Doc. 863 and Doc. 864], 1262 [Pg. 1262 is part of Doc. 866], 1265 [Pg. 1265 is part of Doc. 868], 1268 [Pg. 1268 is part of Doc. 871], 1292 [Pg. 1292 is part of Doc. 894], 1328 [Pg. 1328 includes portions of Doc. 921 and Doc. 922], 1407n [Pg. 1407 includes portions of Doc. 978 and Doc. 979], 1441n [Pg. 1441 is part of Doc. 998], 1444–1445 [Pgs. 1444–1445 include portions of Doc. 999 and Doc. 1000], 1446n [Pg. 1446 is part of Doc. 1001], 1471n [Pg. 1471 includes portions of Doc. 1023 and Doc. 1024], 1481–1482 [Pgs. 1481–1482 include portions of Doc. 1026, Doc. 1027, and Doc. 1028], 1504 [Pg. 1504 includes portions of Doc. 1039 and Doc. 1040], 1510 [Pg. 1510 includes portions of Doc. 1045 and Doc. 1046], 1521–1522 [Pgs. 1521–1522 include portions of Doc. 1057 and Doc. 1058], 1527n [Pg. 1527 includes portions of Doc. 1060 and Doc. 1061], 1528–1529 [Pgs. 1528–1529 include portions of Doc. 1061, Doc. 1062, and Doc. 1063], 1532–1535 [Pgs. 1532–1535 include portions of Doc. 1066, Doc. 1067, Doc. 1068, Doc. 1069, and Doc. 1070], 1541–1542 [Pgs. 1541–1542 include portions of Doc. 1074, Doc. 1075, Doc. 1076, and Doc. 1077], 1547n [Pg. 1547 includes portions of Doc. 1079 and Doc. 1080], 1558n [Pg. 1558 includes portions of Doc. 1086, Doc. 1087, and Doc. 1088], 1561 [Pg. 1561 includes portions of Doc. 1089 and Doc. 1090], 1565 [Pg. 1565 is part of Doc. 1095]

McEnerney, Edward B., 1367–1369 [Pgs. 1367–1369 include portions of Doc. 950, Doc. 951, and Doc. 952]

McGhee, George C., 45–48 [Pgs. 45–48 include portions of Doc. 4, Doc. 5, Doc. 6, and Doc. 7], 54–55 [Pgs. 54–55 include portions of Doc. 8 and Doc. 9], 59–90 [Pgs. 59–90 include portions of Doc. 10, Doc. 11, Doc. 12, and Doc. 13], 165–167 [Pgs. 165–167 include portions of Doc. 71 and Doc. 72], 171n [Pg. 171 is part of Doc. 73], 172 [Pg. 172 is part of Doc. 73], 178–179 [Pg. 178 is part of Doc. 75], 186n [Pg. 186 is part of Doc. 81], 356 [Pg. 356 is part of Doc. 180], 372n [Pg. 372 is part of Doc. 193], 373–376 [Pgs. 373–376 include portions of Doc. 194 and Doc. 195], 385 [Pg. 385 is part of Doc. 201], 414 [Pg. 414 includes portions of Doc. 218 and Doc. 219], 434–435 [Pg. 434 is part of Doc. 236], 443 [Pg. 443 is part of Doc. 243], 458–460 [Pgs. 458–460 include portions of Doc. 252, Doc. 253, and Doc. 254], 463–464 [Pgs. 463–464 include portions of Doc. 256 and Doc. 257], 467 [Pg. 467 is part of Doc. 260], 557n [Pg. 557 includes portions of Doc. 317 and Doc. 318], 563–565 [Pgs. 563–565 include portions of Doc. 322, Doc. 323, Doc. 324, and Doc. 325], 567–571 [Pgs. 567–571 include portions of Doc. 325, Doc. 326, Doc. 327, and Doc. 328], 574 [Pg. 574 includes portions of Doc. 329 and Doc. 330], 579–581 [Pgs. 579–581 include portions of Doc. 330, Doc. 331, Doc. 332, and Doc. 333], 788 [Pg. 788 is part of Doc. 503], 807 [Pg. 807 is part of Doc. 515], 818 [Pg. 818 includes portions of Doc. 524, Doc. 525, and Doc. 526], 827 [Pg. 827 is part of Doc. 533], 842n [Pg. 842 includes portions of Doc. 533 and Doc. 534], 857–859 [Pgs. 857–859 include portions of Doc. 545, Doc. 546, and Doc. 547], 871 [Pg. 871 includes portions of Doc. 557, Doc. 558, and Doc. 559], 897 [Pg. 897 includes portions of Doc. 581 and Doc. 582], 905–906 [Pgs. 905–906 include portions of Doc. 588, Doc. 589, and Doc. 590], 908–910 [Pgs. 908–910 include portions of Doc. 590 and Doc. 591], 918 [Pg. 918 includes portions of Doc. 595 and Doc. 596], 924 [Pg. 924 includes portions of Doc. 600 and Doc. 601], 934–943 [Pgs. 934–943 include portions of Doc. 607, Doc. 608, and Doc. 609], 960n [Pg. 960 includes portions of Doc. 619 and Doc. 620], 963–965 [Pgs. 963–965 include portions of Doc. 622, Doc. 623, Doc. 624, and Doc. 625], 990 [Pg. 990 includes portions of Doc. 642 and Doc. 643], 1007 [Pg. 1007 includes portions of Doc. 656 and Doc. 657], 1013 [Pg. 1013 is part of Doc. 660], 1022–1023 [Pgs. 1022–1023 include portions of Doc. 665, Doc. 666, and Doc. 667], 1030 [Pg. 1030 includes portions of Doc. 670 and Doc. 671], 1032 [Pg. 1032 includes portions of Doc. 671 and Doc. 672], 1035 [Pg. 1035 includes portions of Doc. 673 and Doc. 674], 1048 [Pg. 1048 includes portions of Doc. 686 and Doc. 687], 1086 [Pg. 1086 includes portions of Doc. 720 and Doc. 721], 1139–1140 [Pgs. 1139–1140 include portions of Doc. 763 and Doc. 764], 1141n [Pg. 1141 includes portions of Doc. 764 and Doc. 765], 1153 [Pg. 1153 includes portions of Doc. 772 and Doc. 773], 1206 [Pg. 1206 includes portions of Doc. 814 and Doc. 815], 1208–1209 [Pgs. 1208–1209 include portions of Doc. 816 and Doc. 817], 1212–1213 [Pgs. 1212–1213 include portions of Doc. 819, Doc. 820, and Doc. 821], 1218–1221 [Pgs. 1218–1221 include portions of Doc. 825, Doc. 826, and Doc. 827], 1235–1237 [Pgs. 1235–1237 include portions of Doc. 838, Doc. 839, and Doc. 840], 1248 [Pg. 1248 is part of Doc. 852], 1261–1263 [Pgs. 1261–1263 include portions of Doc. 865 and Doc. 866], 1280n [Pg. 1280 includes portions of Doc. 882 and Doc. 883], 1297–1298 [Pgs. 1297–1298 include portions of Doc. 896, Doc. 897, and Doc. 898], 1304n [Pg. 1304 is part of Doc. 903], 1305n [Pg. 1305 is part of Doc. 904], 1310–1313 [Pgs. 1310–1313 include portions of Doc. 906, Doc. 907, and Doc. 908], 1315–1316 [Pg. 1315 is part of Doc. 910], 1323–1326 [Pgs. 1323–1326 include portions of Doc. 916, Doc. 917, Doc. 918, and Doc. 919], 1328–1333 [Pgs. 1328–1333 include portions of Doc. 921, Doc. 922, Doc. 923, Doc. 924, and Doc. 925], 1350–1354 [Pgs. 1350–1354 include portions of Doc. 936, Doc. 937, and Doc. 938], 1357–1358 [Pgs. 1357–1358 include portions of Doc. 940, Doc. 941, Doc. 942, and Doc. 943], 1365 [Pg. 1365 includes portions of Doc. 947 and Doc. 948], 1376–1378 [Pgs. 1376–1378 include portions of Doc. 957 and Doc. 958], 1382n [Pg. 1382 includes portions of Doc. 960 and Doc. 961], 1393 [Pg. 1393 includes portions of Doc. 969 and Doc. 970], 1396–1397 [Pgs. 1396–1397 include portions of Doc. 972 and Doc. 973], 1399n [Pg. 1399 includes portions of Doc. 974 and Doc. 975], 1403–1405 [Pgs. 1403–1405 include portions of Doc. 975, Doc. 976, Doc. 977, and Doc. 978], 1407 [Pg. 1407 includes portions of Doc. 978 and Doc. 979], 1415 [Pg. 1415 is part of Doc. 984], 1418 [Pg. 1418 includes portions of Doc. 984, Doc. 985, and Doc. 986], 1440–1442 [Pgs. 1440–1442 include portions of Doc. 997, Doc. 998, and Doc. 999], 1443n [Pg. 1443 is part of Doc. 999], 1448 [Pg. 1448 includes portions of Doc. 1002, Doc. 1003, and Doc. 1004], 1459–1460 [Pgs. 1459–1460 include portions of Doc. 1013, Doc. 1014, and Doc. 1015], 1465–1468 [Pgs. 1465–1468 include portions of Doc. 1018, Doc. 1019, and Doc. 1020], 1471 [Pg. 1471 includes portions of Doc. 1023 and Doc. 1024], 1472n [Pg. 1472 includes portions of Doc. 1024 and Doc. 1025], 1483 [Pg. 1483 includes portions of Doc. 1028 and Doc. 1029], 1486–1487 [Pgs. 1486–1487 include portions of Doc. 1029 and Doc. 1030], 1494–1497 [Pgs. 1494–1497 include portions of Doc. 1034, Doc. 1035, and Doc. 1036], 1509 [Pg. 1509 includes portions of Doc. 1043, Doc. 1044, and Doc. 1045], 1511 [Pg. 1511 includes portions of Doc. 1046 and Doc. 1047], 1521 [Pg. 1521 is part of Doc. 1057], 1558 [Pg. 1558 includes portions of Doc. 1086, Doc. 1087, and Doc. 1088], 1616–1617 [Pgs. 1616–1617 include portions of Doc. 1122 and Doc. 1123], 1622–1623 [Pgs. 1622–1623 include portions of Doc. 1125, Doc. 1126, and Doc. 1127], 1632–1633 [Pgs. 1632–1633 include portions of Doc. 1133, Doc. 1134, and Doc. 1135], 1679–1680 [Pgs. 1679–1680 include portions of Doc. 1158 and Doc. 1159], 1682 [Pg. 1682 includes portions of Doc. 1160 and Doc. 1161], 1685 [Pg. 1685 includes portions of Doc. 1162, Doc. 1163, and Doc. 1164], 1735 [Pg. 1735 is part of Doc. 1207], 1742–1746 [Pgs. 1742–1746 include portions of Doc. 1210, Doc. 1211, Doc. 1212, and Doc. 1213]

McLaughlin, Edward D., 582 [Pg. 582 includes portions of Doc. 333 and Doc. 334]

McNaughton, Gen. A. G. L., 399–400 [Pgs. 399–400 include portions of Doc. 211, Doc. 212, and Doc. 213], 707 [Pg. 707 is part of Doc. 431], 708n [Pg. 708 includes portions of Doc. 431 and Doc. 432], 1760–1764 [Pgs. 1760–1764 include portions of Doc. 1219, Doc. 1220, Doc. 1221, Doc. 1222, and Doc. 1223], 1766 [Pg. 1766 includes portions of Doc. 1223 and Doc. 1224], 1768 [Pg. 1768 includes portions of Doc. 1224 and Doc. 1225], 1770–1776 [Pgs. 1770–1776 include portions of Doc. 1225, Doc. 1226, Doc. 1227, Doc. 1228, Doc. 1229, Doc. 1230, and Doc. 1231]

McNeil, Hector, 265 [Pg. 265 includes portions of Doc. 130 and Doc. 131], 301–309 [Pgs. 301–309 include portions of Doc. 148, Doc. 149, Doc. 150, and Doc. 151], 320–323 [Pgs. 320–323 include portions of Doc. 158, Doc. 159, Doc. 160, Doc. 161, and Doc. 162], 329–330 [Pgs. 329–330 include portions of Doc. 163, Doc. 164, and Doc. 165], 338 [Pg. 338 is part of Doc. 169], 350 [Pg. 350 is part of Doc. 176], 408 [Pg. 408 is part of Doc. 215], 660 [Pg. 660 is part of Doc. 392], 1481 [Pg. 1481 includes portions of Doc. 1026 and Doc. 1027]

McNutt, Paul V., 1689 [Pg. 1689 includes portions of Doc. 1166, Doc. 1167, and Doc. 1168]

McWilliams, William J., 1166n [Pg. 1166 includes portions of Doc. 785 and Doc. 786], 1332 [Pg. 1332 is part of Doc. 924]

Meade, C. A., 1742 [Pg. 1742 includes portions of Doc. 1210 and Doc. 1211]

Medadha, Fellah, Oasha, 859 [Pg. 859 includes portions of Doc. 546 and Doc. 547], 867 [Pg. 867 is part of Doc. 554], 872 [Pg. 872 is part of Doc. 560]

Mediterranean Pact, proposed, 230 [Pg. 230 is part of Doc. 105], 233 [Pg. 233 includes portions of Doc. 106 and Doc. 107], 271n [Pg. 271 is part of Doc. 133], 376 [Pg. 376 includes portions of Doc. 194 and Doc. 195], 501 [Pg. 501 includes portions of Doc. 284, Doc. 285, and Doc. 286], 588–589 [Pgs. 588–589 include portions of Doc. 336, Doc. 337, and Doc. 338], 1011 [Pg. 1011 is part of Doc. 659], 1648 [Pg. 1648 is part of Doc. 1146], 1650 [Pg. 1650 is part of Doc. 1146], 1652 [Pg. 1652 is part of Doc. 1146], 1655 [Pg. 1655 is part of Doc. 1148], 1662–1663 [Pg. 1662 is part of Doc. 1152]

Meeker, Leonard C., 531–533 [Pg. 531 is part of Doc. 311], 948n [Pg. 948 includes portions of Doc. 611 and Doc. 612],

Melas, George, 310 [Pg. 310 is part of Doc. 151], 424n [Pg. 424 is part of Doc. 227], 428 [Pg. 428 includes portions of Doc. 230, Doc. 231, and Doc. 232]

Meloy, Francis E., 125 [Pg. 125 includes portions of Doc. 33 and Doc. 34]

Menon, K. P. S., 1702 [Pg. 1702 includes portions of Doc. 1180 and Doc. 1181]

Merriam, Gordon P., 31–39 [Pgs. 31–39 include portions of Doc. 3 and Doc. 4]

Metaxas, Aristides, 240 [Pg. 240 is part of Doc. 113], 309–311 [Pgs. 309–311 include portions of Doc. 150, Doc. 151, and Doc. 152]

Metaxas, John, 465 [Pg. 465 includes portions of Doc. 257, Doc. 258, and Doc. 259]

Mexico, 159 [Pg. 159 is part of Doc. 66], 1540 [Pg. 1540 includes portions of Doc. 1073 and Doc. 1074]

Middle East Pipeline Company, 110–111 [Pgs. 110–111 include portions of Doc. 24 and Doc. 25]

Middle East Relief, 840 [Pg. 840 is part of Doc. 533]

Middle East Union, 840 [Pg. 840 is part of Doc. 533]

Miller, Edward, 840 [Pg. 840 is part of Doc. 533]

Mills, Frank, 910 [Pg. 910 includes portions of Doc. 590 and Doc. 591]

Miner, Robert G., 242n [Pg. 242 includes portions of Doc. 114 and Doc. 115]

Minor, Harold B., 242n [Pg. 242 includes portions of Doc. 114 and Doc. 115], 309–312 [Pgs. 309–312 include portions of Doc. 150, Doc. 151, Doc. 152, and Doc. 153], 316n [Pg. 316 includes portions of Doc. 155 and Doc. 156], 318 [Pg. 318 is part of Doc. 157], 322–324 [Pgs. 322–324 include portions of Doc. 159, Doc. 160, Doc. 161, Doc. 162, and Doc. 163], 376–378 [Pgs. 376–378 include portions of Doc. 194, Doc. 195, and Doc. 196], 385–386 [Pgs. 385–386 include portions of Doc. 201 and Doc. 202], 388 [Pg. 388 is part of Doc. 204], 465–466 [Pgs. 465–466 include portions of Doc. 257, Doc. 258, and Doc. 259]

Mohammad, Seyid, 480 [Pg. 480 includes portions of Doc. 269 and Doc. 270]

Mohn, Paul, 956–957 [Pgs. 956–957 include portions of Doc. 615, Doc. 616, and Doc. 617], 1007 [Pg. 1007 includes portions of Doc. 656 and Doc. 657], 1100 [Pg. 1100 includes portions of Doc. 733, Doc. 734, and Doc. 735]

Moline, Edwin G., 91 [Pg. 91 is part of Doc. 14], 122 [Pg. 122 includes portions of Doc. 31 and Doc. 32]

Moiotov, Vyacheslav M., 262 [Pg. 262 is part of Doc. 127]

Moneim, Abdel, 1450–1451 [Pgs. 1450–1451 include portions of Doc. 1006 and Doc. 1007]

Monem, Abdul, 1128 [Pg. 1128 is part of Doc. 756], 1238–1239 [Pgs. 1238–1239 include portions of Doc. 840, Doc. 841, Doc. 842, Doc. 843, and Doc. 844]

Mongolian People’s Republic (Outer Mongolia), 775 [Pg. 775 includes portions of Doc. 491 and Doc. 492]

Moore, C. Robert, 434 [Pg. 434 includes portions of Doc. 236 and Doc. 237], 1654n [Pg. 1654 includes portions of Doc. 1147 and Doc. 1148], 1679 [Pg. 1679 includes portions of Doc. 1158 and Doc. 1159]

Moore, James S., 59–60 [Pgs. 59–60 include portions of Doc. 10, Doc. 11, and Doc. 12], 71–74 [Pg. 71 is part of Doc. 12], 76 [Pg. 76 is part of Doc. 12], 87 [Pg. 87 is part of Doc. 12]

More, Boland, 1780–1781 [Pg. 1780 is part of Doc. 1235], 1788 [Pg. 1788 includes portions of Doc. 1235 and Doc. 1236]

Morgret, Dorothy H., 813–814 [Pgs. 813–814 include portions of Doc. 519 and Doc. 520]

Morocco. see Spanish Morocco and under French North Africa

Morrison-Knudsen International Company, 477n [Pg. 477 is part of Doc. 267], 1778 [Pg. 1778 includes portions of Doc. 1232 and Doc. 1233]

Morton, Sir Desmond, 1395 [Pg. 1395 is part of Doc. 972], 1416–1417 [Pg. 1416 is part of Doc. 984], 1444 [Pg. 1444 includes portions of Doc. 999 and Doc. 1000], 1472 [Pg. 1472 includes portions of Doc. 1024 and Doc. 1025], 1477 [Pg. 1477 is part of Doc. 1026], 1479 [Pg. 1479 is part of Doc. 1026]

Mouaita, Col. Mohammed Bey, 817 [Pg. 817 includes portions of Doc. 522, Doc. 523, and Doc. 524]

Mountbatten of Burma, Earl, 237 [Pg. 237 is part of Doc. 111], 240 [Pg. 240 is part of Doc. 113], 1703 [Pg. 1703 includes portions of Doc. 1181 and Doc. 1182]

Mudie, Gov., 1725 [Pg. 1725 includes portions of Doc. 1200 and Doc. 1201]

Mulki (Mulqi), Fawzi Pasha el-, 968 [Pg. 968 includes portions of Doc. 627 and Doc. 628], 975 [Pg. 975 is part of Doc. 633], 1071–1072 [Pgs. 1071–1072 include portions of Doc. 703, Doc. 704, and Doc. 705], 1094 [Pg. 1094 includes portions of Doc. 728 and Doc. 729], 1247 [Pg. 1247 includes portions of Doc. 851 and Doc. 852], 1448–1449 [Pgs. 1448–1449 include portions of Doc. 1002, Doc. 1003, Doc. 1004, and Doc. 1005], 1451 [Pg. 1451 includes portions of Doc. 1006 and Doc. 1007], 1470 [Pg. 1470 includes portions of Doc. 1021 and Doc. 1022], 1515–1516 [Pgs. 1515–1516 include portions of Doc. 1051, Doc. 1052, and Doc. 1053]

Muñoz, Rodolfo, 1729 [Pg. 1729 includes portions of Doc. 1203 and Doc. 1204]

Muscat, 121 [Pg. 121 includes portions of Doc. 30 and Doc. 31]

Mussolini, Benito, 335 [Pg. 335 is part of Doc. 166]

Mustafa, Abdul Moniem, 1229n [Pg. 1229 includes portions of Doc. 832 and Doc. 833], 1243–1244 [Pgs. 1243–1244 include portions of Doc. 847 and Doc. 848]

Mutual Defense Assistance Act of 1949, 45n [Pg. 45 includes portions of Doc. 4 and Doc. 5], 47 [Pg. 47 includes portions of Doc. 5 and Doc. 6], 379 [Pg. 379 includes portions of Doc. 198 and Doc. 199], 582 [Pg. 582 includes portions of Doc. 333 and Doc. 334], 1365 [Pg. 1365 includes portions of Doc. 947 and Doc. 948]

Naegelen, Gov. Gen., 1787 [Pg. 1787 is part of Doc. 1235]

Nahas Pasha, Mustafa, 187 [Pg. 187 is part of Doc. 82], 198n [Pg. 198 is part of Doc. 90]

Nairn, Sardar Mohammad, 1777 [Pg. 1777 is part of Doc. 1232]

Nashishibi, Ragheb Pasha, 1483 [Pg. 1483 includes portions of Doc. 1028 and Doc. 1029]

Nasser, Lt. Col., 980 [Pg. 980 includes portions of Doc. 637 and Doc. 638]

National Advisory Council on International Monetary and Financial Problems, 577 [Pg. 577 is part of Doc. 330], 647 [Pg. 647 includes portions of Doc. 382 and Doc. 383], 1506 [Pg. 1506 includes portions of Doc. 1041 and Doc. 1042], 1675 [Pg. 1675 includes portions of Doc. 1156 and Doc. 1157]

National Catholic Welfare Conference, 840 [Pg. 840 is part of Doc. 533]

National Security Council: Arab states, U.S. policy toward, 1339 [Pg. 1339 includes portions of Doc. 930 and Doc. 931], 1430–1440 [Pgs. 1430–1440 include portions of Doc. 995, Doc. 996, Doc. 997, and Doc. 998]

Asia, U.S. policy toward, 11n [Pg. 11 is part of Doc. 3], 48–49 [Pgs. 48–49 include portions of Doc. 6 and Doc. 7]

Eastern Mediterranean and Middle East, U.S. security interests in, 39–40 [Pg. 39 is part of Doc. 4], 43 [Pg. 43 is part of Doc. 4], 271 [Pg. 271 is part of Doc. 133], 1437 [Pg. 1437 is part of Doc. 997]

Egypt, proposed construction of U.S. airfield in the Cairo–Suez area of, 205 [Pg. 205 includes portions of Doc. 92, Doc. 93, and Doc. 94]

Greece, U.S. policy toward, 235–236 [Pgs. 235–236 include portions of Doc. 107, Doc. 108, Doc. 109, and Doc. 110], 269–279 [Pgs. 269–279 include portions of Doc. 133 and Doc. 134], 462 [Pg. 462 includes portions of Doc. 255 and Doc. 256], 1644 [Pg. 1644 includes portions of Doc. 1143 and Doc. 1144]

Iran, U.S. policy toward, 545–551 [Pgs. 545–551 include portions of Doc. 314 and Doc. 315]

Israel, U.S. policy toward, 1009 [Pg. 1009 is part of Doc. 659], 1323 [Pg. 1323 includes portions of Doc. 916, Doc. 917, and Doc. 918], 1339 [Pg. 1339 includes portions of Doc. 930 and Doc. 931], 1430–1440 [Pgs. 1430–1440 include portions of Doc. 995, Doc. 996, Doc. 997, and Doc. 998]

Near and Middle East, U.S. security interests in, 1644–1645 [Pgs. 1644–1645 include portions of Doc. 1143 and Doc. 1144]

North Atlantic Treaty, 44–45 [Pgs. 44–45 include portions of Doc. 4 and Doc. 5]

Palestinian refugee problem, 941 [Pg. 941 is part of Doc. 608]

South Asia, U.S. policy toward, 10 [Pg. 10 is part of Doc. 3], 48 [Pg. 48 includes portions of Doc. 6 and Doc. 7]

Turkey: U.S. air facilities and stockpiles of aviation gas, 1654–1655 [Pgs. 1654–1655 include portions of Doc. 1147 and Doc. 1148], 1672 [Pg. 1672 is part of Doc. 1154]; U.S. policy, 269–279 [Pgs. 269–279 include portions of Doc. 133 and Doc. 134], 1644–1646 [Pgs. 1644–1646 include portions of Doc. 1143, Doc. 1144, and Doc. 1145]

United Kingdom, proposed construction of U.S. airfields in, 205 [Pg. 205 includes portions of Doc. 92, Doc. 93, and Doc. 94]

Yugoslavia, U.S. policy toward, 253 [Pg. 253 includes portions of Doc. 119, Doc. 120, and Doc. 121], 412 [Pg. 412 includes portions of Doc. 216, Doc. 217, and Doc. 218]

Navy, U.S. Department of the, 189–192 [Pgs. 189–192 include portions of Doc. 84, Doc. 85, Doc. 86, and Doc. 87], 194 [Pg. 194 includes portions of Doc. 87 and Doc. 88], 496n [Pg. 496 includes portions of Doc. 280 and Doc. 281], 865 [Pg. 865 is part of Doc. 552]

Near and Middle East (see also Palestine question): Anglo-American cooperation, 33 [Pg. 33 is part of Doc. 4], 59 [Pg. 59 includes portions of Doc. 10 and Doc. 11], 165–167 [Pgs. 165–167 include portions of Doc. 71 and Doc. 72], 172 [Pg. 172 is part of Doc. 73], 188–194 [Pgs. 188–194 include portions of Doc. 83, Doc. 84, Doc. 85, Doc. 86, Doc. 87, and Doc. 88], 672–676 [Pgs. 672–676 include portions of Doc. 402 and Doc. 403], 691 [Pg. 691 includes portions of Doc. 417 and Doc. 418], 695–697 [Pgs. 695–697 include portions of Doc. 421, Doc. 422, Doc. 423, and Doc. 424], 836 [Pg. 836 is part of Doc. 533], 897 [Pg. 897 includes portions of Doc. 581 and Doc. 582]

Anglo-American strategic planning, 165–167 [Pgs. 165–167 include portions of Doc. 71 and Doc. 72], 186 [Pg. 186 is part of Doc. 81], 188 [Pg. 188 is part of Doc. 83]

Anglo-American talks in Washington, 50–90 [Pgs. 50–90 include portions of Doc. 8, Doc. 9, Doc. 10, Doc. 11, Doc. 12, and Doc. 13], 172 [Pg. 172 is part of Doc. 73]

Anglo-American-French talks, proposed, 89–90 [Pgs. 89–90 include portions of Doc. 12 and Doc. 13]

Arms policy, etc. see under Palestine question.

British Middle East Command, 188 [Pg. 188 is part of Doc. 83]

British Middle East Office, 77–78 [Pg. 77 is part of Doc. 12], 697 [Pg. 697 includes portions of Doc. 423 and Doc. 424], 836 [Pg. 836 is part of Doc. 533], 1047 [Pg. 1047 includes portions of Doc. 685 and Doc. 686]

British policy and role, 32 [Pg. 32 is part of Doc. 4], 35 [Pg. 35 is part of Doc. 4], 39–41 [Pg. 39 is part of Doc. 4], 50–53 [Pg. 50 is part of Doc. 8], 59 [Pg. 59 includes portions of Doc. 10 and Doc. 11], 62–64 [Pg. 62 is part of Doc. 12], 67–89 [Pgs. 67–89 include portions of Doc. 12 and Doc. 13], 107–108 [Pgs. 107–108 include portions of Doc. 21, Doc. 22, and Doc. 23], 416 [Pg. 416 includes portions of Doc. 219 and Doc. 220], 435 [Pg. 435 includes portions of Doc. 235 and Doc. 236], 611–612 [Pg. 611 is part of Doc. 354], 835 [Pg. 835 is part of Doc. 533], 907 [Pg. 907 is part of Doc. 590], 910 [Pg. 910 includes portions of Doc. 590 and Doc. 591], 925 [Pg. 925 includes portions of Doc. 601 and Doc. 602], 1011–1012 [Pg. 1011 is part of Doc. 659], 1435 [Pg. 1435 is part of Doc. 997], 1482–1483 [Pgs. 1482–1483 include portions of Doc. 1027, Doc. 1028, and Doc. 1029], 1491 [Pg. 1491 includes portions of Doc. 1032 and Doc. 1033]

Communist movement and threat, 33 [Pg. 33 is part of Doc. 4], 62–63 [Pg. 62 is part of Doc. 12], 170 [Pg. 170 is part of Doc. 73], 178 [Pg. 178 is part of Doc. 75], 224 [Pg. 224 includes portions of Doc. 103 and Doc. 104], 586 [Pg. 586 is part of Doc. 336], 621 [Pg. 621 is part of Doc. 360]

Conference of U.S. Chiefs of Mission in the Near East at Istanbul, Nov. 26–29, 1949, 61 [Pg. 61 is part of Doc. 12], 66 [Pg. 66 is part of Doc. 12], 89n [Pg. 89 includes portions of Doc. 12 and Doc. 13], 165–179 [Pgs. 165–179 include portions of Doc. 71, Doc. 72, Doc. 73, Doc. 74, and Doc. 75], 463–464 [Pgs. 463–464 include portions of Doc. 256 and Doc. 257], 1510–1511 [Pgs. 1510–1511 include portions of Doc. 1045, Doc. 1046, and Doc. 1047], 1521 [Pg. 1521 is part of Doc. 1057], 1533 [Pg. 1533 includes portions of Doc. 1067 and Doc. 1068], 1622 [Pg. 1622 includes portions of Doc. 1125 and Doc. 1126], 1624 [Pg. 1624 includes portions of Doc. 1127 and Doc. 1128], 1627–1629 [Pgs. 1627–1629 include portions of Doc. 1129, Doc. 1130, and Doc. 1131], 1685 [Pg. 1685 includes portions of Doc. 1162, Doc. 1163, and Doc. 1164], 1780n [Pg. 1780 is part of Doc. 1235]

Economic development plans, 67–68 [Pg. 67 is part of Doc. 12], 76–79 [Pg. 76 is part of Doc. 12], 948 [Pg. 948 includes portions of Doc. 611 and Doc. 612], 1651 [Pg. 1651 is part of Doc. 1146]

French position, 1258 [Pg. 1258 is part of Doc. 862], 1482–1483 [Pgs. 1482–1483 include portions of Doc. 1027, Doc. 1028, and Doc. 1029], 1491 [Pg. 1491 includes portions of Doc. 1032 and Doc. 1033]

Middle East pact, proposed, 31 [Pg. 31 includes portions of Doc. 3 and Doc. 4], 33–38 [Pg. 33 is part of Doc. 4], 70 [Pg. 70 is part of Doc. 12], 176 [Pg. 176 is part of Doc. 74], 501 [Pg. 501 includes portions of Doc. 284, Doc. 285, and Doc. 286], 571 [Pg. 571 is part of Doc. 328], 1627–1628 [Pgs. 1627–1628 include portions of Doc. 1129, Doc. 1130, and Doc. 1131]

Persian Gulf: Median line proposal, 92–94 [Pgs. 92–94 include portions of Doc. 14, Doc. 15, and Doc. 16], 104 [Pg. 104 includes portions of Doc. 19 and Doc. 20], 107–108 [Pgs. 107–108 include portions of Doc. 21, Doc. 22, and Doc. 23], 117 [Pg. 117 includes portions of Doc. 26 and Doc. 27]; offshore boundaries, 91–94 [Pgs. 91–94 include portions of Doc. 14, Doc. 15, and Doc. 16], 96–122 [Pgs. 96–122 include portions of Doc. 17, Doc. 18, Doc. 19, Doc. 20, Doc. 21, Doc. 22, Doc. 23, Doc. 24, Doc. 25, Doc. 26, Doc. 27, Doc. 28, Doc. 29, Doc. 30, Doc. 31, and Doc. 32], 125 [Pg. 125 includes portions of Doc. 33 and Doc. 34], 127–136 [Pgs. 127–136 include portions of Doc. 34, Doc. 35, Doc. 36, Doc. 37, Doc. 38, Doc. 39, Doc. 40, Doc. 41, Doc. 42, Doc. 43, Doc. 44, Doc. 45, and Doc. 46], 151–161 [Pgs. 151–161 include portions of Doc. 59, Doc. 60, Doc. 61, Doc. 62, Doc. 63, Doc. 64, Doc. 65, Doc. 66, Doc. 67, and Doc. 68]; situation in, 82–85 [Pg. 82 is part of Doc. 12], 1621 [Pg. 1621 is part of Doc. 1125]

Petroleum pipelines: Development of, 109–111 [Pgs. 109–111 include portions of Doc. 23, Doc. 24, and Doc. 25], 119 [Pg. 119 includes portions of Doc. 28 and Doc. 29], 137–140 [Pgs. 137–140 include portions of Doc. 46, Doc. 47, Doc. 48, and Doc. 49]; strategic importance of, 1010 [Pg. 1010 is part of Doc. 659]

Petroleum resources: British position, 93–94 [Pgs. 93–94 include portions of Doc. 14, Doc. 15, and Doc. 16], 104 [Pg. 104 includes portions of Doc. 19 and Doc. 20], 107–108 [Pgs. 107–108 include portions of Doc. 21, Doc. 22, and Doc. 23]; concessions, disputes concerning, 94–95 [Pgs. 94–95 include portions of Doc. 15 and Doc. 16], 104–105 [Pgs. 104–105 include portions of Doc. 19, Doc. 20, and Doc. 21]; defense of, 17 [Pg. 17 is part of Doc. 3], 30 [Pg. 30 is part of Doc. 3], 41 [Pg. 41 is part of Doc. 4], 58 [Pg. 58 is part of Doc. 10], 1010 [Pg. 1010 is part of Doc. 659]; development of, U.S. participation in the, 41 [Pg. 41 is part of Doc. 4], 51 [Pg. 51 is part of Doc. 8], 91–164 [Pgs. 91–164 include portions of Doc. 14, Doc. 15, Doc. 16, Doc. 17, Doc. 18, Doc. 19, Doc. 20, Doc. 21, Doc. 22, Doc. 23, Doc. 24, Doc. 25, Doc. 26, Doc. 27, Doc. 28, Doc. 29, Doc. 30, Doc. 31, Doc. 32, Doc. 33, Doc. 34, Doc. 35, Doc. 36, Doc. 37, Doc. 38, Doc. 39, Doc. 40, Doc. 41, Doc. 42, Doc. 43, Doc. 44, Doc. 45, Doc. 46, Doc. 47, Doc. 48, Doc. 49, Doc. 50, Doc. 51, Doc. 52, Doc. 53, Doc. 54, Doc. 55, Doc. 56, Doc. 57, Doc. 58, Doc. 59, Doc. 60, Doc. 61, Doc. 62, Doc. 63, Doc. 64, Doc. 65, Doc. 66, Doc. 67, Doc. 68, Doc. 69, and Doc. 70] passim; neutralization of, proposed, 58 [Pg. 58 is part of Doc. 10]; offshore development of, 82 [Pg. 82 is part of Doc. 12], 96–107 [Pgs. 96–107 include portions of Doc. 17, Doc. 18, Doc. 19, Doc. 20, Doc. 21, and Doc. 22], 111–122 [Pgs. 111–122 include portions of Doc. 24, Doc. 25, Doc. 26, Doc. 27, Doc. 28, Doc. 29, Doc. 30, Doc. 31, and Doc. 32], 125 [Pg. 125 includes portions of Doc. 33 and Doc. 34], 127–136 [Pgs. 127–136 include portions of Doc. 34, Doc. 35, Doc. 36, Doc. 37, Doc. 38, Doc. 39, Doc. 40, Doc. 41, Doc. 42, Doc. 43, Doc. 44, Doc. 45, and Doc. 46], 151–161 [Pgs. 151–161 include portions of Doc. 59, Doc. 60, Doc. 61, Doc. 62, Doc. 63, Doc. 64, Doc. 65, Doc. 66, Doc. 67, and Doc. 68]; security importance of, 43 [Pg. 43 is part of Doc. 4], 58 [Pg. 58 is part of Doc. 10], 62–63 [Pg. 62 is part of Doc. 12], 272 [Pg. 272 is part of Doc. 133], 549–550 [Pg. 549 is part of Doc. 315]

Security of, 186 [Pg. 186 is part of Doc. 81], 203n [Pg. 203 is part of Doc. 92], 204n [Pg. 204 is part of Doc. 92], 572 [Pg. 572 is part of Doc. 329], 698 [Pg. 698 includes portions of Doc. 424 and Doc. 425], 1649 [Pg. 1649 is part of Doc. 1146]

Soviet pressure, 5 [Pg. 5 is part of Doc. 1], 30 [Pg. 30 is part of Doc. 3], 33 [Pg. 33 is part of Doc. 4], 40 [Pg. 40 is part of Doc. 4], 42 [Pg. 42 is part of Doc. 4], 62 [Pg. 62 is part of Doc. 12], 199 [Pg. 199 is part of Doc. 91], 474 [Pg. 474 is part of Doc. 264], 519 [Pg. 519 includes portions of Doc. 301 and Doc. 302], 545–546 [Pgs. 545–546 include portions of Doc. 314 and Doc. 315], 548–550 [Pg. 548 is part of Doc. 315], 672 [Pg. 672 is part of Doc. 402], 1062 [Pg. 1062 is part of Doc. 697], 1660 [Pg. 1660 includes portions of Doc. 1151 and Doc. 1152]

Syrian-Iraqi union, proposed. see Syria, proposed merger with under Iraq and Iraq, proposed merger with under Syria.

U.S. economic and military assistance, 45–48 [Pgs. 45–48 include portions of Doc. 4, Doc. 5, Doc. 6, and Doc. 7], 169–170 [Pg. 169 is part of Doc. 73], 172–174 [Pg. 172 is part of Doc. 73], 277 [Pg. 277 is part of Doc. 133], 765 [Pg. 765 includes portions of Doc. 480 and Doc. 481], 807 [Pg. 807 is part of Doc. 515], 937 [Pg. 937 is part of Doc. 608], 943n [Pg. 943 includes portions of Doc. 608 and Doc. 609], 1365 [Pg. 1365 includes portions of Doc. 947 and Doc. 948]

U.S. policy, 52 [Pg. 52 is part of Doc. 8], 62–64 [Pg. 62 is part of Doc. 12], 67–89 [Pgs. 67–89 include portions of Doc. 12 and Doc. 13], 165–179 [Pgs. 165–179 include portions of Doc. 71, Doc. 72, Doc. 73, Doc. 74, and Doc. 75], 182 [Pg. 182 includes portions of Doc. 77 and Doc. 78], 208 [Pg. 208 is part of Doc. 96], 271 [Pg. 271 is part of Doc. 133], 275 [Pg. 275 is part of Doc. 133], 502n [Pg. 502 is part of Doc. 286], 573 [Pg. 573 is part of Doc. 329], 587 [Pg. 587 is part of Doc. 336], 606 [Pg. 606 is part of Doc. 351], 672 [Pg. 672 is part of Doc. 402], 675 [Pg. 675 is part of Doc. 403], 678 [Pg. 678 is part of Doc. 405], 691 [Pg. 691 includes portions of Doc. 417 and Doc. 418], 758 [Pg. 758 is part of Doc. 475], 798 [Pg. 798 includes portions of Doc. 507 and Doc. 508], 831–833 [Pg. 831 is part of Doc. 533], 1061 [Pg. 1061 is part of Doc. 697], 1203 [Pg. 1203 includes portions of Doc. 812 and Doc. 813], 1221 [Pg. 1221 includes portions of Doc. 826 and Doc. 827], 1235 [Pg. 1235 includes portions of Doc. 838 and Doc. 839], 1327 [Pg. 1327 includes portions of Doc. 919, Doc. 920, and Doc. 921], 1435 [Pg. 1435 is part of Doc. 997], 1521–1522 [Pgs. 1521–1522 include portions of Doc. 1057 and Doc. 1058], 1651 [Pg. 1651 is part of Doc. 1146], 1660 [Pg. 1660 includes portions of Doc. 1151 and Doc. 1152]

U.S. security interests in, 1–49 [Pgs. 1–49 include portions of Doc. 1, Doc. 2, Doc. 3, Doc. 4, Doc. 5, Doc. 6, and Doc. 7], 56–59 [Pgs. 56–59 include portions of Doc. 10 and Doc. 11], 271–272 [Pg. 271 is part of Doc. 133], 278 [Pg. 278 is part of Doc. 133], 279n [Pg. 279 includes portions of Doc. 133 and Doc. 134], 455 [Pg. 455 is part of Doc. 249], 456n [Pg. 456 includes portions of Doc. 249, Doc. 250, and Doc. 251], 474 [Pg. 474 is part of Doc. 264], 546 [Pg. 546 is part of Doc. 315], 554 [Pg. 554 is part of Doc. 316], 602 [Pg. 602 includes portions of Doc. 348 and Doc. 349], 611–612 [Pg. 611 is part of Doc. 354], 640 [Pg. 640 includes portions of Doc. 375 and Doc. 376], 652 [Pg. 652 is part of Doc. 386], 658 [Pg. 658 includes portions of Doc. 391 and Doc. 392], 832–833 [Pg. 832 is part of Doc. 533], 835–837 [Pg. 835 is part of Doc. 533], 970 [Pg. 970 includes portions of Doc. 629 and Doc. 630], 973 [Pg. 973 includes portions of Doc. 631 and Doc. 632], 1011–1012 [Pg. 1011 is part of Doc. 659], 1061–1062 [Pg. 1061 is part of Doc. 697], 1073 [Pg. 1073 is part of Doc. 705], 1089 [Pg. 1089 is part of Doc. 722], 1134 [Pg. 1134 is part of Doc. 760], 1219 [Pg. 1219 is part of Doc. 826], 1279 [Pg. 1279 is part of Doc. 882], 1340 [Pg. 1340 is part of Doc. 931], 1436–1437 [Pg. 1436 is part of Doc. 997], 1645 [Pg. 1645 is part of Doc. 1144]

Near East College Association, 840 [Pg. 840 is part of Doc. 533]

Near East Development, 132 [Pg. 132 is part of Doc. 41]

Near East Foundation, 526 [Pg. 526 includes portions of Doc. 305 and Doc. 306], 566 [Pg. 566 is part of Doc. 325], 840 [Pg. 840 is part of Doc. 533]

Nehru, Pandit Jawaharlal, 15 [Pg. 15 is part of Doc. 3], 24 [Pg. 24 is part of Doc. 3], 51 [Pg. 51 is part of Doc. 8], 1483 [Pg. 1483 includes portions of Doc. 1028 and Doc. 1029], 1686 [Pg. 1686 is part of Doc. 1165], 1689 [Pg. 1689 includes portions of Doc. 1166, Doc. 1167, and Doc. 1168], 1693 [Pg. 1693 includes portions of Doc. 1171 and Doc. 1172], 1699 [Pg. 1699 is part of Doc. 1178], 1702–1705 [Pgs. 1702–1705 include portions of Doc. 1180, Doc. 1181, Doc. 1182, and Doc. 1183], 1707 [Pg. 1707 is part of Doc. 1185], 1712 [Pg. 1712 is part of Doc. 1188], 1718–1722 [Pgs. 1718–1722 include portions of Doc. 1193, Doc. 1194, Doc. 1195, Doc. 1196, and Doc. 1197], 1726 [Pg. 1726 is part of Doc. 1202], 1728 [Pg. 1728 includes portions of Doc. 1202 and Doc. 1203], 1731–1739 [Pgs. 1731–1739 include portions of Doc. 1204, Doc. 1205, Doc. 1206, Doc. 1207, Doc. 1208, and Doc. 1209], 1742 [Pg. 1742 includes portions of Doc. 1210 and Doc. 1211], 1744–1746 [Pgs. 1744–1746 include portions of Doc. 1211, Doc. 1212, and Doc. 1213], 1749–1756 [Pgs. 1749–1756 include portions of Doc. 1215, Doc. 1216, and Doc. 1217], 1761 [Pg. 1761 is part of Doc. 1220], 1766–1771 [Pgs. 1766–1771 include portions of Doc. 1223, Doc. 1224, Doc. 1225, Doc. 1226, and Doc. 1227], 1775 [Pg. 1775 includes portions of Doc. 1229, Doc. 1230, and Doc. 1231]

Nelson, Stuart D., 1304n [Pg. 1304 is part of Doc. 903]

Nepal, 8 [Pg. 8 includes portions of Doc. 1, Doc. 2, and Doc. 3], 19 [Pg. 19 is part of Doc. 3], 21 [Pg. 21 is part of Doc. 3], 27 [Pg. 27 is part of Doc. 3], 29 [Pg. 29 is part of Doc. 3]

Netherlands, 63 [Pg. 63 is part of Doc. 12], 453 [Pg. 453 is part of Doc. 249], 694 [Pg. 694 includes portions of Doc. 419, Doc. 420, and Doc. 421], 835 [Pg. 835 is part of Doc. 533], 1512 [Pg. 1512 includes portions of Doc. 1047, Doc. 1048, and Doc. 1049], 1523 [Pg. 1523 includes portions of Doc. 1058 and Doc. 1059], 1526 [Pg. 1526 is part of Doc. 1060], 1683 [Pg. 1683 is part of Doc. 1161]

Neuville, René, 661–663 [Pgs. 661–663 include portions of Doc. 392, Doc. 393, and Doc. 394], 680n [Pg. 680 includes portions of Doc. 406 and Doc. 407], 683n [Pg. 683 includes portions of Doc. 408 and Doc. 409], 747 [Pg. 747 includes portions of Doc. 464 and Doc. 465], 843 [Pg. 843 includes portions of Doc. 534 and Doc. 535], 999–1000 [Pgs. 999–1000 include portions of Doc. 649, Doc. 650, and Doc. 651], 1160n [Pg. 1160 is part of Doc. 780], 1512 [Pg. 1512 includes portions of Doc. 1047, Doc. 1048, and Doc. 1049]

Newmont Mining Corporation, 1794 [Pg. 1794 is part of Doc. 1236]

New Zealand, 52 [Pg. 52 is part of Doc. 8], 694 [Pg. 694 includes portions of Doc. 419, Doc. 420, and Doc. 421], 1511 [Pg. 1511 includes portions of Doc. 1046 and Doc. 1047]

Nicaragua, 1511 [Pg. 1511 includes portions of Doc. 1046 and Doc. 1047]

Nicholson, Thomas L., 1780 [Pg. 1780 is part of Doc. 1235]

Niles, David K., 1083n [Pg. 1083 is part of Doc. 717], 1332 [Pg. 1332 is part of Doc. 924]

Nimitz, Fleet Adm. Chester W., 1691–1693 [Pgs. 1691–1693 include portions of Doc. 1169, Doc. 1170, Doc. 1171, and Doc. 1172], 1700 [Pg. 1700 is part of Doc. 1179], 1702 [Pg. 1702 includes portions of Doc. 1180 and Doc. 1181], 1704–1706 [Pgs. 1704–1706 include portions of Doc. 1182, Doc. 1183, and Doc. 1184], 1709–1710 [Pgs. 1709–1710 include portions of Doc. 1187 and Doc. 1188], 1715 [Pg. 1715 includes portions of Doc. 1190 and Doc. 1191], 1717–1718 [Pgs. 1717–1718 include portions of Doc. 1192 and Doc. 1193], 1722–1723 [Pgs. 1722–1723 include portions of Doc. 1196, Doc. 1197, and Doc. 1198], 1726 [Pg. 1726 is part of Doc. 1202], 1740–1742 [Pgs. 1740–1742 include portions of Doc. 1209, Doc. 1210, and Doc. 1211], 1744 [Pg. 1744 includes portions of Doc. 1211 and Doc. 1212], 1748–1749 [Pgs. 1748–1749 include portions of Doc. 1214 and Doc. 1215]

Nitze, Paul H., 111n [Pg. 111 includes portions of Doc. 24 and Doc. 25], 1332 [Pg. 1332 is part of Doc. 924], 1654n [Pg. 1654 includes portions of Doc. 1147 and Doc. 1148]

Noel-Baker, Philip J., 350 [Pg. 350 is part of Doc. 176], 1761 [Pg. 1761 is part of Doc. 1220]

Nokrashy Pasha, 80–81 [Pg. 80 is part of Doc. 12], 186n [Pg. 186 is part of Doc. 81], 197–198 [Pgs. 197–198 include portions of Doc. 89 and Doc. 90]

North Atlantic Treaty Organization, 29n [Pg. 29 is part of Doc. 3], 45n [Pg. 45 includes portions of Doc. 4 and Doc. 5], 233 [Pg. 233 includes portions of Doc. 106 and Doc. 107], 271n [Pg. 271 is part of Doc. 133], 1640n [Pg. 1640 includes portions of Doc. 1140 and Doc. 1141]

North Atlantic Treaty Organization Council, 414n [Pg. 414 includes portions of Doc. 218 and Doc. 219]

North Atlantic Treaty Organization countries, 503 [Pg. 503 includes portions of Doc. 286 and Doc. 287], 505 [Pg. 505 includes portions of Doc. 288 and Doc. 289], 550 [Pg. 550 is part of Doc. 315], 1616 [Pg. 1616 includes portions of Doc. 1122 and Doc. 1123], 1651 [Pg. 1651 is part of Doc. 1146]

Norton, Sir Clifford, 235–236 [Pgs. 235–236 include portions of Doc. 107, Doc. 108, Doc. 109, and Doc. 110], 240 [Pg. 240 is part of Doc. 113], 256 [Pg. 256 includes portions of Doc. 121 and Doc. 122], 268 [Pg. 268 is part of Doc. 132], 291 [Pg. 291 includes portions of Doc. 141 and Doc. 142], 311 [Pg. 311 includes portions of Doc. 151 and Doc. 152], 312n [Pg. 312 includes portions of Doc. 152 and Doc. 153], 315 [Pg. 315 includes portions of Doc. 154 and Doc. 155], 323 [Pg. 323 includes portions of Doc. 161 and Doc. 162], 354 [Pg. 354 is part of Doc. 178], 362n [Pg. 362 is part of Doc. 185], 370 [Pg. 370 includes portions of Doc. 191 and Doc. 192], 385 [Pg. 385 is part of Doc. 201], 416 [Pg. 416 includes portions of Doc. 219 and Doc. 220], 421 [Pg. 421 is part of Doc. 223], 426 [Pg. 426 includes portions of Doc. 228 and Doc. 229], 435–437 [Pgs. 435–437 include portions of Doc. 235, Doc. 236, Doc. 237, Doc. 238, and Doc. 239], 446 [Pg. 446 is part of Doc. 244]

Norway, 34 [Pg. 34 is part of Doc. 4], 159 [Pg. 159 is part of Doc. 66], 453 [Pg. 453 is part of Doc. 249], 456n [Pg. 456 includes portions of Doc. 249, Doc. 250, and Doc. 251], 1290 [Pg. 1290 includes portions of Doc. 891 and Doc. 892], 1640 [Pg. 1640 includes portions of Doc. 1140 and Doc. 1141], 1762n [Pg. 1762 is part of Doc. 1221]

Nuri as-Said, 80 [Pg. 80 is part of Doc. 12], 111 [Pg. 111 includes portions of Doc. 24 and Doc. 25], 139 [Pg. 139 is part of Doc. 48], 143 [Pg. 143 is part of Doc. 51], 145–146 [Pgs. 145–146 include portions of Doc. 52, Doc. 53, and Doc. 54], 148 [Pg. 148 is part of Doc. 55], 156 [Pg. 156 includes portions of Doc. 63, Doc. 64, and Doc. 65], 635 [Pg. 635 is part of Doc. 372], 746 [Pg. 746 is part of Doc. 463], 757 [Pg. 757 includes portions of Doc. 474 and Doc. 475], 810 [Pg. 810 includes portions of Doc. 517 and Doc. 518], 852 [Pg. 852 is part of Doc. 542], 927 [Pg. 927 includes portions of Doc. 602 and Doc. 603], 994–995 [Pgs. 994–995 include portions of Doc. 645, Doc. 646, and Doc. 647], 1008n [Pg. 1008 includes portions of Doc. 657 and Doc. 658]

Nuveen, John, 237n [Pg. 237 is part of Doc. 111], 238 [Pg. 238 includes portions of Doc. 111 and Doc. 112], 360–361 [Pgs. 360–361 include portions of Doc. 182, Doc. 183, and Doc. 184], 444n [Pg. 444 is part of Doc. 243]

Nuwar, Capt. Ali, 1314 [Pg. 1314 includes portions of Doc. 908 and Doc. 909]

Nye, Lt. Gen. Sir Archibald, 1691 [Pg. 1691 includes portions of Doc. 1169, Doc. 1170, and Doc. 1171], 1699 [Pg. 1699 is part of Doc. 1178], 1720 [Pg. 1720 includes portions of Doc. 1194 and Doc. 1195], 1744 [Pg. 1744 includes portions of Doc. 1211 and Doc. 1212], 1759 [Pg. 1759 includes portions of Doc. 1218 and Doc. 1219], 1768 [Pg. 1768 includes portions of Doc. 1224 and Doc. 1225], 1770–1771 [Pgs. 1770–1771 include portions of Doc. 1225, Doc. 1226, and Doc. 1227]

O’Donoghue, Sidney E., 280–281 [Pgs. 280–281 include portions of Doc. 134, Doc. 135, and Doc. 136]

Office of the Foreign Liquidation Commissioner, 1696 [Pg. 1696 includes portions of Doc. 1174 and Doc. 1175]

Ohliger, Floyd, 133 [Pg. 133 is part of Doc. 42]

Only, John H., 590–591 [Pg. 590 is part of Doc. 339]

O’Keefe, Col. Richard J., 1583 [Pg. 1583 includes portions of Doc. 1108 and Doc. 1109], 1589–1594 [Pgs. 1589–1594 include portions of Doc. 1110, Doc. 1111, and Doc. 1112], 1596 [Pg. 1596 includes portions of Doc. 1113 and Doc. 1114], 1599 [Pg. 1599 includes portions of Doc. 1116 and Doc. 1117], 1604–1605 [Pg. 1604 is part of Doc. 1119], 1612–1613 [Pgs. 1612–1613 include portions of Doc. 1119 and Doc. 1120], 1618–1620 [Pgs. 1618–1620 include portions of Doc. 1124 and Doc. 1125], 1622 [Pg. 1622 includes portions of Doc. 1125 and Doc. 1126], 1624–1627 [Pgs. 1624–1627 include portions of Doc. 1127, Doc. 1128, Doc. 1129, and Doc. 1130]

Oman, 83 [Pg. 83 is part of Doc. 12]

Ordonneau, Pierre-André, 1774 [Pg. 1774 includes portions of Doc. 1228 and Doc. 1229]

Organization of European Economic Cooperation, 441 [Pg. 441 is part of Doc. 242], 1643 [Pg. 1643 includes portions of Doc. 1142 and Doc. 1143], 1658–1659 [Pgs. 1658–1659 include portions of Doc. 1150 and Doc. 1151], 1676 [Pg. 1676 is part of Doc. 1158]

Overseas Consultants, Inc. see under Iran.

Owen, Garry, 133 [Pg. 133 is part of Doc. 42], 152 [Pg. 152 is part of Doc. 60], 155n [Pg. 155 is part of Doc. 63]

Owen, Marguerite, 1426 [Pg. 1426 includes portions of Doc. 993 and Doc. 994]

Pachachi, Muzahim al-, 139 [Pg. 139 is part of Doc. 48]

Pacific Western Oil Corporation, 104–105 [Pgs. 104–105 include portions of Doc. 19, Doc. 20, and Doc. 21], 120 [Pg. 120 includes portions of Doc. 29 and Doc. 30], 132n [Pg. 132 is part of Doc. 41]

Packer, Earl L., 1780 [Pg. 1780 is part of Doc. 1235]

Palliavi, Mohammad Reza Shah, Shah of Iran, 4–5 [Pg. 4 is part of Doc. 1], 55 [Pg. 55 is part of Doc. 9], 170 [Pg. 170 is part of Doc. 73], 471–473 [Pgs. 471–473 include portions of Doc. 262 and Doc. 263], 475–486 [Pgs. 475–486 include portions of Doc. 264, Doc. 265, Doc. 266, Doc. 267, Doc. 268, Doc. 269, Doc. 270, Doc. 271, Doc. 272, and Doc. 273], 488–489 [Pgs. 488–489 include portions of Doc. 275, Doc. 276, and Doc. 277], 498–503 [Pgs. 498–503 include portions of Doc. 282, Doc. 283, Doc. 284, Doc. 285, Doc. 286, and Doc. 287], 505 [Pg. 505 includes portions of Doc. 288 and Doc. 289], 507 [Pg. 507 includes portions of Doc. 291, Doc. 292, and Doc. 293], 512n [Pg. 512 includes portions of Doc. 295 and Doc. 296], 515 [Pg. 515 is part of Doc. 298], 517–519 [Pgs. 517–519 include portions of Doc. 299, Doc. 300, Doc. 301, and Doc. 302], 522–523 [Pgs. 522–523 include portions of Doc. 302, Doc. 303, and Doc. 304], 527 [Pg. 527 includes portions of Doc. 306 and Doc. 307], 529n [Pg. 529 includes portions of Doc. 309 and Doc. 310], 530 [Pg. 530 is part of Doc. 310], 536 [Pg. 536 is part of Doc. 312], 538–539 [Pg. 538 is part of Doc. 312], 542 [Pg. 542 includes portions of Doc. 313 and Doc. 314], 548 [Pg. 548 is part of Doc. 315], 552–556 [Pgs. 552–556 include portions of Doc. 316 and Doc. 317], 557n [Pg. 557 includes portions of Doc. 317 and Doc. 318], 558 [Pg. 558 includes portions of Doc. 319 and Doc. 320], 561n [Pg. 561 includes portions of Doc. 320 and Doc. 321], 563–565 [Pgs. 563–565 include portions of Doc. 322, Doc. 323, Doc. 324, and Doc. 325], 567–593 [Pgs. 567–593 include portions of Doc. 325, Doc. 326, Doc. 327, Doc. 328, Doc. 329, Doc. 330, Doc. 331, Doc. 332, Doc. 333, Doc. 334, Doc. 335, Doc. 336, Doc. 337, Doc. 338, Doc. 339, and Doc. 340], 1512 [Pg. 1512 includes portions of Doc. 1047, Doc. 1048, and Doc. 1049], 1559 [Pg. 1559 is part of Doc. 1088]

Pakistan (see also Kashmir dispute between India and Pakistan): British arms, request for, 1696–1698 [Pgs. 1696–1698 include portions of Doc. 1174, Doc. 1175, Doc. 1176, and Doc. 1177]

British policy, 51 [Pg. 51 is part of Doc. 8], 1483 [Pg. 1483 includes portions of Doc. 1028 and Doc. 1029]

Czechoslovak technical mission, 15 [Pg. 15 is part of Doc. 3]

Independence, 11 [Pg. 11 is part of Doc. 3]

Israel, policy toward, 694 [Pg. 694 includes portions of Doc. 419, Doc. 420, and Doc. 421]

Middle East Pact, question of inclusion in proposed, 37 [Pg. 37 is part of Doc. 4]

Military strength, 21–22 [Pg. 21 is part of Doc. 3]

Northwest frontier tribes, dispute with Afghanistan concerning, 13 [Pg. 13 is part of Doc. 3], 1745 [Pg. 1745 includes portions of Doc. 1212 and Doc. 1213], 1777n [Pg. 1777 is part of Doc. 1232]

Refugee problems, 836 [Pg. 836 is part of Doc. 533]

Regional cooperation with Afghanistan, Iran, and India, proposed, 6 [Pg. 6 is part of Doc. 1]

Soviet policy, 15 [Pg. 15 is part of Doc. 3], 474 [Pg. 474 is part of Doc. 264], 545 [Pg. 545 includes portions of Doc. 314 and Doc. 315]

U.S. base facilities, proposed, 10 [Pg. 10 is part of Doc. 3], 30–31 [Pgs. 30–31 include portions of Doc. 3 and Doc. 4], 41–42 [Pg. 41 is part of Doc. 4]

U.S. economic and financial assistance, 25–26 [Pg. 25 is part of Doc. 3]

U.S. loan, request for (1947), 18 [Pg. 18 is part of Doc. 3]

U.S. military assistance, 24–28 [Pg. 24 is part of Doc. 3], 46–47 [Pgs. 46–47 include portions of Doc. 5 and Doc. 6], 1691 [Pg. 1691 includes portions of Doc. 1169, Doc. 1170, and Doc. 1171]

U.S. policy, 8 [Pg. 8 includes portions of Doc. 1, Doc. 2, and Doc. 3], 10 [Pg. 10 is part of Doc. 3], 12 [Pg. 12 is part of Doc. 3], 17 [Pg. 17 is part of Doc. 3], 29 [Pg. 29 is part of Doc. 3], 31 [Pg. 31 includes portions of Doc. 3 and Doc. 4], 41–42 [Pg. 41 is part of Doc. 4], 46 [Pg. 46 is part of Doc. 5]

Visit to the United States by the Prime Minister, proposed, 1483 [Pg. 1483 includes portions of Doc. 1028 and Doc. 1029]

Palestine question: Arab Higher Committee, 703 [Pg. 703 includes portions of Doc. 428 and Doc. 429]

Arab League, 35 [Pg. 35 is part of Doc. 4], 55 [Pg. 55 is part of Doc. 9], 66 [Pg. 66 is part of Doc. 12], 69–70 [Pg. 69 is part of Doc. 12], 156 [Pg. 156 includes portions of Doc. 63, Doc. 64, and Doc. 65], 168 [Pg. 168 includes portions of Doc. 72 and Doc. 73], 169n [Pg. 169 is part of Doc. 73], 174 [Pg. 174 is part of Doc. 73], 211 [Pg. 211 is part of Doc. 96], 215 [Pg. 215 is part of Doc. 96], 604 [Pg. 604 is part of Doc. 350], 704 [Pg. 704 is part of Doc. 429], 716n [Pg. 716 includes portions of Doc. 440 and Doc. 441], 768 [Pg. 768 includes portions of Doc. 485 and Doc. 486], 777 [Pg. 777 is part of Doc. 493], 792n [Pg. 792 is part of Doc. 505], 803 [Pg. 803 includes portions of Doc. 511, Doc. 512, and Doc. 513], 853 [Pg. 853 includes portions of Doc. 543 and Doc. 544], 1029 [Pg. 1029 includes portions of Doc. 668 and Doc. 669], 1089 [Pg. 1089 is part of Doc. 722], 1246 [Pg. 1246 is part of Doc. 850], 1248 [Pg. 1248 is part of Doc. 852], 1340 [Pg. 1340 is part of Doc. 931], 1382 [Pg. 1382 includes portions of Doc. 960 and Doc. 961], 1389 [Pg. 1389 includes portions of Doc. 965 and Doc. 966], 1434 [Pg. 1434 is part of Doc. 997], 1461 [Pg. 1461 includes portions of Doc. 1015 and Doc. 1016], 1486–1488 [Pgs. 1486–1488 include portions of Doc. 1029, Doc. 1030, and Doc. 1031], 1490 [Pg. 1490 includes portions of Doc. 1031 and Doc. 1032], 1494 [Pg. 1494 includes portions of Doc. 1034 and Doc. 1035], 1503 [Pg. 1503 is part of Doc. 1039], 1506–1508 [Pgs. 1506–1508 include portions of Doc. 1041, Doc. 1042, and Doc. 1043], 1527n [Pg. 1527 includes portions of Doc. 1060 and Doc. 1061], 1571 [Pg. 1571 is part of Doc. 1097], 1578n [Pg. 1578 includes portions of Doc. 1103 and Doc. 1104], 1668 [Pg. 1668 is part of Doc. 1152], 1783–1784 [Pg. 1783 is part of Doc. 1235]

Arab Legion, activities of, 604 [Pg. 604 is part of Doc. 350], 608–609 [Pgs. 608–609 include portions of Doc. 352 and Doc. 353], 644n [Pg. 644 is part of Doc. 381], 648 [Pg. 648 is part of Doc. 383], 685 [Pg. 685 includes portions of Doc. 410 and Doc. 411], 732 [Pg. 732 includes portions of Doc. 454 and Doc. 455], 746 [Pg. 746 is part of Doc. 463], 749 [Pg. 749 includes portions of Doc. 466 and Doc. 467], 787n [Pg. 787 includes portions of Doc. 501 and Doc. 502], 810 [Pg. 810 includes portions of Doc. 517 and Doc. 518], 812–813 [Pgs. 812–813 include portions of Doc. 518 and Doc. 519], 815n [Pg. 815 includes portions of Doc. 520 and Doc. 521], 821 [Pg. 821 includes portions of Doc. 528 and Doc. 529], 823–824 [Pgs. 823–824 include portions of Doc. 529, Doc. 530, and Doc. 531], 844–845 [Pgs. 844–845 include portions of Doc. 535 and Doc. 536], 847 [Pg. 847 is part of Doc. 537], 850–852 [Pgs. 850–852 include portions of Doc. 540, Doc. 541, and Doc. 542], 860–861 [Pgs. 860–861 include portions of Doc. 547 and Doc. 548], 866–867 [Pgs. 866–867 include portions of Doc. 553 and Doc. 554], 872 [Pg. 872 is part of Doc. 560], 887 [Pg. 887 includes portions of Doc. 573 and Doc. 574], 917 [Pg. 917 is part of Doc. 594], 978 [Pg. 978 includes portions of Doc. 634 and Doc. 635], 981n [Pg. 981 is part of Doc. 638], 999 [Pg. 999 includes portions of Doc. 649 and Doc. 650], 1042 [Pg. 1042 includes portions of Doc. 679 and Doc. 680], 1078 [Pg. 1078 includes portions of Doc. 710 and Doc. 711], 1081 [Pg. 1081 is part of Doc. 715], 1121 [Pg. 1121 is part of Doc. 750], 1204 [Pg. 1204 is part of Doc. 813]

Arab Palestine: annexation by or merger with Jordan, proposed, 66 [Pg. 66 is part of Doc. 12], 170–171 [Pg. 170 is part of Doc. 73], 604 [Pg. 604 is part of Doc. 350], 608 [Pg. 608 is part of Doc. 352], 644 [Pg. 644 is part of Doc. 381], 657 [Pg. 657 is part of Doc. 391], 666 [Pg. 666 includes portions of Doc. 396 and Doc. 397], 682 [Pg. 682 is part of Doc. 408], 687–688 [Pgs. 687–688 include portions of Doc. 413, Doc. 414, and Doc. 415], 737 [Pg. 737 is part of Doc. 457], 841 [Pg. 841 is part of Doc. 533], 853 [Pg. 853 includes portions of Doc. 543 and Doc. 544], 915 [Pg. 915 is part of Doc. 592], 917n [Pg. 917 is part of Doc. 594], 932 [Pg. 932 includes portions of Doc. 605 and Doc. 606], 938 [Pg. 938 is part of Doc. 608], 989 [Pg. 989 is part of Doc. 641], 1000 [Pg. 1000 includes portions of Doc. 650 and Doc. 651], 1037 [Pg. 1037 is part of Doc. 675], 1078 [Pg. 1078 includes portions of Doc. 710 and Doc. 711], 1081–1084 [Pgs. 1081–1084 include portions of Doc. 715, Doc. 716, Doc. 717, Doc. 718, and Doc. 719], 1090 [Pg. 1090 includes portions of Doc. 723 and Doc. 724], 1099 [Pg. 1099 is part of Doc. 733], 1144 [Pg. 1144 includes portions of Doc. 768 and Doc. 769], 1215 [Pg. 1215 includes portions of Doc. 822 and Doc. 823], 1224 [Pg. 1224 is part of Doc. 828], 1247 [Pg. 1247 includes portions of Doc. 851 and Doc. 852], 1290 [Pg. 1290 includes portions of Doc. 891 and Doc. 892], 1346 [Pg. 1346 includes portions of Doc. 933 and Doc. 934], 1377–1378 [Pg. 1377 is part of Doc. 958], 1426–1427 [Pgs. 1426–1427 include portions of Doc. 993 and Doc. 994], 1448–1449 [Pgs. 1448–1449 include portions of Doc. 1002, Doc. 1003, Doc. 1004, and Doc. 1005], 1451–1452 [Pgs. 1451–1452 include portions of Doc. 1006, Doc. 1007, and Doc. 1008], 145–1459 [Pgs. 145–1459 include portions of Doc. 52, Doc. 53, Doc. 54, Doc. 55, Doc. 56, Doc. 57, Doc. 58, Doc. 59, Doc. 60, Doc. 61, Doc. 62, Doc. 63, Doc. 64, Doc. 65, Doc. 66, Doc. 67, Doc. 68, Doc. 69, Doc. 70, Doc. 71, Doc. 72, Doc. 73, Doc. 74, Doc. 75, Doc. 76, Doc. 77, Doc. 78, Doc. 79, Doc. 80, Doc. 81, Doc. 82, Doc. 83, Doc. 84, Doc. 85, Doc. 86, Doc. 87, Doc. 88, Doc. 89, Doc. 90, Doc. 91, Doc. 92, Doc. 93, Doc. 94, Doc. 95, Doc. 96, Doc. 97, Doc. 98, Doc. 99, Doc. 100, Doc. 101, Doc. 102, Doc. 103, Doc. 104, Doc. 105, Doc. 106, Doc. 107, Doc. 108, Doc. 109, Doc. 110, Doc. 111, Doc. 112, Doc. 113, Doc. 114, Doc. 115, Doc. 116, Doc. 117, Doc. 118, Doc. 119, Doc. 120, Doc. 121, Doc. 122, Doc. 123, Doc. 124, Doc. 125, Doc. 126, Doc. 127, Doc. 128, Doc. 129, Doc. 130, Doc. 131, Doc. 132, Doc. 133, Doc. 134, Doc. 135, Doc. 136, Doc. 137, Doc. 138, Doc. 139, Doc. 140, Doc. 141, Doc. 142, Doc. 143, Doc. 144, Doc. 145, Doc. 146, Doc. 147, Doc. 148, Doc. 149, Doc. 150, Doc. 151, Doc. 152, Doc. 153, Doc. 154, Doc. 155, Doc. 156, Doc. 157, Doc. 158, Doc. 159, Doc. 160, Doc. 161, Doc. 162, Doc. 163, Doc. 164, Doc. 165, Doc. 166, Doc. 167, Doc. 168, Doc. 169, Doc. 170, Doc. 171, Doc. 172, Doc. 173, Doc. 174, Doc. 175, Doc. 176, Doc. 177, Doc. 178, Doc. 179, Doc. 180, Doc. 181, Doc. 182, Doc. 183, Doc. 184, Doc. 185, Doc. 186, Doc. 187, Doc. 188, Doc. 189, Doc. 190, Doc. 191, Doc. 192, Doc. 193, Doc. 194, Doc. 195, Doc. 196, Doc. 197, Doc. 198, Doc. 199, Doc. 200, Doc. 201, Doc. 202, Doc. 203, Doc. 204, Doc. 205, Doc. 206, Doc. 207, Doc. 208, Doc. 209, Doc. 210, Doc. 211, Doc. 212, Doc. 213, Doc. 214, Doc. 215, Doc. 216, Doc. 217, Doc. 218, Doc. 219, Doc. 220, Doc. 221, Doc. 222, Doc. 223, Doc. 224, Doc. 225, Doc. 226, Doc. 227, Doc. 228, Doc. 229, Doc. 230, Doc. 231, Doc. 232, Doc. 233, Doc. 234, Doc. 235, Doc. 236, Doc. 237, Doc. 238, Doc. 239, Doc. 240, Doc. 241, Doc. 242, Doc. 243, Doc. 244, Doc. 245, Doc. 246, Doc. 247, Doc. 248, Doc. 249, Doc. 250, Doc. 251, Doc. 252, Doc. 253, Doc. 254, Doc. 255, Doc. 256, Doc. 257, Doc. 258, Doc. 259, Doc. 260, Doc. 261, Doc. 262, Doc. 263, Doc. 264, Doc. 265, Doc. 266, Doc. 267, Doc. 268, Doc. 269, Doc. 270, Doc. 271, Doc. 272, Doc. 273, Doc. 274, Doc. 275, Doc. 276, Doc. 277, Doc. 278, Doc. 279, Doc. 280, Doc. 281, Doc. 282, Doc. 283, Doc. 284, Doc. 285, Doc. 286, Doc. 287, Doc. 288, Doc. 289, Doc. 290, Doc. 291, Doc. 292, Doc. 293, Doc. 294, Doc. 295, Doc. 296, Doc. 297, Doc. 298, Doc. 299, Doc. 300, Doc. 301, Doc. 302, Doc. 303, Doc. 304, Doc. 305, Doc. 306, Doc. 307, Doc. 308, Doc. 309, Doc. 310, Doc. 311, Doc. 312, Doc. 313, Doc. 314, Doc. 315, Doc. 316, Doc. 317, Doc. 318, Doc. 319, Doc. 320, Doc. 321, Doc. 322, Doc. 323, Doc. 324, Doc. 325, Doc. 326, Doc. 327, Doc. 328, Doc. 329, Doc. 330, Doc. 331, Doc. 332, Doc. 333, Doc. 334, Doc. 335, Doc. 336, Doc. 337, Doc. 338, Doc. 339, Doc. 340, Doc. 341, Doc. 342, Doc. 343, Doc. 344, Doc. 345, Doc. 346, Doc. 347, Doc. 348, Doc. 349, Doc. 350, Doc. 351, Doc. 352, Doc. 353, Doc. 354, Doc. 355, Doc. 356, Doc. 357, Doc. 358, Doc. 359, Doc. 360, Doc. 361, Doc. 362, Doc. 363, Doc. 364, Doc. 365, Doc. 366, Doc. 367, Doc. 368, Doc. 369, Doc. 370, Doc. 371, Doc. 372, Doc. 373, Doc. 374, Doc. 375, Doc. 376, Doc. 377, Doc. 378, Doc. 379, Doc. 380, Doc. 381, Doc. 382, Doc. 383, Doc. 384, Doc. 385, Doc. 386, Doc. 387, Doc. 388, Doc. 389, Doc. 390, Doc. 391, Doc. 392, Doc. 393, Doc. 394, Doc. 395, Doc. 396, Doc. 397, Doc. 398, Doc. 399, Doc. 400, Doc. 401, Doc. 402, Doc. 403, Doc. 404, Doc. 405, Doc. 406, Doc. 407, Doc. 408, Doc. 409, Doc. 410, Doc. 411, Doc. 412, Doc. 413, Doc. 414, Doc. 415, Doc. 416, Doc. 417, Doc. 418, Doc. 419, Doc. 420, Doc. 421, Doc. 422, Doc. 423, Doc. 424, Doc. 425, Doc. 426, Doc. 427, Doc. 428, Doc. 429, Doc. 430, Doc. 431, Doc. 432, Doc. 433, Doc. 434, Doc. 435, Doc. 436, Doc. 437, Doc. 438, Doc. 439, Doc. 440, Doc. 441, Doc. 442, Doc. 443, Doc. 444, Doc. 445, Doc. 446, Doc. 447, Doc. 448, Doc. 449, Doc. 450, Doc. 451, Doc. 452, Doc. 453, Doc. 454, Doc. 455, Doc. 456, Doc. 457, Doc. 458, Doc. 459, Doc. 460, Doc. 461, Doc. 462, Doc. 463, Doc. 464, Doc. 465, Doc. 466, Doc. 467, Doc. 468, Doc. 469, Doc. 470, Doc. 471, Doc. 472, Doc. 473, Doc. 474, Doc. 475, Doc. 476, Doc. 477, Doc. 478, Doc. 479, Doc. 480, Doc. 481, Doc. 482, Doc. 483, Doc. 484, Doc. 485, Doc. 486, Doc. 487, Doc. 488, Doc. 489, Doc. 490, Doc. 491, Doc. 492, Doc. 493, Doc. 494, Doc. 495, Doc. 496, Doc. 497, Doc. 498, Doc. 499, Doc. 500, Doc. 501, Doc. 502, Doc. 503, Doc. 504, Doc. 505, Doc. 506, Doc. 507, Doc. 508, Doc. 509, Doc. 510, Doc. 511, Doc. 512, Doc. 513, Doc. 514, Doc. 515, Doc. 516, Doc. 517, Doc. 518, Doc. 519, Doc. 520, Doc. 521, Doc. 522, Doc. 523, Doc. 524, Doc. 525, Doc. 526, Doc. 527, Doc. 528, Doc. 529, Doc. 530, Doc. 531, Doc. 532, Doc. 533, Doc. 534, Doc. 535, Doc. 536, Doc. 537, Doc. 538, Doc. 539, Doc. 540, Doc. 541, Doc. 542, Doc. 543, Doc. 544, Doc. 545, Doc. 546, Doc. 547, Doc. 548, Doc. 549, Doc. 550, Doc. 551, Doc. 552, Doc. 553, Doc. 554, Doc. 555, Doc. 556, Doc. 557, Doc. 558, Doc. 559, Doc. 560, Doc. 561, Doc. 562, Doc. 563, Doc. 564, Doc. 565, Doc. 566, Doc. 567, Doc. 568, Doc. 569, Doc. 570, Doc. 571, Doc. 572, Doc. 573, Doc. 574, Doc. 575, Doc. 576, Doc. 577, Doc. 578, Doc. 579, Doc. 580, Doc. 581, Doc. 582, Doc. 583, Doc. 584, Doc. 585, Doc. 586, Doc. 587, Doc. 588, Doc. 589, Doc. 590, Doc. 591, Doc. 592, Doc. 593, Doc. 594, Doc. 595, Doc. 596, Doc. 597, Doc. 598, Doc. 599, Doc. 600, Doc. 601, Doc. 602, Doc. 603, Doc. 604, Doc. 605, Doc. 606, Doc. 607, Doc. 608, Doc. 609, Doc. 610, Doc. 611, Doc. 612, Doc. 613, Doc. 614, Doc. 615, Doc. 616, Doc. 617, Doc. 618, Doc. 619, Doc. 620, Doc. 621, Doc. 622, Doc. 623, Doc. 624, Doc. 625, Doc. 626, Doc. 627, Doc. 628, Doc. 629, Doc. 630, Doc. 631, Doc. 632, Doc. 633, Doc. 634, Doc. 635, Doc. 636, Doc. 637, Doc. 638, Doc. 639, Doc. 640, Doc. 641, Doc. 642, Doc. 643, Doc. 644, Doc. 645, Doc. 646, Doc. 647, Doc. 648, Doc. 649, Doc. 650, Doc. 651, Doc. 652, Doc. 653, Doc. 654, Doc. 655, Doc. 656, Doc. 657, Doc. 658, Doc. 659, Doc. 660, Doc. 661, Doc. 662, Doc. 663, Doc. 664, Doc. 665, Doc. 666, Doc. 667, Doc. 668, Doc. 669, Doc. 670, Doc. 671, Doc. 672, Doc. 673, Doc. 674, Doc. 675, Doc. 676, Doc. 677, Doc. 678, Doc. 679, Doc. 680, Doc. 681, Doc. 682, Doc. 683, Doc. 684, Doc. 685, Doc. 686, Doc. 687, Doc. 688, Doc. 689, Doc. 690, Doc. 691, Doc. 692, Doc. 693, Doc. 694, Doc. 695, Doc. 696, Doc. 697, Doc. 698, Doc. 699, Doc. 700, Doc. 701, Doc. 702, Doc. 703, Doc. 704, Doc. 705, Doc. 706, Doc. 707, Doc. 708, Doc. 709, Doc. 710, Doc. 711, Doc. 712, Doc. 713, Doc. 714, Doc. 715, Doc. 716, Doc. 717, Doc. 718, Doc. 719, Doc. 720, Doc. 721, Doc. 722, Doc. 723, Doc. 724, Doc. 725, Doc. 726, Doc. 727, Doc. 728, Doc. 729, Doc. 730, Doc. 731, Doc. 732, Doc. 733, Doc. 734, Doc. 735, Doc. 736, Doc. 737, Doc. 738, Doc. 739, Doc. 740, Doc. 741, Doc. 742, Doc. 743, Doc. 744, Doc. 745, Doc. 746, Doc. 747, Doc. 748, Doc. 749, Doc. 750, Doc. 751, Doc. 752, Doc. 753, Doc. 754, Doc. 755, Doc. 756, Doc. 757, Doc. 758, Doc. 759, Doc. 760, Doc. 761, Doc. 762, Doc. 763, Doc. 764, Doc. 765, Doc. 766, Doc. 767, Doc. 768, Doc. 769, Doc. 770, Doc. 771, Doc. 772, Doc. 773, Doc. 774, Doc. 775, Doc. 776, Doc. 777, Doc. 778, Doc. 779, Doc. 780, Doc. 781, Doc. 782, Doc. 783, Doc. 784, Doc. 785, Doc. 786, Doc. 787, Doc. 788, Doc. 789, Doc. 790, Doc. 791, Doc. 792, Doc. 793, Doc. 794, Doc. 795, Doc. 796, Doc. 797, Doc. 798, Doc. 799, Doc. 800, Doc. 801, Doc. 802, Doc. 803, Doc. 804, Doc. 805, Doc. 806, Doc. 807, Doc. 808, Doc. 809, Doc. 810, Doc. 811, Doc. 812, Doc. 813, Doc. 814, Doc. 815, Doc. 816, Doc. 817, Doc. 818, Doc. 819, Doc. 820, Doc. 821, Doc. 822, Doc. 823, Doc. 824, Doc. 825, Doc. 826, Doc. 827, Doc. 828, Doc. 829, Doc. 830, Doc. 831, Doc. 832, Doc. 833, Doc. 834, Doc. 835, Doc. 836, Doc. 837, Doc. 838, Doc. 839, Doc. 840, Doc. 841, Doc. 842, Doc. 843, Doc. 844, Doc. 845, Doc. 846, Doc. 847, Doc. 848, Doc. 849, Doc. 850, Doc. 851, Doc. 852, Doc. 853, Doc. 854, Doc. 855, Doc. 856, Doc. 857, Doc. 858, Doc. 859, Doc. 860, Doc. 861, Doc. 862, Doc. 863, Doc. 864, Doc. 865, Doc. 866, Doc. 867, Doc. 868, Doc. 869, Doc. 870, Doc. 871, Doc. 872, Doc. 873, Doc. 874, Doc. 875, Doc. 876, Doc. 877, Doc. 878, Doc. 879, Doc. 880, Doc. 881, Doc. 882, Doc. 883, Doc. 884, Doc. 885, Doc. 886, Doc. 887, Doc. 888, Doc. 889, Doc. 890, Doc. 891, Doc. 892, Doc. 893, Doc. 894, Doc. 895, Doc. 896, Doc. 897, Doc. 898, Doc. 899, Doc. 900, Doc. 901, Doc. 902, Doc. 903, Doc. 904, Doc. 905, Doc. 906, Doc. 907, Doc. 908, Doc. 909, Doc. 910, Doc. 911, Doc. 912, Doc. 913, Doc. 914, Doc. 915, Doc. 916, Doc. 917, Doc. 918, Doc. 919, Doc. 920, Doc. 921, Doc. 922, Doc. 923, Doc. 924, Doc. 925, Doc. 926, Doc. 927, Doc. 928, Doc. 929, Doc. 930, Doc. 931, Doc. 932, Doc. 933, Doc. 934, Doc. 935, Doc. 936, Doc. 937, Doc. 938, Doc. 939, Doc. 940, Doc. 941, Doc. 942, Doc. 943, Doc. 944, Doc. 945, Doc. 946, Doc. 947, Doc. 948, Doc. 949, Doc. 950, Doc. 951, Doc. 952, Doc. 953, Doc. 954, Doc. 955, Doc. 956, Doc. 957, Doc. 958, Doc. 959, Doc. 960, Doc. 961, Doc. 962, Doc. 963, Doc. 964, Doc. 965, Doc. 966, Doc. 967, Doc. 968, Doc. 969, Doc. 970, Doc. 971, Doc. 972, Doc. 973, Doc. 974, Doc. 975, Doc. 976, Doc. 977, Doc. 978, Doc. 979, Doc. 980, Doc. 981, Doc. 982, Doc. 983, Doc. 984, Doc. 985, Doc. 986, Doc. 987, Doc. 988, Doc. 989, Doc. 990, Doc. 991, Doc. 992, Doc. 993, Doc. 994, Doc. 995, Doc. 996, Doc. 997, Doc. 998, Doc. 999, Doc. 1000, Doc. 1001, Doc. 1002, Doc. 1003, Doc. 1004, Doc. 1005, Doc. 1006, Doc. 1007, Doc. 1008, Doc. 1009, Doc. 1010, Doc. 1011, Doc. 1012, Doc. 1013, and Doc. 1014], 1462 [Pg. 1462 includes portions of Doc. 1016 and Doc. 1017], 1486 [Pg. 1486 includes portions of Doc. 1029 and Doc. 1030], 1503 [Pg. 1503 is part of Doc. 1039], 1511 [Pg. 1511 includes portions of Doc. 1046 and Doc. 1047], 1514 [Pg. 1514 includes portions of Doc. 1049 and Doc. 1050], 1526 [Pg. 1526 is part of Doc. 1060], 1553 [Pg. 1553 is part of Doc. 1083], 1578n [Pg. 1578 includes portions of Doc. 1103 and Doc. 1104], 1579–1581 [Pgs. 1579–1581 include portions of Doc. 1104, Doc. 1105, Doc. 1106, and Doc. 1107]; disposition of, 988–989 [Pg. 988 is part of Doc. 641], 999–1000 [Pgs. 999–1000 include portions of Doc. 649, Doc. 650, and Doc. 651], 1019–1020 [Pgs. 1019–1020 include portions of Doc. 663 and Doc. 664], 1104 [Pg. 1104 is part of Doc. 736], 1113–1114 [Pgs. 1113–1114 include portions of Doc. 744 and Doc. 745], 1116 [Pg. 1116 is part of Doc. 747], 1125 [Pg. 1125 is part of Doc. 753], 1171 [Pg. 1171 is part of Doc. 788], 1194 [Pg. 1194 is part of Doc. 806], 1431 [Pg. 1431 is part of Doc. 997]; Palestinian refugees, 935 [Pg. 935 is part of Doc. 608], 937–938 [Pg. 937 is part of Doc. 608], 984–985 [Pg. 984 is part of Doc. 640], 1013–1014 [Pg. 1013 is part of Doc. 660], 1186n [Pg. 1186 includes portions of Doc. 798 and Doc. 799], 1473–1474 [Pg. 1473 is part of Doc. 1025]

Arab states, position of (see also subsequent subheadings), 33–36 [Pg. 33 is part of Doc. 4], 44 [Pg. 44 is part of Doc. 4], 65–66 [Pg. 65 is part of Doc. 12], 138 [Pg. 138 is part of Doc. 48], 143 [Pg. 143 is part of Doc. 51], 157 [Pg. 157 includes portions of Doc. 65 and Doc. 66], 174 [Pg. 174 is part of Doc. 73], 598 [Pg. 598 includes portions of Doc. 344 and Doc. 345], 604–605 [Pgs. 604–605 include portions of Doc. 350 and Doc. 351], 607 [Pg. 607 includes portions of Doc. 351 and Doc. 352], 625–626 [Pgs. 625–626 include portions of Doc. 364 and Doc. 365], 635 [Pg. 635 is part of Doc. 372], 637 [Pg. 637 includes portions of Doc. 373 and Doc. 374], 658 [Pg. 658 includes portions of Doc. 391 and Doc. 392], 660 [Pg. 660 is part of Doc. 392], 666 [Pg. 666 includes portions of Doc. 396 and Doc. 397], 671 [Pg. 671 includes portions of Doc. 401 and Doc. 402], 676 [Pg. 676 is part of Doc. 403], 692 [Pg. 692 is part of Doc. 418], 698 [Pg. 698 includes portions of Doc. 424 and Doc. 425], 703–705 [Pgs. 703–705 include portions of Doc. 428, Doc. 429, and Doc. 430], 708 [Pg. 708 includes portions of Doc. 431 and Doc. 432], 720–722 [Pgs. 720–722 include portions of Doc. 444, Doc. 445, Doc. 446, and Doc. 447], 728 [Pg. 728 is part of Doc. 451], 733 [Pg. 733 is part of Doc. 455], 737–738 [Pg. 737 is part of Doc. 457], 745–746 [Pg. 745 is part of Doc. 463], 748 [Pg. 748 includes portions of Doc. 465 and Doc. 466], 751 [Pg. 751 is part of Doc. 468], 757 [Pg. 757 includes portions of Doc. 474 and Doc. 475], 761–763 [Pgs. 761–763 include portions of Doc. 478 and Doc. 479], 765 [Pg. 765 includes portions of Doc. 480 and Doc. 481], 767–768 [Pgs. 767–768 include portions of Doc. 484, Doc. 485, and Doc. 486], 770 [Pg. 770 is part of Doc. 488], 772–776 [Pgs. 772–776 include portions of Doc. 489, Doc. 490, Doc. 491, Doc. 492, and Doc. 493], 778 [Pg. 778 includes portions of Doc. 493 and Doc. 494], 781–783 [Pgs. 781–783 include portions of Doc. 495, Doc. 496, and Doc. 497], 788 [Pg. 788 is part of Doc. 503], 792n [Pg. 792 is part of Doc. 505], 802–804 [Pgs. 802–804 include portions of Doc. 511, Doc. 512, Doc. 513, and Doc. 514], 830–834 [Pg. 830 is part of Doc. 533], 852–853 [Pgs. 852–853 include portions of Doc. 542, Doc. 543, and Doc. 544], 855 [Pg. 855 is part of Doc. 544], 872 [Pg. 872 is part of Doc. 560], 874 [Pg. 874 is part of Doc. 561], 893 [Pg. 893 is part of Doc. 577], 903 [Pg. 903 is part of Doc. 587], 928 [Pg. 928 includes portions of Doc. 603 and Doc. 604], 1012 [Pg. 1012 is part of Doc. 659], 1018–1019 [Pgs. 1018–1019 include portions of Doc. 662 and Doc. 663], 1022 [Pg. 1022 includes portions of Doc. 665 and Doc. 666], 1032 [Pg. 1032 includes portions of Doc. 671 and Doc. 672], 1066 [Pg. 1066 is part of Doc. 700], 1105 [Pg. 1105 is part of Doc. 736], 1107 [Pg. 1107 is part of Doc. 737], 1115–1116 [Pgs. 1115–1116 include portions of Doc. 745, Doc. 746, and Doc. 747], 1132 [Pg. 1132 is part of Doc. 758], 1152 [Pg. 1152 is part of Doc. 772], 1171–1172 [Pg. 1171 is part of Doc. 788], 1174 [Pg. 1174 includes portions of Doc. 789 and Doc. 790], 1203–1204 [Pgs. 1203–1204 include portions of Doc. 812 and Doc. 813], 1222 [Pg. 1222 is part of Doc. 827], 1247 [Pg. 1247 includes portions of Doc. 851 and Doc. 852], 1428 [Pg. 1428 is part of Doc. 995], 1431 [Pg. 1431 is part of Doc. 997], 1469 [Pg. 1469 includes portions of Doc. 1020 and Doc. 1021], 1484 [Pg. 1484 is part of Doc. 1029], 1488–1490 [Pgs. 1488–1490 include portions of Doc. 1030, Doc. 1031, and Doc. 1032], 1503 [Pg. 1503 is part of Doc. 1039], 1535 [Pg. 1535 includes portions of Doc. 1069 and Doc. 1070], 1541 [Pg. 1541 includes portions of Doc. 1074, Doc. 1075, and Doc. 1076], 1559 [Pg. 1559 is part of Doc. 1088], 1574 [Pg. 1574 includes portions of Doc. 1099 and Doc. 1100]

Armistice arrangements: Egypt–Israel: Agreement, Feb. 24, 1949, 148 [Pg. 148 is part of Doc. 55], 208–209 [Pg. 208 is part of Doc. 96], 215 [Pg. 215 is part of Doc. 96], 217 [Pg. 217 includes portions of Doc. 96 and Doc. 97], 765 [Pg. 765 includes portions of Doc. 480 and Doc. 481], 768–769 [Pgs. 768–769 include portions of Doc. 485, Doc. 486, and Doc. 487], 772–773 [Pgs. 772–773 include portions of Doc. 489 and Doc. 490], 776–777 [Pgs. 776–777 include portions of Doc. 492 and Doc. 493], 784 [Pg. 784 includes portions of Doc. 497 and Doc. 498], 855 [Pg. 855 is part of Doc. 544], 864 [Pg. 864 includes portions of Doc. 551 and Doc. 552], 880 [Pg. 880 is part of Doc. 566], 889 [Pg. 889 includes portions of Doc. 575 and Doc. 576], 1000 [Pg. 1000 includes portions of Doc. 650 and Doc. 651], 1002 [Pg. 1002 is part of Doc. 652], 1191 [Pg. 1191 includes portions of Doc. 803 and Doc. 804], 1203 [Pg. 1203 includes portions of Doc. 812 and Doc. 813], 1240 [Pg. 1240 includes portions of Doc. 845 and Doc. 846], 1243n [Pg. 1243 includes portions of Doc. 847 and Doc. 848], 1263 [Pg. 1263 is part of Doc. 866], 1277 [Pg. 1277 includes portions of Doc. 881 and Doc. 882], 1341 [Pg. 1341 includes portions of Doc. 931 and Doc. 932], 1421n [Pg. 1421 is part of Doc. 988], 1432 [Pg. 1432 is part of Doc. 997], 1435 [Pg. 1435 is part of Doc. 997], 1448n [Pg. 1448 includes portions of Doc. 1002, Doc. 1003, and Doc. 1004], 1450 [Pg. 1450 is part of Doc. 1006]; negotiations, 597 [Pg. 597 is part of Doc. 344], 599 [Pg. 599 includes portions of Doc. 345 and Doc. 346], 603 [Pg. 603 includes portions of Doc. 349 and Doc. 350], 609–610 [Pgs. 609–610 include portions of Doc. 352 and Doc. 353], 612 [Pg. 612 is part of Doc. 354], 615–619 [Pgs. 615–619 include portions of Doc. 355, Doc. 356, Doc. 357, Doc. 358, and Doc. 359], 621 [Pg. 621 is part of Doc. 360], 629 [Pg. 629 includes portions of Doc. 368 and Doc. 369], 631–632 [Pgs. 631–632 include portions of Doc. 370 and Doc. 371], 633n [Pg. 633 includes portions of Doc. 371 and Doc. 372], 634–637 [Pgs. 634–637 include portions of Doc. 372, Doc. 373, and Doc. 374], 639–641 [Pgs. 639–641 include portions of Doc. 374, Doc. 375, Doc. 376, Doc. 377, and Doc. 378], 644–652 [Pgs. 644–652 include portions of Doc. 381, Doc. 382, Doc. 383, Doc. 384, Doc. 385, and Doc. 386], 654–656 [Pgs. 654–656 include portions of Doc. 388, Doc. 389, Doc. 390, and Doc. 391], 660 [Pg. 660 is part of Doc. 392], 662 [Pg. 662 is part of Doc. 393], 665n [Pg. 665 includes portions of Doc. 394 and Doc. 395], 666–667 [Pgs. 666–667 include portions of Doc. 396, Doc. 397, and Doc. 398], 671 [Pg. 671 includes portions of Doc. 401 and Doc. 402], 686–687 [Pgs. 686–687 include portions of Doc. 411, Doc. 412, Doc. 413, and Doc. 414], 689–691 [Pgs. 689–691 include portions of Doc. 415, Doc. 416, Doc. 417, and Doc. 418], 693–695 [Pgs. 693–695 include portions of Doc. 419, Doc. 420, Doc. 421, and Doc. 422], 698–702 [Pgs. 698–702 include portions of Doc. 424, Doc. 425, Doc. 426, Doc. 427, and Doc. 428], 705–709 [Pgs. 705–709 include portions of Doc. 429, Doc. 430, Doc. 431, and Doc. 432], 713–720 [Pgs. 713–720 include portions of Doc. 436, Doc. 437, Doc. 438, Doc. 439, Doc. 440, Doc. 441, Doc. 442, Doc. 443, Doc. 444, and Doc. 445], 723–732 [Pgs. 723–732 include portions of Doc. 447, Doc. 448, Doc. 449, Doc. 450, Doc. 451, Doc. 452, Doc. 453, Doc. 454, and Doc. 455], 734–735 [Pgs. 734–735 include portions of Doc. 455, Doc. 456, and Doc. 457], 748–756 [Pgs. 748–756 include portions of Doc. 465, Doc. 466, Doc. 467, Doc. 468, Doc. 469, Doc. 470, Doc. 471, Doc. 472, Doc. 473, and Doc. 474], 759–761 [Pgs. 759–761 include portions of Doc. 476, Doc. 477, Doc. 478, and Doc. 479], 764–765 [Pgs. 764–765 include portions of Doc. 479, Doc. 480, and Doc. 481], 1398 [Pg. 1398 is part of Doc. 974]

Iraq–Israel negotiations, 635 [Pg. 635 is part of Doc. 372], 715 [Pg. 715 includes portions of Doc. 439 and Doc. 440], 716n [Pg. 716 includes portions of Doc. 440 and Doc. 441], 724 [Pg. 724 is part of Doc. 448], 744n [Pg. 744 includes portions of Doc. 461, Doc. 462, and Doc. 463], 746 [Pg. 746 is part of Doc. 463], 768 [Pg. 768 includes portions of Doc. 485 and Doc. 486], 801 [Pg. 801 is part of Doc. 510], 817 [Pg. 817 includes portions of Doc. 522, Doc. 523, and Doc. 524], 844 [Pg. 844 includes portions of Doc. 535 and Doc. 536], 854 [Pg. 854 is part of Doc. 544], 863 [Pg. 863 includes portions of Doc. 550 and Doc. 551], 888 [Pg. 888 includes portions of Doc. 574 and Doc. 575], 1240 [Pg. 1240 includes portions of Doc. 845 and Doc. 846]

Jordan–Israel: Agreement, Apr. 3, 1949, 888–889 [Pgs. 888–889 include portions of Doc. 574, Doc. 575, and Doc. 576], 899–902 [Pgs. 899–902 include portions of Doc. 583, Doc. 584, Doc. 585, Doc. 586, and Doc. 587], 915–917 [Pgs. 915–917 include portions of Doc. 592, Doc. 593, and Doc. 594], 919 [Pg. 919 includes portions of Doc. 596 and Doc. 597], 922 [Pg. 922 is part of Doc. 599], 929 [Pg. 929 is part of Doc. 604], 961 [Pg. 961 includes portions of Doc. 620 and Doc. 621], 976 [Pg. 976 is part of Doc. 633], 978 [Pg. 978 includes portions of Doc. 634 and Doc. 635], 1006 [Pg. 1006 is part of Doc. 656], 1039–1041 [Pgs. 1039–1041 include portions of Doc. 676, Doc. 677, and Doc. 678], 1049–1051 [Pgs. 1049–1051 include portions of Doc. 687, Doc. 688, and Doc. 689], 1056 [Pg. 1056 includes portions of Doc. 691, Doc. 692, and Doc. 693], 1058–1059 [Pgs. 1058–1059 include portions of Doc. 695 and Doc. 696], 1083n [Pg. 1083 is part of Doc. 717], 1098n [Pg. 1098 is part of Doc. 732], 1118 [Pg. 1118 is part of Doc. 748], 1127 [Pg. 1127 includes portions of Doc. 754 and Doc. 755], 1132–1133 [Pgs. 1132–1133 include portions of Doc. 758 and Doc. 759], 1145 [Pg. 1145 is part of Doc. 769], 1147 [Pg. 1147 is part of Doc. 771], 1153 [Pg. 1153 includes portions of Doc. 772 and Doc. 773], 1167n [Pg. 1167 includes portions of Doc. 786 and Doc. 787], 1168n [Pg. 1168 includes portions of Doc. 787 and Doc. 788], 1182–1184 [Pgs. 1182–1184 include portions of Doc. 794, Doc. 795, and Doc. 796], 1187 [Pg. 1187 includes portions of Doc. 799 and Doc. 800], 1193 [Pg. 1193 includes portions of Doc. 804 and Doc. 805], 1215–1216 [Pgs. 1215–1216 include portions of Doc. 822 and Doc. 823], 1222 [Pg. 1222 is part of Doc. 827], 1225 [Pg. 1225 includes portions of Doc. 829 and Doc. 830], 1240 [Pg. 1240 includes portions of Doc. 845 and Doc. 846], 1242 [Pg. 1242 includes portions of Doc. 846 and Doc. 847], 1263 [Pg. 1263 is part of Doc. 866], 1277 [Pg. 1277 includes portions of Doc. 881 and Doc. 882], 1314 [Pg. 1314 includes portions of Doc. 908 and Doc. 909], 1341 [Pg. 1341 includes portions of Doc. 931 and Doc. 932], 1399 [Pg. 1399 includes portions of Doc. 974 and Doc. 975], 1406–1407 [Pgs. 1406–1407 include portions of Doc. 978 and Doc. 979], 1432 [Pg. 1432 is part of Doc. 997], 1435 [Pg. 1435 is part of Doc. 997], 1447 [Pg. 1447 is part of Doc. 1002], 1449 [Pg. 1449 includes portions of Doc. 1004 and Doc. 1005], 1471 [Pg. 1471 includes portions of Doc. 1023 and Doc. 1024], 1481 [Pg. 1481 includes portions of Doc. 1026 and Doc. 1027], 1494 [Pg. 1494 includes portions of Doc. 1034 and Doc. 1035], 1537 [Pg. 1537 is part of Doc. 1071], 1541 [Pg. 1541 includes portions of Doc. 1074, Doc. 1075, and Doc. 1076]; negotiations, 595 [Pg. 595 includes portions of Doc. 341 and Doc. 342], 598–599 [Pgs. 598–599 include portions of Doc. 344, Doc. 345, and Doc. 346], 604 [Pg. 604 is part of Doc. 350], 606–609 [Pgs. 606–609 include portions of Doc. 351, Doc. 352, and Doc. 353], 622 [Pg. 622 includes portions of Doc. 360, Doc. 361, Doc. 362, and Doc. 363], 630–631 [Pgs. 630–631 include portions of Doc. 369 and Doc. 370], 635 [Pg. 635 is part of Doc. 372], 639–640 [Pgs. 639–640 include portions of Doc. 374, Doc. 375, and Doc. 376], 644 [Pg. 644 is part of Doc. 381], 648 [Pg. 648 is part of Doc. 383], 660–662 [Pgs. 660–662 include portions of Doc. 392 and Doc. 393], 665 [Pg. 665 includes portions of Doc. 394 and Doc. 395], 666n [Pg. 666 includes portions of Doc. 396 and Doc. 397], 667–670 [Pgs. 667–670 include portions of Doc. 397, Doc. 398, Doc. 399, Doc. 400, and Doc. 401], 680 [Pg. 680 includes portions of Doc. 406 and Doc. 407], 683–685 [Pgs. 683–685 include portions of Doc. 408, Doc. 409, Doc. 410, and Doc. 411], 692 [Pg. 692 is part of Doc. 418], 695 [Pg. 695 includes portions of Doc. 421 and Doc. 422], 708 [Pg. 708 includes portions of Doc. 431 and Doc. 432], 715–717 [Pgs. 715–717 include portions of Doc. 439, Doc. 440, Doc. 441, Doc. 442, and Doc. 443], 721–722 [Pgs. 721–722 include portions of Doc. 446 and Doc. 447], 724 [Pg. 724 is part of Doc. 448], 732–734 [Pgs. 732–734 include portions of Doc. 454, Doc. 455, and Doc. 456], 744 [Pg. 744 includes portions of Doc. 461, Doc. 462, and Doc. 463], 747 [Pg. 747 includes portions of Doc. 464 and Doc. 465], 752 [Pg. 752 includes portions of Doc. 468 and Doc. 469], 760 [Pg. 760 includes portions of Doc. 477 and Doc. 478], 767–768 [Pgs. 767–768 include portions of Doc. 484, Doc. 485, and Doc. 486], 785 [Pg. 785 includes portions of Doc. 499 and Doc. 500], 787 [Pg. 787 includes portions of Doc. 501 and Doc. 502], 793 [Pg. 793 is part of Doc. 506], 798 [Pg. 798 includes portions of Doc. 507 and Doc. 508], 799n [Pg. 799 includes portions of Doc. 508 and Doc. 509], 801 [Pg. 801 is part of Doc. 510], 804 [Pg. 804 includes portions of Doc. 513 and Doc. 514], 808–811 [Pgs. 808–811 include portions of Doc. 516, Doc. 517, and Doc. 518], 814–817 [Pgs. 814–817 include portions of Doc. 519, Doc. 520, Doc. 521, Doc. 522, Doc. 523, and Doc. 524], 820–821 [Pgs. 820–821 include portions of Doc. 527, Doc. 528, and Doc. 529], 823–824 [Pgs. 823–824 include portions of Doc. 529, Doc. 530, and Doc. 531], 825n [Pg. 825 includes portions of Doc. 531 and Doc. 532], 826 [Pg. 826 is part of Doc. 532], 847 [Pg. 847 is part of Doc. 537], 851–852 [Pgs. 851–852 include portions of Doc. 541 and Doc. 542], 854–855 [Pg. 854 is part of Doc. 544], 859–864 [Pgs. 859–864 include portions of Doc. 546, Doc. 547, Doc. 548, Doc. 549, Doc. 550, Doc. 551, and Doc. 552], 866–869 [Pgs. 866–869 include portions of Doc. 553, Doc. 554, Doc. 555, and Doc. 556], 871–874 [Pgs. 871–874 include portions of Doc. 557, Doc. 558, Doc. 559, Doc. 560, and Doc. 561], 877–878 [Pgs. 877–878 include portions of Doc. 563 and Doc. 564], 880 [Pg. 880 is part of Doc. 566], 886–887 [Pgs. 886–887 include portions of Doc. 572, Doc. 573, and Doc. 574], 928 [Pg. 928 includes portions of Doc. 603 and Doc. 604], 980–982 [Pgs. 980–982 include portions of Doc. 637, Doc. 638, and Doc. 639], 1145 [Pg. 1145 is part of Doc. 769], 1287 [Pg. 1287 includes portions of Doc. 889 and Doc. 890], 1406 [Pg. 1406 is part of Doc. 978], 1545 [Pg. 1545 is part of Doc. 1079]

Lebanon–Israel: Agreement, Mar. 23, 1949, 854 [Pg. 854 is part of Doc. 544], 864 [Pg. 864 includes portions of Doc. 551 and Doc. 552], 880 [Pg. 880 is part of Doc. 566], 1001–1002 [Pgs. 1001–1002 include portions of Doc. 651 and Doc. 652], 1006 [Pg. 1006 is part of Doc. 656], 1240 [Pg. 1240 includes portions of Doc. 845 and Doc. 846], 1263 [Pg. 1263 is part of Doc. 866], 1277 [Pg. 1277 includes portions of Doc. 881 and Doc. 882], 1341 [Pg. 1341 includes portions of Doc. 931 and Doc. 932], 1432 [Pg. 1432 is part of Doc. 997], 1435 [Pg. 1435 is part of Doc. 997]; negotiations, 595 [Pg. 595 includes portions of Doc. 341 and Doc. 342], 598 [Pg. 598 includes portions of Doc. 344 and Doc. 345], 635 [Pg. 635 is part of Doc. 372], 641 [Pg. 641 includes portions of Doc. 377 and Doc. 378], 660 [Pg. 660 is part of Doc. 392], 685–687 [Pgs. 685–687 include portions of Doc. 410, Doc. 411, Doc. 412, Doc. 413, and Doc. 414], 692 [Pg. 692 is part of Doc. 418], 708 [Pg. 708 includes portions of Doc. 431 and Doc. 432], 715 [Pg. 715 includes portions of Doc. 439 and Doc. 440], 724 [Pg. 724 is part of Doc. 448], 785 [Pg. 785 includes portions of Doc. 499 and Doc. 500], 787 [Pg. 787 includes portions of Doc. 501 and Doc. 502], 799n [Pg. 799 includes portions of Doc. 508 and Doc. 509], 801–803 [Pgs. 801–803 include portions of Doc. 510, Doc. 511, Doc. 512, and Doc. 513], 809–810 [Pgs. 809–810 include portions of Doc. 517 and Doc. 518], 817 [Pg. 817 includes portions of Doc. 522, Doc. 523, and Doc. 524], 846–848 [Pgs. 846–848 include portions of Doc. 536, Doc. 537, Doc. 538, and Doc. 539], 851 [Pg. 851 includes portions of Doc. 541 and Doc. 542], 889 [Pg. 889 includes portions of Doc. 575 and Doc. 576], 956 [Pg. 956 includes portions of Doc. 615 and Doc. 616], 1001–1002 [Pgs. 1001–1002 include portions of Doc. 651 and Doc. 652]

SyriA–Israel: Agreement, July 20, 1949, 141n [Pg. 141 includes portions of Doc. 49 and Doc. 50], 889 [Pg. 889 includes portions of Doc. 575 and Doc. 576], 1239–1240 [Pgs. 1239–1240 include portions of Doc. 842, Doc. 843, Doc. 844, Doc. 845, and Doc. 846], 1249 [Pg. 1249 includes portions of Doc. 852, Doc. 853, Doc. 854, and Doc. 855], 1255 [Pg. 1255 includes portions of Doc. 858 and Doc. 859], 1263 [Pg. 1263 is part of Doc. 866], 1265 [Pg. 1265 is part of Doc. 868], 1275 [Pg. 1275 includes portions of Doc. 878 and Doc. 879], 1277 [Pg. 1277 includes portions of Doc. 881 and Doc. 882], 1304 [Pg. 1304 is part of Doc. 903], 1341 [Pg. 1341 includes portions of Doc. 931 and Doc. 932], 1420–1421 [Pgs. 1420–1421 include portions of Doc. 987 and Doc. 988], 1432 [Pg. 1432 is part of Doc. 997], 1435 [Pg. 1435 is part of Doc. 997]; negotiations, 715 [Pg. 715 includes portions of Doc. 439 and Doc. 440], 724 [Pg. 724 is part of Doc. 448], 734 [Pg. 734 includes portions of Doc. 455 and Doc. 456], 742n [Pg. 742 includes portions of Doc. 459 and Doc. 460], 787 [Pg. 787 includes portions of Doc. 501 and Doc. 502], 799–801 [Pgs. 799–801 include portions of Doc. 508, Doc. 509, and Doc. 510], 809 [Pg. 809 is part of Doc. 517], 817 [Pg. 817 includes portions of Doc. 522, Doc. 523, and Doc. 524], 846–847 [Pgs. 846–847 include portions of Doc. 536 and Doc. 537], 851 [Pg. 851 includes portions of Doc. 541 and Doc. 542], 864 [Pg. 864 includes portions of Doc. 551 and Doc. 552], 890 [Pg. 890 is part of Doc. 577], 898–899 [Pgs. 898–899 include portions of Doc. 582, Doc. 583, Doc. 584, and Doc. 585], 918–919 [Pgs. 918–919 include portions of Doc. 595, Doc. 596, and Doc. 597], 927 [Pg. 927 includes portions of Doc. 602 and Doc. 603], 930–931 [Pgs. 930–931 include portions of Doc. 604 and Doc. 605], 955–957 [Pgs. 955–957 include portions of Doc. 615, Doc. 616, and Doc. 617], 961–962 [Pgs. 961–962 include portions of Doc. 620, Doc. 621, and Doc. 622], 969 [Pg. 969 includes portions of Doc. 628 and Doc. 629], 977 [Pg. 977 includes portions of Doc. 633 and Doc. 634], 980 [Pg. 980 includes portions of Doc. 637 and Doc. 638], 989–990 [Pgs. 989–990 include portions of Doc. 641, Doc. 642, and Doc. 643], 999–1008 [Pgs. 999–1008 include portions of Doc. 649, Doc. 650, Doc. 651, Doc. 652, Doc. 653, Doc. 654, Doc. 655, Doc. 656, Doc. 657, and Doc. 658], 1020–1021 [Pgs. 1020–1021 include portions of Doc. 663, Doc. 664, and Doc. 665], 1030–1032 [Pgs. 1030–1032 include portions of Doc. 670, Doc. 671, and Doc. 672], 1037 [Pg. 1037 is part of Doc. 675], 1046 [Pg. 1046 includes portions of Doc. 684 and Doc. 685], 1053–1056 [Pgs. 1053–1056 include portions of Doc. 689, Doc. 690, Doc. 691, Doc. 692, and Doc. 693], 1077 [Pg. 1077 is part of Doc. 710], 1079 [Pg. 1079 includes portions of Doc. 711, Doc. 712, and Doc. 713], 1091 [Pg. 1091 includes portions of Doc. 724 and Doc. 725], 1100–1102 [Pgs. 1100–1102 include portions of Doc. 733, Doc. 734, Doc. 735, and Doc. 736], 1112 [Pg. 1112 includes portions of Doc. 742, Doc. 743, and Doc. 744], 1119–1120 [Pgs. 1119–1120 include portions of Doc. 748 and Doc. 749], 1131–1133 [Pgs. 1131–1133 include portions of Doc. 757, Doc. 758, and Doc. 759], 1137 [Pg. 1137 includes portions of Doc. 762 and Doc. 763], 1151 [Pg. 1151 is part of Doc. 772], 1156 [Pg. 1156 includes portions of Doc. 776 and Doc. 777], 1162 [Pg. 1162 includes portions of Doc. 781 and Doc. 782], 1165–1166 [Pgs. 1165–1166 include portions of Doc. 784, Doc. 785, and Doc. 786], 1178–1179 [Pgs. 1178–1179 include portions of Doc. 791, Doc. 792, and Doc. 793], 1183 [Pg. 1183 is part of Doc. 795], 1212–1223 [Pgs. 1212–1223 include portions of Doc. 819, Doc. 820, Doc. 821, Doc. 822, Doc. 823, Doc. 824, Doc. 825, Doc. 826, Doc. 827, and Doc. 828], 1225 [Pg. 1225 includes portions of Doc. 829 and Doc. 830], 1227 [Pg. 1227 is part of Doc. 831], 1231 [Pg. 1231 includes portions of Doc. 834 and Doc. 835], 1233–1234 [Pgs. 1233–1234 include portions of Doc. 836, Doc. 837, and Doc. 838], 1630 [Pg. 1630 is part of Doc. 1132]

Arms policy for Palestine and the Near East (see also U.S. arms embargo, infra and Arms embargo, etc. under U.N. Security Council, infra), 141n [Pg. 141 includes portions of Doc. 49 and Doc. 50], 142 [Pg. 142 includes portions of Doc. 50 and Doc. 51], 148 [Pg. 148 is part of Doc. 55], 188n [Pg. 188 is part of Doc. 83], 660–661 [Pgs. 660–661 include portions of Doc. 392 and Doc. 393], 685 [Pg. 685 includes portions of Doc. 410 and Doc. 411], 952–954 [Pgs. 952–954 include portions of Doc. 612, Doc. 613, and Doc. 614], 958–959 [Pgs. 958–959 include portions of Doc. 618 and Doc. 619], 1017–1018 [Pgs. 1017–1018 include portions of Doc. 661, Doc. 662, and Doc. 663], 1030 [Pg. 1030 includes portions of Doc. 670 and Doc. 671], 1056–1058 [Pgs. 1056–1058 include portions of Doc. 691, Doc. 692, Doc. 693, Doc. 694, Doc. 695, and Doc. 696], 1075 [Pg. 1075 includes portions of Doc. 706 and Doc. 707], 1077–1079 [Pgs. 1077–1079 include portions of Doc. 710, Doc. 711, Doc. 712, and Doc. 713], 1091–1092 [Pgs. 1091–1092 include portions of Doc. 724, Doc. 725, Doc. 726, and Doc. 727], 1115–1116 [Pgs. 1115–1116 include portions of Doc. 745, Doc. 746, and Doc. 747], 1213n [Pg. 1213 includes portions of Doc. 820 and Doc. 821], 1249 [Pg. 1249 includes portions of Doc. 852, Doc. 853, Doc. 854, and Doc. 855], 1253 [Pg. 1253 includes portions of Doc. 856 and Doc. 857], 1254n [Pg. 1254 includes portions of Doc. 857 and Doc. 858], 1255 [Pg. 1255 includes portions of Doc. 858 and Doc. 859], 1261–1263 [Pgs. 1261–1263 include portions of Doc. 865 and Doc. 866], 1269–1272 [Pgs. 1269–1272 include portions of Doc. 871, Doc. 872, Doc. 873, Doc. 874, and Doc. 875], 1274 [Pg. 1274 includes portions of Doc. 877 and Doc. 878], 1277–1280 [Pgs. 1277–1280 include portions of Doc. 881, Doc. 882, and Doc. 883], 1284 [Pg. 1284 includes portions of Doc. 886 and Doc. 887], 1304 [Pg. 1304 is part of Doc. 903], 1322–1323 [Pgs. 1322–1323 include portions of Doc. 915, Doc. 916, Doc. 917, and Doc. 918], 1327–1328 [Pgs. 1327–1328 include portions of Doc. 919, Doc. 920, Doc. 921, and Doc. 922], 1365 [Pg. 1365 includes portions of Doc. 947 and Doc. 948], 1405 [Pg. 1405 includes portions of Doc. 977 and Doc. 978], 1418 [Pg. 1418 includes portions of Doc. 984, Doc. 985, and Doc. 986], 1432 [Pg. 1432 is part of Doc. 997], 1435 [Pg. 1435 is part of Doc. 997], 1491 [Pg. 1491 includes portions of Doc. 1032 and Doc. 1033], 1579–1581 [Pgs. 1579–1581 include portions of Doc. 1104, Doc. 1105, Doc. 1106, and Doc. 1107], 1601 [Pg. 1601 is part of Doc. 1118]

Belgian position, 800 [Pg. 800 includes portions of Doc. 509 and Doc. 510]

Bernadotte report, 1948, 634 [Pg. 634 is part of Doc. 372], 679 [Pg. 679 is part of Doc. 405], 771 [Pg. 771 includes portions of Doc. 488 and Doc. 489], 834 [Pg. 834 is part of Doc. 533]

British planes, shooting down by Israelis, of, 627–628 [Pgs. 627–628 include portions of Doc. 366 and Doc. 367], 633n [Pg. 633 includes portions of Doc. 371 and Doc. 372], 634–635 [Pg. 634 is part of Doc. 372], 637 [Pg. 637 includes portions of Doc. 373 and Doc. 374], 639 [Pg. 639 includes portions of Doc. 374 and Doc. 375], 643 [Pg. 643 includes portions of Doc. 379 and Doc. 380], 646 [Pg. 646 is part of Doc. 382], 648 [Pg. 648 is part of Doc. 383], 652 [Pg. 652 is part of Doc. 386], 659 [Pg. 659 is part of Doc. 392], 670 [Pg. 670 includes portions of Doc. 400 and Doc. 401], 687 [Pg. 687 includes portions of Doc. 413 and Doc. 414], 712 [Pg. 712 includes portions of Doc. 435 and Doc. 436]

British position, 51 [Pg. 51 is part of Doc. 8], 63–66 [Pg. 63 is part of Doc. 12], 94 [Pg. 94 includes portions of Doc. 15 and Doc. 16], 141n [Pg. 141 includes portions of Doc. 49 and Doc. 50], 142–146 [Pgs. 142–146 include portions of Doc. 50, Doc. 51, Doc. 52, Doc. 53, and Doc. 54], 148 [Pg. 148 is part of Doc. 55], 156–157 [Pgs. 156–157 include portions of Doc. 63, Doc. 64, Doc. 65, and Doc. 66], 200 [Pg. 200 is part of Doc. 91], 594–596 [Pgs. 594–596 include portions of Doc. 341, Doc. 342, and Doc. 343], 601 [Pg. 601 includes portions of Doc. 347 and Doc. 348], 605–609 [Pgs. 605–609 include portions of Doc. 351, Doc. 352, and Doc. 353], 611–612 [Pg. 611 is part of Doc. 354], 614–615 [Pgs. 614–615 include portions of Doc. 355 and Doc. 356], 621 [Pg. 621 is part of Doc. 360], 627 [Pg. 627 includes portions of Doc. 366 and Doc. 367], 639–640 [Pgs. 639–640 include portions of Doc. 374, Doc. 375, and Doc. 376], 645–646 [Pg. 645 is part of Doc. 382], 653 [Pg. 653 includes portions of Doc. 387 and Doc. 388], 658–660 [Pgs. 658–660 include portions of Doc. 391 and Doc. 392], 662 [Pg. 662 is part of Doc. 393], 669–676 [Pgs. 669–676 include portions of Doc. 399, Doc. 400, Doc. 401, Doc. 402, and Doc. 403], 678–680 [Pgs. 678–680 include portions of Doc. 405, Doc. 406, and Doc. 407], 694–697 [Pgs. 694–697 include portions of Doc. 419, Doc. 420, Doc. 421, Doc. 422, Doc. 423, and Doc. 424], 705 [Pg. 705 includes portions of Doc. 429 and Doc. 430], 714–715 [Pgs. 714–715 include portions of Doc. 438, Doc. 439, and Doc. 440], 721 [Pg. 721 is part of Doc. 446], 747–748 [Pgs. 747–748 include portions of Doc. 464, Doc. 465, and Doc. 466], 854–855 [Pg. 854 is part of Doc. 544], 958–959 [Pgs. 958–959 include portions of Doc. 618 and Doc. 619], 1077 [Pg. 1077 is part of Doc. 710], 1251 [Pg. 1251 is part of Doc. 855], 1279 [Pg. 1279 is part of Doc. 882], 1435 [Pg. 1435 is part of Doc. 997], 1437 [Pg. 1437 is part of Doc. 997], 1556 [Pg. 1556 is part of Doc. 1085]

Egyptian blockade measures against Israel. see Suez Canal, etc. under Egypt.

Egyptian position (see also subsequent subheadings), 186–187 [Pgs. 186–187 include portions of Doc. 81 and Doc. 82], 197–198 [Pgs. 197–198 include portions of Doc. 89 and Doc. 90], 200 [Pg. 200 is part of Doc. 91], 206 [Pg. 206 is part of Doc. 94], 213–214 [Pg. 213 is part of Doc. 96], 216 [Pg. 216 is part of Doc. 96], 223–225 [Pgs. 223–225 include portions of Doc. 102, Doc. 103, and Doc. 104], 602 [Pg. 602 includes portions of Doc. 348 and Doc. 349], 605–606 [Pg. 605 is part of Doc. 351], 614 [Pg. 614 is part of Doc. 355], 617–620 [Pgs. 617–620 include portions of Doc. 357, Doc. 358, Doc. 359, and Doc. 360], 622–625 [Pgs. 622–625 include portions of Doc. 360, Doc. 361, Doc. 362, Doc. 363, Doc. 364, and Doc. 365], 688 [Pg. 688 includes portions of Doc. 414 and Doc. 415], 704 [Pg. 704 is part of Doc. 429], 721 [Pg. 721 is part of Doc. 446], 748 [Pg. 748 includes portions of Doc. 465 and Doc. 466], 915 [Pg. 915 is part of Doc. 592], 923 [Pg. 923 is part of Doc. 600], 1075 [Pg. 1075 includes portions of Doc. 706 and Doc. 707], 1111 [Pg. 1111 is part of Doc. 742], 1306 [Pg. 1306 is part of Doc. 904], 1457 [Pg. 1457 is part of Doc. 1013], 1491–1492 [Pgs. 1491–1492 include portions of Doc. 1032 and Doc. 1033], 1503 [Pg. 1503 is part of Doc. 1039], 1506–1509 [Pgs. 1506–1509 include portions of Doc. 1041, Doc. 1042, Doc. 1043, Doc. 1044, and Doc. 1045], 1521 [Pg. 1521 is part of Doc. 1057], 1542 [Pg. 1542 includes portions of Doc. 1076 and Doc. 1077], 1561 [Pg. 1561 includes portions of Doc. 1089 and Doc. 1090]

French position, 138–139 [Pg. 138 is part of Doc. 48], 143–144 [Pgs. 143–144 include portions of Doc. 51 and Doc. 52], 146–147 [Pgs. 146–147 include portions of Doc. 53, Doc. 54, and Doc. 55], 163 [Pg. 163 is part of Doc. 70], 673 [Pg. 673 is part of Doc. 402], 748 [Pg. 748 includes portions of Doc. 465 and Doc. 466], 800 [Pg. 800 includes portions of Doc. 509 and Doc. 510], 1279 [Pg. 1279 is part of Doc. 882], 1437 [Pg. 1437 is part of Doc. 997]

Greek position, 36 [Pg. 36 is part of Doc. 4]

Haifa refinery, problem concerning reopening of, 80–82 [Pg. 80 is part of Doc. 12], 119 [Pg. 119 includes portions of Doc. 28 and Doc. 29], 137–147 [Pgs. 137–147 include portions of Doc. 46, Doc. 47, Doc. 48, Doc. 49, Doc. 50, Doc. 51, Doc. 52, Doc. 53, Doc. 54, and Doc. 55], 156–157 [Pgs. 156–157 include portions of Doc. 63, Doc. 64, Doc. 65, and Doc. 66], 162–167 [Pgs. 162–167 include portions of Doc. 69, Doc. 70, Doc. 71, and Doc. 72], 682 [Pg. 682 is part of Doc. 408], 1224 [Pg. 1224 is part of Doc. 828], 1253–1254 [Pgs. 1253–1254 include portions of Doc. 856, Doc. 857, and Doc. 858], 1346 [Pg. 1346 includes portions of Doc. 933 and Doc. 934], 1373–1374 [Pgs. 1373–1374 include portions of Doc. 954 and Doc. 955], 1377–1378 [Pg. 1377 is part of Doc. 958]

Iraqi position (see also subsequent subheadings), 183 [Pg. 183 is part of Doc. 78], 604n [Pg. 604 is part of Doc. 350], 609 [Pg. 609 includes portions of Doc. 352 and Doc. 353], 614 [Pg. 614 is part of Doc. 355], 622 [Pg. 622 includes portions of Doc. 360, Doc. 361, Doc. 362, and Doc. 363], 627 [Pg. 627 includes portions of Doc. 366 and Doc. 367], 689 [Pg. 689 includes portions of Doc. 415 and Doc. 416], 704 [Pg. 704 is part of Doc. 429], 709 [Pg. 709 is part of Doc. 432], 721 [Pg. 721 is part of Doc. 446], 737 [Pg. 737 is part of Doc. 457], 803 [Pg. 803 includes portions of Doc. 511, Doc. 512, and Doc. 513], 809–810 [Pgs. 809–810 include portions of Doc. 517 and Doc. 518], 815–816 [Pgs. 815–816 include portions of Doc. 520, Doc. 521, and Doc. 522], 819 [Pg. 819 includes portions of Doc. 526 and Doc. 527], 825n [Pg. 825 includes portions of Doc. 531 and Doc. 532], 845 [Pg. 845 is part of Doc. 536], 846n [Pg. 846 includes portions of Doc. 536 and Doc. 537], 847 [Pg. 847 is part of Doc. 537], 850–851 [Pgs. 850–851 include portions of Doc. 540, Doc. 541, and Doc. 542], 860–861 [Pgs. 860–861 include portions of Doc. 547 and Doc. 548], 866–867 [Pgs. 866–867 include portions of Doc. 553 and Doc. 554], 869 [Pg. 869 is part of Doc. 556], 871–872 [Pgs. 871–872 include portions of Doc. 557, Doc. 558, Doc. 559, and Doc. 560], 873n [Pg. 873 includes portions of Doc. 560 and Doc. 561], 878 [Pg. 878 includes portions of Doc. 563 and Doc. 564], 981n [Pg. 981 is part of Doc. 638], 994–995 [Pgs. 994–995 include portions of Doc. 645, Doc. 646, and Doc. 647], 1075 [Pg. 1075 includes portions of Doc. 706 and Doc. 707]

Israeli attack on Egyptian territory, 594–596 [Pgs. 594–596 include portions of Doc. 341, Doc. 342, and Doc. 343], 599–603 [Pgs. 599–603 include portions of Doc. 345, Doc. 346, Doc. 347, Doc. 348, Doc. 349, and Doc. 350], 605 [Pg. 605 is part of Doc. 351], 608 [Pg. 608 is part of Doc. 352], 611 [Pg. 611 is part of Doc. 354], 614 [Pg. 614 is part of Doc. 355], 616 [Pg. 616 includes portions of Doc. 356 and Doc. 357], 621 [Pg. 621 is part of Doc. 360], 625 [Pg. 625 includes portions of Doc. 364 and Doc. 365], 628–630 [Pgs. 628–630 include portions of Doc. 367, Doc. 368, Doc. 369, and Doc. 370], 632–634 [Pgs. 632–634 include portions of Doc. 370, Doc. 371, and Doc. 372], 636 [Pg. 636 is part of Doc. 373], 646 [Pg. 646 is part of Doc. 382], 659 [Pg. 659 is part of Doc. 392], 670 [Pg. 670 includes portions of Doc. 400 and Doc. 401], 672 [Pg. 672 is part of Doc. 402]

Israeli occupation of Southern Negev, 810–815 [Pgs. 810–815 include portions of Doc. 517, Doc. 518, Doc. 519, Doc. 520, and Doc. 521], 817–818 [Pgs. 817–818 include portions of Doc. 522, Doc. 523, Doc. 524, Doc. 525, and Doc. 526], 821–826 [Pgs. 821–826 include portions of Doc. 528, Doc. 529, Doc. 530, Doc. 531, and Doc. 532], 844–845 [Pgs. 844–845 include portions of Doc. 535 and Doc. 536], 850 [Pg. 850 is part of Doc. 540], 853n [Pg. 853 includes portions of Doc. 543 and Doc. 544], 854–855 [Pg. 854 is part of Doc. 544], 876 [Pg. 876 is part of Doc. 563], 930 [Pg. 930 includes portions of Doc. 604 and Doc. 605], 1171 [Pg. 1171 is part of Doc. 788]

Israeli position (see also subsequent subheadings), 66 [Pg. 66 is part of Doc. 12], 138–139 [Pg. 138 is part of Doc. 48], 142–144 [Pgs. 142–144 include portions of Doc. 50, Doc. 51, and Doc. 52], 147 [Pg. 147 includes portions of Doc. 54 and Doc. 55], 164 [Pg. 164 is part of Doc. 70], 171n [Pg. 171 is part of Doc. 73], 174 [Pg. 174 is part of Doc. 73], 594–595 [Pgs. 594–595 include portions of Doc. 341 and Doc. 342], 597–598 [Pgs. 597–598 include portions of Doc. 344 and Doc. 345], 600–601 [Pgs. 600–601 include portions of Doc. 347 and Doc. 348], 605–607 [Pgs. 605–607 include portions of Doc. 351 and Doc. 352], 761–764 [Pgs. 761–764 include portions of Doc. 478, Doc. 479, and Doc. 480], 782 [Pg. 782 is part of Doc. 496], 923 [Pg. 923 is part of Doc. 600], 930 [Pg. 930 includes portions of Doc. 604 and Doc. 605], 932 [Pg. 932 includes portions of Doc. 605 and Doc. 606], 967 [Pg. 967 includes portions of Doc. 626 and Doc. 627], 980–982 [Pgs. 980–982 include portions of Doc. 637, Doc. 638, and Doc. 639], 996–998 [Pgs. 996–998 include portions of Doc. 647, Doc. 648, and Doc. 649], 1077 [Pg. 1077 is part of Doc. 710], 1102–1107 [Pgs. 1102–1107 include portions of Doc. 735, Doc. 736, and Doc. 737], 1109 [Pg. 1109 includes portions of Doc. 739 and Doc. 740], 1111 [Pg. 1111 is part of Doc. 742], 1115 [Pg. 1115 includes portions of Doc. 745, Doc. 746, and Doc. 747], 1124–1126 [Pgs. 1124–1126 include portions of Doc. 752, Doc. 753, and Doc. 754], 1128 [Pg. 1128 is part of Doc. 756], 1142 [Pg. 1142 includes portions of Doc. 765, Doc. 766, and Doc. 767], 1148–1149 [Pg. 1148 is part of Doc. 772], 1167 [Pg. 1167 includes portions of Doc. 786 and Doc. 787], 1174 [Pg. 1174 includes portions of Doc. 789 and Doc. 790], 1202–1205 [Pgs. 1202–1205 include portions of Doc. 810, Doc. 811, Doc. 812, and Doc. 813], 1222 [Pg. 1222 is part of Doc. 827], 1398–1399 [Pgs. 1398–1399 include portions of Doc. 974 and Doc. 975], 1441n [Pg. 1441 is part of Doc. 998], 1457 [Pg. 1457 is part of Doc. 1013], 1502–1504 [Pgs. 1502–1504 include portions of Doc. 1038, Doc. 1039, and Doc. 1040], 1621 [Pg. 1621 is part of Doc. 1125]

Jericho resolutions by Palestine Arabs, 1948, 604 [Pg. 604 is part of Doc. 350], 608 [Pg. 608 is part of Doc. 352], 804 [Pg. 804 includes portions of Doc. 513 and Doc. 514]

Jerusalem (see also subsequent subheadings): British position, 783–784 [Pgs. 783–784 include portions of Doc. 496, Doc. 497, and Doc. 498], 1377 [Pg. 1377 is part of Doc. 958], 1426–1427 [Pgs. 1426–1427 include portions of Doc. 993 and Doc. 994], 1456 [Pg. 1456 includes portions of Doc. 1012 and Doc. 1013]

Division between Israel and Jordan, proposed, 608 [Pg. 608 is part of Doc. 352], 631n [Pg. 631 is part of Doc. 370], 644 [Pg. 644 is part of Doc. 381], 662–663 [Pgs. 662–663 include portions of Doc. 393 and Doc. 394], 667–669 [Pgs. 667–669 include portions of Doc. 397, Doc. 398, Doc. 399, and Doc. 400], 683–684 [Pgs. 683–684 include portions of Doc. 408, Doc. 409, and Doc. 410], 710 [Pg. 710 is part of Doc. 433], 721 [Pg. 721 is part of Doc. 446], 729 [Pg. 729 includes portions of Doc. 451 and Doc. 452], 733 [Pg. 733 is part of Doc. 455], 739 [Pg. 739 is part of Doc. 458], 783n [Pg. 783 includes portions of Doc. 496 and Doc. 497], 784 [Pg. 784 includes portions of Doc. 497 and Doc. 498], 793 [Pg. 793 is part of Doc. 506], 843 [Pg. 843 includes portions of Doc. 534 and Doc. 535], 849 [Pg. 849 is part of Doc. 539], 892 [Pg. 892 is part of Doc. 577], 895–896 [Pgs. 895–896 include portions of Doc. 578, Doc. 579, Doc. 580, and Doc. 581], 900 [Pg. 900 includes portions of Doc. 585 and Doc. 586], 911–912 [Pgs. 911–912 include portions of Doc. 591 and Doc. 592], 932 [Pg. 932 includes portions of Doc. 605 and Doc. 606], 1023–1025 [Pgs. 1023–1025 include portions of Doc. 666 and Doc. 667], 1027–1028 [Pgs. 1027–1028 include portions of Doc. 667 and Doc. 668]

Egyptian position, 751 [Pg. 751 is part of Doc. 468]

Future status, 64–66 [Pg. 64 is part of Doc. 12], 140 [Pg. 140 includes portions of Doc. 48 and Doc. 49], 177 [Pg. 177 is part of Doc. 74], 215 [Pg. 215 is part of Doc. 96], 644 [Pg. 644 is part of Doc. 381], 661 [Pg. 661 includes portions of Doc. 392 and Doc. 393], 680 [Pg. 680 includes portions of Doc. 406 and Doc. 407], 919 [Pg. 919 includes portions of Doc. 596 and Doc. 597], 1462 [Pg. 1462 includes portions of Doc. 1016 and Doc. 1017]

Holy Places, proposals regarding international administration and control over, 920–921 [Pgs. 920–921 include portions of Doc. 597 and Doc. 598], 929 [Pg. 929 is part of Doc. 604], 945 [Pg. 945 is part of Doc. 610], 949–951 [Pg. 949 is part of Doc. 612], 956 [Pg. 956 includes portions of Doc. 615 and Doc. 616], 968 [Pg. 968 includes portions of Doc. 627 and Doc. 628], 977 [Pg. 977 includes portions of Doc. 633 and Doc. 634], 997 [Pg. 997 is part of Doc. 648], 1016–1017 [Pgs. 1016–1017 include portions of Doc. 661 and Doc. 662], 1024 [Pg. 1024 is part of Doc. 667], 1026 [Pg. 1026 is part of Doc. 667], 1085 [Pg. 1085 includes portions of Doc. 719 and Doc. 720], 1146 [Pg. 1146 includes portions of Doc. 769 and Doc. 770], 1150 [Pg. 1150 is part of Doc. 772], 1159 [Pg. 1159 includes portions of Doc. 779 and Doc. 780], 1194n [Pg. 1194 is part of Doc. 806], 1201–1202 [Pgs. 1201–1202 include portions of Doc. 810, Doc. 811, and Doc. 812], 1224 [Pg. 1224 is part of Doc. 828], 1251–1253 [Pgs. 1251–1253 include portions of Doc. 855, Doc. 856, and Doc. 857], 1259 [Pg. 1259 is part of Doc. 863], 1295–1297 [Pgs. 1295–1297 include portions of Doc. 896 and Doc. 897], 1309 [Pg. 1309 is part of Doc. 905], 1322 [Pg. 1322 includes portions of Doc. 915 and Doc. 916], 1331 [Pg. 1331 includes portions of Doc. 922 and Doc. 923], 1340 [Pg. 1340 is part of Doc. 931], 1346 [Pg. 1346 includes portions of Doc. 933 and Doc. 934], 1348 [Pg. 1348 includes portions of Doc. 934 and Doc. 935], 1356–1357 [Pgs. 1356–1357 include portions of Doc. 939, Doc. 940, and Doc. 941], 1370 [Pg. 1370 is part of Doc. 953], 1384–1385 [Pg. 1384 is part of Doc. 962], 1391 [Pg. 1391 is part of Doc. 967], 1394 [Pg. 1394 includes portions of Doc. 970 and Doc. 971], 1399 [Pg. 1399 includes portions of Doc. 974 and Doc. 975], 1406 [Pg. 1406 is part of Doc. 978], 1412 [Pg. 1412 is part of Doc. 981], 1439 [Pg. 1439 is part of Doc. 997], 1445 [Pg. 1445 is part of Doc. 1000], 1450–1451 [Pgs. 1450–1451 include portions of Doc. 1006 and Doc. 1007], 1452n [Pg. 1452 includes portions of Doc. 1007 and Doc. 1008], 1496–1499 [Pgs. 1496–1499 include portions of Doc. 1036 and Doc. 1037], 1509 [Pg. 1509 includes portions of Doc. 1043, Doc. 1044, and Doc. 1045], 1511–1512 [Pgs. 1511–1512 include portions of Doc. 1046, Doc. 1047, Doc. 1048, and Doc. 1049], 1515 [Pg. 1515 is part of Doc. 1051], 1518 [Pg. 1518 includes portions of Doc. 1053, Doc. 1054, and Doc. 1055], 1525–1526 [Pg. 1525 is part of Doc. 1060], 1552 [Pg. 1552 is part of Doc. 1083], 1555 [Pg. 1555 includes portions of Doc. 1083 and Doc. 1084]

International regime, proposals concerning, 654 [Pg. 654 includes portions of Doc. 388 and Doc. 389], 662–663 [Pgs. 662–663 include portions of Doc. 393 and Doc. 394], 668 [Pg. 668 includes portions of Doc. 398 and Doc. 399], 683 [Pg. 683 includes portions of Doc. 408 and Doc. 409], 710 [Pg. 710 is part of Doc. 433], 717 [Pg. 717 includes portions of Doc. 441, Doc. 442, and Doc. 443], 718n [Pg. 718 includes portions of Doc. 443 and Doc. 444], 721 [Pg. 721 is part of Doc. 446], 734 [Pg. 734 includes portions of Doc. 455 and Doc. 456], 736 [Pg. 736 is part of Doc. 457], 738n [Pg. 738 is part of Doc. 457], 739–740 [Pg. 739 is part of Doc. 458], 745 [Pg. 745 is part of Doc. 463], 747 [Pg. 747 includes portions of Doc. 464 and Doc. 465], 749–750 [Pgs. 749–750 include portions of Doc. 466, Doc. 467, and Doc. 468], 751n [Pg. 751 is part of Doc. 468], 756 [Pg. 756 includes portions of Doc. 472, Doc. 473, and Doc. 474], 767n [Pg. 767 includes portions of Doc. 484 and Doc. 485], 773–774 [Pgs. 773–774 include portions of Doc. 490 and Doc. 491], 780 [Pg. 780 includes portions of Doc. 494 and Doc. 495], 783–784 [Pgs. 783–784 include portions of Doc. 496, Doc. 497, and Doc. 498], 795 [Pg. 795 is part of Doc. 506], 798 [Pg. 798 includes portions of Doc. 507 and Doc. 508], 819–820 [Pgs. 819–820 include portions of Doc. 526, Doc. 527, and Doc. 528], 826 [Pg. 826 is part of Doc. 532], 842–843 [Pgs. 842–843 include portions of Doc. 533, Doc. 534, and Doc. 535], 848–849 [Pgs. 848–849 include portions of Doc. 537, Doc. 538, and Doc. 539], 881 [Pg. 881 is part of Doc. 566], 883n [Pg. 883 includes portions of Doc. 568 and Doc. 569], 891–892 [Pg. 891 is part of Doc. 577], 896 [Pg. 896 includes portions of Doc. 580 and Doc. 581], 902–903 [Pgs. 902–903 include portions of Doc. 586 and Doc. 587], 910–913 [Pgs. 910–913 include portions of Doc. 590, Doc. 591, and Doc. 592], 920–921 [Pgs. 920–921 include portions of Doc. 597 and Doc. 598], 925–926 [Pgs. 925–926 include portions of Doc. 601 and Doc. 602], 928–929 [Pgs. 928–929 include portions of Doc. 603 and Doc. 604], 931–932 [Pgs. 931–932 include portions of Doc. 605 and Doc. 606], 943 [Pg. 943 includes portions of Doc. 608 and Doc. 609], 948–950 [Pgs. 948–950 include portions of Doc. 611 and Doc. 612], 955 [Pg. 955 is part of Doc. 615], 968 [Pg. 968 includes portions of Doc. 627 and Doc. 628], 981 [Pg. 981 is part of Doc. 638], 997 [Pg. 997 is part of Doc. 648], 1005 [Pg. 1005 includes portions of Doc. 655 and Doc. 656], 1015–1017 [Pgs. 1015–1017 include portions of Doc. 660, Doc. 661, and Doc. 662], 1019 [Pg. 1019 is part of Doc. 663], 1022–1028 [Pgs. 1022–1028 include portions of Doc. 665, Doc. 666, Doc. 667, and Doc. 668], 1031 [Pg. 1031 is part of Doc. 671], 1083n [Pg. 1083 is part of Doc. 717], 1130–1131 [Pgs. 1130–1131 include portions of Doc. 756, Doc. 757, and Doc. 758], 1146 [Pg. 1146 includes portions of Doc. 769 and Doc. 770], 1153–1154 [Pgs. 1153–1154 include portions of Doc. 772, Doc. 773, and Doc. 774], 1159 [Pg. 1159 includes portions of Doc. 779 and Doc. 780], 1160n [Pg. 1160 is part of Doc. 780], 1168 [Pg. 1168 includes portions of Doc. 787 and Doc. 788], 1183 [Pg. 1183 is part of Doc. 795], 1193–1194 [Pgs. 1193–1194 include portions of Doc. 804, Doc. 805, and Doc. 806], 1198 [Pg. 1198 is part of Doc. 810], 1224 [Pg. 1224 is part of Doc. 828], 1226 [Pg. 1226 includes portions of Doc. 830 and Doc. 831], 1243 [Pg. 1243 includes portions of Doc. 847 and Doc. 848], 1249–1250 [Pgs. 1249–1250 include portions of Doc. 852, Doc. 853, Doc. 854, and Doc. 855], 1259 [Pg. 1259 is part of Doc. 863], 1268 [Pg. 1268 is part of Doc. 871], 1274 [Pg. 1274 includes portions of Doc. 877 and Doc. 878], 1293–1294 [Pg. 1293 is part of Doc. 895], 1300–1301 [Pgs. 1300–1301 include portions of Doc. 899 and Doc. 900], 1309 [Pg. 1309 is part of Doc. 905], 1336n [Pg. 1336 is part of Doc. 928], 1340 [Pg. 1340 is part of Doc. 931], 1346 [Pg. 1346 includes portions of Doc. 933 and Doc. 934], 1348 [Pg. 1348 includes portions of Doc. 934 and Doc. 935], 1356n [Pg. 1356 includes portions of Doc. 939 and Doc. 940], 1367n [Pg. 1367 includes portions of Doc. 950 and Doc. 951], 1381 [Pg. 1381 is part of Doc. 960], 1384–1387 [Pgs. 1384–1387 include portions of Doc. 962 and Doc. 963], 1391 [Pg. 1391 is part of Doc. 967], 1393–1394 [Pgs. 1393–1394 include portions of Doc. 969, Doc. 970, and Doc. 971], 1396–1397 [Pgs. 1396–1397 include portions of Doc. 972 and Doc. 973], 1409–1410 [Pgs. 1409–1410 include portions of Doc. 980 and Doc. 981], 1412 [Pg. 1412 is part of Doc. 981], 1416 [Pg. 1416 is part of Doc. 984], 1419 [Pg. 1419 includes portions of Doc. 986 and Doc. 987], 1426–1427 [Pgs. 1426–1427 include portions of Doc. 993 and Doc. 994], 1430 [Pg. 1430 includes portions of Doc. 995, Doc. 996, and Doc. 997], 1438–1439 [Pg. 1438 is part of Doc. 997], 1442 [Pg. 1442 includes portions of Doc. 998 and Doc. 999], 1452n [Pg. 1452 includes portions of Doc. 1007 and Doc. 1008], 1456 [Pg. 1456 includes portions of Doc. 1012 and Doc. 1013], 1468 [Pg. 1468 includes portions of Doc. 1019 and Doc. 1020], 1495 [Pg. 1495 includes portions of Doc. 1035 and Doc. 1036], 1498–1499 [Pgs. 1498–1499 include portions of Doc. 1036 and Doc. 1037], 1509 [Pg. 1509 includes portions of Doc. 1043, Doc. 1044, and Doc. 1045], 1511–1513 [Pgs. 1511–1513 include portions of Doc. 1046, Doc. 1047, Doc. 1048, and Doc. 1049], 1515–1516 [Pgs. 1515–1516 include portions of Doc. 1051, Doc. 1052, and Doc. 1053], 1518–1519 [Pgs. 1518–1519 include portions of Doc. 1053, Doc. 1054, and Doc. 1055], 1525 [Pg. 1525 is part of Doc. 1060], 1542 [Pg. 1542 includes portions of Doc. 1076 and Doc. 1077], 1551–1552 [Pgs. 1551–1552 include portions of Doc. 1081, Doc. 1082, and Doc. 1083]

Israeli position, 717–718 [Pgs. 717–718 include portions of Doc. 441, Doc. 442, Doc. 443, and Doc. 444], 725 [Pg. 725 includes portions of Doc. 449 and Doc. 450], 729 [Pg. 729 includes portions of Doc. 451 and Doc. 452], 733 [Pg. 733 is part of Doc. 455], 736 [Pg. 736 is part of Doc. 457], 736–741 [Pgs. 736–741 include portions of Doc. 457, Doc. 458, and Doc. 459], 749–750 [Pgs. 749–750 include portions of Doc. 466, Doc. 467, and Doc. 468], 756n [Pg. 756 includes portions of Doc. 472, Doc. 473, and Doc. 474], 767 [Pg. 767 includes portions of Doc. 484 and Doc. 485], 817 [Pg. 817 includes portions of Doc. 522, Doc. 523, and Doc. 524], 825 [Pg. 825 includes portions of Doc. 531 and Doc. 532], 842–843 [Pgs. 842–843 include portions of Doc. 533, Doc. 534, and Doc. 535], 883 [Pg. 883 includes portions of Doc. 568 and Doc. 569], 892–896 [Pgs. 892–896 include portions of Doc. 577, Doc. 578, Doc. 579, Doc. 580, and Doc. 581], 900 [Pg. 900 includes portions of Doc. 585 and Doc. 586], 903 [Pg. 903 is part of Doc. 587], 911–913 [Pgs. 911–913 include portions of Doc. 591 and Doc. 592], 919 [Pg. 919 includes portions of Doc. 596 and Doc. 597], 923n [Pg. 923 is part of Doc. 600], 925–926 [Pgs. 925–926 include portions of Doc. 601 and Doc. 602], 928 [Pg. 928 includes portions of Doc. 603 and Doc. 604], 931–932 [Pgs. 931–932 include portions of Doc. 605 and Doc. 606], 943–948 [Pgs. 943–948 include portions of Doc. 608, Doc. 609, Doc. 610, Doc. 611, and Doc. 612], 955 [Pg. 955 is part of Doc. 615], 961 [Pg. 961 includes portions of Doc. 620 and Doc. 621], 967 [Pg. 967 includes portions of Doc. 626 and Doc. 627], 979n [Pg. 979 is part of Doc. 636], 981 [Pg. 981 is part of Doc. 638], 997 [Pg. 997 is part of Doc. 648], 1017 [Pg. 1017 includes portions of Doc. 661 and Doc. 662], 1019 [Pg. 1019 is part of Doc. 663], 1022 [Pg. 1022 includes portions of Doc. 665 and Doc. 666], 1031n [Pg. 1031 is part of Doc. 671], 1032 [Pg. 1032 includes portions of Doc. 671 and Doc. 672], 1039–1043 [Pgs. 1039–1043 include portions of Doc. 676, Doc. 677, Doc. 678, Doc. 679, Doc. 680, and Doc. 681], 1049–1051 [Pgs. 1049–1051 include portions of Doc. 687, Doc. 688, and Doc. 689], 1059 [Pg. 1059 is part of Doc. 696], 1085 [Pg. 1085 includes portions of Doc. 719 and Doc. 720], 1098 [Pg. 1098 is part of Doc. 732], 1114 [Pg. 1114 includes portions of Doc. 744 and Doc. 745], 1117–1121 [Pgs. 1117–1121 include portions of Doc. 747, Doc. 748, Doc. 749, and Doc. 750], 1126–1127 [Pgs. 1126–1127 include portions of Doc. 754 and Doc. 755], 1130–1133 [Pgs. 1130–1133 include portions of Doc. 756, Doc. 757, Doc. 758, and Doc. 759], 1137 [Pg. 1137 includes portions of Doc. 762 and Doc. 763], 1141 [Pg. 1141 includes portions of Doc. 764 and Doc. 765], 1146 [Pg. 1146 includes portions of Doc. 769 and Doc. 770], 1150 [Pg. 1150 is part of Doc. 772], 1158–1159 [Pgs. 1158–1159 include portions of Doc. 778, Doc. 779, and Doc. 780], 1166 [Pg. 1166 includes portions of Doc. 785 and Doc. 786], 1170–1171 [Pg. 1170 is part of Doc. 788], 1176 [Pg. 1176 is part of Doc. 790], 1182–1184 [Pgs. 1182–1184 include portions of Doc. 794, Doc. 795, and Doc. 796], 1193 [Pg. 1193 includes portions of Doc. 804 and Doc. 805], 1215–1216 [Pgs. 1215–1216 include portions of Doc. 822 and Doc. 823], 1226 [Pg. 1226 includes portions of Doc. 830 and Doc. 831], 1231n [Pg. 1231 includes portions of Doc. 834 and Doc. 835], 1243 [Pg. 1243 includes portions of Doc. 847 and Doc. 848], 1250–1251 [Pg. 1250 is part of Doc. 855], 1259 [Pg. 1259 is part of Doc. 863], 1268 [Pg. 1268 is part of Doc. 871], 1273–1274 [Pgs. 1273–1274 include portions of Doc. 876, Doc. 877, and Doc. 878], 1309n [Pg. 1309 is part of Doc. 905], 1314 [Pg. 1314 includes portions of Doc. 908 and Doc. 909], 1321–1322 [Pgs. 1321–1322 include portions of Doc. 913, Doc. 914, Doc. 915, and Doc. 916], 1366 [Pg. 1366 includes portions of Doc. 949 and Doc. 950], 1381 [Pg. 1381 is part of Doc. 960], 1385 [Pg. 1385 is part of Doc. 962], 1390–1392 [Pgs. 1390–1392 include portions of Doc. 966, Doc. 967, and Doc. 968], 1405–1407 [Pgs. 1405–1407 include portions of Doc. 977, Doc. 978, and Doc. 979], 1436 [Pg. 1436 is part of Doc. 997], 1457 [Pg. 1457 is part of Doc. 1013], 1462 [Pg. 1462 includes portions of Doc. 1016 and Doc. 1017], 1471 [Pg. 1471 includes portions of Doc. 1023 and Doc. 1024], 1481–1482 [Pgs. 1481–1482 include portions of Doc. 1026, Doc. 1027, and Doc. 1028], 1503–1504 [Pgs. 1503–1504 include portions of Doc. 1039 and Doc. 1040], 1513 [Pg. 1513 is part of Doc. 1049], 1515 [Pg. 1515 is part of Doc. 1051], 1519 [Pg. 1519 is part of Doc. 1055], 1521 [Pg. 1521 is part of Doc. 1057], 1523 [Pg. 1523 includes portions of Doc. 1058 and Doc. 1059], 1525 [Pg. 1525 is part of Doc. 1060], 1528 [Pg. 1528 includes portions of Doc. 1061 and Doc. 1062], 1532–1535 [Pgs. 1532–1535 include portions of Doc. 1066, Doc. 1067, Doc. 1068, Doc. 1069, and Doc. 1070], 1541–1542 [Pgs. 1541–1542 include portions of Doc. 1074, Doc. 1075, Doc. 1076, and Doc. 1077], 1545 [Pg. 1545 is part of Doc. 1079], 1547–1548 [Pgs. 1547–1548 include portions of Doc. 1079, Doc. 1080, and Doc. 1081], 1551 [Pg. 1551 includes portions of Doc. 1081, Doc. 1082, and Doc. 1083], 1553–1555 [Pgs. 1553–1555 include portions of Doc. 1083 and Doc. 1084]

Jordanian position, 721 [Pg. 721 is part of Doc. 446], 729 [Pg. 729 includes portions of Doc. 451 and Doc. 452], 733 [Pg. 733 is part of Doc. 455], 745 [Pg. 745 is part of Doc. 463], 874 [Pg. 874 is part of Doc. 561], 892 [Pg. 892 is part of Doc. 577], 901 [Pg. 901 is part of Doc. 586], 961–963 [Pgs. 961–963 include portions of Doc. 620, Doc. 621, and Doc. 622], 981 [Pg. 981 is part of Doc. 638], 1042 [Pg. 1042 includes portions of Doc. 679 and Doc. 680], 1049–1050 [Pgs. 1049–1050 include portions of Doc. 687 and Doc. 688], 1057 [Pg. 1057 includes portions of Doc. 693, Doc. 694, and Doc. 695], 1081 [Pg. 1081 is part of Doc. 715], 1085 [Pg. 1085 includes portions of Doc. 719 and Doc. 720], 1117–1118 [Pgs. 1117–1118 include portions of Doc. 747 and Doc. 748], 1121 [Pg. 1121 is part of Doc. 750], 1132–1133 [Pgs. 1132–1133 include portions of Doc. 758 and Doc. 759], 1141 [Pg. 1141 includes portions of Doc. 764 and Doc. 765], 1146 [Pg. 1146 includes portions of Doc. 769 and Doc. 770], 1158–1159 [Pgs. 1158–1159 include portions of Doc. 778, Doc. 779, and Doc. 780], 1168 [Pg. 1168 includes portions of Doc. 787 and Doc. 788], 1216 [Pg. 1216 is part of Doc. 823], 1225–1226 [Pgs. 1225–1226 include portions of Doc. 829, Doc. 830, and Doc. 831], 1231n [Pg. 1231 includes portions of Doc. 834 and Doc. 835], 1247 [Pg. 1247 includes portions of Doc. 851 and Doc. 852], 1251 [Pg. 1251 is part of Doc. 855], 1259 [Pg. 1259 is part of Doc. 863], 1268–1269 [Pgs. 1268–1269 include portions of Doc. 871 and Doc. 872], 1314 [Pg. 1314 includes portions of Doc. 908 and Doc. 909], 1483 [Pg. 1483 includes portions of Doc. 1028 and Doc. 1029], 1495 [Pg. 1495 includes portions of Doc. 1035 and Doc. 1036], 1513 [Pg. 1513 is part of Doc. 1049], 1515 [Pg. 1515 is part of Doc. 1051], 1519 [Pg. 1519 is part of Doc. 1055], 1521 [Pg. 1521 is part of Doc. 1057], 1545 [Pg. 1545 is part of Doc. 1079]

Soviet position, 1194 [Pg. 1194 is part of Doc. 806]

Trusteeship for Israel and Jordan, proposed, 951–952 [Pgs. 951–952 include portions of Doc. 612 and Doc. 613], 1015n [Pg. 1015 includes portions of Doc. 660 and Doc. 661], 1016 [Pg. 1016 is part of Doc. 661]

U.N. trusteeship, proposed, 951 [Pg. 951 is part of Doc. 612]

U.S. position, 668n [Pg. 668 includes portions of Doc. 398 and Doc. 399], 680 [Pg. 680 includes portions of Doc. 406 and Doc. 407], 682–684 [Pgs. 682–684 include portions of Doc. 408, Doc. 409, and Doc. 410], 717–718 [Pgs. 717–718 include portions of Doc. 441, Doc. 442, Doc. 443, and Doc. 444], 725 [Pg. 725 includes portions of Doc. 449 and Doc. 450], 734 [Pg. 734 includes portions of Doc. 455 and Doc. 456], 739–741 [Pgs. 739–741 include portions of Doc. 458 and Doc. 459], 756 [Pg. 756 includes portions of Doc. 472, Doc. 473, and Doc. 474], 783–784 [Pgs. 783–784 include portions of Doc. 496, Doc. 497, and Doc. 498], 793–794 [Pg. 793 is part of Doc. 506], 819–820 [Pgs. 819–820 include portions of Doc. 526, Doc. 527, and Doc. 528], 881 [Pg. 881 is part of Doc. 566], 891 [Pg. 891 is part of Doc. 577], 900 [Pg. 900 includes portions of Doc. 585 and Doc. 586], 910–911 [Pgs. 910–911 include portions of Doc. 590, Doc. 591, and Doc. 592], 920 [Pg. 920 includes portions of Doc. 597 and Doc. 598], 923 [Pg. 923 is part of Doc. 600], 928–930 [Pgs. 928–930 include portions of Doc. 603, Doc. 604, and Doc. 605], 948–952 [Pgs. 948–952 include portions of Doc. 611, Doc. 612, and Doc. 613], 1005 [Pg. 1005 includes portions of Doc. 655 and Doc. 656], 1015–1017 [Pgs. 1015–1017 include portions of Doc. 660, Doc. 661, and Doc. 662], 1021 [Pg. 1021 includes portions of Doc. 664 and Doc. 665], 1085–1086 [Pgs. 1085–1086 include portions of Doc. 719, Doc. 720, and Doc. 721], 1093–1094 [Pgs. 1093–1094 include portions of Doc. 728 and Doc. 729], 1137 [Pg. 1137 includes portions of Doc. 762 and Doc. 763], 1153–1154 [Pgs. 1153–1154 include portions of Doc. 772, Doc. 773, and Doc. 774], 1157–1160 [Pgs. 1157–1160 include portions of Doc. 777, Doc. 778, Doc. 779, and Doc. 780], 1162–1163 [Pgs. 1162–1163 include portions of Doc. 781, Doc. 782, and Doc. 783], 1167–1168 [Pgs. 1167–1168 include portions of Doc. 786, Doc. 787, and Doc. 788], 1184 [Pg. 1184 includes portions of Doc. 795 and Doc. 796], 1187–1188 [Pgs. 1187–1188 include portions of Doc. 799, Doc. 800, and Doc. 801], 1193 [Pg. 1193 includes portions of Doc. 804 and Doc. 805], 1196 [Pg. 1196 is part of Doc. 808], 1198–1202 [Pgs. 1198–1202 include portions of Doc. 810, Doc. 811, and Doc. 812], 1206 [Pg. 1206 includes portions of Doc. 814 and Doc. 815], 1215–1216 [Pgs. 1215–1216 include portions of Doc. 822 and Doc. 823], 1226 [Pg. 1226 includes portions of Doc. 830 and Doc. 831], 1242–1243 [Pgs. 1242–1243 include portions of Doc. 846, Doc. 847, and Doc. 848], 1245 [Pg. 1245 includes portions of Doc. 849 and Doc. 850], 1251 [Pg. 1251 is part of Doc. 855], 1259–1260 [Pgs. 1259–1260 include portions of Doc. 863 and Doc. 864], 1268 [Pg. 1268 is part of Doc. 871], 1293–1297 [Pgs. 1293–1297 include portions of Doc. 895, Doc. 896, and Doc. 897], 1306 [Pg. 1306 is part of Doc. 904], 1331 [Pg. 1331 includes portions of Doc. 922 and Doc. 923], 1340 [Pg. 1340 is part of Doc. 931], 1348 [Pg. 1348 includes portions of Doc. 934 and Doc. 935], 1383–1387 [Pgs. 1383–1387 include portions of Doc. 962 and Doc. 963], 1456 [Pg. 1456 includes portions of Doc. 1012 and Doc. 1013], 1498–1499 [Pgs. 1498–1499 include portions of Doc. 1036 and Doc. 1037], 1547–1548 [Pgs. 1547–1548 include portions of Doc. 1079, Doc. 1080, and Doc. 1081], 1551–1555 [Pgs. 1551–1555 include portions of Doc. 1081, Doc. 1082, Doc. 1083, and Doc. 1084]

Vatican position, 1307–1308 [Pgs. 1307–1308 include portions of Doc. 904 and Doc. 905], 1322 [Pg. 1322 includes portions of Doc. 915 and Doc. 916], 1348 [Pg. 1348 includes portions of Doc. 934 and Doc. 935], 1349n [Pg. 1349 includes portions of Doc. 935 and Doc. 936], 1384 [Pg. 1384 is part of Doc. 962], 1498 [Pg. 1498 includes portions of Doc. 1036 and Doc. 1037], 1522–1523 [Pgs. 1522–1523 include portions of Doc. 1057, Doc. 1058, and Doc. 1059], 1525 [Pg. 1525 is part of Doc. 1060], 1531–1533 [Pgs. 1531–1533 include portions of Doc. 1063, Doc. 1064, Doc. 1065, Doc. 1066, Doc. 1067, and Doc. 1068], 1537–1538 [Pgs. 1537–1538 include portions of Doc. 1071 and Doc. 1072], 1548 [Pg. 1548 includes portions of Doc. 1080 and Doc. 1081], 1552–1554 [Pg. 1552 is part of Doc. 1083]

Jordanian position (see also subsequent subheadings), 66 [Pg. 66 is part of Doc. 12], 170–171 [Pg. 170 is part of Doc. 73], 607–608 [Pgs. 607–608 include portions of Doc. 351 and Doc. 352], 610 [Pg. 610 is part of Doc. 353], 688 [Pg. 688 includes portions of Doc. 414 and Doc. 415], 704 [Pg. 704 is part of Doc. 429], 709–710 [Pgs. 709–710 include portions of Doc. 432 and Doc. 433], 737 [Pg. 737 is part of Doc. 457], 748 [Pg. 748 includes portions of Doc. 465 and Doc. 466], 803–804 [Pgs. 803–804 include portions of Doc. 511, Doc. 512, Doc. 513, and Doc. 514], 915 [Pg. 915 is part of Doc. 592], 919–920 [Pgs. 919–920 include portions of Doc. 596, Doc. 597, and Doc. 598], 922–923 [Pgs. 922–923 include portions of Doc. 599 and Doc. 600], 925 [Pg. 925 includes portions of Doc. 601 and Doc. 602], 981–982 [Pgs. 981–982 include portions of Doc. 638 and Doc. 639], 1097–1098 [Pgs. 1097–1098 include portions of Doc. 731 and Doc. 732], 1111 [Pg. 1111 is part of Doc. 742], 1141–1142 [Pgs. 1141–1142 include portions of Doc. 764, Doc. 765, Doc. 766, and Doc. 767], 1144–1146 [Pgs. 1144–1146 include portions of Doc. 768, Doc. 769, and Doc. 770], 1461–1462 [Pgs. 1461–1462 include portions of Doc. 1015, Doc. 1016, and Doc. 1017], 1468–1469 [Pgs. 1468–1469 include portions of Doc. 1019, Doc. 1020, and Doc. 1021], 1483–1486 [Pgs. 1483–1486 include portions of Doc. 1028, Doc. 1029, and Doc. 1030], 1494–1495 [Pgs. 1494–1495 include portions of Doc. 1034, Doc. 1035, and Doc. 1036], 1502–1503 [Pgs. 1502–1503 include portions of Doc. 1038 and Doc. 1039], 1509–1511 [Pgs. 1509–1511 include portions of Doc. 1043, Doc. 1044, Doc. 1045, Doc. 1046, and Doc. 1047], 1515–1516 [Pgs. 1515–1516 include portions of Doc. 1051, Doc. 1052, and Doc. 1053]

Lebanese position (see also subsequent subheadings), 622 [Pg. 622 includes portions of Doc. 360, Doc. 361, Doc. 362, and Doc. 363], 625–626 [Pgs. 625–626 include portions of Doc. 364 and Doc. 365], 641 [Pg. 641 includes portions of Doc. 377 and Doc. 378], 688 [Pg. 688 includes portions of Doc. 414 and Doc. 415], 704 [Pg. 704 is part of Doc. 429], 733 [Pg. 733 is part of Doc. 455], 746 [Pg. 746 is part of Doc. 463], 790–791 [Pg. 790 is part of Doc. 505], 915 [Pg. 915 is part of Doc. 592], 923 [Pg. 923 is part of Doc. 600], 1075 [Pg. 1075 includes portions of Doc. 706 and Doc. 707], 1111 [Pg. 1111 is part of Doc. 742], 1419 [Pg. 1419 includes portions of Doc. 986 and Doc. 987], 1485 [Pg. 1485 is part of Doc. 1029]

Military situation, 594–600 [Pgs. 594–600 include portions of Doc. 341, Doc. 342, Doc. 343, Doc. 344, Doc. 345, Doc. 346, and Doc. 347], 602–606 [Pgs. 602–606 include portions of Doc. 348, Doc. 349, Doc. 350, and Doc. 351], 619 [Pg. 619 is part of Doc. 359], 627 [Pg. 627 includes portions of Doc. 366 and Doc. 367]

Palestine Conciliation Commission: Activities of, 64–66 [Pg. 64 is part of Doc. 12], 139–140 [Pgs. 139–140 include portions of Doc. 48 and Doc. 49], 607–608 [Pgs. 607–608 include portions of Doc. 351 and Doc. 352], 615 [Pg. 615 includes portions of Doc. 355 and Doc. 356], 617 [Pg. 617 includes portions of Doc. 357, Doc. 358, and Doc. 359], 623–624 [Pgs. 623–624 include portions of Doc. 363 and Doc. 364], 636 [Pg. 636 is part of Doc. 373], 655 [Pg. 655 includes portions of Doc. 389 and Doc. 390], 659–661 [Pgs. 659–661 include portions of Doc. 392 and Doc. 393], 687 [Pg. 687 includes portions of Doc. 413 and Doc. 414], 691 [Pg. 691 includes portions of Doc. 417 and Doc. 418], 702n [Pg. 702 includes portions of Doc. 427 and Doc. 428], 705 [Pg. 705 includes portions of Doc. 429 and Doc. 430], 718–719 [Pgs. 718–719 include portions of Doc. 443 and Doc. 444], 724n [Pg. 724 is part of Doc. 448], 729 [Pg. 729 includes portions of Doc. 451 and Doc. 452], 735–738 [Pgs. 735–738 include portions of Doc. 456 and Doc. 457], 771 [Pg. 771 includes portions of Doc. 488 and Doc. 489], 800–801 [Pgs. 800–801 include portions of Doc. 509 and Doc. 510], 830 [Pg. 830 is part of Doc. 533], 905 [Pg. 905 includes portions of Doc. 588 and Doc. 589], 1432 [Pg. 1432 is part of Doc. 997], 1447–1448 [Pgs. 1447–1448 include portions of Doc. 1002, Doc. 1003, and Doc. 1004], 1502 [Pg. 1502 includes portions of Doc. 1038 and Doc. 1039], 1535 [Pg. 1535 includes portions of Doc. 1069 and Doc. 1070], 1573 [Pg. 1573 is part of Doc. 1099]

Arab states, position of, 140 [Pg. 140 includes portions of Doc. 48 and Doc. 49], 143 [Pg. 143 is part of Doc. 51], 778–781 [Pgs. 778–781 include portions of Doc. 493, Doc. 494, Doc. 495, and Doc. 496], 785–787 [Pgs. 785–787 include portions of Doc. 499, Doc. 500, Doc. 501, and Doc. 502], 793 [Pg. 793 is part of Doc. 506], 796–797 [Pgs. 796–797 include portions of Doc. 506 and Doc. 507], 806–807 [Pg. 806 is part of Doc. 515], 815 [Pg. 815 includes portions of Doc. 520 and Doc. 521], 825–826 [Pgs. 825–826 include portions of Doc. 531 and Doc. 532], 847 [Pg. 847 is part of Doc. 537], 856–858 [Pgs. 856–858 include portions of Doc. 544, Doc. 545, and Doc. 546], 870–871 [Pgs. 870–871 include portions of Doc. 557, Doc. 558, and Doc. 559], 876–877 [Pg. 876 is part of Doc. 563], 883–884 [Pgs. 883–884 include portions of Doc. 568, Doc. 569, and Doc. 570], 894–895 [Pgs. 894–895 include portions of Doc. 577, Doc. 578, Doc. 579, and Doc. 580], 902 [Pg. 902 includes portions of Doc. 586 and Doc. 587], 904–905 [Pgs. 904–905 include portions of Doc. 587, Doc. 588, and Doc. 589], 917 [Pg. 917 is part of Doc. 594], 922 [Pg. 922 is part of Doc. 599], 955 [Pg. 955 is part of Doc. 615], 960 [Pg. 960 includes portions of Doc. 619 and Doc. 620], 963 [Pg. 963 is part of Doc. 622], 968–969 [Pgs. 968–969 include portions of Doc. 627, Doc. 628, and Doc. 629], 972–975 [Pgs. 972–975 include portions of Doc. 631, Doc. 632, and Doc. 633], 977 [Pg. 977 includes portions of Doc. 633 and Doc. 634], 982 [Pg. 982 includes portions of Doc. 638 and Doc. 639], 988–989 [Pg. 988 is part of Doc. 641], 992–994 [Pgs. 992–994 include portions of Doc. 643, Doc. 644, Doc. 645, and Doc. 646], 998–999 [Pgs. 998–999 include portions of Doc. 648, Doc. 649, and Doc. 650], 1014 [Pg. 1014 is part of Doc. 660], 1019–1020 [Pgs. 1019–1020 include portions of Doc. 663 and Doc. 664], 1023 [Pg. 1023 includes portions of Doc. 666 and Doc. 667], 1028–1029 [Pgs. 1028–1029 include portions of Doc. 667, Doc. 668, and Doc. 669], 1033 [Pg. 1033 is part of Doc. 672], 1036 [Pg. 1036 is part of Doc. 675], 1038–1039 [Pgs. 1038–1039 include portions of Doc. 675, Doc. 676, Doc. 677, and Doc. 678], 1043–1044 [Pgs. 1043–1044 include portions of Doc. 680, Doc. 681, Doc. 682, and Doc. 683], 1061 [Pg. 1061 is part of Doc. 697], 1064 [Pg. 1064 includes portions of Doc. 698 and Doc. 699], 1067–1072 [Pgs. 1067–1072 include portions of Doc. 700, Doc. 701, Doc. 702, Doc. 703, Doc. 704, and Doc. 705], 1076 [Pg. 1076 includes portions of Doc. 708 and Doc. 709], 1086 [Pg. 1086 includes portions of Doc. 720 and Doc. 721], 1087n [Pg. 1087 includes portions of Doc. 721 and Doc. 722], 1094 [Pg. 1094 includes portions of Doc. 728 and Doc. 729], 1096–1097 [Pgs. 1096–1097 include portions of Doc. 730, Doc. 731, and Doc. 732], 1103 [Pg. 1103 is part of Doc. 736], 1106 [Pg. 1106 is part of Doc. 736], 1108–1109 [Pgs. 1108–1109 include portions of Doc. 738, Doc. 739, and Doc. 740], 1112–1113 [Pgs. 1112–1113 include portions of Doc. 742, Doc. 743, and Doc. 744], 1122 [Pg. 1122 is part of Doc. 751], 1127–1129 [Pgs. 1127–1129 include portions of Doc. 754, Doc. 755, and Doc. 756], 1135–1136 [Pgs. 1135–1136 include portions of Doc. 760 and Doc. 761], 1137n [Pg. 1137 includes portions of Doc. 762 and Doc. 763], 1138–1139 [Pg. 1138 is part of Doc. 763], 1141n [Pg. 1141 includes portions of Doc. 764 and Doc. 765], 1143–1144 [Pgs. 1143–1144 include portions of Doc. 767, Doc. 768, and Doc. 769], 1150–1152 [Pg. 1150 is part of Doc. 772], 1154–1155 [Pgs. 1154–1155 include portions of Doc. 773, Doc. 774, and Doc. 775], 1161 [Pg. 1161 is part of Doc. 781], 1169–1170 [Pg. 1169 is part of Doc. 788], 1179 [Pg. 1179 includes portions of Doc. 792 and Doc. 793], 1181 [Pg. 1181 is part of Doc. 794], 1185–1187 [Pgs. 1185–1187 include portions of Doc. 797, Doc. 798, Doc. 799, and Doc. 800], 1190 [Pg. 1190 is part of Doc. 802], 1193 [Pg. 1193 includes portions of Doc. 804 and Doc. 805], 1221 [Pg. 1221 includes portions of Doc. 826 and Doc. 827], 1223–1224 [Pgs. 1223–1224 include portions of Doc. 827 and Doc. 828], 1230–1232 [Pgs. 1230–1232 include portions of Doc. 833, Doc. 834, Doc. 835, and Doc. 836], 1234 [Pg. 1234 is part of Doc. 838], 1235n [Pg. 1235 includes portions of Doc. 838 and Doc. 839], 1237–1240 [Pgs. 1237–1240 include portions of Doc. 839, Doc. 840, Doc. 841, Doc. 842, Doc. 843, Doc. 844, Doc. 845, and Doc. 846], 1244–1248 [Pgs. 1244–1248 include portions of Doc. 848, Doc. 849, Doc. 850, Doc. 851, and Doc. 852], 1257 [Pg. 1257 includes portions of Doc. 861 and Doc. 862], 1262–1269 [Pgs. 1262–1269 include portions of Doc. 866, Doc. 867, Doc. 868, Doc. 869, Doc. 870, Doc. 871, and Doc. 872], 1272 [Pg. 1272 includes portions of Doc. 874 and Doc. 875], 1275–1276 [Pgs. 1275–1276 include portions of Doc. 878, Doc. 879, Doc. 880, and Doc. 881], 1281 [Pg. 1281 is part of Doc. 884], 1285 [Pg. 1285 includes portions of Doc. 887 and Doc. 888], 1287–1289 [Pgs. 1287–1289 include portions of Doc. 889, Doc. 890, and Doc. 891], 1290n [Pg. 1290 includes portions of Doc. 891 and Doc. 892], 1297 [Pg. 1297 includes portions of Doc. 896 and Doc. 897], 1299–1300 [Pg. 1299 is part of Doc. 899], 1306–1308 [Pgs. 1306–1308 include portions of Doc. 904 and Doc. 905], 1317–1321 [Pgs. 1317–1321 include portions of Doc. 911, Doc. 912, Doc. 913, Doc. 914, and Doc. 915], 1323–1329 [Pgs. 1323–1329 include portions of Doc. 916, Doc. 917, Doc. 918, Doc. 919, Doc. 920, Doc. 921, and Doc. 922], 1346 [Pg. 1346 includes portions of Doc. 933 and Doc. 934], 1354–1360 [Pgs. 1354–1360 include portions of Doc. 937, Doc. 938, Doc. 939, Doc. 940, Doc. 941, Doc. 942, Doc. 943, and Doc. 944], 1362n [Pg. 1362 includes portions of Doc. 946 and Doc. 947], 1369n [Pg. 1369 includes portions of Doc. 951 and Doc. 952], 1374n [Pg. 1374 includes portions of Doc. 954 and Doc. 955], 1375–1378 [Pgs. 1375–1378 include portions of Doc. 956, Doc. 957, and Doc. 958], 1380–1381 [Pgs. 1380–1381 include portions of Doc. 959 and Doc. 960], 1382n [Pg. 1382 includes portions of Doc. 960 and Doc. 961], 1383–1388 [Pgs. 1383–1388 include portions of Doc. 962, Doc. 963, Doc. 964, and Doc. 965], 1390n [Pg. 1390 includes portions of Doc. 966 and Doc. 967], 1392 [Pg. 1392 includes portions of Doc. 967 and Doc. 968], 1395n [Pg. 1395 is part of Doc. 972], 1411 [Pg. 1411 is part of Doc. 981], 1414 [Pg. 1414 is part of Doc. 983], 1425 [Pg. 1425 is part of Doc. 993], 1438 [Pg. 1438 is part of Doc. 997], 1450–1451 [Pgs. 1450–1451 include portions of Doc. 1006 and Doc. 1007], 1462–1463 [Pgs. 1462–1463 include portions of Doc. 1016, Doc. 1017, and Doc. 1018], 1466–1467 [Pg. 1466 is part of Doc. 1019], 1478–1479 [Pg. 1478 is part of Doc. 1026], 1486–1490 [Pgs. 1486–1490 include portions of Doc. 1029, Doc. 1030, Doc. 1031, and Doc. 1032], 1505 [Pg. 1505 is part of Doc. 1041]

Armistice agreements, implementatation of, 869 [Pg. 869 is part of Doc. 556], 885 [Pg. 885 includes portions of Doc. 570 and Doc. 571], 930–931 [Pgs. 930–931 include portions of Doc. 604 and Doc. 605], 957n [Pg. 957 includes portions of Doc. 616 and Doc. 617], 1275 [Pg. 1275 includes portions of Doc. 878 and Doc. 879], 1278 [Pg. 1278 is part of Doc. 882]

British policy, 609 [Pg. 609 includes portions of Doc. 352 and Doc. 353], 675 [Pg. 675 is part of Doc. 403], 679n [Pg. 679 is part of Doc. 405], 991 [Pg. 991 is part of Doc. 643], 1013 [Pg. 1013 is part of Doc. 660], 1033 [Pg. 1033 is part of Doc. 672], 1065n [Pg. 1065 includes portions of Doc. 699 and Doc. 700], 1077 [Pg. 1077 is part of Doc. 710], 1099 [Pg. 1099 is part of Doc. 733], 1223 [Pg. 1223 includes portions of Doc. 827 and Doc. 828], 1247 [Pg. 1247 includes portions of Doc. 851 and Doc. 852], 1275 [Pg. 1275 includes portions of Doc. 878 and Doc. 879], 1285–1286 [Pgs. 1285–1286 include portions of Doc. 887, Doc. 888, and Doc. 889], 1289 [Pg. 1289 includes portions of Doc. 890 and Doc. 891], 1359n [Pg. 1359 includes portions of Doc. 943 and Doc. 944], 1374–1377 [Pgs. 1374–1377 include portions of Doc. 954, Doc. 955, Doc. 956, Doc. 957, and Doc. 958], 1382n [Pg. 1382 includes portions of Doc. 960 and Doc. 961], 1395–1396 [Pgs. 1395–1396 include portions of Doc. 972 and Doc. 973], 1452n [Pg. 1452 includes portions of Doc. 1007 and Doc. 1008], 1459 [Pg. 1459 includes portions of Doc. 1013 and Doc. 1014], 1464 [Pg. 1464 is part of Doc. 1018], 1465n [Pg. 1465 includes portions of Doc. 1018 and Doc. 1019]

Conciliation efforts, 773 [Pg. 773 is part of Doc. 490], 786 [Pg. 786 includes portions of Doc. 500 and Doc. 501], 792n [Pg. 792 is part of Doc. 505], 847 [Pg. 847 is part of Doc. 537], 902 [Pg. 902 includes portions of Doc. 586 and Doc. 587], 934 [Pg. 934 includes portions of Doc. 607 and Doc. 608], 1128 [Pg. 1128 is part of Doc. 756], 1241–1242 [Pgs. 1241–1242 include portions of Doc. 844, Doc. 845, Doc. 846, and Doc. 847], 1279 [Pg. 1279 is part of Doc. 882], 1283 [Pg. 1283 includes portions of Doc. 885 and Doc. 886], 1303 [Pg. 1303 is part of Doc. 902], 1315–1316 [Pg. 1315 is part of Doc. 910], 1325 [Pg. 1325 is part of Doc. 918], 1329–1330 [Pg. 1329 is part of Doc. 922], 1357 [Pg. 1357 includes portions of Doc. 940 and Doc. 941], 1377 [Pg. 1377 is part of Doc. 958], 1388 [Pg. 1388 includes portions of Doc. 963, Doc. 964, and Doc. 965], 1428 [Pg. 1428 is part of Doc. 995], 1464 [Pg. 1464 is part of Doc. 1018], 1466–1467 [Pg. 1466 is part of Doc. 1019]

Economic Survey Mission: Establishment and activities of, 54–55 [Pgs. 54–55 include portions of Doc. 8 and Doc. 9], 65 [Pg. 65 is part of Doc. 12], 67–68 [Pg. 67 is part of Doc. 12], 77 [Pg. 77 is part of Doc. 12], 146 [Pg. 146 includes portions of Doc. 53 and Doc. 54], 165 [Pg. 165 is part of Doc. 71], 174 [Pg. 174 is part of Doc. 73], 178 [Pg. 178 is part of Doc. 75], 857–859 [Pgs. 857–859 include portions of Doc. 545, Doc. 546, and Doc. 547], 870–871 [Pgs. 870–871 include portions of Doc. 557, Doc. 558, and Doc. 559], 940–941 [Pg. 940 is part of Doc. 608], 964 [Pg. 964 includes portions of Doc. 622 and Doc. 623], 990–991 [Pgs. 990–991 include portions of Doc. 642 and Doc. 643], 1014 [Pg. 1014 is part of Doc. 660], 1033 [Pg. 1033 is part of Doc. 672], 1038–1039 [Pgs. 1038–1039 include portions of Doc. 675, Doc. 676, Doc. 677, and Doc. 678], 1046–1047 [Pgs. 1046–1047 include portions of Doc. 684, Doc. 685, and Doc. 686], 1063–1065 [Pgs. 1063–1065 include portions of Doc. 697, Doc. 698, Doc. 699, and Doc. 700], 1082 [Pg. 1082 includes portions of Doc. 716 and Doc. 717], 1086 [Pg. 1086 includes portions of Doc. 720 and Doc. 721], 1087n [Pg. 1087 includes portions of Doc. 721 and Doc. 722], 1108–1109 [Pgs. 1108–1109 include portions of Doc. 738, Doc. 739, and Doc. 740], 1124 [Pg. 1124 includes portions of Doc. 752 and Doc. 753], 1141n [Pg. 1141 includes portions of Doc. 764 and Doc. 765], 1164 [Pg. 1164 includes portions of Doc. 783 and Doc. 784], 1211 [Pg. 1211 is part of Doc. 818], 1218 [Pg. 1218 includes portions of Doc. 825 and Doc. 826], 1220–1221 [Pgs. 1220–1221 include portions of Doc. 826 and Doc. 827], 1255 [Pg. 1255 includes portions of Doc. 858 and Doc. 859], 1257–1258 [Pgs. 1257–1258 include portions of Doc. 861 and Doc. 862], 1267 [Pg. 1267 is part of Doc. 870], 1273 [Pg. 1273 includes portions of Doc. 876 and Doc. 877], 1289 [Pg. 1289 includes portions of Doc. 890 and Doc. 891], 1298 [Pg. 1298 includes portions of Doc. 897 and Doc. 898], 1312–1313 [Pgs. 1312–1313 include portions of Doc. 907 and Doc. 908], 1318 [Pg. 1318 is part of Doc. 911], 1326–1327 [Pgs. 1326–1327 include portions of Doc. 918, Doc. 919, Doc. 920, and Doc. 921], 1329–1330 [Pg. 1329 is part of Doc. 922], 1333 [Pg. 1333 is part of Doc. 925], 1335 [Pg. 1335 is part of Doc. 927], 1337 [Pg. 1337 includes portions of Doc. 928 and Doc. 929], 1342–1344 [Pgs. 1342–1344 include portions of Doc. 932 and Doc. 933], 1346–1353 [Pgs. 1346–1353 include portions of Doc. 933, Doc. 934, Doc. 935, Doc. 936, and Doc. 937], 1355–1364 [Pgs. 1355–1364 include portions of Doc. 938, Doc. 939, Doc. 940, Doc. 941, Doc. 942, Doc. 943, Doc. 944, Doc. 945, Doc. 946, and Doc. 947], 1366–1367 [Pgs. 1366–1367 include portions of Doc. 949, Doc. 950, and Doc. 951], 1369 [Pg. 1369 includes portions of Doc. 951 and Doc. 952], 1374–1377 [Pgs. 1374–1377 include portions of Doc. 954, Doc. 955, Doc. 956, Doc. 957, and Doc. 958], 1379–1380 [Pg. 1379 is part of Doc. 959], 1382 [Pg. 1382 includes portions of Doc. 960 and Doc. 961], 1387–1390 [Pgs. 1387–1390 include portions of Doc. 962, Doc. 963, Doc. 964, Doc. 965, Doc. 966, and Doc. 967], 1392–1396 [Pgs. 1392–1396 include portions of Doc. 967, Doc. 968, Doc. 969, Doc. 970, Doc. 971, Doc. 972, and Doc. 973], 1401–1405 [Pgs. 1401–1405 include portions of Doc. 975, Doc. 976, Doc. 977, and Doc. 978], 1407–1409 [Pgs. 1407–1409 include portions of Doc. 978, Doc. 979, Doc. 980, and Doc. 981], 1414–1417 [Pgs. 1414–1417 include portions of Doc. 983 and Doc. 984], 1424–1426 [Pgs. 1424–1426 include portions of Doc. 992, Doc. 993, and Doc. 994], 1428–1430 [Pgs. 1428–1430 include portions of Doc. 995, Doc. 996, and Doc. 997], 1442–1444 [Pgs. 1442–1444 include portions of Doc. 998, Doc. 999, and Doc. 1000], 1450 [Pg. 1450 is part of Doc. 1006], 1463–1465 [Pgs. 1463–1465 include portions of Doc. 1017, Doc. 1018, and Doc. 1019], 1469–1470 [Pgs. 1469–1470 include portions of Doc. 1020, Doc. 1021, and Doc. 1022], 1493–1494 [Pgs. 1493–1494 include portions of Doc. 1033, Doc. 1034, and Doc. 1035], 1505 [Pg. 1505 is part of Doc. 1041]

Report (Clapp report), Nov. 6, 1949, 67–69 [Pg. 67 is part of Doc. 12], 77 [Pg. 77 is part of Doc. 12], 165 [Pg. 165 is part of Doc. 71], 167 [Pg. 167 includes portions of Doc. 71 and Doc. 72], 173 [Pg. 173 is part of Doc. 73], 176 [Pg. 176 is part of Doc. 74], 178 [Pg. 178 is part of Doc. 75], 1316 [Pg. 1316 is part of Doc. 910], 1334 [Pg. 1334 is part of Doc. 926], 1370–1372 [Pg. 1370 is part of Doc. 953], 1408 [Pg. 1408 is part of Doc. 979], 1413 [Pg. 1413 is part of Doc. 982], 1422–1423 [Pgs. 1422–1423 include portions of Doc. 989, Doc. 990, and Doc. 991], 1430 [Pg. 1430 includes portions of Doc. 995, Doc. 996, and Doc. 997], 1452–1455 [Pgs. 1452–1455 include portions of Doc. 1007, Doc. 1008, Doc. 1009, Doc. 1010, Doc. 1011, and Doc. 1012], 1464 [Pg. 1464 is part of Doc. 1018], 1469 [Pg. 1469 includes portions of Doc. 1020 and Doc. 1021], 1471–1481 [Pgs. 1471–1481 include portions of Doc. 1023, Doc. 1024, Doc. 1025, Doc. 1026, and Doc. 1027], 1500–1501 [Pg. 1500 is part of Doc. 1038], 1505 [Pg. 1505 is part of Doc. 1041], 1511 [Pg. 1511 includes portions of Doc. 1046 and Doc. 1047], 1514 [Pg. 1514 includes portions of Doc. 1049 and Doc. 1050], 1522 [Pg. 1522 includes portions of Doc. 1057 and Doc. 1058], 1529–1530 [Pgs. 1529–1530 include portions of Doc. 1062, Doc. 1063, Doc. 1064, Doc. 1065, and Doc. 1066], 1533 [Pg. 1533 includes portions of Doc. 1067 and Doc. 1068], 1548–1551 [Pgs. 1548–1551 include portions of Doc. 1080, Doc. 1081, Doc. 1082, and Doc. 1083], 1557 [Pg. 1557 is part of Doc. 1086], 1564 [Pg. 1564 includes portions of Doc. 1093 and Doc. 1094]

Egyptian position, 750–752 [Pgs. 750–752 include portions of Doc. 467, Doc. 468, and Doc. 469], 779n [Pg. 779 is part of Doc. 494], 894 [Pg. 894 includes portions of Doc. 577 and Doc. 578], 955–956 [Pgs. 955–956 include portions of Doc. 615 and Doc. 616], 966n [Pg. 966 includes portions of Doc. 625 and Doc. 626], 989 [Pg. 989 is part of Doc. 641], 1034 [Pg. 1034 is part of Doc. 673], 1036 [Pg. 1036 is part of Doc. 675], 1071 [Pg. 1071 includes portions of Doc. 703 and Doc. 704], 1076 [Pg. 1076 includes portions of Doc. 708 and Doc. 709], 1086 [Pg. 1086 includes portions of Doc. 720 and Doc. 721], 1090–1091 [Pgs. 1090–1091 include portions of Doc. 723, Doc. 724, and Doc. 725], 1116 [Pg. 1116 is part of Doc. 747], 1152–1154 [Pgs. 1152–1154 include portions of Doc. 772, Doc. 773, and Doc. 774], 1179–1182 [Pgs. 1179–1182 include portions of Doc. 792, Doc. 793, Doc. 794, and Doc. 795], 1188–1189 [Pgs. 1188–1189 include portions of Doc. 800, Doc. 801, and Doc. 802], 1195n [Pg. 1195 includes portions of Doc. 806 and Doc. 807], 1223 [Pg. 1223 includes portions of Doc. 827 and Doc. 828], 1229 [Pg. 1229 includes portions of Doc. 832 and Doc. 833], 1231n [Pg. 1231 includes portions of Doc. 834 and Doc. 835], 1238–1239 [Pgs. 1238–1239 include portions of Doc. 840, Doc. 841, Doc. 842, Doc. 843, and Doc. 844], 1243n [Pg. 1243 includes portions of Doc. 847 and Doc. 848], 1244 [Pg. 1244 is part of Doc. 848], 1248 [Pg. 1248 is part of Doc. 852], 1254 [Pg. 1254 includes portions of Doc. 857 and Doc. 858], 1265 [Pg. 1265 is part of Doc. 868], 1272 [Pg. 1272 includes portions of Doc. 874 and Doc. 875], 1285–1286 [Pgs. 1285–1286 include portions of Doc. 887, Doc. 888, and Doc. 889], 1300 [Pg. 1300 is part of Doc. 899], 1306 [Pg. 1306 is part of Doc. 904], 1337–1338 [Pgs. 1337–1338 include portions of Doc. 928, Doc. 929, and Doc. 930], 1345 [Pg. 1345 is part of Doc. 933], 1414 [Pg. 1414 is part of Doc. 983], 1450–1451 [Pgs. 1450–1451 include portions of Doc. 1006 and Doc. 1007], 1479 [Pg. 1479 is part of Doc. 1026], 1488 [Pg. 1488 includes portions of Doc. 1030 and Doc. 1031], 1535 [Pg. 1535 includes portions of Doc. 1069 and Doc. 1070]

French role, 611 [Pg. 611 is part of Doc. 354], 748 [Pg. 748 includes portions of Doc. 465 and Doc. 466], 793–794 [Pg. 793 is part of Doc. 506], 801 [Pg. 801 is part of Doc. 510], 819 [Pg. 819 includes portions of Doc. 526 and Doc. 527], 879 [Pg. 879 includes portions of Doc. 564 and Doc. 565], 911–913 [Pgs. 911–913 include portions of Doc. 591 and Doc. 592], 920 [Pg. 920 includes portions of Doc. 597 and Doc. 598], 924 [Pg. 924 includes portions of Doc. 600 and Doc. 601], 949 [Pg. 949 is part of Doc. 612], 967 [Pg. 967 includes portions of Doc. 626 and Doc. 627], 1013 [Pg. 1013 is part of Doc. 660], 1032 [Pg. 1032 includes portions of Doc. 671 and Doc. 672], 1039 [Pg. 1039 includes portions of Doc. 676, Doc. 677, and Doc. 678], 1070 [Pg. 1070 is part of Doc. 703], 1231 [Pg. 1231 includes portions of Doc. 834 and Doc. 835], 1247 [Pg. 1247 includes portions of Doc. 851 and Doc. 852], 1275 [Pg. 1275 includes portions of Doc. 878 and Doc. 879], 1285–1286 [Pgs. 1285–1286 include portions of Doc. 887, Doc. 888, and Doc. 889], 1289–1290 [Pgs. 1289–1290 include portions of Doc. 890, Doc. 891, and Doc. 892], 1298–1301 [Pgs. 1298–1301 include portions of Doc. 897, Doc. 898, Doc. 899, and Doc. 900], 1316 [Pg. 1316 is part of Doc. 910], 1322 [Pg. 1322 includes portions of Doc. 915 and Doc. 916], 1336n [Pg. 1336 is part of Doc. 928], 1376 [Pg. 1376 includes portions of Doc. 957 and Doc. 958], 1382n [Pg. 1382 includes portions of Doc. 960 and Doc. 961], 1392n [Pg. 1392 includes portions of Doc. 967 and Doc. 968], 1459 [Pg. 1459 includes portions of Doc. 1013 and Doc. 1014], 1464 [Pg. 1464 is part of Doc. 1018]

Gaza strip, Israeli claim to, 1036 [Pg. 1036 is part of Doc. 675], 1060 [Pg. 1060 is part of Doc. 697], 1070–1071 [Pgs. 1070–1071 include portions of Doc. 703 and Doc. 704], 1076 [Pg. 1076 includes portions of Doc. 708 and Doc. 709], 1085–1086 [Pgs. 1085–1086 include portions of Doc. 719, Doc. 720, and Doc. 721], 1090–1091 [Pgs. 1090–1091 include portions of Doc. 723, Doc. 724, and Doc. 725], 1095–1097 [Pgs. 1095–1097 include portions of Doc. 729, Doc. 730, Doc. 731, and Doc. 732], 1104 [Pg. 1104 is part of Doc. 736], 1111 [Pg. 1111 is part of Doc. 742], 1116–1117 [Pgs. 1116–1117 include portions of Doc. 747 and Doc. 748], 1124–1125 [Pgs. 1124–1125 include portions of Doc. 752 and Doc. 753], 1136 [Pg. 1136 is part of Doc. 761], 1139 [Pg. 1139 is part of Doc. 763], 1149 [Pg. 1149 is part of Doc. 772], 1152 [Pg. 1152 is part of Doc. 772], 1161 [Pg. 1161 is part of Doc. 781], 1166 [Pg. 1166 includes portions of Doc. 785 and Doc. 786], 1175 [Pg. 1175 is part of Doc. 790], 1177 [Pg. 1177 includes portions of Doc. 790 and Doc. 791], 1179–1180 [Pgs. 1179–1180 include portions of Doc. 792 and Doc. 793], 1182 [Pg. 1182 includes portions of Doc. 794 and Doc. 795], 1186 [Pg. 1186 includes portions of Doc. 798 and Doc. 799], 1189–1193 [Pgs. 1189–1193 include portions of Doc. 801, Doc. 802, Doc. 803, Doc. 804, and Doc. 805], 1195–1197 [Pgs. 1195–1197 include portions of Doc. 806, Doc. 807, Doc. 808, and Doc. 809], 1208–1209 [Pgs. 1208–1209 include portions of Doc. 816 and Doc. 817], 1213–1214 [Pgs. 1213–1214 include portions of Doc. 820, Doc. 821, and Doc. 822], 1224 [Pg. 1224 is part of Doc. 828], 1228–1229 [Pgs. 1228–1229 include portions of Doc. 831, Doc. 832, and Doc. 833], 1239 [Pg. 1239 includes portions of Doc. 842, Doc. 843, and Doc. 844], 1243n [Pg. 1243 includes portions of Doc. 847 and Doc. 848], 1244 [Pg. 1244 is part of Doc. 848], 1247–1248 [Pgs. 1247–1248 include portions of Doc. 851 and Doc. 852], 1250 [Pg. 1250 is part of Doc. 855], 1264 [Pg. 1264 includes portions of Doc. 866 and Doc. 867], 1276 [Pg. 1276 includes portions of Doc. 879, Doc. 880, and Doc. 881], 1287 [Pg. 1287 includes portions of Doc. 889 and Doc. 890], 1301 [Pg. 1301 includes portions of Doc. 899 and Doc. 900], 1317 [Pg. 1317 is part of Doc. 911], 1338 [Pg. 1338 includes portions of Doc. 929 and Doc. 930], 1345 [Pg. 1345 is part of Doc. 933], 1378 [Pg. 1378 is part of Doc. 958], 1446n [Pg. 1446 is part of Doc. 1001]

Iraqi position, 757–758 [Pgs. 757–758 include portions of Doc. 474 and Doc. 475], 894 [Pg. 894 includes portions of Doc. 577 and Doc. 578], 955 [Pg. 955 is part of Doc. 615], 1072 [Pg. 1072 includes portions of Doc. 704 and Doc. 705], 1376 [Pg. 1376 includes portions of Doc. 957 and Doc. 958], 1382 [Pg. 1382 includes portions of Doc. 960 and Doc. 961], 1395n [Pg. 1395 is part of Doc. 972], 1414 [Pg. 1414 is part of Doc. 983], 1488 [Pg. 1488 includes portions of Doc. 1030 and Doc. 1031]

Israeli position, 65 [Pg. 65 is part of Doc. 12], 140 [Pg. 140 includes portions of Doc. 48 and Doc. 49], 611–612 [Pg. 611 is part of Doc. 354], 661 [Pg. 661 includes portions of Doc. 392 and Doc. 393], 719 [Pg. 719 is part of Doc. 444], 736–738 [Pg. 736 is part of Doc. 457], 750n [Pg. 750 includes portions of Doc. 467 and Doc. 468], 772–780 [Pgs. 772–780 include portions of Doc. 489, Doc. 490, Doc. 491, Doc. 492, Doc. 493, Doc. 494, and Doc. 495], 785n [Pg. 785 includes portions of Doc. 499 and Doc. 500], 787 [Pg. 787 includes portions of Doc. 501 and Doc. 502], 793 [Pg. 793 is part of Doc. 506], 798 [Pg. 798 includes portions of Doc. 507 and Doc. 508], 806–807 [Pg. 806 is part of Doc. 515], 815 [Pg. 815 includes portions of Doc. 520 and Doc. 521], 825–826 [Pgs. 825–826 include portions of Doc. 531 and Doc. 532], 842–843 [Pgs. 842–843 include portions of Doc. 533, Doc. 534, and Doc. 535], 848 [Pg. 848 includes portions of Doc. 537, Doc. 538, and Doc. 539], 853n [Pg. 853 includes portions of Doc. 543 and Doc. 544], 876–877 [Pg. 876 is part of Doc. 563], 893 [Pg. 893 is part of Doc. 577], 895 [Pg. 895 includes portions of Doc. 578, Doc. 579, and Doc. 580], 899–900 [Pgs. 899–900 include portions of Doc. 583, Doc. 584, Doc. 585, and Doc. 586], 902–905 [Pgs. 902–905 include portions of Doc. 586, Doc. 587, Doc. 588, and Doc. 589], 911–916 [Pgs. 911–916 include portions of Doc. 591, Doc. 592, Doc. 593, and Doc. 594], 925–927 [Pgs. 925–927 include portions of Doc. 601, Doc. 602, and Doc. 603], 949 [Pg. 949 is part of Doc. 612], 955–957 [Pgs. 955–957 include portions of Doc. 615, Doc. 616, and Doc. 617], 960–961 [Pgs. 960–961 include portions of Doc. 619, Doc. 620, and Doc. 621], 966 [Pg. 966 includes portions of Doc. 625 and Doc. 626], 969 [Pg. 969 includes portions of Doc. 628 and Doc. 629], 973–977 [Pgs. 973–977 include portions of Doc. 631, Doc. 632, Doc. 633, and Doc. 634], 979 [Pg. 979 is part of Doc. 636], 988–989 [Pg. 988 is part of Doc. 641], 992–994 [Pgs. 992–994 include portions of Doc. 643, Doc. 644, Doc. 645, and Doc. 646], 997–999 [Pgs. 997–999 include portions of Doc. 648, Doc. 649, and Doc. 650], 1005 [Pg. 1005 includes portions of Doc. 655 and Doc. 656], 1015 [Pg. 1015 includes portions of Doc. 660 and Doc. 661], 1018–1020 [Pgs. 1018–1020 include portions of Doc. 662, Doc. 663, and Doc. 664], 1023 [Pg. 1023 includes portions of Doc. 666 and Doc. 667], 1028–1029 [Pgs. 1028–1029 include portions of Doc. 667, Doc. 668, and Doc. 669], 1033 [Pg. 1033 is part of Doc. 672], 1035–1039 [Pgs. 1035–1039 include portions of Doc. 673, Doc. 674, Doc. 675, Doc. 676, Doc. 677, and Doc. 678], 1052 [Pg. 1052 is part of Doc. 689], 1055–1056 [Pgs. 1055–1056 include portions of Doc. 690, Doc. 691, Doc. 692, and Doc. 693], 1058–1073 [Pgs. 1058–1073 include portions of Doc. 695, Doc. 696, Doc. 697, Doc. 698, Doc. 699, Doc. 700, Doc. 701, Doc. 702, Doc. 703, Doc. 704, and Doc. 705], 1076–1077 [Pgs. 1076–1077 include portions of Doc. 708, Doc. 709, and Doc. 710], 1083n [Pg. 1083 is part of Doc. 717], 1085–1086 [Pgs. 1085–1086 include portions of Doc. 719, Doc. 720, and Doc. 721], 1087n [Pg. 1087 includes portions of Doc. 721 and Doc. 722], 1094–1097 [Pgs. 1094–1097 include portions of Doc. 728, Doc. 729, Doc. 730, Doc. 731, and Doc. 732], 1099 [Pg. 1099 is part of Doc. 733], 1102–1106 [Pgs. 1102–1106 include portions of Doc. 735 and Doc. 736], 1108–1109 [Pgs. 1108–1109 include portions of Doc. 738, Doc. 739, and Doc. 740], 1112–1114 [Pgs. 1112–1114 include portions of Doc. 742, Doc. 743, Doc. 744, and Doc. 745], 1116n [Pg. 1116 is part of Doc. 747], 1122n [Pg. 1122 is part of Doc. 751]-1125 [Pg. 1125 is part of Doc. 753], 1128–1130 [Pgs. 1128–1130 include portions of Doc. 756 and Doc. 757], 1135–1136 [Pgs. 1135–1136 include portions of Doc. 760 and Doc. 761], 1137n [Pg. 1137 includes portions of Doc. 762 and Doc. 763], 1138–1139 [Pg. 1138 is part of Doc. 763], 1141n [Pg. 1141 includes portions of Doc. 764 and Doc. 765], 1142–1143 [Pgs. 1142–1143 include portions of Doc. 765, Doc. 766, Doc. 767, and Doc. 768], 1145–1146 [Pgs. 1145–1146 include portions of Doc. 769 and Doc. 770], 1149–1152 [Pg. 1149 is part of Doc. 772], 1161–1164 [Pgs. 1161–1164 include portions of Doc. 781, Doc. 782, Doc. 783, and Doc. 784], 1169–1174 [Pgs. 1169–1174 include portions of Doc. 788, Doc. 789, and Doc. 790], 1179 [Pg. 1179 includes portions of Doc. 792 and Doc. 793], 1181–1185 [Pgs. 1181–1185 include portions of Doc. 794, Doc. 795, Doc. 796, Doc. 797, and Doc. 798], 1191 [Pg. 1191 includes portions of Doc. 803 and Doc. 804], 1206 [Pg. 1206 includes portions of Doc. 814 and Doc. 815], 1213–1214 [Pgs. 1213–1214 include portions of Doc. 820, Doc. 821, and Doc. 822], 1217 [Pg. 1217 includes portions of Doc. 824 and Doc. 825], 1221 [Pg. 1221 includes portions of Doc. 826 and Doc. 827], 1223 [Pg. 1223 includes portions of Doc. 827 and Doc. 828], 1226 [Pg. 1226 includes portions of Doc. 830 and Doc. 831], 1230–1231 [Pgs. 1230–1231 include portions of Doc. 833, Doc. 834, and Doc. 835], 1236–1240 [Pgs. 1236–1240 include portions of Doc. 839, Doc. 840, Doc. 841, Doc. 842, Doc. 843, Doc. 844, Doc. 845, and Doc. 846], 1244n [Pg. 1244 is part of Doc. 848], 1245n [Pg. 1245 includes portions of Doc. 849 and Doc. 850], 1246 [Pg. 1246 is part of Doc. 850], 1254 [Pg. 1254 includes portions of Doc. 857 and Doc. 858], 1257 [Pg. 1257 includes portions of Doc. 861 and Doc. 862], 1262–1267 [Pgs. 1262–1267 include portions of Doc. 866, Doc. 867, Doc. 868, Doc. 869, and Doc. 870], 1271–1273 [Pgs. 1271–1273 include portions of Doc. 872, Doc. 873, Doc. 874, Doc. 875, Doc. 876, and Doc. 877], 1275–1277 [Pgs. 1275–1277 include portions of Doc. 878, Doc. 879, Doc. 880, Doc. 881, and Doc. 882], 1279 [Pg. 1279 is part of Doc. 882], 1281–1282 [Pgs. 1281–1282 include portions of Doc. 884 and Doc. 885], 1285 [Pg. 1285 includes portions of Doc. 887 and Doc. 888], 1287–1288 [Pgs. 1287–1288 include portions of Doc. 889 and Doc. 890], 1290n [Pg. 1290 includes portions of Doc. 891 and Doc. 892], 1297–1301 [Pgs. 1297–1301 include portions of Doc. 896, Doc. 897, Doc. 898, Doc. 899, and Doc. 900], 1305–1308 [Pgs. 1305–1308 include portions of Doc. 904 and Doc. 905], 1312n [Pg. 1312 is part of Doc. 907], 1317–1321 [Pgs. 1317–1321 include portions of Doc. 911, Doc. 912, Doc. 913, Doc. 914, and Doc. 915], 1323–1327 [Pgs. 1323–1327 include portions of Doc. 916, Doc. 917, Doc. 918, Doc. 919, Doc. 920, and Doc. 921], 1335–1338 [Pgs. 1335–1338 include portions of Doc. 927, Doc. 928, Doc. 929, and Doc. 930], 1346 [Pg. 1346 includes portions of Doc. 933 and Doc. 934], 1349–1350 [Pgs. 1349–1350 include portions of Doc. 935, Doc. 936, and Doc. 937], 1354–1358 [Pgs. 1354–1358 include portions of Doc. 937, Doc. 938, Doc. 939, Doc. 940, Doc. 941, Doc. 942, and Doc. 943], 1361 [Pg. 1361 includes portions of Doc. 944, Doc. 945, and Doc. 946], 1362n [Pg. 1362 includes portions of Doc. 946 and Doc. 947], 1369n [Pg. 1369 includes portions of Doc. 951 and Doc. 952], 1374n [Pg. 1374 includes portions of Doc. 954 and Doc. 955], 1375–1377 [Pgs. 1375–1377 include portions of Doc. 956, Doc. 957, and Doc. 958], 1380 [Pg. 1380 is part of Doc. 959], 1383–1388 [Pgs. 1383–1388 include portions of Doc. 962, Doc. 963, Doc. 964, and Doc. 965], 1390–1393 [Pgs. 1390–1393 include portions of Doc. 966, Doc. 967, Doc. 968, Doc. 969, and Doc. 970], 1396–1397 [Pgs. 1396–1397 include portions of Doc. 972 and Doc. 973], 1409–1411 [Pgs. 1409–1411 include portions of Doc. 980 and Doc. 981], 1417 [Pg. 1417 is part of Doc. 984], 1419–1420 [Pgs. 1419–1420 include portions of Doc. 986, Doc. 987, and Doc. 988], 1425 [Pg. 1425 is part of Doc. 993], 1428 [Pg. 1428 is part of Doc. 995], 1432–1433 [Pg. 1432 is part of Doc. 997], 1438 [Pg. 1438 is part of Doc. 997], 1441 [Pg. 1441 is part of Doc. 998], 1445 [Pg. 1445 is part of Doc. 1000], 1447 [Pg. 1447 is part of Doc. 1002], 1462–1463 [Pgs. 1462–1463 include portions of Doc. 1016, Doc. 1017, and Doc. 1018], 1466 [Pg. 1466 is part of Doc. 1019], 1479–1480 [Pg. 1479 is part of Doc. 1026], 1487–1488 [Pgs. 1487–1488 include portions of Doc. 1030 and Doc. 1031], 1496–1498 [Pgs. 1496–1498 include portions of Doc. 1036 and Doc. 1037], 1505 [Pg. 1505 is part of Doc. 1041], 1510–1511 [Pgs. 1510–1511 include portions of Doc. 1045, Doc. 1046, and Doc. 1047], 1521 [Pg. 1521 is part of Doc. 1057], 1535–1536 [Pgs. 1535–1536 include portions of Doc. 1069, Doc. 1070, and Doc. 1071]

Jerusalem and the Holy Places, future status of, 140 [Pg. 140 includes portions of Doc. 48 and Doc. 49], 177 [Pg. 177 is part of Doc. 74], 710 [Pg. 710 is part of Doc. 433], 718n [Pg. 718 includes portions of Doc. 443 and Doc. 444], 729 [Pg. 729 includes portions of Doc. 451 and Doc. 452], 734–741 [Pgs. 734–741 include portions of Doc. 455, Doc. 456, Doc. 457, Doc. 458, and Doc. 459], 745 [Pg. 745 is part of Doc. 463], 747 [Pg. 747 includes portions of Doc. 464 and Doc. 465], 750–751 [Pgs. 750–751 include portions of Doc. 467 and Doc. 468], 757n [Pg. 757 includes portions of Doc. 474 and Doc. 475], 758 [Pg. 758 is part of Doc. 475], 767 [Pg. 767 includes portions of Doc. 484 and Doc. 485], 773–774 [Pgs. 773–774 include portions of Doc. 490 and Doc. 491], 777 [Pg. 777 is part of Doc. 493], 780 [Pg. 780 includes portions of Doc. 494 and Doc. 495], 783–784 [Pgs. 783–784 include portions of Doc. 496, Doc. 497, and Doc. 498], 786–787 [Pgs. 786–787 include portions of Doc. 500, Doc. 501, and Doc. 502], 793–796 [Pgs. 793–796 include portions of Doc. 506 and Doc. 507], 798 [Pg. 798 includes portions of Doc. 507 and Doc. 508], 806n [Pg. 806 is part of Doc. 515], 819–820 [Pgs. 819–820 include portions of Doc. 526, Doc. 527, and Doc. 528], 825–826 [Pgs. 825–826 include portions of Doc. 531 and Doc. 532], 842–843 [Pgs. 842–843 include portions of Doc. 533, Doc. 534, and Doc. 535], 848–849 [Pgs. 848–849 include portions of Doc. 537, Doc. 538, and Doc. 539], 883n [Pg. 883 includes portions of Doc. 568 and Doc. 569], 887 [Pg. 887 includes portions of Doc. 573 and Doc. 574], 894 [Pg. 894 includes portions of Doc. 577 and Doc. 578], 896–897 [Pgs. 896–897 include portions of Doc. 580, Doc. 581, and Doc. 582], 900–903 [Pgs. 900–903 include portions of Doc. 585, Doc. 586, and Doc. 587], 910–913 [Pgs. 910–913 include portions of Doc. 590, Doc. 591, and Doc. 592], 920–921 [Pgs. 920–921 include portions of Doc. 597 and Doc. 598], 923 [Pg. 923 is part of Doc. 600], 925–926 [Pgs. 925–926 include portions of Doc. 601 and Doc. 602], 929 [Pg. 929 is part of Doc. 604], 948–949 [Pgs. 948–949 include portions of Doc. 611 and Doc. 612], 955–956 [Pgs. 955–956 include portions of Doc. 615 and Doc. 616], 967–968 [Pgs. 967–968 include portions of Doc. 626, Doc. 627, and Doc. 628], 975 [Pg. 975 is part of Doc. 633], 977 [Pg. 977 includes portions of Doc. 633 and Doc. 634], 988 [Pg. 988 is part of Doc. 641], 1005 [Pg. 1005 includes portions of Doc. 655 and Doc. 656], 1015–1016 [Pgs. 1015–1016 include portions of Doc. 660 and Doc. 661], 1022–1028 [Pgs. 1022–1028 include portions of Doc. 665, Doc. 666, Doc. 667, and Doc. 668], 1041n [Pg. 1041 is part of Doc. 678], 1050–1051 [Pgs. 1050–1051 include portions of Doc. 688 and Doc. 689], 1059 [Pg. 1059 is part of Doc. 696], 1079–1081 [Pgs. 1079–1081 include portions of Doc. 711, Doc. 712, Doc. 713, Doc. 714, and Doc. 715], 1083n [Pg. 1083 is part of Doc. 717], 1084–1085 [Pgs. 1084–1085 include portions of Doc. 718, Doc. 719, and Doc. 720], 1093–1094 [Pgs. 1093–1094 include portions of Doc. 728 and Doc. 729], 1098n [Pg. 1098 is part of Doc. 732], 1108 [Pg. 1108 includes portions of Doc. 738 and Doc. 739], 1117–1118 [Pgs. 1117–1118 include portions of Doc. 747 and Doc. 748], 1130–1131 [Pgs. 1130–1131 include portions of Doc. 756, Doc. 757, and Doc. 758], 1150 [Pg. 1150 is part of Doc. 772], 1152 [Pg. 1152 is part of Doc. 772], 1170 [Pg. 1170 is part of Doc. 788], 1183–1184 [Pgs. 1183–1184 include portions of Doc. 795 and Doc. 796], 1187 [Pg. 1187 includes portions of Doc. 799 and Doc. 800], 1193 [Pg. 1193 includes portions of Doc. 804 and Doc. 805], 1198 [Pg. 1198 is part of Doc. 810], 1215 [Pg. 1215 includes portions of Doc. 822 and Doc. 823], 1218 [Pg. 1218 includes portions of Doc. 825 and Doc. 826], 1220 [Pg. 1220 is part of Doc. 826], 1226 [Pg. 1226 includes portions of Doc. 830 and Doc. 831], 1230 [Pg. 1230 includes portions of Doc. 833 and Doc. 834], 1231n [Pg. 1231 includes portions of Doc. 834 and Doc. 835], 1234 [Pg. 1234 is part of Doc. 838], 1243 [Pg. 1243 includes portions of Doc. 847 and Doc. 848], 1245 [Pg. 1245 includes portions of Doc. 849 and Doc. 850], 1252–1253 [Pgs. 1252–1253 include portions of Doc. 855, Doc. 856, and Doc. 857], 1256 [Pg. 1256 includes portions of Doc. 860 and Doc. 861], 1259 [Pg. 1259 is part of Doc. 863], 1268–1269 [Pgs. 1268–1269 include portions of Doc. 871 and Doc. 872], 1274–1275 [Pgs. 1274–1275 include portions of Doc. 877, Doc. 878, and Doc. 879], 1286 [Pg. 1286 includes portions of Doc. 888 and Doc. 889], 1289 [Pg. 1289 includes portions of Doc. 890 and Doc. 891], 1293–1297 [Pgs. 1293–1297 include portions of Doc. 895, Doc. 896, and Doc. 897], 1300–1301 [Pgs. 1300–1301 include portions of Doc. 899 and Doc. 900], 1306–1307 [Pg. 1306 is part of Doc. 904], 1309n [Pg. 1309 is part of Doc. 905], 1321–1322 [Pgs. 1321–1322 include portions of Doc. 913, Doc. 914, Doc. 915, and Doc. 916], 1331 [Pg. 1331 includes portions of Doc. 922 and Doc. 923], 1336–1337 [Pgs. 1336–1337 include portions of Doc. 928 and Doc. 929], 1348 [Pg. 1348 includes portions of Doc. 934 and Doc. 935], 1349n [Pg. 1349 includes portions of Doc. 935 and Doc. 936], 1356 [Pg. 1356 includes portions of Doc. 939 and Doc. 940], 1381–1387 [Pgs. 1381–1387 include portions of Doc. 960, Doc. 961, Doc. 962, and Doc. 963], 1390–1394 [Pgs. 1390–1394 include portions of Doc. 966, Doc. 967, Doc. 968, Doc. 969, Doc. 970, and Doc. 971], 1396–1397 [Pgs. 1396–1397 include portions of Doc. 972 and Doc. 973], 1400 [Pg. 1400 is part of Doc. 975], 1407n [Pg. 1407 includes portions of Doc. 978 and Doc. 979], 1409–1412 [Pgs. 1409–1412 include portions of Doc. 980 and Doc. 981], 1419–1420 [Pgs. 1419–1420 include portions of Doc. 986, Doc. 987, and Doc. 988], 1426 [Pg. 1426 includes portions of Doc. 993 and Doc. 994], 1429 [Pg. 1429 is part of Doc. 995], 1432 [Pg. 1432 is part of Doc. 997], 1438–1439 [Pg. 1438 is part of Doc. 997], 1441–1442 [Pgs. 1441–1442 include portions of Doc. 998 and Doc. 999], 1445 [Pg. 1445 is part of Doc. 1000], 1447 [Pg. 1447 is part of Doc. 1002], 1450–1451 [Pgs. 1450–1451 include portions of Doc. 1006 and Doc. 1007], 1452n [Pg. 1452 includes portions of Doc. 1007 and Doc. 1008], 1468 [Pg. 1468 includes portions of Doc. 1019 and Doc. 1020], 1496–1499 [Pgs. 1496–1499 include portions of Doc. 1036 and Doc. 1037], 1511–1512 [Pgs. 1511–1512 include portions of Doc. 1046, Doc. 1047, Doc. 1048, and Doc. 1049], 1520 [Pg. 1520 includes portions of Doc. 1055 and Doc. 1056], 1522–1523 [Pgs. 1522–1523 include portions of Doc. 1057, Doc. 1058, and Doc. 1059], 1541 [Pg. 1541 includes portions of Doc. 1074, Doc. 1075, and Doc. 1076]

Jordanian position, 744–747 [Pgs. 744–747 include portions of Doc. 461, Doc. 462, Doc. 463, Doc. 464, and Doc. 465], 777 [Pg. 777 is part of Doc. 493], 779 [Pg. 779 is part of Doc. 494], 793 [Pg. 793 is part of Doc. 506], 798 [Pg. 798 includes portions of Doc. 507 and Doc. 508], 894 [Pg. 894 includes portions of Doc. 577 and Doc. 578], 917 [Pg. 917 is part of Doc. 594], 922 [Pg. 922 is part of Doc. 599], 924 [Pg. 924 includes portions of Doc. 600 and Doc. 601], 955 [Pg. 955 is part of Doc. 615], 963 [Pg. 963 is part of Doc. 622], 968 [Pg. 968 includes portions of Doc. 627 and Doc. 628], 975 [Pg. 975 is part of Doc. 633], 980–981 [Pgs. 980–981 include portions of Doc. 637 and Doc. 638], 989 [Pg. 989 is part of Doc. 641], 1037 [Pg. 1037 is part of Doc. 675], 1056 [Pg. 1056 includes portions of Doc. 691, Doc. 692, and Doc. 693], 1071–1072 [Pgs. 1071–1072 include portions of Doc. 703, Doc. 704, and Doc. 705], 1079 [Pg. 1079 includes portions of Doc. 711, Doc. 712, and Doc. 713], 1145 [Pg. 1145 is part of Doc. 769], 1154 [Pg. 1154 includes portions of Doc. 773 and Doc. 774], 1224 [Pg. 1224 is part of Doc. 828], 1231n [Pg. 1231 includes portions of Doc. 834 and Doc. 835], 1265 [Pg. 1265 is part of Doc. 868], 1268–1269 [Pgs. 1268–1269 include portions of Doc. 871 and Doc. 872], 1285–1286 [Pgs. 1285–1286 include portions of Doc. 887, Doc. 888, and Doc. 889], 1299–1300 [Pg. 1299 is part of Doc. 899], 1306 [Pg. 1306 is part of Doc. 904], 1337–1339 [Pgs. 1337–1339 include portions of Doc. 928, Doc. 929, Doc. 930, and Doc. 931], 1345 [Pg. 1345 is part of Doc. 933], 1354–1355 [Pgs. 1354–1355 include portions of Doc. 937 and Doc. 938], 1385 [Pg. 1385 is part of Doc. 962], 1408 [Pg. 1408 is part of Doc. 979], 1414 [Pg. 1414 is part of Doc. 983], 1416 [Pg. 1416 is part of Doc. 984], 1479 [Pg. 1479 is part of Doc. 1026], 1488 [Pg. 1488 includes portions of Doc. 1030 and Doc. 1031], 1494 [Pg. 1494 includes portions of Doc. 1034 and Doc. 1035], 1535 [Pg. 1535 includes portions of Doc. 1069 and Doc. 1070]

Lausanne negotiations, 879 [Pg. 879 includes portions of Doc. 564 and Doc. 565], 883–884 [Pgs. 883–884 include portions of Doc. 568, Doc. 569, and Doc. 570], 917 [Pg. 917 is part of Doc. 594], 922–924 [Pgs. 922–924 include portions of Doc. 599, Doc. 600, and Doc. 601], 928 [Pg. 928 includes portions of Doc. 603 and Doc. 604], 933 [Pg. 933 includes portions of Doc. 606 and Doc. 607], 940 [Pg. 940 is part of Doc. 608], 945 [Pg. 945 is part of Doc. 610], 947 [Pg. 947 includes portions of Doc. 610 and Doc. 611], 955–956 [Pgs. 955–956 include portions of Doc. 615 and Doc. 616], 959–961 [Pgs. 959–961 include portions of Doc. 618, Doc. 619, Doc. 620, and Doc. 621], 964 [Pg. 964 includes portions of Doc. 622 and Doc. 623], 966n [Pg. 966 includes portions of Doc. 625 and Doc. 626], 968–970 [Pgs. 968–970 include portions of Doc. 627, Doc. 628, Doc. 629, and Doc. 630], 973–977 [Pgs. 973–977 include portions of Doc. 631, Doc. 632, Doc. 633, and Doc. 634], 980 [Pg. 980 includes portions of Doc. 637 and Doc. 638], 982 [Pg. 982 includes portions of Doc. 638 and Doc. 639], 988–990 [Pgs. 988–990 include portions of Doc. 641, Doc. 642, and Doc. 643], 992–994 [Pgs. 992–994 include portions of Doc. 643, Doc. 644, Doc. 645, and Doc. 646], 997–999 [Pgs. 997–999 include portions of Doc. 648, Doc. 649, and Doc. 650], 1003–1005 [Pgs. 1003–1005 include portions of Doc. 652, Doc. 653, Doc. 654, Doc. 655, and Doc. 656], 1018–1021 [Pgs. 1018–1021 include portions of Doc. 662, Doc. 663, Doc. 664, and Doc. 665], 1028–1029 [Pgs. 1028–1029 include portions of Doc. 667, Doc. 668, and Doc. 669], 1030n [Pg. 1030 includes portions of Doc. 670 and Doc. 671], 1034–1041 [Pgs. 1034–1041 include portions of Doc. 673, Doc. 674, Doc. 675, Doc. 676, Doc. 677, and Doc. 678], 1043–1044 [Pgs. 1043–1044 include portions of Doc. 680, Doc. 681, Doc. 682, and Doc. 683], 1050–1052 [Pgs. 1050–1052 include portions of Doc. 688 and Doc. 689], 1054–1056 [Pgs. 1054–1056 include portions of Doc. 690, Doc. 691, Doc. 692, and Doc. 693], 1058–1063 [Pgs. 1058–1063 include portions of Doc. 695, Doc. 696, Doc. 697, and Doc. 698], 1065–1073 [Pgs. 1065–1073 include portions of Doc. 699, Doc. 700, Doc. 701, Doc. 702, Doc. 703, Doc. 704, and Doc. 705], 1076–1080 [Pgs. 1076–1080 include portions of Doc. 708, Doc. 709, Doc. 710, Doc. 711, Doc. 712, Doc. 713, and Doc. 714], 1082–1087 [Pgs. 1082–1087 include portions of Doc. 716, Doc. 717, Doc. 718, Doc. 719, Doc. 720, Doc. 721, and Doc. 722], 1090–1091 [Pgs. 1090–1091 include portions of Doc. 723, Doc. 724, and Doc. 725], 1096–1097 [Pgs. 1096–1097 include portions of Doc. 730, Doc. 731, and Doc. 732], 1099 [Pg. 1099 is part of Doc. 733], 1101–1103 [Pgs. 1101–1103 include portions of Doc. 735 and Doc. 736], 1108–1109 [Pgs. 1108–1109 include portions of Doc. 738, Doc. 739, and Doc. 740], 1112–1114 [Pgs. 1112–1114 include portions of Doc. 742, Doc. 743, Doc. 744, and Doc. 745], 1116–1117 [Pgs. 1116–1117 include portions of Doc. 747 and Doc. 748], 1122–1130 [Pgs. 1122–1130 include portions of Doc. 751, Doc. 752, Doc. 753, Doc. 754, Doc. 755, Doc. 756, and Doc. 757], 1135–1136 [Pgs. 1135–1136 include portions of Doc. 760 and Doc. 761], 1137n [Pg. 1137 includes portions of Doc. 762 and Doc. 763], 1142–1146 [Pgs. 1142–1146 include portions of Doc. 765, Doc. 766, Doc. 767, Doc. 768, Doc. 769, and Doc. 770], 1150–1155 [Pgs. 1150–1155 include portions of Doc. 772, Doc. 773, Doc. 774, and Doc. 775], 1159–1162 [Pgs. 1159–1162 include portions of Doc. 779, Doc. 780, Doc. 781, and Doc. 782], 1164–1165 [Pgs. 1164–1165 include portions of Doc. 783, Doc. 784, and Doc. 785], 1169–1170 [Pg. 1169 is part of Doc. 788], 1174 [Pg. 1174 includes portions of Doc. 789 and Doc. 790], 1177 [Pg. 1177 includes portions of Doc. 790 and Doc. 791], 1181–1187 [Pgs. 1181–1187 include portions of Doc. 794, Doc. 795, Doc. 796, Doc. 797, Doc. 798, Doc. 799, and Doc. 800], 1195n [Pg. 1195 includes portions of Doc. 806 and Doc. 807], 1217–1219 [Pgs. 1217–1219 include portions of Doc. 824, Doc. 825, and Doc. 826], 1221 [Pg. 1221 includes portions of Doc. 826 and Doc. 827], 1229–1230 [Pgs. 1229–1230 include portions of Doc. 832, Doc. 833, and Doc. 834], 1231n [Pg. 1231 includes portions of Doc. 834 and Doc. 835], 1232 [Pg. 1232 is part of Doc. 836], 1234 [Pg. 1234 is part of Doc. 838], 1236–1238 [Pgs. 1236–1238 include portions of Doc. 839, Doc. 840, Doc. 841, and Doc. 842], 1240 [Pg. 1240 includes portions of Doc. 845 and Doc. 846], 1244–1246 [Pgs. 1244–1246 include portions of Doc. 848, Doc. 849, and Doc. 850], 1248 [Pg. 1248 is part of Doc. 852], 1251 [Pg. 1251 is part of Doc. 855], 1253–1258 [Pgs. 1253–1258 include portions of Doc. 856, Doc. 857, Doc. 858, Doc. 859, Doc. 860, Doc. 861, and Doc. 862], 1260 [Pg. 1260 includes portions of Doc. 863 and Doc. 864], 1262 [Pg. 1262 is part of Doc. 866], 1263n [Pg. 1263 is part of Doc. 866], 1265 [Pg. 1265 is part of Doc. 868], 1267–1270 [Pgs. 1267–1270 include portions of Doc. 870, Doc. 871, and Doc. 872], 1273–1275 [Pgs. 1273–1275 include portions of Doc. 876, Doc. 877, Doc. 878, and Doc. 879], 1279 [Pg. 1279 is part of Doc. 882], 1281–1282 [Pgs. 1281–1282 include portions of Doc. 884 and Doc. 885], 1284–1287 [Pgs. 1284–1287 include portions of Doc. 886, Doc. 887, Doc. 888, Doc. 889, and Doc. 890], 1289–1290 [Pgs. 1289–1290 include portions of Doc. 890, Doc. 891, and Doc. 892], 1297–1301 [Pgs. 1297–1301 include portions of Doc. 896, Doc. 897, Doc. 898, Doc. 899, and Doc. 900], 1305–1308 [Pgs. 1305–1308 include portions of Doc. 904 and Doc. 905], 1311 [Pg. 1311 includes portions of Doc. 906 and Doc. 907], 1314 [Pg. 1314 includes portions of Doc. 908 and Doc. 909], 1316n [Pg. 1316 is part of Doc. 910], 1317–1321 [Pgs. 1317–1321 include portions of Doc. 911, Doc. 912, Doc. 913, Doc. 914, and Doc. 915], 1323–1325 [Pgs. 1323–1325 include portions of Doc. 916, Doc. 917, and Doc. 918], 1330 [Pg. 1330 is part of Doc. 922], 1336–1339 [Pgs. 1336–1339 include portions of Doc. 928, Doc. 929, Doc. 930, and Doc. 931], 1354–1355 [Pgs. 1354–1355 include portions of Doc. 937 and Doc. 938], 1359 [Pg. 1359 includes portions of Doc. 943 and Doc. 944], 1361–1362 [Pgs. 1361–1362 include portions of Doc. 944, Doc. 945, Doc. 946, and Doc. 947], 1366 [Pg. 1366 includes portions of Doc. 949 and Doc. 950], 1369 [Pg. 1369 includes portions of Doc. 951 and Doc. 952], 1375 [Pg. 1375 includes portions of Doc. 956 and Doc. 957], 1387–1390 [Pgs. 1387–1390 include portions of Doc. 962, Doc. 963, Doc. 964, Doc. 965, Doc. 966, and Doc. 967], 1392 [Pg. 1392 includes portions of Doc. 967 and Doc. 968], 1411 [Pg. 1411 is part of Doc. 981], 1455 [Pg. 1455 includes portions of Doc. 1011 and Doc. 1012], 1487–1490 [Pgs. 1487–1490 include portions of Doc. 1030, Doc. 1031, and Doc. 1032]

Lebanese position, 767n [Pg. 767 includes portions of Doc. 484 and Doc. 485], 768 [Pg. 768 includes portions of Doc. 485 and Doc. 486], 777 [Pg. 777 is part of Doc. 493], 847 [Pg. 847 is part of Doc. 537], 894 [Pg. 894 includes portions of Doc. 577 and Doc. 578], 955–956 [Pgs. 955–956 include portions of Doc. 615 and Doc. 616], 966n [Pg. 966 includes portions of Doc. 625 and Doc. 626], 982 [Pg. 982 includes portions of Doc. 638 and Doc. 639], 1036 [Pg. 1036 is part of Doc. 675], 1154–1155 [Pgs. 1154–1155 include portions of Doc. 773, Doc. 774, and Doc. 775], 1187 [Pg. 1187 includes portions of Doc. 799 and Doc. 800], 1238 [Pg. 1238 includes portions of Doc. 840, Doc. 841, and Doc. 842], 1265 [Pg. 1265 is part of Doc. 868], 1286 [Pg. 1286 includes portions of Doc. 888 and Doc. 889], 1300–1301 [Pgs. 1300–1301 include portions of Doc. 899 and Doc. 900], 1305 [Pg. 1305 is part of Doc. 904], 1337–1338 [Pgs. 1337–1338 include portions of Doc. 928, Doc. 929, and Doc. 930], 1389–1390 [Pgs. 1389–1390 include portions of Doc. 965, Doc. 966, and Doc. 967], 1414 [Pg. 1414 is part of Doc. 983], 1479 [Pg. 1479 is part of Doc. 1026], 1488 [Pg. 1488 includes portions of Doc. 1030 and Doc. 1031], 1535 [Pg. 1535 includes portions of Doc. 1069 and Doc. 1070]

Palestinian refugees (see also subsequent subheading), 140 [Pg. 140 includes portions of Doc. 48 and Doc. 49], 723 [Pg. 723 includes portions of Doc. 447 and Doc. 448], 725 [Pg. 725 includes portions of Doc. 449 and Doc. 450], 737 [Pg. 737 is part of Doc. 457], 738n [Pg. 738 is part of Doc. 457], 745–746 [Pg. 745 is part of Doc. 463], 750–752 [Pgs. 750–752 include portions of Doc. 467, Doc. 468, and Doc. 469], 756–758 [Pgs. 756–758 include portions of Doc. 472, Doc. 473, Doc. 474, and Doc. 475], 763–764 [Pgs. 763–764 include portions of Doc. 479 and Doc. 480], 767 [Pg. 767 includes portions of Doc. 484 and Doc. 485], 772–780 [Pgs. 772–780 include portions of Doc. 489, Doc. 490, Doc. 491, Doc. 492, Doc. 493, Doc. 494, and Doc. 495], 782 [Pg. 782 is part of Doc. 496], 785–786 [Pgs. 785–786 include portions of Doc. 499, Doc. 500, and Doc. 501], 796–797 [Pgs. 796–797 include portions of Doc. 506 and Doc. 507], 805–807 [Pgs. 805–807 include portions of Doc. 514 and Doc. 515], 818 [Pg. 818 includes portions of Doc. 524, Doc. 525, and Doc. 526], 825–826 [Pgs. 825–826 include portions of Doc. 531 and Doc. 532], 830–831 [Pg. 830 is part of Doc. 533], 833 [Pg. 833 is part of Doc. 533], 837–839 [Pg. 837 is part of Doc. 533], 848 [Pg. 848 includes portions of Doc. 537, Doc. 538, and Doc. 539], 855–859 [Pgs. 855–859 include portions of Doc. 544, Doc. 545, Doc. 546, and Doc. 547], 870 [Pg. 870 is part of Doc. 557], 876 [Pg. 876 is part of Doc. 563], 893–895 [Pgs. 893–895 include portions of Doc. 577, Doc. 578, Doc. 579, and Doc. 580], 900 [Pg. 900 includes portions of Doc. 585 and Doc. 586], 902–910 [Pgs. 902–910 include portions of Doc. 586, Doc. 587, Doc. 588, Doc. 589, Doc. 590, and Doc. 591], 913–914 [Pg. 913 is part of Doc. 592], 923 [Pg. 923 is part of Doc. 600], 925–927 [Pgs. 925–927 include portions of Doc. 601, Doc. 602, and Doc. 603], 932 [Pg. 932 includes portions of Doc. 605 and Doc. 606], 939–940 [Pg. 939 is part of Doc. 608], 955–957 [Pgs. 955–957 include portions of Doc. 615, Doc. 616, and Doc. 617], 959–960 [Pgs. 959–960 include portions of Doc. 618, Doc. 619, and Doc. 620], 963–966 [Pgs. 963–966 include portions of Doc. 622, Doc. 623, Doc. 624, Doc. 625, and Doc. 626], 968 [Pg. 968 includes portions of Doc. 627 and Doc. 628], 970–971 [Pgs. 970–971 include portions of Doc. 629, Doc. 630, and Doc. 631], 974–977 [Pgs. 974–977 include portions of Doc. 632, Doc. 633, and Doc. 634], 979 [Pg. 979 is part of Doc. 636], 981–983 [Pgs. 981–983 include portions of Doc. 638, Doc. 639, and Doc. 640], 988–989 [Pg. 988 is part of Doc. 641], 992–993 [Pgs. 992–993 include portions of Doc. 643, Doc. 644, and Doc. 645], 997–998 [Pgs. 997–998 include portions of Doc. 648 and Doc. 649], 1005 [Pg. 1005 includes portions of Doc. 655 and Doc. 656], 1007 [Pg. 1007 includes portions of Doc. 656 and Doc. 657], 1013–1015 [Pgs. 1013–1015 include portions of Doc. 660 and Doc. 661], 1019–1020 [Pgs. 1019–1020 include portions of Doc. 663 and Doc. 664], 1022–1023 [Pgs. 1022–1023 include portions of Doc. 665, Doc. 666, and Doc. 667], 1028–1029 [Pgs. 1028–1029 include portions of Doc. 667, Doc. 668, and Doc. 669], 1032–1033 [Pgs. 1032–1033 include portions of Doc. 671 and Doc. 672], 1035 [Pg. 1035 includes portions of Doc. 673 and Doc. 674], 1037–1038 [Pgs. 1037–1038 include portions of Doc. 675 and Doc. 676], 1043–1044 [Pgs. 1043–1044 include portions of Doc. 680, Doc. 681, Doc. 682, and Doc. 683], 1047–1048 [Pgs. 1047–1048 include portions of Doc. 685, Doc. 686, and Doc. 687], 1051–1053 [Pgs. 1051–1053 include portions of Doc. 688, Doc. 689, and Doc. 690], 1060–1061 [Pg. 1060 is part of Doc. 697], 1064–1073 [Pgs. 1064–1073 include portions of Doc. 698, Doc. 699, Doc. 700, Doc. 701, Doc. 702, Doc. 703, Doc. 704, and Doc. 705], 1076 [Pg. 1076 includes portions of Doc. 708 and Doc. 709], 1078 [Pg. 1078 includes portions of Doc. 710 and Doc. 711], 1082 [Pg. 1082 includes portions of Doc. 716 and Doc. 717], 1086–1087 [Pgs. 1086–1087 include portions of Doc. 720, Doc. 721, and Doc. 722], 1090 [Pg. 1090 includes portions of Doc. 723 and Doc. 724], 1094 [Pg. 1094 includes portions of Doc. 728 and Doc. 729], 1096–1097 [Pgs. 1096–1097 include portions of Doc. 730, Doc. 731, and Doc. 732], 1103 [Pg. 1103 is part of Doc. 736], 1105–1106 [Pg. 1105 is part of Doc. 736], 1109–1110 [Pgs. 1109–1110 include portions of Doc. 739, Doc. 740, Doc. 741, and Doc. 742], 1112 [Pg. 1112 includes portions of Doc. 742, Doc. 743, and Doc. 744], 1116n [Pg. 1116 is part of Doc. 747], 1117 [Pg. 1117 includes portions of Doc. 747 and Doc. 748], 1124–1125 [Pgs. 1124–1125 include portions of Doc. 752 and Doc. 753], 1127–1130 [Pgs. 1127–1130 include portions of Doc. 754, Doc. 755, Doc. 756, and Doc. 757], 1135–1136 [Pgs. 1135–1136 include portions of Doc. 760 and Doc. 761], 1138–1140 [Pgs. 1138–1140 include portions of Doc. 763 and Doc. 764], 1141n [Pg. 1141 includes portions of Doc. 764 and Doc. 765], 1142–1143 [Pgs. 1142–1143 include portions of Doc. 765, Doc. 766, Doc. 767, and Doc. 768], 1149–1152 [Pg. 1149 is part of Doc. 772], 1154 [Pg. 1154 includes portions of Doc. 773 and Doc. 774], 1155n [Pg. 1155 includes portions of Doc. 774 and Doc. 775], 1161–1163 [Pgs. 1161–1163 include portions of Doc. 781, Doc. 782, and Doc. 783], 1169–1174 [Pgs. 1169–1174 include portions of Doc. 788, Doc. 789, and Doc. 790], 1179 [Pg. 1179 includes portions of Doc. 792 and Doc. 793], 1181–1182 [Pgs. 1181–1182 include portions of Doc. 794 and Doc. 795], 1185–1188 [Pgs. 1185–1188 include portions of Doc. 797, Doc. 798, Doc. 799, Doc. 800, and Doc. 801], 1195n [Pg. 1195 includes portions of Doc. 806 and Doc. 807], 1203 [Pg. 1203 includes portions of Doc. 812 and Doc. 813], 1206 [Pg. 1206 includes portions of Doc. 814 and Doc. 815], 1210–1211 [Pg. 1210 is part of Doc. 818], 1215 [Pg. 1215 includes portions of Doc. 822 and Doc. 823], 1217–1218 [Pgs. 1217–1218 include portions of Doc. 824, Doc. 825, and Doc. 826], 1220 [Pg. 1220 is part of Doc. 826], 1223–1224 [Pgs. 1223–1224 include portions of Doc. 827 and Doc. 828], 1230 [Pg. 1230 includes portions of Doc. 833 and Doc. 834], 1231n [Pg. 1231 includes portions of Doc. 834 and Doc. 835], 1234 [Pg. 1234 is part of Doc. 838], 1236 [Pg. 1236 is part of Doc. 839], 1237n [Pg. 1237 includes portions of Doc. 839 and Doc. 840], 1240 [Pg. 1240 includes portions of Doc. 845 and Doc. 846], 1245–1246 [Pgs. 1245–1246 include portions of Doc. 849 and Doc. 850], 1255 [Pg. 1255 includes portions of Doc. 858 and Doc. 859], 1257–1258 [Pgs. 1257–1258 include portions of Doc. 861 and Doc. 862], 1262 [Pg. 1262 is part of Doc. 866], 1263n [Pg. 1263 is part of Doc. 866], 1264–1266 [Pgs. 1264–1266 include portions of Doc. 866, Doc. 867, Doc. 868, and Doc. 869], 1271–1277 [Pgs. 1271–1277 include portions of Doc. 872, Doc. 873, Doc. 874, Doc. 875, Doc. 876, Doc. 877, Doc. 878, Doc. 879, Doc. 880, Doc. 881, and Doc. 882], 1281–1282 [Pgs. 1281–1282 include portions of Doc. 884 and Doc. 885], 1286–1289 [Pgs. 1286–1289 include portions of Doc. 888, Doc. 889, Doc. 890, and Doc. 891], 1291 [Pg. 1291 includes portions of Doc. 892 and Doc. 893], 1297–1298 [Pgs. 1297–1298 include portions of Doc. 896, Doc. 897, and Doc. 898], 1300 [Pg. 1300 is part of Doc. 899], 1306–1307 [Pg. 1306 is part of Doc. 904], 1312–1315 [Pgs. 1312–1315 include portions of Doc. 907, Doc. 908, Doc. 909, and Doc. 910], 1317–1321 [Pgs. 1317–1321 include portions of Doc. 911, Doc. 912, Doc. 913, Doc. 914, and Doc. 915], 1324–1328 [Pgs. 1324–1328 include portions of Doc. 918, Doc. 919, Doc. 920, Doc. 921, and Doc. 922], 1349–1351 [Pgs. 1349–1351 include portions of Doc. 935, Doc. 936, and Doc. 937], 1354–1355 [Pgs. 1354–1355 include portions of Doc. 937 and Doc. 938], 1357 [Pg. 1357 includes portions of Doc. 940 and Doc. 941], 1362–1363 [Pgs. 1362–1363 include portions of Doc. 946 and Doc. 947], 1377 [Pg. 1377 is part of Doc. 958], 1387–1388 [Pgs. 1387–1388 include portions of Doc. 962, Doc. 963, Doc. 964, and Doc. 965], 1425 [Pg. 1425 is part of Doc. 993], 1429 [Pg. 1429 is part of Doc. 995], 1432 [Pg. 1432 is part of Doc. 997], 1447 [Pg. 1447 is part of Doc. 1002], 1450 [Pg. 1450 is part of Doc. 1006], 1463 [Pg. 1463 includes portions of Doc. 1017 and Doc. 1018], 1472–1474 [Pgs. 1472–1474 include portions of Doc. 1024 and Doc. 1025], 1478 [Pg. 1478 is part of Doc. 1026], 1487 [Pg. 1487 is part of Doc. 1030], 1505 [Pg. 1505 is part of Doc. 1041], 1541 [Pg. 1541 includes portions of Doc. 1074, Doc. 1075, and Doc. 1076]

Reports, 786–787 [Pgs. 786–787 include portions of Doc. 500, Doc. 501, and Doc. 502], 857–858 [Pgs. 857–858 include portions of Doc. 545 and Doc. 546], 895 [Pg. 895 includes portions of Doc. 578, Doc. 579, and Doc. 580], 913 [Pg. 913 is part of Doc. 592], 959–960 [Pgs. 959–960 include portions of Doc. 618, Doc. 619, and Doc. 620], 1127 [Pg. 1127 includes portions of Doc. 754 and Doc. 755], 1267 [Pg. 1267 is part of Doc. 870], 1269 [Pg. 1269 includes portions of Doc. 871 and Doc. 872], 1315–1316 [Pg. 1315 is part of Doc. 910], 1370–1372 [Pg. 1370 is part of Doc. 953], 1388 [Pg. 1388 includes portions of Doc. 963, Doc. 964, and Doc. 965], 1394 [Pg. 1394 includes portions of Doc. 970 and Doc. 971], 1453–1454 [Pgs. 1453–1454 include portions of Doc. 1008, Doc. 1009, and Doc. 1010], 1522–1523 [Pgs. 1522–1523 include portions of Doc. 1057, Doc. 1058, and Doc. 1059], 1530 [Pg. 1530 includes portions of Doc. 1065 and Doc. 1066], 1541 [Pg. 1541 includes portions of Doc. 1074, Doc. 1075, and Doc. 1076], 1551–1553 [Pgs. 1551–1553 include portions of Doc. 1081, Doc. 1082, and Doc. 1083]

Saudi Arabian position, 722 [Pg. 722 includes portions of Doc. 446 and Doc. 447], 733 [Pg. 733 is part of Doc. 455], 756–757 [Pgs. 756–757 include portions of Doc. 472, Doc. 473, Doc. 474, and Doc. 475], 894 [Pg. 894 includes portions of Doc. 577 and Doc. 578], 955 [Pg. 955 is part of Doc. 615], 1414 [Pg. 1414 is part of Doc. 983], 1423–1424 [Pgs. 1423–1424 include portions of Doc. 990, Doc. 991, and Doc. 992], 1428 [Pg. 1428 is part of Doc. 995]

Syrian position, 742n [Pg. 742 includes portions of Doc. 459 and Doc. 460], 766–767 [Pgs. 766–767 include portions of Doc. 481, Doc. 482, Doc. 483, Doc. 484, and Doc. 485], 796–798 [Pgs. 796–798 include portions of Doc. 506, Doc. 507, and Doc. 508], 894 [Pg. 894 includes portions of Doc. 577 and Doc. 578], 955 [Pg. 955 is part of Doc. 615], 957 [Pg. 957 includes portions of Doc. 616 and Doc. 617], 965–966 [Pgs. 965–966 include portions of Doc. 623, Doc. 624, Doc. 625, and Doc. 626], 968 [Pg. 968 includes portions of Doc. 627 and Doc. 628], 989 [Pg. 989 is part of Doc. 641], 995 [Pg. 995 includes portions of Doc. 646 and Doc. 647], 998–999 [Pgs. 998–999 include portions of Doc. 648, Doc. 649, and Doc. 650], 1037 [Pg. 1037 is part of Doc. 675], 1071 [Pg. 1071 includes portions of Doc. 703 and Doc. 704], 1154 [Pg. 1154 includes portions of Doc. 773 and Doc. 774], 1186 [Pg. 1186 includes portions of Doc. 798 and Doc. 799], 1234–1235 [Pgs. 1234–1235 include portions of Doc. 838 and Doc. 839], 1245 [Pg. 1245 includes portions of Doc. 849 and Doc. 850], 1257 [Pg. 1257 includes portions of Doc. 861 and Doc. 862], 1286–1287 [Pgs. 1286–1287 include portions of Doc. 888, Doc. 889, and Doc. 890], 1300 [Pg. 1300 is part of Doc. 899], 1305 [Pg. 1305 is part of Doc. 904], 1311 [Pg. 1311 includes portions of Doc. 906 and Doc. 907], 1337–1338 [Pgs. 1337–1338 include portions of Doc. 928, Doc. 929, and Doc. 930], 1354–1355 [Pgs. 1354–1355 include portions of Doc. 937 and Doc. 938], 1376 [Pg. 1376 includes portions of Doc. 957 and Doc. 958], 1390n [Pg. 1390 includes portions of Doc. 966 and Doc. 967], 1414 [Pg. 1414 is part of Doc. 983], 1416 [Pg. 1416 is part of Doc. 984], 1479 [Pg. 1479 is part of Doc. 1026], 1488 [Pg. 1488 includes portions of Doc. 1030 and Doc. 1031], 1493–1494 [Pgs. 1493–1494 include portions of Doc. 1033, Doc. 1034, and Doc. 1035], 1535 [Pg. 1535 includes portions of Doc. 1069 and Doc. 1070], 1636 [Pg. 1636 is part of Doc. 1137]

Territorial questions, 140 [Pg. 140 includes portions of Doc. 48 and Doc. 49], 215 [Pg. 215 is part of Doc. 96], 917 [Pg. 917 is part of Doc. 594], 923n [Pg. 923 is part of Doc. 600], 925–927 [Pgs. 925–927 include portions of Doc. 601, Doc. 602, and Doc. 603], 956 [Pg. 956 includes portions of Doc. 615 and Doc. 616], 961 [Pg. 961 includes portions of Doc. 620 and Doc. 621], 975 [Pg. 975 is part of Doc. 633], 977 [Pg. 977 includes portions of Doc. 633 and Doc. 634], 988–989 [Pg. 988 is part of Doc. 641], 993–994 [Pgs. 993–994 include portions of Doc. 644, Doc. 645, and Doc. 646], 997–999 [Pgs. 997–999 include portions of Doc. 648, Doc. 649, and Doc. 650], 1005 [Pg. 1005 includes portions of Doc. 655 and Doc. 656], 1019 [Pg. 1019 is part of Doc. 663], 1020 [Pg. 1020 includes portions of Doc. 663 and Doc. 664], 1028 [Pg. 1028 includes portions of Doc. 667 and Doc. 668], 1036–1037 [Pg. 1036 is part of Doc. 675], 1051–1052 [Pgs. 1051–1052 include portions of Doc. 688 and Doc. 689], 1054–1055 [Pgs. 1054–1055 include portions of Doc. 690 and Doc. 691], 1058–1060 [Pgs. 1058–1060 include portions of Doc. 695, Doc. 696, and Doc. 697], 1062 [Pg. 1062 is part of Doc. 697], 1068–1071 [Pgs. 1068–1071 include portions of Doc. 701, Doc. 702, Doc. 703, and Doc. 704], 1073 [Pg. 1073 is part of Doc. 705], 1082 [Pg. 1082 includes portions of Doc. 716 and Doc. 717], 1086–1087 [Pgs. 1086–1087 include portions of Doc. 720, Doc. 721, and Doc. 722], 1090–1091 [Pgs. 1090–1091 include portions of Doc. 723, Doc. 724, and Doc. 725], 1094–1097 [Pgs. 1094–1097 include portions of Doc. 728, Doc. 729, Doc. 730, Doc. 731, and Doc. 732], 1101 [Pg. 1101 is part of Doc. 735], 1103–1105 [Pg. 1103 is part of Doc. 736], 1110 [Pg. 1110 includes portions of Doc. 741 and Doc. 742], 1112 [Pg. 1112 includes portions of Doc. 742, Doc. 743, and Doc. 744], 1114 [Pg. 1114 includes portions of Doc. 744 and Doc. 745], 1116–1117 [Pgs. 1116–1117 include portions of Doc. 747 and Doc. 748], 1122–1125 [Pgs. 1122–1125 include portions of Doc. 751, Doc. 752, and Doc. 753], 1127–1129 [Pgs. 1127–1129 include portions of Doc. 754, Doc. 755, and Doc. 756], 1143 [Pg. 1143 includes portions of Doc. 767 and Doc. 768], 1145–1146 [Pgs. 1145–1146 include portions of Doc. 769 and Doc. 770], 1149 [Pg. 1149 is part of Doc. 772], 1151–1154 [Pgs. 1151–1154 include portions of Doc. 772, Doc. 773, and Doc. 774], 1161n [Pg. 1161 is part of Doc. 781], 1163–1164 [Pgs. 1163–1164 include portions of Doc. 782, Doc. 783, and Doc. 784], 1170–1171 [Pg. 1170 is part of Doc. 788], 1174 [Pg. 1174 includes portions of Doc. 789 and Doc. 790], 1179–1180 [Pgs. 1179–1180 include portions of Doc. 792 and Doc. 793], 1186–1187 [Pgs. 1186–1187 include portions of Doc. 798, Doc. 799, and Doc. 800], 1190 [Pg. 1190 is part of Doc. 802], 1218 [Pg. 1218 includes portions of Doc. 825 and Doc. 826], 1220 [Pg. 1220 is part of Doc. 826], 1223–1224 [Pgs. 1223–1224 include portions of Doc. 827 and Doc. 828], 1230 [Pg. 1230 includes portions of Doc. 833 and Doc. 834], 1231n [Pg. 1231 includes portions of Doc. 834 and Doc. 835], 1234 [Pg. 1234 is part of Doc. 838], 1239–1240 [Pgs. 1239–1240 include portions of Doc. 842, Doc. 843, Doc. 844, Doc. 845, and Doc. 846], 1244 [Pg. 1244 is part of Doc. 848], 1245n [Pg. 1245 includes portions of Doc. 849 and Doc. 850], 1253 [Pg. 1253 includes portions of Doc. 856 and Doc. 857], 1256 [Pg. 1256 includes portions of Doc. 860 and Doc. 861], 1265–1266 [Pgs. 1265–1266 include portions of Doc. 868 and Doc. 869], 1274–1276 [Pgs. 1274–1276 include portions of Doc. 877, Doc. 878, Doc. 879, Doc. 880, and Doc. 881], 1286–1287 [Pgs. 1286–1287 include portions of Doc. 888, Doc. 889, and Doc. 890], 1289 [Pg. 1289 includes portions of Doc. 890 and Doc. 891], 1291 [Pg. 1291 includes portions of Doc. 892 and Doc. 893], 1301–1302 [Pgs. 1301–1302 include portions of Doc. 899, Doc. 900, Doc. 901, and Doc. 902], 1306–1308 [Pgs. 1306–1308 include portions of Doc. 904 and Doc. 905], 1312n [Pg. 1312 is part of Doc. 907], 1320 [Pg. 1320 is part of Doc. 913], 1324–1326 [Pgs. 1324–1326 include portions of Doc. 918 and Doc. 919], 1335 [Pg. 1335 is part of Doc. 927], 1345–1346 [Pgs. 1345–1346 include portions of Doc. 933 and Doc. 934], 1349–1350 [Pgs. 1349–1350 include portions of Doc. 935, Doc. 936, and Doc. 937], 1355 [Pg. 1355 is part of Doc. 938], 1361 [Pg. 1361 includes portions of Doc. 944, Doc. 945, and Doc. 946], 1377–1380 [Pgs. 1377–1380 include portions of Doc. 958 and Doc. 959], 1387–1388 [Pgs. 1387–1388 include portions of Doc. 962, Doc. 963, Doc. 964, and Doc. 965], 1392 [Pg. 1392 includes portions of Doc. 967 and Doc. 968], 1427 [Pg. 1427 is part of Doc. 994], 1429 [Pg. 1429 is part of Doc. 995], 1432 [Pg. 1432 is part of Doc. 997], 1438 [Pg. 1438 is part of Doc. 997], 1450 [Pg. 1450 is part of Doc. 1006], 1466 [Pg. 1466 is part of Doc. 1019], 1487 [Pg. 1487 is part of Doc. 1030], 1489 [Pg. 1489 is part of Doc. 1031], 1541 [Pg. 1541 includes portions of Doc. 1074, Doc. 1075, and Doc. 1076]

Turkish role, 611 [Pg. 611 is part of Doc. 354], 748 [Pg. 748 includes portions of Doc. 465 and Doc. 466], 793 [Pg. 793 is part of Doc. 506], 801 [Pg. 801 is part of Doc. 510], 879 [Pg. 879 includes portions of Doc. 564 and Doc. 565], 912–913 [Pg. 912 is part of Doc. 592], 924 [Pg. 924 includes portions of Doc. 600 and Doc. 601], 1013 [Pg. 1013 is part of Doc. 660], 1032 [Pg. 1032 includes portions of Doc. 671 and Doc. 672], 1039 [Pg. 1039 includes portions of Doc. 676, Doc. 677, and Doc. 678], 1070 [Pg. 1070 is part of Doc. 703], 1231 [Pg. 1231 includes portions of Doc. 834 and Doc. 835], 1247 [Pg. 1247 includes portions of Doc. 851 and Doc. 852], 1275 [Pg. 1275 includes portions of Doc. 878 and Doc. 879], 1285–1286 [Pgs. 1285–1286 include portions of Doc. 887, Doc. 888, and Doc. 889], 1289–1290 [Pgs. 1289–1290 include portions of Doc. 890, Doc. 891, and Doc. 892], 1298–1300 [Pgs. 1298–1300 include portions of Doc. 897, Doc. 898, and Doc. 899], 1382n [Pg. 1382 includes portions of Doc. 960 and Doc. 961], 1392n [Pg. 1392 includes portions of Doc. 967 and Doc. 968], 1459 [Pg. 1459 includes portions of Doc. 1013 and Doc. 1014], 1464 [Pg. 1464 is part of Doc. 1018], 1668 [Pg. 1668 is part of Doc. 1152]

U.S. position, 140–141 [Pgs. 140–141 include portions of Doc. 48, Doc. 49, and Doc. 50], 145–146 [Pgs. 145–146 include portions of Doc. 52, Doc. 53, and Doc. 54], 174 [Pg. 174 is part of Doc. 73], 177 [Pg. 177 is part of Doc. 74], 209 [Pg. 209 is part of Doc. 96], 599 [Pg. 599 includes portions of Doc. 345 and Doc. 346], 604 [Pg. 604 is part of Doc. 350], 609 [Pg. 609 includes portions of Doc. 352 and Doc. 353], 611–612 [Pg. 611 is part of Doc. 354], 622 [Pg. 622 includes portions of Doc. 360, Doc. 361, Doc. 362, and Doc. 363], 624 [Pg. 624 is part of Doc. 364], 626n [Pg. 626 is part of Doc. 365], 638–640 [Pgs. 638–640 include portions of Doc. 374, Doc. 375, and Doc. 376], 653–654 [Pgs. 653–654 include portions of Doc. 387, Doc. 388, and Doc. 389], 668–669 [Pgs. 668–669 include portions of Doc. 398, Doc. 399, and Doc. 400], 680–684 [Pgs. 680–684 include portions of Doc. 406, Doc. 407, Doc. 408, Doc. 409, and Doc. 410], 690 [Pg. 690 is part of Doc. 416], 692–693 [Pgs. 692–693 include portions of Doc. 418 and Doc. 419], 695 [Pg. 695 includes portions of Doc. 421 and Doc. 422], 720n [Pg. 720 includes portions of Doc. 444 and Doc. 445], 734 [Pg. 734 includes portions of Doc. 455 and Doc. 456], 754 [Pg. 754 includes portions of Doc. 470 and Doc. 471], 765 [Pg. 765 includes portions of Doc. 480 and Doc. 481], 771 [Pg. 771 includes portions of Doc. 488 and Doc. 489], 772n [Pg. 772 includes portions of Doc. 489 and Doc. 490], 783n [Pg. 783 includes portions of Doc. 496 and Doc. 497], 801 [Pg. 801 is part of Doc. 510], 803 [Pg. 803 includes portions of Doc. 511, Doc. 512, and Doc. 513], 805–807 [Pgs. 805–807 include portions of Doc. 514 and Doc. 515], 819–820 [Pgs. 819–820 include portions of Doc. 526, Doc. 527, and Doc. 528], 833 [Pg. 833 is part of Doc. 533], 851n [Pg. 851 includes portions of Doc. 541 and Doc. 542], 853n [Pg. 853 includes portions of Doc. 543 and Doc. 544], 862 [Pg. 862 includes portions of Doc. 548 and Doc. 549], 864–865 [Pgs. 864–865 include portions of Doc. 551 and Doc. 552], 870–871 [Pgs. 870–871 include portions of Doc. 557, Doc. 558, and Doc. 559], 879 [Pg. 879 includes portions of Doc. 564 and Doc. 565], 910–911 [Pgs. 910–911 include portions of Doc. 590, Doc. 591, and Doc. 592], 919–920 [Pgs. 919–920 include portions of Doc. 596, Doc. 597, and Doc. 598], 927–928 [Pgs. 927–928 include portions of Doc. 602, Doc. 603, and Doc. 604], 932 [Pg. 932 includes portions of Doc. 605 and Doc. 606], 939 [Pg. 939 is part of Doc. 608], 967–968 [Pgs. 967–968 include portions of Doc. 626, Doc. 627, and Doc. 628], 979 [Pg. 979 is part of Doc. 636], 982–983 [Pgs. 982–983 include portions of Doc. 638, Doc. 639, and Doc. 640], 1005 [Pg. 1005 includes portions of Doc. 655 and Doc. 656], | 1017 [Pg. 1017 includes portions of Doc. 661 and Doc. 662], 1032–1033 [Pgs. 1032–1033 include portions of Doc. 671 and Doc. 672], 1039 [Pg. 1039 includes portions of Doc. 676, Doc. 677, and Doc. 678], 1047–1048 [Pgs. 1047–1048 include portions of Doc. 685, Doc. 686, and Doc. 687], 1051–1053 [Pgs. 1051–1053 include portions of Doc. 688, Doc. 689, and Doc. 690], 1062–1064 [Pgs. 1062–1064 include portions of Doc. 697, Doc. 698, and Doc. 699], 1072–1073 [Pgs. 1072–1073 include portions of Doc. 704 and Doc. 705], 1078–1080 [Pgs. 1078–1080 include portions of Doc. 710, Doc. 711, Doc. 712, Doc. 713, and Doc. 714], 1082–1083 [Pgs. 1082–1083 include portions of Doc. 716 and Doc. 717], 1090–1091 [Pgs. 1090–1091 include portions of Doc. 723, Doc. 724, and Doc. 725], 1093–1094 [Pgs. 1093–1094 include portions of Doc. 728 and Doc. 729], 1108 [Pg. 1108 includes portions of Doc. 738 and Doc. 739], 1110 [Pg. 1110 includes portions of Doc. 741 and Doc. 742], 1116 [Pg. 1116 is part of Doc. 747], 1127 [Pg. 1127 includes portions of Doc. 754 and Doc. 755], 1146 [Pg. 1146 includes portions of Doc. 769 and Doc. 770], 1153n [Pg. 1153 includes portions of Doc. 772 and Doc. 773], 1155 [Pg. 1155 includes portions of Doc. 774 and Doc. 775], 1159–1162 [Pgs. 1159–1162 include portions of Doc. 779, Doc. 780, Doc. 781, and Doc. 782], 1164–1165 [Pgs. 1164–1165 include portions of Doc. 783, Doc. 784, and Doc. 785], 1167 [Pg. 1167 includes portions of Doc. 786 and Doc. 787], 1181 [Pg. 1181 is part of Doc. 794], 1196 [Pg. 1196 is part of Doc. 808], 1210 [Pg. 1210 is part of Doc. 818], 1213 [Pg. 1213 includes portions of Doc. 820 and Doc. 821], 1215 [Pg. 1215 includes portions of Doc. 822 and Doc. 823], 1217–1221 [Pgs. 1217–1221 include portions of Doc. 824, Doc. 825, Doc. 826, and Doc. 827], 1223–1224 [Pgs. 1223–1224 include portions of Doc. 827 and Doc. 828], 1229–1232 [Pgs. 1229–1232 include portions of Doc. 832, Doc. 833, Doc. 834, Doc. 835, and Doc. 836], 1236–1237 [Pgs. 1236–1237 include portions of Doc. 839 and Doc. 840], 1239–1240 [Pgs. 1239–1240 include portions of Doc. 842, Doc. 843, Doc. 844, Doc. 845, and Doc. 846], 1243–1247 [Pgs. 1243–1247 include portions of Doc. 847, Doc. 848, Doc. 849, Doc. 850, Doc. 851, and Doc. 852], 1256–1258 [Pgs. 1256–1258 include portions of Doc. 860, Doc. 861, and Doc. 862], 1260 [Pg. 1260 includes portions of Doc. 863 and Doc. 864], 1267 [Pg. 1267 is part of Doc. 870], 1269–1270 [Pgs. 1269–1270 include portions of Doc. 871 and Doc. 872], 1275–1276 [Pgs. 1275–1276 include portions of Doc. 878, Doc. 879, Doc. 880, and Doc. 881], 1286–1291 [Pgs. 1286–1291 include portions of Doc. 888, Doc. 889, Doc. 890, Doc. 891, Doc. 892, and Doc. 893], 1295–1302 [Pgs. 1295–1302 include portions of Doc. 896, Doc. 897, Doc. 898, Doc. 899, Doc. 900, Doc. 901, and Doc. 902], 1305 [Pg. 1305 is part of Doc. 904], 1309n [Pg. 1309 is part of Doc. 905], 1312 [Pg. 1312 is part of Doc. 907], 1315–1318 [Pgs. 1315–1318 include portions of Doc. 910 and Doc. 911], 1321–1322 [Pgs. 1321–1322 include portions of Doc. 913, Doc. 914, Doc. 915, and Doc. 916], 1324–1327 [Pgs. 1324–1327 include portions of Doc. 918, Doc. 919, Doc. 920, and Doc. 921], 1329–1330 [Pg. 1329 is part of Doc. 922], 1338 [Pg. 1338 includes portions of Doc. 929 and Doc. 930], 1359–1361 [Pgs. 1359–1361 include portions of Doc. 943, Doc. 944, Doc. 945, and Doc. 946], 1366 [Pg. 1366 includes portions of Doc. 949 and Doc. 950], 1369 [Pg. 1369 includes portions of Doc. 951 and Doc. 952], 1374–1375 [Pgs. 1374–1375 include portions of Doc. 954, Doc. 955, Doc. 956, and Doc. 957], 1377 [Pg. 1377 is part of Doc. 958], 1382 [Pg. 1382 includes portions of Doc. 960 and Doc. 961], 1388–1390 [Pgs. 1388–1390 include portions of Doc. 963, Doc. 964, Doc. 965, Doc. 966, and Doc. 967], 1392–1396 [Pgs. 1392–1396 include portions of Doc. 967, Doc. 968, Doc. 969, Doc. 970, Doc. 971, Doc. 972, and Doc. 973], 1400 [Pg. 1400 is part of Doc. 975], 1409 [Pg. 1409 includes portions of Doc. 980 and Doc. 981], 1412 [Pg. 1412 is part of Doc. 981], 1420 [Pg. 1420 includes portions of Doc. 987 and Doc. 988], 1423 [Pg. 1423 includes portions of Doc. 990 and Doc. 991], 1428–1429 [Pg. 1428 is part of Doc. 995], 1432 [Pg. 1432 is part of Doc. 997], 1441–1442 [Pgs. 1441–1442 include portions of Doc. 998 and Doc. 999], 1452–1455 [Pgs. 1452–1455 include portions of Doc. 1007, Doc. 1008, Doc. 1009, Doc. 1010, Doc. 1011, and Doc. 1012], 1459–1460 [Pgs. 1459–1460 include portions of Doc. 1013, Doc. 1014, and Doc. 1015], 1463–1468 [Pgs. 1463–1468 include portions of Doc. 1017, Doc. 1018, Doc. 1019, and Doc. 1020], 1493–1494 [Pgs. 1493–1494 include portions of Doc. 1033, Doc. 1034, and Doc. 1035], 1497 [Pg. 1497 is part of Doc. 1036], 1499 [Pg. 1499 is part of Doc. 1037], 1505 [Pg. 1505 is part of Doc. 1041], 1516 [Pg. 1516 includes portions of Doc. 1051, Doc. 1052, and Doc. 1053], 1520 [Pg. 1520 includes portions of Doc. 1055 and Doc. 1056], 1535–1536 [Pgs. 1535–1536 include portions of Doc. 1069, Doc. 1070, and Doc. 1071], 1551–1553 [Pgs. 1551–1553 include portions of Doc. 1081, Doc. 1082, and Doc. 1083], 1586 [Pg. 1586 is part of Doc. 1110]

Yemeni position, 955 [Pg. 955 is part of Doc. 615], 1488 [Pg. 1488 includes portions of Doc. 1030 and Doc. 1031]

Palestinian refugees (see also under Palestine Conciliation Commission, supra): Arab states, position of, 704 [Pg. 704 is part of Doc. 429], 721 [Pg. 721 is part of Doc. 446], 772 [Pg. 772 includes portions of Doc. 489 and Doc. 490], 835 [Pg. 835 is part of Doc. 533], 837–838 [Pg. 837 is part of Doc. 533], 847–848 [Pgs. 847–848 include portions of Doc. 537, Doc. 538, and Doc. 539], 856–858 [Pgs. 856–858 include portions of Doc. 544, Doc. 545, and Doc. 546], 876–877 [Pg. 876 is part of Doc. 563], 904 [Pg. 904 is part of Doc. 587], 908 [Pg. 908 is part of Doc. 590], 926 [Pg. 926 is part of Doc. 602], 935–939 [Pg. 935 is part of Doc. 608], 959 [Pg. 959 includes portions of Doc. 618 and Doc. 619], 966 [Pg. 966 includes portions of Doc. 625 and Doc. 626], 969–971 [Pgs. 969–971 include portions of Doc. 628, Doc. 629, Doc. 630, and Doc. 631], 973 [Pg. 973 includes portions of Doc. 631 and Doc. 632], 982–985 [Pgs. 982–985 include portions of Doc. 638, Doc. 639, and Doc. 640], 987 [Pg. 987 is part of Doc. 640], 992 [Pg. 992 includes portions of Doc. 643 and Doc. 644], 994 [Pg. 994 includes portions of Doc. 645 and Doc. 646], 998 [Pg. 998 includes portions of Doc. 648 and Doc. 649], 1007 [Pg. 1007 includes portions of Doc. 656 and Doc. 657], 1019–1022 [Pgs. 1019–1022 include portions of Doc. 663, Doc. 664, Doc. 665, and Doc. 666], 1029 [Pg. 1029 includes portions of Doc. 668 and Doc. 669], 1033–1035 [Pgs. 1033–1035 include portions of Doc. 672, Doc. 673, and Doc. 674], 1045 [Pg. 1045 is part of Doc. 683], 1047 [Pg. 1047 includes portions of Doc. 685 and Doc. 686], 1052 [Pg. 1052 is part of Doc. 689], 1058 [Pg. 1058 includes portions of Doc. 695 and Doc. 696], 1061 [Pg. 1061 is part of Doc. 697], 1064 [Pg. 1064 includes portions of Doc. 698 and Doc. 699], 1066–1067 [Pgs. 1066–1067 include portions of Doc. 700 and Doc. 701], 1072–1073 [Pgs. 1072–1073 include portions of Doc. 704 and Doc. 705], 1086 [Pg. 1086 includes portions of Doc. 720 and Doc. 721], 1087n [Pg. 1087 includes portions of Doc. 721 and Doc. 722], 1106–1107 [Pgs. 1106–1107 include portions of Doc. 736 and Doc. 737], 1109 [Pg. 1109 includes portions of Doc. 739 and Doc. 740], 1116 [Pg. 1116 is part of Doc. 747], 1122 [Pg. 1122 is part of Doc. 751], 1139 [Pg. 1139 is part of Doc. 763], 1141n [Pg. 1141 includes portions of Doc. 764 and Doc. 765], 1151–1152 [Pg. 1151 is part of Doc. 772], 1154 [Pg. 1154 includes portions of Doc. 773 and Doc. 774], 1155n [Pg. 1155 includes portions of Doc. 774 and Doc. 775], 1157 [Pg. 1157 includes portions of Doc. 777 and Doc. 778], 1161 [Pg. 1161 is part of Doc. 781], 1172–1173 [Pgs. 1172–1173 include portions of Doc. 788 and Doc. 789], 1175 [Pg. 1175 is part of Doc. 790], 1181 [Pg. 1181 is part of Doc. 794], 1186 [Pg. 1186 includes portions of Doc. 798 and Doc. 799], 1188–1190 [Pgs. 1188–1190 include portions of Doc. 800, Doc. 801, and Doc. 802], 1203–1204 [Pgs. 1203–1204 include portions of Doc. 812 and Doc. 813], 1206–1209 [Pgs. 1206–1209 include portions of Doc. 814, Doc. 815, Doc. 816, and Doc. 817], 1214–1215 [Pgs. 1214–1215 include portions of Doc. 821, Doc. 822, and Doc. 823], 1219 [Pg. 1219 is part of Doc. 826], 1223 [Pg. 1223 includes portions of Doc. 827 and Doc. 828], 1227 [Pg. 1227 is part of Doc. 831], 1231n [Pg. 1231 includes portions of Doc. 834 and Doc. 835], 1232 [Pg. 1232 is part of Doc. 836], 1262–1263 [Pg. 1262 is part of Doc. 866], 1333 [Pg. 1333 is part of Doc. 925], 1343 [Pg. 1343 is part of Doc. 933], 1345 [Pg. 1345 is part of Doc. 933], 1352 [Pg. 1352 is part of Doc. 937], 1362 [Pg. 1362 includes portions of Doc. 946 and Doc. 947], 1379–1380 [Pg. 1379 is part of Doc. 959], 1415 [Pg. 1415 is part of Doc. 984], 1437–1438 [Pg. 1437 is part of Doc. 997], 1442–1443 [Pgs. 1442–1443 include portions of Doc. 998 and Doc. 999], 1457 [Pg. 1457 is part of Doc. 1013], 1784 [Pg. 1784 is part of Doc. 1235]

Belgian role, 835 [Pg. 835 is part of Doc. 533]

British policy, 51 [Pg. 51 is part of Doc. 8], 64 [Pg. 64 is part of Doc. 12], 69n [Pg. 69 is part of Doc. 12], 832 [Pg. 832 is part of Doc. 533], 834–836 [Pg. 834 is part of Doc. 533], 841 [Pg. 841 is part of Doc. 533], 897 [Pg. 897 includes portions of Doc. 581 and Doc. 582], 906–908 [Pgs. 906–908 include portions of Doc. 589 and Doc. 590], 940–941 [Pg. 940 is part of Doc. 608], 969–970 [Pgs. 969–970 include portions of Doc. 628, Doc. 629, and Doc. 630], 983 [Pg. 983 includes portions of Doc. 639 and Doc. 640], 984n [Pg. 984 is part of Doc. 640], 990 [Pg. 990 includes portions of Doc. 642 and Doc. 643], 1013 [Pg. 1013 is part of Doc. 660], 1058 [Pg. 1058 includes portions of Doc. 695 and Doc. 696], 1065n [Pg. 1065 includes portions of Doc. 699 and Doc. 700], 1070 [Pg. 1070 is part of Doc. 703], 1077 [Pg. 1077 is part of Doc. 710], 1123 [Pg. 1123 includes portions of Doc. 751 and Doc. 752], 1157 [Pg. 1157 includes portions of Doc. 777 and Doc. 778], 1192 [Pg. 1192 is part of Doc. 804], 1342–1346 [Pgs. 1342–1346 include portions of Doc. 932, Doc. 933, and Doc. 934], 1378 [Pg. 1378 is part of Doc. 958], 1430 [Pg. 1430 includes portions of Doc. 995, Doc. 996, and Doc. 997]

French role, 835–836 [Pg. 835 is part of Doc. 533], 1070 [Pg. 1070 is part of Doc. 703], 1157 [Pg. 1157 includes portions of Doc. 777 and Doc. 778], 1258 [Pg. 1258 is part of Doc. 862]

Israeli position, 631n [Pg. 631 is part of Doc. 370], 644 [Pg. 644 is part of Doc. 381], 669–670 [Pgs. 669–670 include portions of Doc. 399, Doc. 400, and Doc. 401], 709 [Pg. 709 is part of Doc. 432], 712 [Pg. 712 includes portions of Doc. 435 and Doc. 436], 761–762 [Pgs. 761–762 include portions of Doc. 478 and Doc. 479], 829–831 [Pg. 829 is part of Doc. 533], 833–834 [Pg. 833 is part of Doc. 533], 837–838 [Pg. 837 is part of Doc. 533], 841–842 [Pgs. 841–842 include portions of Doc. 533 and Doc. 534], 848 [Pg. 848 includes portions of Doc. 537, Doc. 538, and Doc. 539], 855–857 [Pgs. 855–857 include portions of Doc. 544, Doc. 545, and Doc. 546], 863 [Pg. 863 includes portions of Doc. 550 and Doc. 551], 876–877 [Pg. 876 is part of Doc. 563], 880–881 [Pg. 880 is part of Doc. 566], 892–893 [Pg. 892 is part of Doc. 577], 900 [Pg. 900 includes portions of Doc. 585 and Doc. 586], 902–904 [Pgs. 902–904 include portions of Doc. 586 and Doc. 587], 907–908 [Pg. 907 is part of Doc. 590], 913–914 [Pg. 913 is part of Doc. 592], 916 [Pg. 916 includes portions of Doc. 592, Doc. 593, and Doc. 594], 923n [Pg. 923 is part of Doc. 600], 925–928 [Pgs. 925–928 include portions of Doc. 601, Doc. 602, Doc. 603, and Doc. 604], 930–931 [Pgs. 930–931 include portions of Doc. 604 and Doc. 605], 935 [Pg. 935 is part of Doc. 608], 937–938 [Pg. 937 is part of Doc. 608], 943–948 [Pgs. 943–948 include portions of Doc. 608, Doc. 609, Doc. 610, Doc. 611, and Doc. 612], 954 [Pg. 954 includes portions of Doc. 613 and Doc. 614], 957 [Pg. 957 includes portions of Doc. 616 and Doc. 617], 959 [Pg. 959 includes portions of Doc. 618 and Doc. 619], 963 [Pg. 963 is part of Doc. 622], 965–967 [Pgs. 965–967 include portions of Doc. 623, Doc. 624, Doc. 625, Doc. 626, and Doc. 627], 969 [Pg. 969 includes portions of Doc. 628 and Doc. 629], 970n [Pg. 970 includes portions of Doc. 629 and Doc. 630], 971 [Pg. 971 is part of Doc. 631], 973 [Pg. 973 includes portions of Doc. 631 and Doc. 632], 978–979 [Pgs. 978–979 include portions of Doc. 634, Doc. 635, and Doc. 636], 983–984 [Pgs. 983–984 include portions of Doc. 639 and Doc. 640], 986–987 [Pg. 986 is part of Doc. 640], 992–993 [Pgs. 992–993 include portions of Doc. 643, Doc. 644, and Doc. 645], 997 [Pg. 997 is part of Doc. 648], 1005 [Pg. 1005 includes portions of Doc. 655 and Doc. 656], 1007 [Pg. 1007 includes portions of Doc. 656 and Doc. 657], 1008n [Pg. 1008 includes portions of Doc. 657 and Doc. 658], 1014 [Pg. 1014 is part of Doc. 660], 1017 [Pg. 1017 includes portions of Doc. 661 and Doc. 662], 1019–1022 [Pgs. 1019–1022 include portions of Doc. 663, Doc. 664, Doc. 665, and Doc. 666], 1029 [Pg. 1029 includes portions of Doc. 668 and Doc. 669], 1031n [Pg. 1031 is part of Doc. 671], 1032–1035 [Pgs. 1032–1035 include portions of Doc. 671, Doc. 672, Doc. 673, and Doc. 674], 1044–1045 [Pgs. 1044–1045 include portions of Doc. 682 and Doc. 683], 1047–1049 [Pgs. 1047–1049 include portions of Doc. 685, Doc. 686, Doc. 687, and Doc. 688], 1058 [Pg. 1058 includes portions of Doc. 695 and Doc. 696], 1060 [Pg. 1060 is part of Doc. 697], 1064–1070 [Pgs. 1064–1070 include portions of Doc. 698, Doc. 699, Doc. 700, Doc. 701, Doc. 702, and Doc. 703], 1075–1076 [Pgs. 1075–1076 include portions of Doc. 706, Doc. 707, Doc. 708, and Doc. 709], 1086 [Pg. 1086 includes portions of Doc. 720 and Doc. 721], 1087n [Pg. 1087 includes portions of Doc. 721 and Doc. 722], 1094 [Pg. 1094 includes portions of Doc. 728 and Doc. 729], 1097 [Pg. 1097 includes portions of Doc. 731 and Doc. 732], 1103 [Pg. 1103 is part of Doc. 736], 1105–1107 [Pgs. 1105–1107 include portions of Doc. 736 and Doc. 737], 1109 [Pg. 1109 includes portions of Doc. 739 and Doc. 740], 1111–1112 [Pgs. 1111–1112 include portions of Doc. 742, Doc. 743, and Doc. 744], 1115 [Pg. 1115 includes portions of Doc. 745, Doc. 746, and Doc. 747], 1124–1125 [Pgs. 1124–1125 include portions of Doc. 752 and Doc. 753], 1135–1136 [Pgs. 1135–1136 include portions of Doc. 760 and Doc. 761], 1138–1139 [Pg. 1138 is part of Doc. 763], 1141n [Pg. 1141 includes portions of Doc. 764 and Doc. 765], 1142–1143 [Pgs. 1142–1143 include portions of Doc. 765, Doc. 766, Doc. 767, and Doc. 768], 1148–1150 [Pg. 1148 is part of Doc. 772], 1152 [Pg. 1152 is part of Doc. 772], 1161–1163 [Pgs. 1161–1163 include portions of Doc. 781, Doc. 782, and Doc. 783], 1169–1175 [Pgs. 1169–1175 include portions of Doc. 788, Doc. 789, and Doc. 790], 1181–1182 [Pgs. 1181–1182 include portions of Doc. 794 and Doc. 795], 1190 [Pg. 1190 is part of Doc. 802], 1196–1197 [Pgs. 1196–1197 include portions of Doc. 808 and Doc. 809], 1203–1209 [Pgs. 1203–1209 include portions of Doc. 812, Doc. 813, Doc. 814, Doc. 815, Doc. 816, and Doc. 817], 1214–1217 [Pgs. 1214–1217 include portions of Doc. 821, Doc. 822, Doc. 823, Doc. 824, and Doc. 825], 1219 [Pg. 1219 is part of Doc. 826], 1222–1223 [Pgs. 1222–1223 include portions of Doc. 827 and Doc. 828], 1226 [Pg. 1226 includes portions of Doc. 830 and Doc. 831], 1228 [Pg. 1228 includes portions of Doc. 831 and Doc. 832], 1232 [Pg. 1232 is part of Doc. 836], 1236 [Pg. 1236 is part of Doc. 839]; 1250 [Pg. 1250 is part of Doc. 855], 1260–1264 [Pgs. 1260–1264 include portions of Doc. 863, Doc. 864, Doc. 865, Doc. 866, and Doc. 867], 1276–1277 [Pgs. 1276–1277 include portions of Doc. 879, Doc. 880, Doc. 881, and Doc. 882], 1292 [Pg. 1292 is part of Doc. 894], 1333 [Pg. 1333 is part of Doc. 925], 1343 [Pg. 1343 is part of Doc. 933], 1345 [Pg. 1345 is part of Doc. 933], 1362–1365 [Pgs. 1362–1365 include portions of Doc. 946, Doc. 947, and Doc. 948], 1379–1380 [Pg. 1379 is part of Doc. 959], 1437–1438 [Pg. 1437 is part of Doc. 997], 1141n [Pg. 1141 includes portions of Doc. 764 and Doc. 765], 1446 [Pg. 1446 is part of Doc. 1001], 1458 [Pg. 1458 is part of Doc. 1013]

Netherlands role, 835 [Pg. 835 is part of Doc. 533]

U.S. policy, 64 [Pg. 64 is part of Doc. 12], 69n [Pg. 69 is part of Doc. 12], 77 [Pg. 77 is part of Doc. 12], 170 [Pg. 170 is part of Doc. 73], 177 [Pg. 177 is part of Doc. 74], 215 [Pg. 215 is part of Doc. 96], 642–643 [Pgs. 642–643 include portions of Doc. 378, Doc. 379, and Doc. 380], 663–665 [Pgs. 663–665 include portions of Doc. 393, Doc. 394, and Doc. 395], 677 [Pg. 677 includes portions of Doc. 404 and Doc. 405], 682 [Pg. 682 is part of Doc. 408], 697–698 [Pgs. 697–698 include portions of Doc. 423, Doc. 424, and Doc. 425], 722–723 [Pgs. 722–723 include portions of Doc. 446, Doc. 447, and Doc. 448], 747 [Pg. 747 includes portions of Doc. 464 and Doc. 465], 754–755 [Pgs. 754–755 include portions of Doc. 470, Doc. 471, and Doc. 472], 761–764 [Pgs. 761–764 include portions of Doc. 478, Doc. 479, and Doc. 480], 788 [Pg. 788 is part of Doc. 503], 804–805 [Pgs. 804–805 include portions of Doc. 513, Doc. 514, and Doc. 515], 818 [Pg. 818 includes portions of Doc. 524, Doc. 525, and Doc. 526], 827–842 [Pgs. 827–842 include portions of Doc. 533 and Doc. 534], 853n [Pg. 853 includes portions of Doc. 543 and Doc. 544], 855 [Pg. 855 is part of Doc. 544], 862 [Pg. 862 includes portions of Doc. 548 and Doc. 549], 870–871 [Pgs. 870–871 include portions of Doc. 557, Doc. 558, and Doc. 559], 881 [Pg. 881 is part of Doc. 566], 891–892 [Pg. 891 is part of Doc. 577], 899 [Pg. 899 includes portions of Doc. 583, Doc. 584, and Doc. 585], 905–906 [Pgs. 905–906 include portions of Doc. 588, Doc. 589, and Doc. 590], 908–909 [Pg. 908 is part of Doc. 590], 923 [Pg. 923 is part of Doc. 600], 926 [Pg. 926 is part of Doc. 602], 928 [Pg. 928 includes portions of Doc. 603 and Doc. 604], 932–943 [Pgs. 932–943 include portions of Doc. 605, Doc. 606, Doc. 607, Doc. 608, and Doc. 609], 957 [Pg. 957 includes portions of Doc. 616 and Doc. 617], 959–960 [Pgs. 959–960 include portions of Doc. 618, Doc. 619, and Doc. 620], 962 [Pg. 962 includes portions of Doc. 621 and Doc. 622], 964–965 [Pgs. 964–965 include portions of Doc. 622, Doc. 623, Doc. 624, and Doc. 625], 970–973 [Pgs. 970–973 include portions of Doc. 629, Doc. 630, Doc. 631, and Doc. 632], 979 [Pg. 979 is part of Doc. 636], 982–987 [Pgs. 982–987 include portions of Doc. 638, Doc. 639, and Doc. 640], 990–992 [Pgs. 990–992 include portions of Doc. 642, Doc. 643, and Doc. 644], 1005 [Pg. 1005 includes portions of Doc. 655 and Doc. 656], 1007–1008 [Pgs. 1007–1008 include portions of Doc. 656, Doc. 657, and Doc. 658], 1021–1023 [Pgs. 1021–1023 include portions of Doc. 664, Doc. 665, Doc. 666, and Doc. 667], 1029 [Pg. 1029 includes portions of Doc. 668 and Doc. 669], 1032–1035 [Pgs. 1032–1035 include portions of Doc. 671, Doc. 672, Doc. 673, and Doc. 674], 1038–1039 [Pgs. 1038–1039 include portions of Doc. 675, Doc. 676, Doc. 677, and Doc. 678], 1042 [Pg. 1042 includes portions of Doc. 679 and Doc. 680], 1047–1049 [Pgs. 1047–1049 include portions of Doc. 685, Doc. 686, Doc. 687, and Doc. 688], 1051–1053 [Pgs. 1051–1053 include portions of Doc. 688, Doc. 689, and Doc. 690], 1056 [Pg. 1056 includes portions of Doc. 691, Doc. 692, and Doc. 693], 1058 [Pg. 1058 includes portions of Doc. 695 and Doc. 696], 1060–1061 [Pg. 1060 is part of Doc. 697], 1063–1064 [Pgs. 1063–1064 include portions of Doc. 697, Doc. 698, and Doc. 699], 1070 [Pg. 1070 is part of Doc. 703], 1072–1073 [Pgs. 1072–1073 include portions of Doc. 704 and Doc. 705], 1082 [Pg. 1082 includes portions of Doc. 716 and Doc. 717], 1110 [Pg. 1110 includes portions of Doc. 741 and Doc. 742], 1117 [Pg. 1117 includes portions of Doc. 747 and Doc. 748], 1126 [Pg. 1126 is part of Doc. 754], 1130 [Pg. 1130 includes portions of Doc. 756 and Doc. 757], 1134–1135 [Pgs. 1134–1135 include portions of Doc. 760 and Doc. 761], 1140–1141 [Pgs. 1140–1141 include portions of Doc. 764 and Doc. 765], 1152 [Pg. 1152 is part of Doc. 772], 1156–1157 [Pgs. 1156–1157 include portions of Doc. 776, Doc. 777, and Doc. 778], 1161–1162 [Pgs. 1161–1162 include portions of Doc. 781 and Doc. 782], 1175 [Pg. 1175 is part of Doc. 790], 1177n [Pg. 1177 includes portions of Doc. 790 and Doc. 791], 1179–1182 [Pgs. 1179–1182 include portions of Doc. 792, Doc. 793, Doc. 794, and Doc. 795], 1185–1186 [Pgs. 1185–1186 include portions of Doc. 797, Doc. 798, and Doc. 799], 1188–1189 [Pgs. 1188–1189 include portions of Doc. 800, Doc. 801, and Doc. 802], 1191–1193 [Pgs. 1191–1193 include portions of Doc. 803, Doc. 804, and Doc. 805], 1202–1208 [Pgs. 1202–1208 include portions of Doc. 810, Doc. 811, Doc. 812, Doc. 813, Doc. 814, Doc. 815, Doc. 816, and Doc. 817], 1210–1211 [Pg. 1210 is part of Doc. 818], 1214–1219 [Pgs. 1214–1219 include portions of Doc. 821, Doc. 822, Doc. 823, Doc. 824, Doc. 825, and Doc. 826], 1223–1224 [Pgs. 1223–1224 include portions of Doc. 827 and Doc. 828], 1226–1228 [Pgs. 1226–1228 include portions of Doc. 830, Doc. 831, and Doc. 832], 1232 [Pg. 1232 is part of Doc. 836], 1236 [Pg. 1236 is part of Doc. 839], 1248–1250 [Pgs. 1248–1250 include portions of Doc. 852, Doc. 853, Doc. 854, and Doc. 855], 1260 [Pg. 1260 includes portions of Doc. 863 and Doc. 864], 1282–1283 [Pgs. 1282–1283 include portions of Doc. 884, Doc. 885, and Doc. 886], 1320 [Pg. 1320 is part of Doc. 913], 1333–1334 [Pgs. 1333–1334 include portions of Doc. 925 and Doc. 926], 1362–1365 [Pgs. 1362–1365 include portions of Doc. 946, Doc. 947, and Doc. 948], 1379–1380 [Pg. 1379 is part of Doc. 959], 1422 [Pg. 1422 is part of Doc. 989], 1430 [Pg. 1430 includes portions of Doc. 995, Doc. 996, and Doc. 997], 1439 [Pg. 1439 is part of Doc. 997], 1495 [Pg. 1495 includes portions of Doc. 1035 and Doc. 1036], 1505–1506 [Pgs. 1505–1506 include portions of Doc. 1041 and Doc. 1042], 1557–1558 [Pgs. 1557–1558 include portions of Doc. 1086, Doc. 1087, and Doc. 1088]

Peace conference, proposed, 879 [Pg. 879 includes portions of Doc. 564 and Doc. 565], 883–884 [Pgs. 883–884 include portions of Doc. 568, Doc. 569, and Doc. 570], 896 [Pg. 896 includes portions of Doc. 580 and Doc. 581], 922–924 [Pgs. 922–924 include portions of Doc. 599, Doc. 600, and Doc. 601], 931 [Pg. 931 is part of Doc. 605], 947 [Pg. 947 includes portions of Doc. 610 and Doc. 611], 1040 [Pg. 1040 is part of Doc. 678]

Peace negotiations between Israel and Jordan, 1509–1514 [Pgs. 1509–1514 include portions of Doc. 1043, Doc. 1044, Doc. 1045, Doc. 1046, Doc. 1047, Doc. 1048, Doc. 1049, and Doc. 1050], 1516–1521 [Pgs. 1516–1521 include portions of Doc. 1051, Doc. 1052, Doc. 1053, Doc. 1054, Doc. 1055, Doc. 1056, and Doc. 1057], 1526 [Pg. 1526 is part of Doc. 1060], 1528 [Pg. 1528 includes portions of Doc. 1061 and Doc. 1062], 1531–1534 [Pgs. 1531–1534 include portions of Doc. 1063, Doc. 1064, Doc. 1065, Doc. 1066, Doc. 1067, Doc. 1068, and Doc. 1069], 1537 [Pg. 1537 is part of Doc. 1071], 1540–1541 [Pgs. 1540–1541 include portions of Doc. 1073, Doc. 1074, Doc. 1075, and Doc. 1076], 1545–1548 [Pgs. 1545–1548 include portions of Doc. 1079, Doc. 1080, and Doc. 1081], 1556 [Pg. 1556 is part of Doc. 1085], 1558–1562 [Pgs. 1558–1562 include portions of Doc. 1086, Doc. 1087, Doc. 1088, Doc. 1089, Doc. 1090, and Doc. 1091], 1564n [Pg. 1564 includes portions of Doc. 1093 and Doc. 1094], 1565 [Pg. 1565 is part of Doc. 1095]

Peace settlement, proposals concerning, 598 [Pg. 598 includes portions of Doc. 344 and Doc. 345], 604 [Pg. 604 is part of Doc. 350], 606–607 [Pgs. 606–607 include portions of Doc. 351 and Doc. 352], 609 [Pg. 609 includes portions of Doc. 352 and Doc. 353], 737 [Pg. 737 is part of Doc. 457], 745 [Pg. 745 is part of Doc. 463], 855–857 [Pgs. 855–857 include portions of Doc. 544, Doc. 545, and Doc. 546], 863 [Pg. 863 includes portions of Doc. 550 and Doc. 551], 892 [Pg. 892 is part of Doc. 577], 900 [Pg. 900 includes portions of Doc. 585 and Doc. 586], 902–904 [Pgs. 902–904 include portions of Doc. 586 and Doc. 587], 915 [Pg. 915 is part of Doc. 592], 919 [Pg. 919 includes portions of Doc. 596 and Doc. 597], 927–929 [Pgs. 927–929 include portions of Doc. 602, Doc. 603, and Doc. 604], 933 [Pg. 933 includes portions of Doc. 606 and Doc. 607], 945 [Pg. 945 is part of Doc. 610], 955 [Pg. 955 is part of Doc. 615], 1040 [Pg. 1040 is part of Doc. 678], 1052 [Pg. 1052 is part of Doc. 689], 1054 [Pg. 1054 is part of Doc. 690], 1066 [Pg. 1066 is part of Doc. 700], 1070 [Pg. 1070 is part of Doc. 703], 1073 [Pg. 1073 is part of Doc. 705], 1075 [Pg. 1075 includes portions of Doc. 706 and Doc. 707], 1103 [Pg. 1103 is part of Doc. 736], 1106–1107 [Pgs. 1106–1107 include portions of Doc. 736 and Doc. 737], 1109 [Pg. 1109 includes portions of Doc. 739 and Doc. 740], 1113 [Pg. 1113 is part of Doc. 744], 1116 [Pg. 1116 is part of Doc. 747], 1122 [Pg. 1122 is part of Doc. 751], 1138 [Pg. 1138 is part of Doc. 763], 1143 [Pg. 1143 includes portions of Doc. 767 and Doc. 768], 1169 [Pg. 1169 is part of Doc. 788], 1172–1173 [Pgs. 1172–1173 include portions of Doc. 788 and Doc. 789], 1202n [Pg. 1202 includes portions of Doc. 810, Doc. 811, and Doc. 812], 1235 [Pg. 1235 includes portions of Doc. 838 and Doc. 839], 1265–1266 [Pgs. 1265–1266 include portions of Doc. 868 and Doc. 869], 1270 [Pg. 1270 is part of Doc. 872], 1306–1307 [Pg. 1306 is part of Doc. 904], 1312 [Pg. 1312 is part of Doc. 907]

Saudi Arabian position (see also previous and subsequent subheadings), 620–622 [Pgs. 620–622 include portions of Doc. 359, Doc. 360, Doc. 361, Doc. 362, and Doc. 363], 625–626 [Pgs. 625–626 include portions of Doc. 364 and Doc. 365], 688 [Pg. 688 includes portions of Doc. 414 and Doc. 415], 704 [Pg. 704 is part of Doc. 429], 712n [Pg. 712 includes portions of Doc. 435 and Doc. 436], 715–716 [Pgs. 715–716 include portions of Doc. 439, Doc. 440, and Doc. 441], 720–721 [Pgs. 720–721 include portions of Doc. 444, Doc. 445, and Doc. 446], 1240 [Pg. 1240 includes portions of Doc. 845 and Doc. 846], 1457 [Pg. 1457 is part of Doc. 1013], 1561 [Pg. 1561 includes portions of Doc. 1089 and Doc. 1090]

Soviet policy, 656–658 [Pgs. 656–658 include portions of Doc. 390, Doc. 391, and Doc. 392], 676 [Pg. 676 is part of Doc. 403], 694 [Pg. 694 includes portions of Doc. 419, Doc. 420, and Doc. 421], 704 [Pg. 704 is part of Doc. 429], 712 [Pg. 712 includes portions of Doc. 435 and Doc. 436], 1100 [Pg. 1100 includes portions of Doc. 733, Doc. 734, and Doc. 735]

Syrian position (see also previous and subsequent subheadings), 110 [Pg. 110 is part of Doc. 24], 622 [Pg. 622 includes portions of Doc. 360, Doc. 361, Doc. 362, and Doc. 363], 625–626 [Pgs. 625–626 include portions of Doc. 364 and Doc. 365], 637–639 [Pgs. 637–639 include portions of Doc. 373, Doc. 374, and Doc. 375], 688–689 [Pgs. 688–689 include portions of Doc. 414, Doc. 415, and Doc. 416], 704 [Pg. 704 is part of Doc. 429], 721 [Pg. 721 is part of Doc. 446], 737 [Pg. 737 is part of Doc. 457], 746 [Pg. 746 is part of Doc. 463], 802–803 [Pgs. 802–803 include portions of Doc. 511, Doc. 512, and Doc. 513], 809 [Pg. 809 is part of Doc. 517], 894n [Pg. 894 includes portions of Doc. 577 and Doc. 578], 899 [Pg. 899 includes portions of Doc. 583, Doc. 584, and Doc. 585], 923 [Pg. 923 is part of Doc. 600], 1075 [Pg. 1075 includes portions of Doc. 706 and Doc. 707], 1310 [Pg. 1310 is part of Doc. 906], 1503 [Pg. 1503 is part of Doc. 1039]

Territorial questions (see also under Palestine Conciliation Commission, supra), 608–609 [Pgs. 608–609 include portions of Doc. 352 and Doc. 353], 612–613 [Pg. 612 is part of Doc. 354], 621 [Pg. 621 is part of Doc. 360], 623–625 [Pgs. 623–625 include portions of Doc. 363, Doc. 364, and Doc. 365], 630 [Pg. 630 includes portions of Doc. 369 and Doc. 370], 644 [Pg. 644 is part of Doc. 381], 657–659 [Pgs. 657–659 include portions of Doc. 391 and Doc. 392], 669 [Pg. 669 includes portions of Doc. 399 and Doc. 400], 681–684 [Pgs. 681–684 include portions of Doc. 407, Doc. 408, Doc. 409, and Doc. 410], 685n [Pg. 685 includes portions of Doc. 410 and Doc. 411], 693 [Pg. 693 is part of Doc. 419], 695 [Pg. 695 includes portions of Doc. 421 and Doc. 422], 711–712 [Pgs. 711–712 include portions of Doc. 434, Doc. 435, and Doc. 436], 737–738 [Pg. 737 is part of Doc. 457], 741–742 [Pgs. 741–742 include portions of Doc. 458, Doc. 459, and Doc. 460], 746–747 [Pgs. 746–747 include portions of Doc. 463, Doc. 464, and Doc. 465], 750–751 [Pgs. 750–751 include portions of Doc. 467 and Doc. 468], 770 [Pg. 770 is part of Doc. 488], 772n [Pg. 772 includes portions of Doc. 489 and Doc. 490], 777 [Pg. 777 is part of Doc. 493], 780 [Pg. 780 includes portions of Doc. 494 and Doc. 495], 787 [Pg. 787 includes portions of Doc. 501 and Doc. 502], 792n [Pg. 792 is part of Doc. 505], 802 [Pg. 802 is part of Doc. 511], 810n [Pg. 810 includes portions of Doc. 517 and Doc. 518], 826 [Pg. 826 is part of Doc. 532], 852 [Pg. 852 is part of Doc. 542], 853n [Pg. 853 includes portions of Doc. 543 and Doc. 544], 857 [Pg. 857 includes portions of Doc. 545 and Doc. 546], 860 [Pg. 860 is part of Doc. 547], 862–863 [Pgs. 862–863 include portions of Doc. 548, Doc. 549, Doc. 550, and Doc. 551], 872 [Pg. 872 is part of Doc. 560], 873n [Pg. 873 includes portions of Doc. 560 and Doc. 561], 877–881 [Pgs. 877–881 include portions of Doc. 563, Doc. 564, Doc. 565, and Doc. 566], 890–891 [Pg. 890 is part of Doc. 577], 900 [Pg. 900 includes portions of Doc. 585 and Doc. 586], 914–915 [Pg. 914 is part of Doc. 592], 917 [Pg. 917 is part of Doc. 594], 920 [Pg. 920 includes portions of Doc. 597 and Doc. 598], 922n [Pg. 922 is part of Doc. 599], 923n [Pg. 923 is part of Doc. 600], 925–928 [Pgs. 925–928 include portions of Doc. 601, Doc. 602, Doc. 603, and Doc. 604], 931–932 [Pgs. 931–932 include portions of Doc. 605 and Doc. 606], 943–947 [Pgs. 943–947 include portions of Doc. 608, Doc. 609, Doc. 610, and Doc. 611], 961 [Pg. 961 includes portions of Doc. 620 and Doc. 621], 963 [Pg. 963 is part of Doc. 622], 967 [Pg. 967 includes portions of Doc. 626 and Doc. 627], 977 [Pg. 977 includes portions of Doc. 633 and Doc. 634], 981–982 [Pgs. 981–982 include portions of Doc. 638 and Doc. 639], 993–994 [Pgs. 993–994 include portions of Doc. 644, Doc. 645, and Doc. 646], 997–999 [Pgs. 997–999 include portions of Doc. 648, Doc. 649, and Doc. 650], 1002 [Pg. 1002 is part of Doc. 652], 1005 [Pg. 1005 includes portions of Doc. 655 and Doc. 656], 1019–1022 [Pgs. 1019–1022 include portions of Doc. 663, Doc. 664, Doc. 665, and Doc. 666], 1031–1032 [Pgs. 1031–1032 include portions of Doc. 671 and Doc. 672], 1037–1038 [Pgs. 1037–1038 include portions of Doc. 675 and Doc. 676], 1051–1052 [Pgs. 1051–1052 include portions of Doc. 688 and Doc. 689], 1054–1055 [Pgs. 1054–1055 include portions of Doc. 690 and Doc. 691], 1058–1060 [Pgs. 1058–1060 include portions of Doc. 695, Doc. 696, and Doc. 697], 1062 [Pg. 1062 is part of Doc. 697], 1068–1073 [Pgs. 1068–1073 include portions of Doc. 701, Doc. 702, Doc. 703, Doc. 704, and Doc. 705], 1075–1077 [Pgs. 1075–1077 include portions of Doc. 706, Doc. 707, Doc. 708, Doc. 709, and Doc. 710], 1081–1082 [Pgs. 1081–1082 include portions of Doc. 715, Doc. 716, and Doc. 717], 1084 [Pg. 1084 includes portions of Doc. 718 and Doc. 719], 1086–1087 [Pgs. 1086–1087 include portions of Doc. 720, Doc. 721, and Doc. 722], 1090–1091 [Pgs. 1090–1091 include portions of Doc. 723, Doc. 724, and Doc. 725], 1094–1097 [Pgs. 1094–1097 include portions of Doc. 728, Doc. 729, Doc. 730, Doc. 731, and Doc. 732], 1100–1101 [Pgs. 1100–1101 include portions of Doc. 733, Doc. 734, and Doc. 735], 1103–1105 [Pg. 1103 is part of Doc. 736], 1107 [Pg. 1107 is part of Doc. 737], 1110–1117 [Pgs. 1110–1117 include portions of Doc. 741, Doc. 742, Doc. 743, Doc. 744, Doc. 745, Doc. 746, Doc. 747, and Doc. 748], 1122–1129 [Pgs. 1122–1129 include portions of Doc. 751, Doc. 752, Doc. 753, Doc. 754, Doc. 755, and Doc. 756], 1143 [Pg. 1143 includes portions of Doc. 767 and Doc. 768], 1145–1146 [Pgs. 1145–1146 include portions of Doc. 769 and Doc. 770], 1148–1149 [Pg. 1148 is part of Doc. 772], 1151–1152 [Pg. 1151 is part of Doc. 772], 1154 [Pg. 1154 includes portions of Doc. 773 and Doc. 774], 1155n [Pg. 1155 includes portions of Doc. 774 and Doc. 775], 1163–1164 [Pgs. 1163–1164 include portions of Doc. 782, Doc. 783, and Doc. 784], 1170–1171 [Pg. 1170 is part of Doc. 788], 1174–1176 [Pgs. 1174–1176 include portions of Doc. 789 and Doc. 790], 1177n [Pg. 1177 includes portions of Doc. 790 and Doc. 791], 1179–1180 [Pgs. 1179–1180 include portions of Doc. 792 and Doc. 793], 1186–1187 [Pgs. 1186–1187 include portions of Doc. 798, Doc. 799, and Doc. 800], 1190–1193 [Pgs. 1190–1193 include portions of Doc. 802, Doc. 803, Doc. 804, and Doc. 805], 1195–1197 [Pgs. 1195–1197 include portions of Doc. 806, Doc. 807, Doc. 808, and Doc. 809], 1205 [Pg. 1205 is part of Doc. 813], 1207 [Pg. 1207 includes portions of Doc. 815 and Doc. 816], 1222–1224 [Pgs. 1222–1224 include portions of Doc. 827 and Doc. 828], 1226 [Pg. 1226 includes portions of Doc. 830 and Doc. 831], 1236 [Pg. 1236 is part of Doc. 839], 1248 [Pg. 1248 is part of Doc. 852], 1264 [Pg. 1264 includes portions of Doc. 866 and Doc. 867], 1277 [Pg. 1277 includes portions of Doc. 881 and Doc. 882], 1343 [Pg. 1343 is part of Doc. 933], 1377 [Pg. 1377 is part of Doc. 958], 1441n [Pg. 1441 is part of Doc. 998], 1446 [Pg. 1446 is part of Doc. 1001], 1484 [Pg. 1484 is part of Doc. 1029], 1513 [Pg. 1513 is part of Doc. 1049], 1519–1520 [Pgs. 1519–1520 include portions of Doc. 1055 and Doc. 1056], 1542 [Pg. 1542 includes portions of Doc. 1076 and Doc. 1077], 1545–1546 [Pg. 1545 is part of Doc. 1079], 1558–1559 [Pgs. 1558–1559 include portions of Doc. 1086, Doc. 1087, and Doc. 1088], 1562 [Pg. 1562 is part of Doc. 1091]

Turkish position, 36 [Pg. 36 is part of Doc. 4], 1437 [Pg. 1437 is part of Doc. 997], 1668 [Pg. 1668 is part of Doc. 1152]

U.N. General Assembly: Arab states, position of, 1317 [Pg. 1317 is part of Doc. 911], 1525 [Pg. 1525 is part of Doc. 1060], 1533 [Pg. 1533 includes portions of Doc. 1067 and Doc. 1068], 1552–1553 [Pg. 1552 is part of Doc. 1083]

Armistice and cease-fire proposals, 601 [Pg. 601 includes portions of Doc. 347 and Doc. 348], 705 [Pg. 705 includes portions of Doc. 429 and Doc. 430]

Arms embargo, 1272 [Pg. 1272 includes portions of Doc. 874 and Doc. 875]

Australian position, 1525 [Pg. 1525 is part of Doc. 1060], 1531 [Pg. 1531 includes portions of Doc. 1063, Doc. 1064, and Doc. 1065], 1533 [Pg. 1533 includes portions of Doc. 1067 and Doc. 1068], 1537 [Pg. 1537 is part of Doc. 1071], 1552–1553 [Pg. 1552 is part of Doc. 1083]

Belgian position, 835 [Pg. 835 is part of Doc. 533]

Bolivian position, 1512 [Pg. 1512 includes portions of Doc. 1047, Doc. 1048, and Doc. 1049]

Brazilian position, 1511 [Pg. 1511 includes portions of Doc. 1046 and Doc. 1047]

British position, 80–81 [Pg. 80 is part of Doc. 12], 771 [Pg. 771 includes portions of Doc. 488 and Doc. 489], 834–835 [Pg. 834 is part of Doc. 533], 996 [Pg. 996 includes portions of Doc. 647 and Doc. 648], 1427 [Pg. 1427 is part of Doc. 994], 1462–1463 [Pgs. 1462–1463 include portions of Doc. 1016, Doc. 1017, and Doc. 1018], 1511 [Pg. 1511 includes portions of Doc. 1046 and Doc. 1047], 1514 [Pg. 1514 includes portions of Doc. 1049 and Doc. 1050], 1530 [Pg. 1530 includes portions of Doc. 1065 and Doc. 1066], 1552 [Pg. 1552 is part of Doc. 1083]

Canadian position, 1511 [Pg. 1511 includes portions of Doc. 1046 and Doc. 1047]

Chilean position, 1511 [Pg. 1511 includes portions of Doc. 1046 and Doc. 1047]

Egyptian position, 1511 [Pg. 1511 includes portions of Doc. 1046 and Doc. 1047]

French position, 996 [Pg. 996 includes portions of Doc. 647 and Doc. 648], 1514 [Pg. 1514 includes portions of Doc. 1049 and Doc. 1050]

Israeli membership, 876 [Pg. 876 is part of Doc. 563], 880 [Pg. 880 is part of Doc. 566], 894n [Pg. 894 includes portions of Doc. 577 and Doc. 578], 923 [Pg. 923 is part of Doc. 600], 927–928 [Pgs. 927–928 include portions of Doc. 602, Doc. 603, and Doc. 604], 930–931 [Pgs. 930–931 include portions of Doc. 604 and Doc. 605], 943–946 [Pgs. 943–946 include portions of Doc. 608, Doc. 609, and Doc. 610], 947n [Pg. 947 includes portions of Doc. 610 and Doc. 611], 954 [Pg. 954 includes portions of Doc. 613 and Doc. 614], 968–969 [Pgs. 968–969 include portions of Doc. 627, Doc. 628, and Doc. 629], 973–974 [Pgs. 973–974 include portions of Doc. 631 and Doc. 632], 979n [Pg. 979 is part of Doc. 636], 988–989 [Pg. 988 is part of Doc. 641], 995–997 [Pgs. 995–997 include portions of Doc. 646, Doc. 647, and Doc. 648], 1003–1005 [Pgs. 1003–1005 include portions of Doc. 652, Doc. 653, Doc. 654, Doc. 655, and Doc. 656], 1008 [Pg. 1008 includes portions of Doc. 657 and Doc. 658], 1019 [Pg. 1019 is part of Doc. 663], 1021 [Pg. 1021 includes portions of Doc. 664 and Doc. 665], 1028 [Pg. 1028 includes portions of Doc. 667 and Doc. 668], 1113 [Pg. 1113 is part of Doc. 744], 1129 [Pg. 1129 is part of Doc. 756], 1161 [Pg. 1161 is part of Doc. 781]

Israeli position, 736 [Pg. 736 is part of Doc. 457], 1273 [Pg. 1273 includes portions of Doc. 876 and Doc. 877], 1317 [Pg. 1317 is part of Doc. 911], 1387 [Pg. 1387 includes portions of Doc. 962 and Doc. 963], 1396–1397 [Pgs. 1396–1397 include portions of Doc. 972 and Doc. 973], 1420 [Pg. 1420 includes portions of Doc. 987 and Doc. 988], 1442 [Pg. 1442 includes portions of Doc. 998 and Doc. 999], 1445 [Pg. 1445 is part of Doc. 1000], 1496–1498 [Pgs. 1496–1498 include portions of Doc. 1036 and Doc. 1037], 1511 [Pg. 1511 includes portions of Doc. 1046 and Doc. 1047], 1526 [Pg. 1526 is part of Doc. 1060], 1532–1537 [Pgs. 1532–1537 include portions of Doc. 1066, Doc. 1067, Doc. 1068, Doc. 1069, Doc. 1070, and Doc. 1071], 1539 [Pg. 1539 includes portions of Doc. 1072 and Doc. 1073], 1542–1544 [Pgs. 1542–1544 include portions of Doc. 1076, Doc. 1077, and Doc. 1078], 1553 [Pg. 1553 is part of Doc. 1083]

Jerusalem and the Holy Places, proposed international regime for, 177 [Pg. 177 is part of Doc. 74], 1274 [Pg. 1274 includes portions of Doc. 877 and Doc. 878], 1357 [Pg. 1357 includes portions of Doc. 940 and Doc. 941], 1370 [Pg. 1370 is part of Doc. 953], 1372 [Pg. 1372 is part of Doc. 953], 1381 [Pg. 1381 is part of Doc. 960], 1383–1387 [Pgs. 1383–1387 include portions of Doc. 962 and Doc. 963], 1393–1394 [Pgs. 1393–1394 include portions of Doc. 969, Doc. 970, and Doc. 971], 1396–1397 [Pgs. 1396–1397 include portions of Doc. 972 and Doc. 973], 1399 [Pg. 1399 includes portions of Doc. 974 and Doc. 975], 1411–1412 [Pg. 1411 is part of Doc. 981], 1420 [Pg. 1420 includes portions of Doc. 987 and Doc. 988], 1427 [Pg. 1427 is part of Doc. 994], 1429 [Pg. 1429 is part of Doc. 995], 1442 [Pg. 1442 includes portions of Doc. 998 and Doc. 999], 1454 [Pg. 1454 includes portions of Doc. 1009 and Doc. 1010], 1496–1499 [Pgs. 1496–1499 include portions of Doc. 1036 and Doc. 1037], 1509 [Pg. 1509 includes portions of Doc. 1043, Doc. 1044, and Doc. 1045], 1511–1512 [Pgs. 1511–1512 include portions of Doc. 1046, Doc. 1047, Doc. 1048, and Doc. 1049], 1518 [Pg. 1518 includes portions of Doc. 1053, Doc. 1054, and Doc. 1055], 1520 [Pg. 1520 includes portions of Doc. 1055 and Doc. 1056], 1522–1523 [Pgs. 1522–1523 include portions of Doc. 1057, Doc. 1058, and Doc. 1059], 1525–1527 [Pgs. 1525–1527 include portions of Doc. 1060 and Doc. 1061], 1530–1531 [Pg. 1530 is part of Doc. 1065], 1533–1538 [Pgs. 1533–1538 include portions of Doc. 1067, Doc. 1068, Doc. 1069, Doc. 1070, Doc. 1071, and Doc. 1072], 1541–1542 [Pgs. 1541–1542 include portions of Doc. 1074, Doc. 1075, Doc. 1076, and Doc. 1077], 1552–1553 [Pg. 1552 is part of Doc. 1083]

Jordanian position, 1411 [Pg. 1411 is part of Doc. 981], 1496 [Pg. 1496 is part of Doc. 1036], 1512 [Pg. 1512 includes portions of Doc. 1047, Doc. 1048, and Doc. 1049], 1533 [Pg. 1533 includes portions of Doc. 1067 and Doc. 1068], 1539 [Pg. 1539 includes portions of Doc. 1072 and Doc. 1073], 1552–1553 [Pg. 1552 is part of Doc. 1083]

Latin American position, 1525 [Pg. 1525 is part of Doc. 1060]

Netherlands position, 835 [Pg. 835 is part of Doc. 533], 1512 [Pg. 1512 includes portions of Doc. 1047, Doc. 1048, and Doc. 1049], 1523 [Pg. 1523 includes portions of Doc. 1058 and Doc. 1059], 1526 [Pg. 1526 is part of Doc. 1060]

New Zealand position, 1511 [Pg. 1511 includes portions of Doc. 1046 and Doc. 1047]

Nicaraguan position, 1511 [Pg. 1511 includes portions of Doc. 1046 and Doc. 1047]

Palestine question, 1260 [Pg. 1260 includes portions of Doc. 863 and Doc. 864], 1269 [Pg. 1269 includes portions of Doc. 871 and Doc. 872], 1273–1274 [Pgs. 1273–1274 include portions of Doc. 876, Doc. 877, and Doc. 878], 1299 [Pg. 1299 is part of Doc. 899], 1317 [Pg. 1317 is part of Doc. 911], 1342 [Pg. 1342 includes portions of Doc. 932 and Doc. 933], 1362 [Pg. 1362 includes portions of Doc. 946 and Doc. 947], 1366 [Pg. 1366 includes portions of Doc. 949 and Doc. 950], 1370–1372 [Pg. 1370 is part of Doc. 953], 1394 [Pg. 1394 includes portions of Doc. 970 and Doc. 971], 1399 [Pg. 1399 includes portions of Doc. 974 and Doc. 975], 1408 [Pg. 1408 is part of Doc. 979], 1413 [Pg. 1413 is part of Doc. 982], 1451–1454 [Pgs. 1451–1454 include portions of Doc. 1006, Doc. 1007, Doc. 1008, Doc. 1009, and Doc. 1010], 1462–1463 [Pgs. 1462–1463 include portions of Doc. 1016, Doc. 1017, and Doc. 1018], 1468 [Pg. 1468 includes portions of Doc. 1019 and Doc. 1020], 1472 [Pg. 1472 includes portions of Doc. 1024 and Doc. 1025], 1479 [Pg. 1479 is part of Doc. 1026]

Palestinian refugees, 640 [Pg. 640 includes portions of Doc. 375 and Doc. 376], 1260 [Pg. 1260 includes portions of Doc. 863 and Doc. 864], 1267 [Pg. 1267 is part of Doc. 870], 1277 [Pg. 1277 includes portions of Doc. 881 and Doc. 882], 1334 [Pg. 1334 is part of Doc. 926], 1344 [Pg. 1344 is part of Doc. 933], 1370–1371 [Pg. 1370 is part of Doc. 953], 1394 [Pg. 1394 includes portions of Doc. 970 and Doc. 971], 1399 [Pg. 1399 includes portions of Doc. 974 and Doc. 975], 1401–1402 [Pg. 1401 is part of Doc. 975], 1408 [Pg. 1408 is part of Doc. 979], 1413 [Pg. 1413 is part of Doc. 982], 1422 [Pg. 1422 is part of Doc. 989], 1427 [Pg. 1427 is part of Doc. 994], 1432 [Pg. 1432 is part of Doc. 997], 1463–1464 [Pgs. 1463–1464 include portions of Doc. 1017 and Doc. 1018], 1467 [Pg. 1467 is part of Doc. 1019], 1472 [Pg. 1472 includes portions of Doc. 1024 and Doc. 1025], 1474–1475 [Pg. 1474 is part of Doc. 1025], 1500–1502 [Pgs. 1500–1502 include portions of Doc. 1038 and Doc. 1039], 1506 [Pg. 1506 includes portions of Doc. 1041 and Doc. 1042], 1509 [Pg. 1509 includes portions of Doc. 1043, Doc. 1044, and Doc. 1045], 1514 [Pg. 1514 includes portions of Doc. 1049 and Doc. 1050], 1528–1530 [Pgs. 1528–1530 include portions of Doc. 1061, Doc. 1062, Doc. 1063, Doc. 1064, Doc. 1065, and Doc. 1066], 1533 [Pg. 1533 includes portions of Doc. 1067 and Doc. 1068]

Resolution 181 (II), Nov. 29, 1947, 600–601 [Pgs. 600–601 include portions of Doc. 347 and Doc. 348], 612–613 [Pg. 612 is part of Doc. 354], 657 [Pg. 657 is part of Doc. 391], 658–659 [Pgs. 658–659 include portions of Doc. 391 and Doc. 392], 681–682 [Pgs. 681–682 include portions of Doc. 407 and Doc. 408], 705 [Pg. 705 includes portions of Doc. 429 and Doc. 430], 712 [Pg. 712 includes portions of Doc. 435 and Doc. 436], 739 [Pg. 739 is part of Doc. 458], 741–742 [Pgs. 741–742 include portions of Doc. 458, Doc. 459, and Doc. 460], 755 [Pg. 755 includes portions of Doc. 471 and Doc. 472], 761 [Pg. 761 includes portions of Doc. 478 and Doc. 479], 770 [Pg. 770 is part of Doc. 488], 782 [Pg. 782 is part of Doc. 496], 814 [Pg. 814 includes portions of Doc. 519 and Doc. 520], 831 [Pg. 831 is part of Doc. 533], 845 [Pg. 845 is part of Doc. 536], 879 [Pg. 879 includes portions of Doc. 564 and Doc. 565], 881 [Pg. 881 is part of Doc. 566], 890–892 [Pg. 890 is part of Doc. 577], 903 [Pg. 903 is part of Doc. 587], 936 [Pg. 936 is part of Doc. 608], 944–946 [Pgs. 944–946 include portions of Doc. 609 and Doc. 610], 963 [Pg. 963 is part of Doc. 622], 967 [Pg. 967 includes portions of Doc. 626 and Doc. 627], 994 [Pg. 994 includes portions of Doc. 645 and Doc. 646], 1002 [Pg. 1002 is part of Doc. 652], 1006 [Pg. 1006 is part of Doc. 656], 1015 [Pg. 1015 includes portions of Doc. 660 and Doc. 661], 1019 [Pg. 1019 is part of Doc. 663], 1021 [Pg. 1021 includes portions of Doc. 664 and Doc. 665], 1051–1052 [Pgs. 1051–1052 include portions of Doc. 688 and Doc. 689], 1060 [Pg. 1060 is part of Doc. 697], 1072–1073 [Pgs. 1072–1073 include portions of Doc. 704 and Doc. 705], 1075 [Pg. 1075 includes portions of Doc. 706 and Doc. 707], 1104–1105 [Pg. 1104 is part of Doc. 736], 1113–1114 [Pgs. 1113–1114 include portions of Doc. 744 and Doc. 745], 1129 [Pg. 1129 is part of Doc. 756], 1170–1172 [Pg. 1170 is part of Doc. 788], 1175–1176 [Pg. 1175 is part of Doc. 790], 1194 [Pg. 1194 is part of Doc. 806], 1201 [Pg. 1201 is part of Doc. 810], 1222 [Pg. 1222 is part of Doc. 827], 1234 [Pg. 1234 is part of Doc. 838], 1245 [Pg. 1245 includes portions of Doc. 849 and Doc. 850], 1249 [Pg. 1249 includes portions of Doc. 852, Doc. 853, Doc. 854, and Doc. 855], 1268 [Pg. 1268 is part of Doc. 871], 1273–1274 [Pgs. 1273–1274 include portions of Doc. 876, Doc. 877, and Doc. 878], 1277 [Pg. 1277 includes portions of Doc. 881 and Doc. 882], 1292–1293 [Pgs. 1292–1293 include portions of Doc. 894 and Doc. 895], 1355 [Pg. 1355 is part of Doc. 938], 1367n [Pg. 1367 includes portions of Doc. 950 and Doc. 951], 1409–1410 [Pgs. 1409–1410 include portions of Doc. 980 and Doc. 981], 1430–1432 [Pgs. 1430–1432 include portions of Doc. 995, Doc. 996, and Doc. 997], 1438 [Pg. 1438 is part of Doc. 997], 1488 [Pg. 1488 includes portions of Doc. 1030 and Doc. 1031], 1518 [Pg. 1518 includes portions of Doc. 1053, Doc. 1054, and Doc. 1055], 1525 [Pg. 1525 is part of Doc. 1060], 1530–1531 [Pg. 1530 is part of Doc. 1065], 1532n [Pg. 1532 includes portions of Doc. 1066 and Doc. 1067], 1538 [Pg. 1538 includes portions of Doc. 1071 and Doc. 1072], 1547 [Pg. 1547 includes portions of Doc. 1079 and Doc. 1080], 1552–1553 [Pg. 1552 is part of Doc. 1083], 1586 [Pg. 1586 is part of Doc. 1110]

Resolution 212 (III), 1500–1502 [Pgs. 1500–1502 include portions of Doc. 1038 and Doc. 1039]

Resolution of May 14, 1948, 1431 [Pg. 1431 is part of Doc. 997], 1467 [Pg. 1467 is part of Doc. 1019]

Resolution of Nov. 19, 1948, 215 [Pg. 215 is part of Doc. 96], 664 [Pg. 664 is part of Doc. 394], 677 [Pg. 677 includes portions of Doc. 404 and Doc. 405], 829–831 [Pg. 829 is part of Doc. 533], 862 [Pg. 862 includes portions of Doc. 548 and Doc. 549], 899 [Pg. 899 includes portions of Doc. 583, Doc. 584, and Doc. 585], 971 [Pg. 971 is part of Doc. 631], 1157 [Pg. 1157 includes portions of Doc. 777 and Doc. 778], 1432 [Pg. 1432 is part of Doc. 997]

Resolution 194 (III), Dec. 11, 1948, 64 [Pg. 64 is part of Doc. 12], 597 [Pg. 597 is part of Doc. 344], 601 [Pg. 601 includes portions of Doc. 347 and Doc. 348], 617 [Pg. 617 includes portions of Doc. 357, Doc. 358, and Doc. 359], 620 [Pg. 620 includes portions of Doc. 359 and Doc. 360], 624 [Pg. 624 is part of Doc. 364], 653 [Pg. 653 includes portions of Doc. 387 and Doc. 388], 659 [Pg. 659 is part of Doc. 392], 661 [Pg. 661 includes portions of Doc. 392 and Doc. 393], 680–683 [Pgs. 680–683 include portions of Doc. 406, Doc. 407, Doc. 408, and Doc. 409], 705 [Pg. 705 includes portions of Doc. 429 and Doc. 430], 718n [Pg. 718 includes portions of Doc. 443 and Doc. 444], 723 [Pg. 723 includes portions of Doc. 447 and Doc. 448], 729 [Pg. 729 includes portions of Doc. 451 and Doc. 452], 736–737 [Pg. 736 is part of Doc. 457], 739 [Pg. 739 is part of Doc. 458], 750–751 [Pgs. 750–751 include portions of Doc. 467 and Doc. 468], 755–756 [Pgs. 755–756 include portions of Doc. 471, Doc. 472, Doc. 473, and Doc. 474], 758 [Pg. 758 is part of Doc. 475], 767 [Pg. 767 includes portions of Doc. 484 and Doc. 485], 771–773 [Pgs. 771–773 include portions of Doc. 488, Doc. 489, and Doc. 490], 782–783 [Pgs. 782–783 include portions of Doc. 496 and Doc. 497], 786 [Pg. 786 includes portions of Doc. 500 and Doc. 501], 799 [Pg. 799 includes portions of Doc. 508 and Doc. 509], 800–801 [Pgs. 800–801 include portions of Doc. 509 and Doc. 510], 804–805 [Pgs. 804–805 include portions of Doc. 513, Doc. 514, and Doc. 515], 818 [Pg. 818 includes portions of Doc. 524, Doc. 525, and Doc. 526], 830 [Pg. 830 is part of Doc. 533], 833 [Pg. 833 is part of Doc. 533], 839 [Pg. 839 is part of Doc. 533], 843–844 [Pgs. 843–844 include portions of Doc. 534, Doc. 535, and Doc. 536], 851n [Pg. 851 includes portions of Doc. 541 and Doc. 542], 856–859 [Pgs. 856–859 include portions of Doc. 544, Doc. 545, Doc. 546, and Doc. 547], 870 [Pg. 870 is part of Doc. 557], 876 [Pg. 876 is part of Doc. 563], 880–881 [Pg. 880 is part of Doc. 566], 883n [Pg. 883 includes portions of Doc. 568 and Doc. 569], 891 [Pg. 891 is part of Doc. 577], 894–897 [Pgs. 894–897 include portions of Doc. 577, Doc. 578, Doc. 579, Doc. 580, Doc. 581, and Doc. 582], 900 [Pg. 900 includes portions of Doc. 585 and Doc. 586], 902–903 [Pgs. 902–903 include portions of Doc. 586 and Doc. 587], 904n [Pg. 904 is part of Doc. 587], 911–912 [Pgs. 911–912 include portions of Doc. 591 and Doc. 592], 919 [Pg. 919 includes portions of Doc. 596 and Doc. 597], 925 [Pg. 925 includes portions of Doc. 601 and Doc. 602], 927–928 [Pgs. 927–928 include portions of Doc. 602, Doc. 603, and Doc. 604], 930–933 [Pgs. 930–933 include portions of Doc. 604, Doc. 605, Doc. 606, and Doc. 607], 935 [Pg. 935 is part of Doc. 608], 949 [Pg. 949 is part of Doc. 612], 956 [Pg. 956 includes portions of Doc. 615 and Doc. 616], 959 [Pg. 959 includes portions of Doc. 618 and Doc. 619], 963 [Pg. 963 is part of Doc. 622], 966n [Pg. 966 includes portions of Doc. 625 and Doc. 626], 973–974 [Pgs. 973–974 include portions of Doc. 631 and Doc. 632], 991 [Pg. 991 is part of Doc. 643], 993–994 [Pgs. 993–994 include portions of Doc. 644, Doc. 645, and Doc. 646], 996–998 [Pgs. 996–998 include portions of Doc. 647, Doc. 648, and Doc. 649], 1008 [Pg. 1008 includes portions of Doc. 657 and Doc. 658], 1015–1016 [Pgs. 1015–1016 include portions of Doc. 660 and Doc. 661], 1019 [Pg. 1019 is part of Doc. 663], 1034 [Pg. 1034 is part of Doc. 673], 1041n [Pg. 1041 is part of Doc. 678], 1043 [Pg. 1043 includes portions of Doc. 680 and Doc. 681], 1052 [Pg. 1052 is part of Doc. 689], 1060–1061 [Pg. 1060 is part of Doc. 697], 1064 [Pg. 1064 includes portions of Doc. 698 and Doc. 699], 1073–1074 [Pgs. 1073–1074 include portions of Doc. 705 and Doc. 706], 1098n [Pg. 1098 is part of Doc. 732], 1102–1104 [Pgs. 1102–1104 include portions of Doc. 735 and Doc. 736], 1106 [Pg. 1106 is part of Doc. 736], 1122–1124 [Pgs. 1122–1124 include portions of Doc. 751, Doc. 752, and Doc. 753], 1128–1129 [Pg. 1128 is part of Doc. 756], 1135 [Pg. 1135 includes portions of Doc. 760 and Doc. 761], 1143n [Pg. 1143 includes portions of Doc. 767 and Doc. 768], 1149–1151 [Pg. 1149 is part of Doc. 772], 1154 [Pg. 1154 includes portions of Doc. 773 and Doc. 774], 1161–1162 [Pgs. 1161–1162 include portions of Doc. 781 and Doc. 782], 1169–1170 [Pg. 1169 is part of Doc. 788], 1175–1176 [Pg. 1175 is part of Doc. 790], 1186–1187 [Pgs. 1186–1187 include portions of Doc. 798, Doc. 799, and Doc. 800], 1196 [Pg. 1196 is part of Doc. 808], 1218 [Pg. 1218 includes portions of Doc. 825 and Doc. 826], 1220 [Pg. 1220 is part of Doc. 826], 1226 [Pg. 1226 includes portions of Doc. 830 and Doc. 831], 1230–1231 [Pgs. 1230–1231 include portions of Doc. 833, Doc. 834, and Doc. 835], 1236 [Pg. 1236 is part of Doc. 839], 1240–1244 [Pgs. 1240–1244 include portions of Doc. 845, Doc. 846, Doc. 847, and Doc. 848], 1246n [Pg. 1246 is part of Doc. 850], 1248 [Pg. 1248 is part of Doc. 852], 1252 [Pg. 1252 includes portions of Doc. 855 and Doc. 856], 1256–1257 [Pgs. 1256–1257 include portions of Doc. 860, Doc. 861, and Doc. 862], 1260 [Pg. 1260 includes portions of Doc. 863 and Doc. 864], 1263n [Pg. 1263 is part of Doc. 866], 1277–1278 [Pgs. 1277–1278 include portions of Doc. 881 and Doc. 882], 1293–1295 [Pgs. 1293–1295 include portions of Doc. 895 and Doc. 896], 1297 [Pg. 1297 includes portions of Doc. 896 and Doc. 897], 1300 [Pg. 1300 is part of Doc. 899], 1303 [Pg. 1303 is part of Doc. 902], 1306–1307 [Pg. 1306 is part of Doc. 904], 1317 [Pg. 1317 is part of Doc. 911], 1319–1320 [Pgs. 1319–1320 include portions of Doc. 912 and Doc. 913], 1336–1337 [Pgs. 1336–1337 include portions of Doc. 928 and Doc. 929], 1346–1347 [Pgs. 1346–1347 include portions of Doc. 933 and Doc. 934], 1359 [Pg. 1359 includes portions of Doc. 943 and Doc. 944], 1363 [Pg. 1363 is part of Doc. 947], 1367n [Pg. 1367 includes portions of Doc. 950 and Doc. 951], 1383 [Pg. 1383 is part of Doc. 962], 1385 [Pg. 1385 is part of Doc. 962], 1425 [Pg. 1425 is part of Doc. 993], 1432 [Pg. 1432 is part of Doc. 997], 1437–1438 [Pg. 1437 is part of Doc. 997], 1450 [Pg. 1450 is part of Doc. 1006], 1453 [Pg. 1453 includes portions of Doc. 1008 and Doc. 1009], 1457 [Pg. 1457 is part of Doc. 1013], 1466–1467 [Pg. 1466 is part of Doc. 1019], 1479 [Pg. 1479 is part of Doc. 1026], 1489 [Pg. 1489 is part of Doc. 1031], 1498 [Pg. 1498 includes portions of Doc. 1036 and Doc. 1037], 1500 [Pg. 1500 is part of Doc. 1038], 1526 [Pg. 1526 is part of Doc. 1060], 1530 [Pg. 1530 includes portions of Doc. 1065 and Doc. 1066], 1668 [Pg. 1668 is part of Doc. 1152]

Resolution 273 (III), May 11, 1949, regarding Israeli membership, 996 [Pg. 996 includes portions of Doc. 647 and Doc. 648], 1129 [Pg. 1129 is part of Doc. 756]

Resolution 302 (IV), Dec. 8, 1949, regarding establishment of U.N. Relief and Works Agency for Palestine, 1529–1530 [Pgs. 1529–1530 include portions of Doc. 1062, Doc. 1063, Doc. 1064, Doc. 1065, and Doc. 1066], 1549 [Pg. 1549 is part of Doc. 1081], 1551 [Pg. 1551 includes portions of Doc. 1081, Doc. 1082, and Doc. 1083], 1557 [Pg. 1557 is part of Doc. 1086]

Resolution 303 (IV), Dec. 9, 1949, regarding Jerusalem, 1530–1531 [Pg. 1530 is part of Doc. 1065], 1534 [Pg. 1534 includes portions of Doc. 1068 and Doc. 1069], 1536–1539 [Pgs. 1536–1539 include portions of Doc. 1070, Doc. 1071, Doc. 1072, and Doc. 1073], 1543 [Pg. 1543 is part of Doc. 1078], 1547–1548 [Pgs. 1547–1548 include portions of Doc. 1079, Doc. 1080, and Doc. 1081], 1553–1555 [Pgs. 1553–1555 include portions of Doc. 1083 and Doc. 1084]

Soviet bloc, position of, 1525 [Pg. 1525 is part of Doc. 1060], 1552–1553 [Pg. 1552 is part of Doc. 1083]

Soviet position, 996 [Pg. 996 includes portions of Doc. 647 and Doc. 648], 1194 [Pg. 1194 is part of Doc. 806], 1525 [Pg. 1525 is part of Doc. 1060], 1530 [Pg. 1530 includes portions of Doc. 1065 and Doc. 1066], 1532–1533 [Pgs. 1532–1533 include portions of Doc. 1066, Doc. 1067, and Doc. 1068], 1542 [Pg. 1542 includes portions of Doc. 1076 and Doc. 1077]

Swedish position, 1523 [Pg. 1523 includes portions of Doc. 1058 and Doc. 1059], 1526 [Pg. 1526 is part of Doc. 1060]

Syrian position, 1511 [Pg. 1511 includes portions of Doc. 1046 and Doc. 1047]

Turkish position, 996 [Pg. 996 includes portions of Doc. 647 and Doc. 648], 1514 [Pg. 1514 includes portions of Doc. 1049 and Doc. 1050], 1668 [Pg. 1668 is part of Doc. 1152]

U.S. position, 640 [Pg. 640 includes portions of Doc. 375 and Doc. 376], 658–659 [Pgs. 658–659 include portions of Doc. 391 and Doc. 392], 722–723 [Pgs. 722–723 include portions of Doc. 446, Doc. 447, and Doc. 448], 739 [Pg. 739 is part of Doc. 458], 741–742 [Pgs. 741–742 include portions of Doc. 458, Doc. 459, and Doc. 460], 771 [Pg. 771 includes portions of Doc. 488 and Doc. 489], 804 [Pg. 804 includes portions of Doc. 513 and Doc. 514], 835 [Pg. 835 is part of Doc. 533], 879–881 [Pgs. 879–881 include portions of Doc. 564, Doc. 565, and Doc. 566], 988–989 [Pg. 988 is part of Doc. 641], 995–996 [Pgs. 995–996 include portions of Doc. 646, Doc. 647, and Doc. 648], 1003–1005 [Pgs. 1003–1005 include portions of Doc. 652, Doc. 653, Doc. 654, Doc. 655, and Doc. 656], 1008 [Pg. 1008 includes portions of Doc. 657 and Doc. 658], 1015 [Pg. 1015 includes portions of Doc. 660 and Doc. 661], 1021 [Pg. 1021 includes portions of Doc. 664 and Doc. 665], 1028 [Pg. 1028 includes portions of Doc. 667 and Doc. 668], 1334 [Pg. 1334 is part of Doc. 926], 1370–1372 [Pg. 1370 is part of Doc. 953], 1383–1387 [Pgs. 1383–1387 include portions of Doc. 962 and Doc. 963], 1394 [Pg. 1394 includes portions of Doc. 970 and Doc. 971], 1399–1403 [Pgs. 1399–1403 include portions of Doc. 974, Doc. 975, and Doc. 976], 1413 [Pg. 1413 is part of Doc. 982], 1429 [Pg. 1429 is part of Doc. 995], 1431–1432 [Pg. 1431 is part of Doc. 997], 1451–1454 [Pgs. 1451–1454 include portions of Doc. 1006, Doc. 1007, Doc. 1008, Doc. 1009, and Doc. 1010], 1462 [Pg. 1462 includes portions of Doc. 1016 and Doc. 1017], 1498–1502 [Pgs. 1498–1502 include portions of Doc. 1036, Doc. 1037, Doc. 1038, and Doc. 1039], 1511–1512 [Pgs. 1511–1512 include portions of Doc. 1046, Doc. 1047, Doc. 1048, and Doc. 1049], 1514 [Pg. 1514 includes portions of Doc. 1049 and Doc. 1050], 1520 [Pg. 1520 includes portions of Doc. 1055 and Doc. 1056], 1522–1523 [Pgs. 1522–1523 include portions of Doc. 1057, Doc. 1058, and Doc. 1059], 1530–1532 [Pgs. 1530–1532 include portions of Doc. 1065, Doc. 1066, and Doc. 1067], 1537–1539 [Pgs. 1537–1539 include portions of Doc. 1071, Doc. 1072, and Doc. 1073], 1551–1552 [Pgs. 1551–1552 include portions of Doc. 1081, Doc. 1082, and Doc. 1083], 1554 [Pg. 1554 is part of Doc. 1083]

U.N. Mediator (see also Bunche), 138–139 [Pg. 138 is part of Doc. 48], 603 [Pg. 603 includes portions of Doc. 349 and Doc. 350], 611–612 [Pg. 611 is part of Doc. 354], 615–617 [Pgs. 615–617 include portions of Doc. 355, Doc. 356, Doc. 357, Doc. 358, and Doc. 359], 621–622 [Pgs. 621–622 include portions of Doc. 360, Doc. 361, Doc. 362, and Doc. 363], 628 [Pg. 628 is part of Doc. 367], 636 [Pg. 636 is part of Doc. 373], 641 [Pg. 641 includes portions of Doc. 377 and Doc. 378], 649–650 [Pgs. 649–650 include portions of Doc. 383, Doc. 384, and Doc. 385], 654–656 [Pgs. 654–656 include portions of Doc. 388, Doc. 389, Doc. 390, and Doc. 391], 664 [Pg. 664 is part of Doc. 394], 667 [Pg. 667 includes portions of Doc. 397 and Doc. 398], 669 [Pg. 669 includes portions of Doc. 399 and Doc. 400], 692 [Pg. 692 is part of Doc. 418], 698–700 [Pgs. 698–700 include portions of Doc. 424, Doc. 425, Doc. 426, and Doc. 427], 713 [Pg. 713 includes portions of Doc. 436, Doc. 437, and Doc. 438], 723–724 [Pgs. 723–724 include portions of Doc. 447 and Doc. 448], 730–731 [Pgs. 730–731 include portions of Doc. 453 and Doc. 454], 800 [Pg. 800 includes portions of Doc. 509 and Doc. 510], 1104 [Pg. 1104 is part of Doc. 736], 1241–1242 [Pgs. 1241–1242 include portions of Doc. 844, Doc. 845, Doc. 846, and Doc. 847], 1255 [Pg. 1255 includes portions of Doc. 858 and Doc. 859], 1303–1304 [Pgs. 1303–1304 include portions of Doc. 902 and Doc. 903], 1431 [Pg. 1431 is part of Doc. 997]

U.N. military observers, 597 [Pg. 597 is part of Doc. 344], 610 [Pg. 610 is part of Doc. 353], 629–630 [Pgs. 629–630 include portions of Doc. 368, Doc. 369, and Doc. 370], 637 [Pg. 637 includes portions of Doc. 373 and Doc. 374], 686 [Pg. 686 includes portions of Doc. 411, Doc. 412, and Doc. 413], 699 [Pg. 699 includes portions of Doc. 425 and Doc. 426], 713 [Pg. 713 includes portions of Doc. 436, Doc. 437, and Doc. 438], 769n [Pg. 769 includes portions of Doc. 486 and Doc. 487], 800–801 [Pgs. 800–801 include portions of Doc. 509 and Doc. 510], 812–814 [Pgs. 812–814 include portions of Doc. 518, Doc. 519, and Doc. 520], 817 [Pg. 817 includes portions of Doc. 522, Doc. 523, and Doc. 524], 820 [Pg. 820 includes portions of Doc. 527 and Doc. 528], 823–824 [Pgs. 823–824 include portions of Doc. 529, Doc. 530, and Doc. 531], 844–845 [Pgs. 844–845 include portions of Doc. 535 and Doc. 536], 864–865 [Pgs. 864–865 include portions of Doc. 551 and Doc. 552], 999 [Pg. 999 includes portions of Doc. 649 and Doc. 650], 1055 [Pg. 1055 includes portions of Doc. 690 and Doc. 691], 1101 [Pg. 1101 is part of Doc. 735], 1147 [Pg. 1147 is part of Doc. 771], 1240 [Pg. 1240 includes portions of Doc. 845 and Doc. 846]

U.N. Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees, establishment and activities of, 1501–1502 [Pgs. 1501–1502 include portions of Doc. 1038 and Doc. 1039], 1514 [Pg. 1514 includes portions of Doc. 1049 and Doc. 1050], 1529–1530 [Pgs. 1529–1530 include portions of Doc. 1062, Doc. 1063, Doc. 1064, Doc. 1065, and Doc. 1066], 1533 [Pg. 1533 includes portions of Doc. 1067 and Doc. 1068], 1549–1550 [Pg. 1549 is part of Doc. 1081], 1563 [Pg. 1563 includes portions of Doc. 1092 and Doc. 1093]

U.N. Relief for Palestine Refugees, 642 [Pg. 642 includes portions of Doc. 378 and Doc. 379], 654 [Pg. 654 includes portions of Doc. 388 and Doc. 389], 665 [Pg. 665 includes portions of Doc. 394 and Doc. 395], 830 [Pg. 830 is part of Doc. 533], 936 [Pg. 936 is part of Doc. 608], 938–940 [Pg. 938 is part of Doc. 608], 959–960 [Pgs. 959–960 include portions of Doc. 618, Doc. 619, and Doc. 620], 971 [Pg. 971 is part of Doc. 631], 986 [Pg. 986 is part of Doc. 640], 991 [Pg. 991 is part of Doc. 643], 1013 [Pg. 1013 is part of Doc. 660], 1033 [Pg. 1033 is part of Doc. 672], 1139 [Pg. 1139 is part of Doc. 763], 1157 [Pg. 1157 includes portions of Doc. 777 and Doc. 778], 1181 [Pg. 1181 is part of Doc. 794], 1186 [Pg. 1186 includes portions of Doc. 798 and Doc. 799], 1193 [Pg. 1193 includes portions of Doc. 804 and Doc. 805], 1196 [Pg. 1196 is part of Doc. 808], 1210 [Pg. 1210 is part of Doc. 818], 1214 [Pg. 1214 includes portions of Doc. 821 and Doc. 822], 1220 [Pg. 1220 is part of Doc. 826], 1260 [Pg. 1260 includes portions of Doc. 863 and Doc. 864], 1272 [Pg. 1272 includes portions of Doc. 874 and Doc. 875], 1282–1283 [Pgs. 1282–1283 include portions of Doc. 884, Doc. 885, and Doc. 886], 1317 [Pg. 1317 is part of Doc. 911], 1334 [Pg. 1334 is part of Doc. 926], 1343–1344 [Pg. 1343 is part of Doc. 933], 1363 [Pg. 1363 is part of Doc. 947], 1370 [Pg. 1370 is part of Doc. 953], 1372 [Pg. 1372 is part of Doc. 953], 1380 [Pg. 1380 is part of Doc. 959], 1400 [Pg. 1400 is part of Doc. 975], 1402 [Pg. 1402 is part of Doc. 975], 1404 [Pg. 1404 includes portions of Doc. 976 and Doc. 977], 1413 [Pg. 1413 is part of Doc. 982], 1415n [Pg. 1415 is part of Doc. 984], 1422 [Pg. 1422 is part of Doc. 989], 1443–1444 [Pgs. 1443–1444 include portions of Doc. 999 and Doc. 1000], 1453–1454 [Pgs. 1453–1454 include portions of Doc. 1008, Doc. 1009, and Doc. 1010], 1459–1461 [Pgs. 1459–1461 include portions of Doc. 1013, Doc. 1014, Doc. 1015, and Doc. 1016], 1464 [Pg. 1464 is part of Doc. 1018], 1467 [Pg. 1467 is part of Doc. 1019], 1469–1470 [Pgs. 1469–1470 include portions of Doc. 1020, Doc. 1021, and Doc. 1022], 1473–1475 [Pg. 1473 is part of Doc. 1025], 1477 [Pg. 1477 is part of Doc. 1026], 1481 [Pg. 1481 includes portions of Doc. 1026 and Doc. 1027], 1501–1502 [Pgs. 1501–1502 include portions of Doc. 1038 and Doc. 1039], 1505 [Pg. 1505 is part of Doc. 1041], 1563 [Pg. 1563 includes portions of Doc. 1092 and Doc. 1093]

U.N. Security Council: Armistice and cease-fire proposals, 595 [Pg. 595 includes portions of Doc. 341 and Doc. 342], 597 [Pg. 597 is part of Doc. 344], 600–601 [Pgs. 600–601 include portions of Doc. 347 and Doc. 348], 603 [Pg. 603 includes portions of Doc. 349 and Doc. 350], 609–610 [Pgs. 609–610 include portions of Doc. 352 and Doc. 353], 612 [Pg. 612 is part of Doc. 354], 614 [Pg. 614 is part of Doc. 355], 616–617 [Pgs. 616–617 include portions of Doc. 356, Doc. 357, Doc. 358, and Doc. 359], 621–622 [Pgs. 621–622 include portions of Doc. 360, Doc. 361, Doc. 362, and Doc. 363], 649–650 [Pgs. 649–650 include portions of Doc. 383, Doc. 384, and Doc. 385], 654–655 [Pgs. 654–655 include portions of Doc. 388, Doc. 389, and Doc. 390], 687 [Pg. 687 includes portions of Doc. 413 and Doc. 414], 698–700 [Pgs. 698–700 include portions of Doc. 424, Doc. 425, Doc. 426, and Doc. 427], 704 [Pg. 704 is part of Doc. 429], 785 [Pg. 785 includes portions of Doc. 499 and Doc. 500], 816–817 [Pgs. 816–817 include portions of Doc. 521, Doc. 522, Doc. 523, and Doc. 524], 844 [Pg. 844 includes portions of Doc. 535 and Doc. 536], 869 [Pg. 869 is part of Doc. 556], 884–885 [Pgs. 884–885 include portions of Doc. 569, Doc. 570, and Doc. 571], 918–919 [Pgs. 918–919 include portions of Doc. 595, Doc. 596, and Doc. 597], 930–931 [Pgs. 930–931 include portions of Doc. 604 and Doc. 605], 933–934 [Pgs. 933–934 include portions of Doc. 606, Doc. 607, and Doc. 608], 1278 [Pg. 1278 is part of Doc. 882]

Arms embargo, lifting of, 148 [Pg. 148 is part of Doc. 55], 225–226 [Pg. 225 is part of Doc. 104], 1255 [Pg. 1255 includes portions of Doc. 858 and Doc. 859], 1262–1263 [Pg. 1262 is part of Doc. 866], 1269–1271 [Pgs. 1269–1271 include portions of Doc. 871, Doc. 872, Doc. 873, and Doc. 874], 1274–1275 [Pgs. 1274–1275 include portions of Doc. 877, Doc. 878, and Doc. 879], 1277–1280 [Pgs. 1277–1280 include portions of Doc. 881, Doc. 882, and Doc. 883], 1284 [Pg. 1284 includes portions of Doc. 886 and Doc. 887], 1304 [Pg. 1304 is part of Doc. 903], 1322–1323 [Pgs. 1322–1323 include portions of Doc. 915, Doc. 916, Doc. 917, and Doc. 918], 1328 [Pg. 1328 includes portions of Doc. 921 and Doc. 922], 1365 [Pg. 1365 includes portions of Doc. 947 and Doc. 948], 1435 [Pg. 1435 is part of Doc. 997], 1492 [Pg. 1492 is part of Doc. 1033]

British position, 148 [Pg. 148 is part of Doc. 55], 594 [Pg. 594 is part of Doc. 341], 600 [Pg. 600 is part of Doc. 347], 643 [Pg. 643 includes portions of Doc. 379 and Doc. 380], 675–676 [Pg. 675 is part of Doc. 403], 775 [Pg. 775 includes portions of Doc. 491 and Doc. 492], 789 [Pg. 789 includes portions of Doc. 503, Doc. 504, and Doc. 505], 1270 [Pg. 1270 is part of Doc. 872], 1280 [Pg. 1280 includes portions of Doc. 882 and Doc. 883], 1284 [Pg. 1284 includes portions of Doc. 886 and Doc. 887]

Canadian position, 1275 [Pg. 1275 includes portions of Doc. 878 and Doc. 879], 1284 [Pg. 1284 includes portions of Doc. 886 and Doc. 887], 1290 [Pg. 1290 includes portions of Doc. 891 and Doc. 892], 1291n [Pg. 1291 includes portions of Doc. 892 and Doc. 893], 1302 [Pg. 1302 includes portions of Doc. 900, Doc. 901, and Doc. 902], 1341 [Pg. 1341 includes portions of Doc. 931 and Doc. 932]

Chinese position, 1284 [Pg. 1284 includes portions of Doc. 886 and Doc. 887]

Committee on Palestine question, 610 [Pg. 610 is part of Doc. 353], 621–623 [Pgs. 621–623 include portions of Doc. 360, Doc. 361, Doc. 362, Doc. 363, and Doc. 364], 629 [Pg. 629 includes portions of Doc. 368 and Doc. 369], 632 [Pg. 632 includes portions of Doc. 370 and Doc. 371]

Cuban position, 1284 [Pg. 1284 includes portions of Doc. 886 and Doc. 887]

Egyptian membership, 601 [Pg. 601 includes portions of Doc. 347 and Doc. 348], 606 [Pg. 606 is part of Doc. 351]

Egyptian position, 595 [Pg. 595 includes portions of Doc. 341 and Doc. 342], 597 [Pg. 597 is part of Doc. 344], 609 [Pg. 609 includes portions of Doc. 352 and Doc. 353], 695n [Pg. 695 includes portions of Doc. 421 and Doc. 422], 775 [Pg. 775 includes portions of Doc. 491 and Doc. 492], 789 [Pg. 789 includes portions of Doc. 503, Doc. 504, and Doc. 505], 1270 [Pg. 1270 is part of Doc. 872], 1280 [Pg. 1280 includes portions of Doc. 882 and Doc. 883], 1284 [Pg. 1284 includes portions of Doc. 886 and Doc. 887], 1454 [Pg. 1454 includes portions of Doc. 1009 and Doc. 1010]

French position, 611 [Pg. 611 is part of Doc. 354], 1290 [Pg. 1290 includes portions of Doc. 891 and Doc. 892], 1291n [Pg. 1291 includes portions of Doc. 892 and Doc. 893], 1302 [Pg. 1302 includes portions of Doc. 900, Doc. 901, and Doc. 902], 1341 [Pg. 1341 includes portions of Doc. 931 and Doc. 932]

Israeli membership in the United Nations, 597 [Pg. 597 is part of Doc. 344], 601 [Pg. 601 includes portions of Doc. 347 and Doc. 348], 740 [Pg. 740 is part of Doc. 458], 766 [Pg. 766 includes portions of Doc. 481, Doc. 482, Doc. 483, and Doc. 484], 774–775 [Pgs. 774–775 include portions of Doc. 490, Doc. 491, and Doc. 492], 789 [Pg. 789 includes portions of Doc. 503, Doc. 504, and Doc. 505], 1004 [Pg. 1004 includes portions of Doc. 654 and Doc. 655]

Israeli position, 80 [Pg. 80 is part of Doc. 12], 148 [Pg. 148 is part of Doc. 55], 595 [Pg. 595 includes portions of Doc. 341 and Doc. 342], 597 [Pg. 597 is part of Doc. 344], 606 [Pg. 606 is part of Doc. 351], 610 [Pg. 610 is part of Doc. 353], 629 [Pg. 629 includes portions of Doc. 368 and Doc. 369], 643 [Pg. 643 includes portions of Doc. 379 and Doc. 380], 645 [Pg. 645 is part of Doc. 382], 647 [Pg. 647 includes portions of Doc. 382 and Doc. 383], 653 [Pg. 653 includes portions of Doc. 387 and Doc. 388], 660 [Pg. 660 is part of Doc. 392], 1270 [Pg. 1270 is part of Doc. 872], 1280 [Pg. 1280 includes portions of Doc. 882 and Doc. 883], 1291 [Pg. 1291 includes portions of Doc. 892 and Doc. 893]

Jerusalem, future status of, 1454 [Pg. 1454 includes portions of Doc. 1009 and Doc. 1010]

Norwegian position, 1290 [Pg. 1290 includes portions of Doc. 891 and Doc. 892]

Palestine question, 1269 [Pg. 1269 includes portions of Doc. 871 and Doc. 872], 1278 [Pg. 1278 is part of Doc. 882], 1283–1284 [Pgs. 1283–1284 include portions of Doc. 885, Doc. 886, and Doc. 887], 1290–1291 [Pgs. 1290–1291 include portions of Doc. 891, Doc. 892, and Doc. 893], 1302 [Pg. 1302 includes portions of Doc. 900, Doc. 901, and Doc. 902]

Report by Acting U.N. Mediator Bunche, 933–934 [Pgs. 933–934 include portions of Doc. 606, Doc. 607, and Doc. 608], 1240–1241 [Pg. 1240 is part of Doc. 845], 1278 [Pg. 1278 is part of Doc. 882], 1290 [Pg. 1290 includes portions of Doc. 891 and Doc. 892], 1291n [Pg. 1291 includes portions of Doc. 892 and Doc. 893], 1302 [Pg. 1302 includes portions of Doc. 900, Doc. 901, and Doc. 902], 1304 [Pg. 1304 is part of Doc. 903], 1341 [Pg. 1341 includes portions of Doc. 931 and Doc. 932]

Resolution of Apr. 23, 1948, 617 [Pg. 617 includes portions of Doc. 357, Doc. 358, and Doc. 359], 884 [Pg. 884 includes portions of Doc. 569 and Doc. 570]

Resolution 50, May 29, 1948, 42n [Pg. 42 is part of Doc. 4], 602 [Pg. 602 includes portions of Doc. 348 and Doc. 349], 613 [Pg. 613 is part of Doc. 354], 660–661 [Pgs. 660–661 include portions of Doc. 392 and Doc. 393], 800 [Pg. 800 includes portions of Doc. 509 and Doc. 510], 843–844 [Pgs. 843–844 include portions of Doc. 534, Doc. 535, and Doc. 536], 864 [Pg. 864 includes portions of Doc. 551 and Doc. 552], 1162 [Pg. 1162 includes portions of Doc. 781 and Doc. 782], 1255 [Pg. 1255 includes portions of Doc. 858 and Doc. 859], 1262 [Pg. 1262 is part of Doc. 866], 1278 [Pg. 1278 is part of Doc. 882], 1284 [Pg. 1284 includes portions of Doc. 886 and Doc. 887], 1303–1304 [Pgs. 1303–1304 include portions of Doc. 902 and Doc. 903], 1341 [Pg. 1341 includes portions of Doc. 931 and Doc. 932], 1432 [Pg. 1432 is part of Doc. 997], 1435 [Pg. 1435 is part of Doc. 997], 1489 [Pg. 1489 is part of Doc. 1031]

Resolution 54, July 15, 1948, 602 [Pg. 602 includes portions of Doc. 348 and Doc. 349], 814 [Pg. 814 includes portions of Doc. 519 and Doc. 520], 864 [Pg. 864 includes portions of Doc. 551 and Doc. 552], 919 [Pg. 919 includes portions of Doc. 596 and Doc. 597], 934 [Pg. 934 includes portions of Doc. 607 and Doc. 608], 1147 [Pg. 1147 is part of Doc. 771], 1162 [Pg. 1162 includes portions of Doc. 781 and Doc. 782], 1240–1242 [Pgs. 1240–1242 include portions of Doc. 845, Doc. 846, and Doc. 847], 1262 [Pg. 1262 is part of Doc. 866], 1284 [Pg. 1284 includes portions of Doc. 886 and Doc. 887], 1303–1304 [Pgs. 1303–1304 include portions of Doc. 902 and Doc. 903], 1341 [Pg. 1341 includes portions of Doc. 931 and Doc. 932], 1432 [Pg. 1432 is part of Doc. 997], 1435 [Pg. 1435 is part of Doc. 997], 1489 [Pg. 1489 is part of Doc. 1031]

Resolution of Aug. 19, 1948, 1320 [Pg. 1320 is part of Doc. 913]

Resolution of Nov. 4, 1948, 602 [Pg. 602 includes portions of Doc. 348 and Doc. 349], 610n [Pg. 610 is part of Doc. 353], 611 [Pg. 611 is part of Doc. 354], 618 [Pg. 618 is part of Doc. 359], 621 [Pg. 621 is part of Doc. 360], 636 [Pg. 636 is part of Doc. 373], 649 [Pg. 649 includes portions of Doc. 383 and Doc. 384], 655 [Pg. 655 includes portions of Doc. 389 and Doc. 390], 659–660 [Pg. 659 is part of Doc. 392], 666 [Pg. 666 includes portions of Doc. 396 and Doc. 397], 690 [Pg. 690 is part of Doc. 416], 693 [Pg. 693 is part of Doc. 419], 706–707 [Pgs. 706–707 include portions of Doc. 430 and Doc. 431], 714 [Pg. 714 includes portions of Doc. 438 and Doc. 439], 718–719 [Pgs. 718–719 include portions of Doc. 443 and Doc. 444], 726 [Pg. 726 is part of Doc. 450], 734 [Pg. 734 includes portions of Doc. 455 and Doc. 456], 742n [Pg. 742 includes portions of Doc. 459 and Doc. 460], 755 [Pg. 755 includes portions of Doc. 471 and Doc. 472]

Resolution 62, Nov. 16, 1948, 601–603 [Pgs. 601–603 include portions of Doc. 347, Doc. 348, Doc. 349, and Doc. 350], 618 [Pg. 618 is part of Doc. 359], 621 [Pg. 621 is part of Doc. 360], 636 [Pg. 636 is part of Doc. 373], 649 [Pg. 649 includes portions of Doc. 383 and Doc. 384], 655 [Pg. 655 includes portions of Doc. 389 and Doc. 390], 659–660 [Pg. 659 is part of Doc. 392], 666 [Pg. 666 includes portions of Doc. 396 and Doc. 397], 685 [Pg. 685 includes portions of Doc. 410 and Doc. 411], 693 [Pg. 693 is part of Doc. 419], 718–719 [Pgs. 718–719 include portions of Doc. 443 and Doc. 444], 726 [Pg. 726 is part of Doc. 450], 742n [Pg. 742 includes portions of Doc. 459 and Doc. 460], 785–786 [Pgs. 785–786 include portions of Doc. 499, Doc. 500, and Doc. 501], 799–800 [Pgs. 799–800 include portions of Doc. 508, Doc. 509, and Doc. 510], 809–810 [Pgs. 809–810 include portions of Doc. 517 and Doc. 518], 817 [Pg. 817 includes portions of Doc. 522, Doc. 523, and Doc. 524], 847 [Pg. 847 is part of Doc. 537], 869n [Pg. 869 is part of Doc. 556], 1053–1054 [Pgs. 1053–1054 include portions of Doc. 689 and Doc. 690], 1101 [Pg. 1101 is part of Doc. 735], 1123 [Pg. 1123 includes portions of Doc. 751 and Doc. 752], 1147 [Pg. 1147 is part of Doc. 771], 1241 [Pg. 1241 includes portions of Doc. 844 and Doc. 845], 1278 [Pg. 1278 is part of Doc. 882], 1283 [Pg. 1283 includes portions of Doc. 885 and Doc. 886], 1302 [Pg. 1302 includes portions of Doc. 900, Doc. 901, and Doc. 902]

Resolution of Dec. 29, 1948, 636n [Pg. 636 is part of Doc. 373], 659 [Pg. 659 is part of Doc. 392], 666 [Pg. 666 includes portions of Doc. 396 and Doc. 397], 699 [Pg. 699 includes portions of Doc. 425 and Doc. 426], 714 [Pg. 714 includes portions of Doc. 438 and Doc. 439], 726 [Pg. 726 is part of Doc. 450]

Resolution 72, Aug. 11, 1949, regarding report of Acting U.N. Mediator, 1302n [Pg. 1302 includes portions of Doc. 900, Doc. 901, and Doc. 902]

Resolution 73, Aug. 11, 1949, terminating U.N. mediation effort and lifting arms embargo, 57–58 [Pg. 57 is part of Doc. 10], 225–226 [Pg. 225 is part of Doc. 104], 1302–1303 [Pgs. 1302–1303 include portions of Doc. 900, Doc. 901, and Doc. 902], 1435 [Pg. 1435 is part of Doc. 997], 1440 [Pg. 1440 includes portions of Doc. 997 and Doc. 998], 1492 [Pg. 1492 is part of Doc. 1033]

Soviet position, 1269–1270 [Pgs. 1269–1270 include portions of Doc. 871 and Doc. 872], 1290–1291 [Pgs. 1290–1291 include portions of Doc. 891, Doc. 892, and Doc. 893], 1302 [Pg. 1302 includes portions of Doc. 900, Doc. 901, and Doc. 902]

Suez Canal, freedom of navigation in, 148n [Pg. 148 is part of Doc. 55]

Ukrainian position, 1270 [Pg. 1270 is part of Doc. 872], 1302 [Pg. 1302 includes portions of Doc. 900, Doc. 901, and Doc. 902]

U.S. position, 225–226 [Pg. 225 is part of Doc. 104], 600 [Pg. 600 is part of Doc. 347], 602 [Pg. 602 includes portions of Doc. 348 and Doc. 349], 622–623 [Pgs. 622–623 include portions of Doc. 360, Doc. 361, Doc. 362, Doc. 363, and Doc. 364], 640 [Pg. 640 includes portions of Doc. 375 and Doc. 376], 789 [Pg. 789 includes portions of Doc. 503, Doc. 504, and Doc. 505], 884–885 [Pgs. 884–885 include portions of Doc. 569, Doc. 570, and Doc. 571], 1004 [Pg. 1004 includes portions of Doc. 654 and Doc. 655], 1279–1280 [Pgs. 1279–1280 include portions of Doc. 882 and Doc. 883], 1283–1284 [Pgs. 1283–1284 include portions of Doc. 885, Doc. 886, and Doc. 887], 1341 [Pg. 1341 includes portions of Doc. 931 and Doc. 932], 1365 [Pg. 1365 includes portions of Doc. 947 and Doc. 948], 1368 [Pg. 1368 is part of Doc. 951], 1432 [Pg. 1432 is part of Doc. 997], 1435–1436 [Pg. 1435 is part of Doc. 997], 1492 [Pg. 1492 is part of Doc. 1033]

U.N. Special Committee on Palestine, 1113 [Pg. 1113 is part of Doc. 744]

U.N. Truce Commission, 617 [Pg. 617 includes portions of Doc. 357, Doc. 358, and Doc. 359], 654 [Pg. 654 includes portions of Doc. 388 and Doc. 389], 869 [Pg. 869 is part of Doc. 556], 884–885 [Pgs. 884–885 include portions of Doc. 569, Doc. 570, and Doc. 571], 931 [Pg. 931 is part of Doc. 605]

U.N. Trusteeship Council: Belgian position, 1554 [Pg. 1554 is part of Doc. 1083]; French position, 1543–1544 [Pg. 1543 is part of Doc. 1078], 1554 [Pg. 1554 is part of Doc. 1083]; Israeli position, 1543–1544 [Pg. 1543 is part of Doc. 1078]; Jerusalem, responsibilities concerning, 794 [Pg. 794 is part of Doc. 506], 796 [Pg. 796 includes portions of Doc. 506 and Doc. 507], 951–952 [Pgs. 951–952 include portions of Doc. 612 and Doc. 613], 1194 [Pg. 1194 is part of Doc. 806], 1518 [Pg. 1518 includes portions of Doc. 1053, Doc. 1054, and Doc. 1055], 1520 [Pg. 1520 includes portions of Doc. 1055 and Doc. 1056], 1531–1532 [Pgs. 1531–1532 include portions of Doc. 1063, Doc. 1064, Doc. 1065, Doc. 1066, and Doc. 1067], 1536 [Pg. 1536 includes portions of Doc. 1070 and Doc. 1071], 1538–1539 [Pgs. 1538–1539 include portions of Doc. 1071, Doc. 1072, and Doc. 1073], 1544 [Pg. 1544 is part of Doc. 1078], 1553 [Pg. 1553 is part of Doc. 1083]; Mexican position, 1540 [Pg. 1540 includes portions of Doc. 1073 and Doc. 1074]; statute for Jerusalem, 1538–1539 [Pgs. 1538–1539 include portions of Doc. 1071, Doc. 1072, and Doc. 1073], 1543 [Pg. 1543 is part of Doc. 1078], 1547 [Pg. 1547 includes portions of Doc. 1079 and Doc. 1080], 1553–1555 [Pgs. 1553–1555 include portions of Doc. 1083 and Doc. 1084]; U.S. position, 1538–1539 [Pgs. 1538–1539 include portions of Doc. 1071, Doc. 1072, and Doc. 1073], 1553–1554 [Pg. 1553 is part of Doc. 1083]

U.S. arms embargo: Application of, 32 [Pg. 32 is part of Doc. 4], 42n [Pg. 42 is part of Doc. 4], 223 [Pg. 223 includes portions of Doc. 102 and Doc. 103], 661 [Pg. 661 includes portions of Doc. 392 and Doc. 393], 712 [Pg. 712 includes portions of Doc. 435 and Doc. 436], 757 [Pg. 757 includes portions of Doc. 474 and Doc. 475], 770 [Pg. 770 is part of Doc. 488], 843–844 [Pgs. 843–844 include portions of Doc. 534, Doc. 535, and Doc. 536], 850 [Pg. 850 is part of Doc. 540], 863–864 [Pgs. 863–864 include portions of Doc. 550, Doc. 551, and Doc. 552], 885 [Pg. 885 includes portions of Doc. 570 and Doc. 571], 1030n [Pg. 1030 includes portions of Doc. 670 and Doc. 671], 1078 [Pg. 1078 includes portions of Doc. 710 and Doc. 711], 1328 [Pg. 1328 includes portions of Doc. 921 and Doc. 922], 1341–1342 [Pgs. 1341–1342 include portions of Doc. 931, Doc. 932, and Doc. 933], 1524 [Pg. 1524 includes portions of Doc. 1059 and Doc. 1060], 1577 [Pg. 1577 includes portions of Doc. 1102 and Doc. 1103], 1579–1581 [Pgs. 1579–1581 include portions of Doc. 1104, Doc. 1105, Doc. 1106, and Doc. 1107], 1601 [Pg. 1601 is part of Doc. 1118]: lifting of, 58 [Pg. 58 is part of Doc. 10], 224–226 [Pgs. 224–226 include portions of Doc. 103 and Doc. 104], 1284 [Pg. 1284 includes portions of Doc. 886 and Doc. 887], 1365 [Pg. 1365 includes portions of Doc. 947 and Doc. 948], 1368–1369 [Pgs. 1368–1369 include portions of Doc. 951 and Doc. 952], 1405 [Pg. 1405 includes portions of Doc. 977 and Doc. 978], 1418–1419 [Pgs. 1418–1419 include portions of Doc. 984, Doc. 985, Doc. 986, and Doc. 987], 1436 [Pg. 1436 is part of Doc. 997], 1439 [Pg. 1439 is part of Doc. 997], 1490–1492 [Pgs. 1490–1492 include portions of Doc. 1031, Doc. 1032, and Doc. 1033], 1524 [Pg. 1524 includes portions of Doc. 1059 and Doc. 1060]

U.S. military training program for Israel and Arab states, proposals concerning, 863–864 [Pgs. 863–864 include portions of Doc. 550, Doc. 551, and Doc. 552], 1018 [Pg. 1018 includes portions of Doc. 662 and Doc. 663]

U.S. position, 64–66 [Pg. 64 is part of Doc. 12], 70 [Pg. 70 is part of Doc. 12], 110 [Pg. 110 is part of Doc. 24], 143 [Pg. 143 is part of Doc. 51], 168 [Pg. 168 includes portions of Doc. 72 and Doc. 73], 174 [Pg. 174 is part of Doc. 73], 177 [Pg. 177 is part of Doc. 74], 208 [Pg. 208 is part of Doc. 96], 223 [Pg. 223 includes portions of Doc. 102 and Doc. 103], 594–596 [Pgs. 594–596 include portions of Doc. 341, Doc. 342, and Doc. 343], 601–604 [Pgs. 601–604 include portions of Doc. 347, Doc. 348, Doc. 349, and Doc. 350], 614–615 [Pgs. 614–615 include portions of Doc. 355 and Doc. 356], 629 [Pg. 629 includes portions of Doc. 368 and Doc. 369], 640 [Pg. 640 includes portions of Doc. 375 and Doc. 376], 659–661 [Pgs. 659–661 include portions of Doc. 392 and Doc. 393], 666 [Pg. 666 includes portions of Doc. 396 and Doc. 397], 672–673 [Pg. 672 is part of Doc. 402], 677–679 [Pgs. 677–679 include portions of Doc. 404 and Doc. 405], 691–692 [Pgs. 691–692 include portions of Doc. 417 and Doc. 418], 694–695 [Pgs. 694–695 include portions of Doc. 419, Doc. 420, Doc. 421, and Doc. 422], 712–713 [Pgs. 712–713 include portions of Doc. 435, Doc. 436, Doc. 437, and Doc. 438], 741–744 [Pgs. 741–744 include portions of Doc. 458, Doc. 459, Doc. 460, Doc. 461, Doc. 462, and Doc. 463], 747–748 [Pgs. 747–748 include portions of Doc. 464, Doc. 465, and Doc. 466], 771–772 [Pgs. 771–772 include portions of Doc. 488, Doc. 489, and Doc. 490], 832 [Pg. 832 is part of Doc. 533], 873 [Pg. 873 includes portions of Doc. 560 and Doc. 561], 875 [Pg. 875 is part of Doc. 562], 878–881 [Pgs. 878–881 include portions of Doc. 563, Doc. 564, Doc. 565, and Doc. 566], 890–894 [Pgs. 890–894 include portions of Doc. 577 and Doc. 578], 902 [Pg. 902 includes portions of Doc. 586 and Doc. 587], 915–916 [Pgs. 915–916 include portions of Doc. 592, Doc. 593, and Doc. 594], 920 [Pg. 920 includes portions of Doc. 597 and Doc. 598], 927–928 [Pgs. 927–928 include portions of Doc. 602, Doc. 603, and Doc. 604], 962 [Pg. 962 includes portions of Doc. 621 and Doc. 622], 1014 [Pg. 1014 is part of Doc. 660], 1021–1022 [Pgs. 1021–1022 include portions of Doc. 664, Doc. 665, and Doc. 666], 1058–1063 [Pgs. 1058–1063 include portions of Doc. 695, Doc. 696, Doc. 697, and Doc. 698], 1072–1074 [Pgs. 1072–1074 include portions of Doc. 704, Doc. 705, and Doc. 706], 1099–1100 [Pgs. 1099–1100 include portions of Doc. 733, Doc. 734, and Doc. 735], 1107 [Pg. 1107 is part of Doc. 737], 1129–1130 [Pgs. 1129–1130 include portions of Doc. 756 and Doc. 757], 1144 [Pg. 1144 includes portions of Doc. 768 and Doc. 769], 1151 [Pg. 1151 is part of Doc. 772], 1153n [Pg. 1153 includes portions of Doc. 772 and Doc. 773], 1166–1167 [Pgs. 1166–1167 include portions of Doc. 785, Doc. 786, and Doc. 787], 1174–1177 [Pgs. 1174–1177 include portions of Doc. 789, Doc. 790, and Doc. 791], 1195–1196 [Pgs. 1195–1196 include portions of Doc. 806, Doc. 807, and Doc. 808], 1205 [Pg. 1205 is part of Doc. 813], 1223 [Pg. 1223 includes portions of Doc. 827 and Doc. 828], 1226 [Pg. 1226 includes portions of Doc. 830 and Doc. 831], 1228–1229 [Pgs. 1228–1229 include portions of Doc. 831, Doc. 832, and Doc. 833], 1248 [Pg. 1248 is part of Doc. 852], 1305–1308 [Pgs. 1305–1308 include portions of Doc. 904 and Doc. 905], 1310 [Pg. 1310 is part of Doc. 906], 1320–1321 [Pgs. 1320–1321 include portions of Doc. 913, Doc. 914, and Doc. 915], 1323 [Pg. 1323 includes portions of Doc. 916, Doc. 917, and Doc. 918], 1428–1430 [Pgs. 1428–1430 include portions of Doc. 995, Doc. 996, and Doc. 997], 1574 [Pg. 1574 includes portions of Doc. 1099 and Doc. 1100], 1614 [Pg. 1614 includes portions of Doc. 1120 and Doc. 1121], 1687 [Pg. 1687 includes portions of Doc. 1165 and Doc. 1166]

Yemeni position, 704 [Pg. 704 is part of Doc. 429], 715–716 [Pgs. 715–716 include portions of Doc. 439, Doc. 440, and Doc. 441], 721 [Pg. 721 is part of Doc. 446], 877 [Pg. 877 is part of Doc. 563], 1240 [Pg. 1240 includes portions of Doc. 845 and Doc. 846]

Palmer, Ely E., 1455 [Pg. 1455 includes portions of Doc. 1011 and Doc. 1012]

Palmer, George E., 1781 [Pg. 1781 is part of Doc. 1235]

Palmer, Joseph, 54n [Pg. 54 includes portions of Doc. 8 and Doc. 9], 59 [Pg. 59 includes portions of Doc. 10 and Doc. 11], 90 [Pg. 90 is part of Doc. 13], 142 [Pg. 142 includes portions of Doc. 50 and Doc. 51], 753 [Pg. 753 includes portions of Doc. 469 and Doc. 470]

Pandit, Mme. Vijaya Lakshmi, 1727 [Pg. 1727 is part of Doc. 1202], 1735–1736 [Pgs. 1735–1736 include portions of Doc. 1207 and Doc. 1208]

Papagos, Gen. Alexander, 234–235 [Pgs. 234–235 include portions of Doc. 107, Doc. 108, and Doc. 109], 237n [Pg. 237 is part of Doc. 111], 240n [Pg. 240 is part of Doc. 113], 241 [Pg. 241 is part of Doc. 114], 245n [Pg. 245 includes portions of Doc. 115, Doc. 116, and Doc. 117], 246–249 [Pgs. 246–249 include portions of Doc. 117 and Doc. 118], 256–257 [Pgs. 256–257 include portions of Doc. 121, Doc. 122, and Doc. 123], 268 [Pg. 268 is part of Doc. 132], 282–284 [Pg. 282 is part of Doc. 136], 286 [Pg. 286 is part of Doc. 138], 296 [Pg. 296 is part of Doc. 145], 309–311 [Pgs. 309–311 include portions of Doc. 150, Doc. 151, and Doc. 152], 314 [Pg. 314 includes portions of Doc. 153 and Doc. 154], 318 [Pg. 318 is part of Doc. 157], 346–347 [Pgs. 346–347 include portions of Doc. 173 and Doc. 174], 354 [Pg. 354 is part of Doc. 178], 375 [Pg. 375 is part of Doc. 194], 385 [Pg. 385 is part of Doc. 201], 401 [Pg. 401 includes portions of Doc. 213 and Doc. 214], 420n [Pg. 420 is part of Doc. 223], 428 [Pg. 428 includes portions of Doc. 230, Doc. 231, and Doc. 232], 440n [Pg. 440 is part of Doc. 242], 458–459 [Pgs. 458–459 include portions of Doc. 252 and Doc. 253], 464 [Pg. 464 is part of Doc. 257], 466 [Pg. 466 is part of Doc. 259]

Papandreou, George, 233–234 [Pgs. 233–234 include portions of Doc. 106 and Doc. 107]

Pasquet, Maurice, 1780 [Pg. 1780 is part of Doc. 1235]

Patel, 1727 [Pg. 1727 is part of Doc. 1202], 1770 [Pg. 1770 includes portions of Doc. 1225 and Doc. 1226]

Patrick, Sir Paul Joseph, 1689–1690 [Pgs. 1689–1690 include portions of Doc. 1166, Doc. 1167, Doc. 1168, and Doc. 1169]

Patterson, Jefferson, 104–105 [Pgs. 104–105 include portions of Doc. 19, Doc. 20, and Doc. 21], 186 [Pg. 186 is part of Doc. 81], 189–190 [Pg. 189 is part of Doc. 84], 192–194 [Pgs. 192–194 include portions of Doc. 86, Doc. 87, and Doc. 88], 220–222 [Pgs. 220–222 include portions of Doc. 98, Doc. 99, Doc. 100, and Doc. 101], 617–620 [Pgs. 617–620 include portions of Doc. 357, Doc. 358, Doc. 359, and Doc. 360], 629n [Pg. 629 includes portions of Doc. 368 and Doc. 369], 633n [Pg. 633 includes portions of Doc. 371 and Doc. 372], 666–667 [Pgs. 666–667 include portions of Doc. 396, Doc. 397, and Doc. 398], 706n [Pg. 706 is part of Doc. 430], 718–720 [Pgs. 718–720 include portions of Doc. 443, Doc. 444, and Doc. 445], 750–752 [Pgs. 750–752 include portions of Doc. 467, Doc. 468, and Doc. 469], 764–765 [Pgs. 764–765 include portions of Doc. 479, Doc. 480, and Doc. 481], 768–769 [Pgs. 768–769 include portions of Doc. 485, Doc. 486, and Doc. 487], 803–804 [Pgs. 803–804 include portions of Doc. 511, Doc. 512, Doc. 513, and Doc. 514], 966n [Pg. 966 includes portions of Doc. 625 and Doc. 626], 996 [Pg. 996 includes portions of Doc. 647 and Doc. 648], 1044–1045 [Pgs. 1044–1045 include portions of Doc. 682 and Doc. 683], 1117n [Pg. 1117 includes portions of Doc. 747 and Doc. 748], 1180 [Pg. 1180 is part of Doc. 793], 1188–1189 [Pgs. 1188–1189 include portions of Doc. 800, Doc. 801, and Doc. 802], 1195n [Pg. 1195 includes portions of Doc. 806 and Doc. 807], 1229n [Pg. 1229 includes portions of Doc. 832 and Doc. 833], 1243n [Pg. 1243 includes portions of Doc. 847 and Doc. 848], 1244 [Pg. 1244 is part of Doc. 848], 1322–1323 [Pgs. 1322–1323 include portions of Doc. 915, Doc. 916, Doc. 917, and Doc. 918], 1327–1328 [Pgs. 1327–1328 include portions of Doc. 919, Doc. 920, Doc. 921, and Doc. 922], 1373–1374 [Pgs. 1373–1374 include portions of Doc. 954 and Doc. 955]

Patton, Dr., 840 [Pg. 840 is part of Doc. 533]

Paul I., King of Greece, 227 [Pg. 227 is part of Doc. 105], 230 [Pg. 230 is part of Doc. 105], 233–238 [Pgs. 233–238 include portions of Doc. 106, Doc. 107, Doc. 108, Doc. 109, Doc. 110, Doc. 111, and Doc. 112], 240–241 [Pgs. 240–241 include portions of Doc. 113 and Doc. 114], 247–249 [Pgs. 247–249 include portions of Doc. 117 and Doc. 118], 256 [Pg. 256 includes portions of Doc. 121 and Doc. 122], 284n [Pg. 284 is part of Doc. 136], 285 [Pg. 285 includes portions of Doc. 136 and Doc. 137], 295–296 [Pgs. 295–296 include portions of Doc. 144 and Doc. 145], 309–312 [Pgs. 309–312 include portions of Doc. 150, Doc. 151, Doc. 152, and Doc. 153], 314–315 [Pgs. 314–315 include portions of Doc. 153, Doc. 154, and Doc. 155], 318 [Pg. 318 is part of Doc. 157], 362 [Pg. 362 is part of Doc. 185], 363n [Pg. 363 includes portions of Doc. 185 and Doc. 186], 378 [Pg. 378 includes portions of Doc. 195 and Doc. 196], 389 [Pg. 389 includes portions of Doc. 204, Doc. 205, and Doc. 206], 420n [Pg. 420 is part of Doc. 223], 450n [Pg. 450 is part of Doc. 247], 464 [Pg. 464 is part of Doc. 257], 466 [Pg. 466 is part of Doc. 259]

Peake, Sir Charles, 266n [Pg. 266 is part of Doc. 131], 363 [Pg. 363 includes portions of Doc. 185 and Doc. 186], 369–370 [Pgs. 369–370 include portions of Doc. 190, Doc. 191, and Doc. 192], 380 [Pg. 380 includes portions of Doc. 196, Doc. 197, and Doc. 198], 386n [Pg. 386 includes portions of Doc. 201 and Doc. 202]

Pearson, Drew, 323 [Pg. 323 includes portions of Doc. 161 and Doc. 162]

Pearson, Lester B., 417 [Pg. 417 includes portions of Doc. 220 and Doc. 221], 439 [Pg. 439 includes portions of Doc. 240 and Doc. 241]

Persian Gulf. see under Near and Middle East.

Persian Gulf Lighting Service, 106 [Pg. 106 is part of Doc. 21]

Peru, 159 [Pg. 159 is part of Doc. 66], 748 [Pg. 748 includes portions of Doc. 465 and Doc. 466]

Petroleum Development Qatar, 124 [Pg. 124 is part of Doc. 32]

Philippines, 45n [Pg. 45 includes portions of Doc. 4 and Doc. 5], 445 [Pg. 445 includes portions of Doc. 243 and Doc. 244], 552 [Pg. 552 is part of Doc. 316], 573 [Pg. 573 is part of Doc. 329], 1586 [Pg. 1586 is part of Doc. 1110], 1616 [Pg. 1616 includes portions of Doc. 1122 and Doc. 1123], 1806 [Pg. 1806 is part of Doc. 1241]

Pierce, Col. John R., 505 [Pg. 505 includes portions of Doc. 288 and Doc. 289], 527n [Pg. 527 includes portions of Doc. 306 and Doc. 307], 530 [Pg. 530 is part of Doc. 310]

Pinkerton, Lowell C., 168 [Pg. 168 includes portions of Doc. 72 and Doc. 73], 641–642 [Pgs. 641–642 include portions of Doc. 377, Doc. 378, and Doc. 379], 766–767 [Pgs. 766–767 include portions of Doc. 481, Doc. 482, Doc. 483, Doc. 484, and Doc. 485], 787n [Pg. 787 includes portions of Doc. 501 and Doc. 502], 856–859 [Pgs. 856–859 include portions of Doc. 544, Doc. 545, Doc. 546, and Doc. 547], 876–878 [Pgs. 876–878 include portions of Doc. 563 and Doc. 564], 883–884 [Pgs. 883–884 include portions of Doc. 568, Doc. 569, and Doc. 570], 887–888 [Pgs. 887–888 include portions of Doc. 573, Doc. 574, and Doc. 575], 894–897 [Pgs. 894–897 include portions of Doc. 577, Doc. 578, Doc. 579, Doc. 580, Doc. 581, and Doc. 582], 966n [Pg. 966 includes portions of Doc. 625 and Doc. 626], 1238 [Pg. 1238 includes portions of Doc. 840, Doc. 841, and Doc. 842], 1390n [Pg. 1390 includes portions of Doc. 966 and Doc. 967], 1393 [Pg. 1393 includes portions of Doc. 969 and Doc. 970], 1415–1417 [Pg. 1415 is part of Doc. 984], 1425–1426 [Pgs. 1425–1426 include portions of Doc. 993 and Doc. 994], 1442–1444 [Pgs. 1442–1444 include portions of Doc. 998, Doc. 999, and Doc. 1000], 1469–1470 [Pgs. 1469–1470 include portions of Doc. 1020, Doc. 1021, and Doc. 1022]

Pipinelis, Panayotis, 253 [Pg. 253 includes portions of Doc. 119, Doc. 120, and Doc. 121], 258 [Pg. 258 includes portions of Doc. 123 and Doc. 124], 267–268 [Pgs. 267–268 include portions of Doc. 131 and Doc. 132], 289 [Pg. 289 is part of Doc. 140], 293 [Pg. 293 is part of Doc. 143], 299 [Pg. 299 is part of Doc. 147], 311 [Pg. 311 includes portions of Doc. 151 and Doc. 152], 316n [Pg. 316 includes portions of Doc. 155 and Doc. 156], 322n [Pg. 322 includes portions of Doc. 159 and Doc. 160], 345–347 [Pgs. 345–347 include portions of Doc. 172, Doc. 173, and Doc. 174], 349 [Pg. 349 is part of Doc. 175], 370 [Pg. 370 includes portions of Doc. 191 and Doc. 192], 374 [Pg. 374 is part of Doc. 194], 375n [Pg. 375 is part of Doc. 194], 381–385 [Pgs. 381–385 include portions of Doc. 199, Doc. 200, and Doc. 201], 386n [Pg. 386 includes portions of Doc. 201 and Doc. 202], 388 [Pg. 388 is part of Doc. 204], 419–420 [Pgs. 419–420 include portions of Doc. 222 and Doc. 223], 424 [Pg. 424 is part of Doc. 227]

Platt, Edward G., 158n [Pg. 158 is part of Doc. 66],

Point Four program, 9 [Pg. 9 is part of Doc. 3], 52 [Pg. 52 is part of Doc. 8], 65 [Pg. 65 is part of Doc. 12], 67–68 [Pg. 67 is part of Doc. 12], 77–78 [Pg. 77 is part of Doc. 12], 173–176 [Pgs. 173–176 include portions of Doc. 73 and Doc. 74], 178 [Pg. 178 is part of Doc. 75], 467 [Pg. 467 is part of Doc. 260], 510 [Pg. 510 includes portions of Doc. 294 and Doc. 295], 525–526 [Pgs. 525–526 include portions of Doc. 304, Doc. 305, and Doc. 306], 536 [Pg. 536 is part of Doc. 312], 540 [Pg. 540 is part of Doc. 313], 559 [Pg. 559 is part of Doc. 320], 562 [Pg. 562 includes portions of Doc. 321 and Doc. 322], 566–567 [Pgs. 566–567 include portions of Doc. 325 and Doc. 326], 570 [Pg. 570 is part of Doc. 328], 587 [Pg. 587 is part of Doc. 336], 593 [Pg. 593 is part of Doc. 340], 792 [Pg. 792 is part of Doc. 505], 798 [Pg. 798 includes portions of Doc. 507 and Doc. 508], 807 [Pg. 807 is part of Doc. 515], 859 [Pg. 859 includes portions of Doc. 546 and Doc. 547], 898 [Pg. 898 includes portions of Doc. 582 and Doc. 583], 905–906 [Pgs. 905–906 include portions of Doc. 588, Doc. 589, and Doc. 590], 908 [Pg. 908 is part of Doc. 590], 937 [Pg. 937 is part of Doc. 608], 943n [Pg. 943 includes portions of Doc. 608 and Doc. 609], 987 [Pg. 987 is part of Doc. 640], 1014 [Pg. 1014 is part of Doc. 660], 1444 [Pg. 1444 includes portions of Doc. 999 and Doc. 1000], 1521–1522 [Pgs. 1521–1522 include portions of Doc. 1057 and Doc. 1058], 1587 [Pg. 1587 is part of Doc. 1110], 1600 [Pg. 1600 includes portions of Doc. 1117 and Doc. 1118], 1615 [Pg. 1615 includes portions of Doc. 1121 and Doc. 1122], 1666–1667 [Pg. 1666 is part of Doc. 1152], 1670 [Pg. 1670 includes portions of Doc. 1152 and Doc. 1153], 1713 [Pg. 1713 is part of Doc. 1189], 1793–1794 [Pg. 1793 is part of Doc. 1236]

Poland, 15 [Pg. 15 is part of Doc. 3], 274 [Pg. 274 is part of Doc. 133], 329 [Pg. 329 includes portions of Doc. 163 and Doc. 164], 340 [Pg. 340 is part of Doc. 170], 346 [Pg. 346 is part of Doc. 173], 348 [Pg. 348 is part of Doc. 175], 352 [Pg. 352 is part of Doc. 177], 430 [Pg. 430 is part of Doc. 233]

Policy Planning Staff of the Department of State, reports of, 31–45 [Pgs. 31–45 include portions of Doc. 3, Doc. 4, and Doc. 5], 235–236 [Pgs. 235–236 include portions of Doc. 107, Doc. 108, Doc. 109, and Doc. 110], 311 [Pg. 311 includes portions of Doc. 151 and Doc. 152], 412 [Pg. 412 includes portions of Doc. 216, Doc. 217, and Doc. 218], 1645 [Pg. 1645 is part of Doc. 1144]

Polk, Judd, 1673–1675 [Pgs. 1673–1675 include portions of Doc. 1155, Doc. 1156, and Doc. 1157], 1677–1679 [Pgs. 1677–1679 include portions of Doc. 1158 and Doc. 1159]

Popović, Vladimir, 380 [Pg. 380 includes portions of Doc. 196, Doc. 197, and Doc. 198]

Popper, David H., 399 [Pg. 399 includes portions of Doc. 211 and Doc. 212]

Porphyrogenis, Miltiades, 304 [Pg. 304 is part of Doc. 150], 331 [Pg. 331 is part of Doc. 165]

Porter, Paul R., 444 [Pg. 444 is part of Doc. 243], 1229 [Pg. 1229 includes portions of Doc. 832 and Doc. 833], 1231–1237 [Pgs. 1231–1237 include portions of Doc. 834, Doc. 835, Doc. 836, Doc. 837, Doc. 838, Doc. 839, and Doc. 840], 1245n [Pg. 1245 includes portions of Doc. 849 and Doc. 850], 1254–1256 [Pgs. 1254–1256 include portions of Doc. 857, Doc. 858, Doc. 859, Doc. 860, and Doc. 861], 1257n [Pg. 1257 includes portions of Doc. 861 and Doc. 862], 1260 [Pg. 1260 includes portions of Doc. 863 and Doc. 864], 1264 [Pg. 1264 includes portions of Doc. 866 and Doc. 867], 1266 [Pg. 1266 is part of Doc. 869], 1271–1273 [Pgs. 1271–1273 include portions of Doc. 872, Doc. 873, Doc. 874, Doc. 875, Doc. 876, and Doc. 877], 1276 [Pg. 1276 includes portions of Doc. 879, Doc. 880, and Doc. 881], 1281–1282 [Pgs. 1281–1282 include portions of Doc. 884 and Doc. 885], 1286–1289 [Pgs. 1286–1289 include portions of Doc. 888, Doc. 889, Doc. 890, and Doc. 891], 1290n [Pg. 1290 includes portions of Doc. 891 and Doc. 892], 1302 [Pg. 1302 includes portions of Doc. 900, Doc. 901, and Doc. 902], 1304n [Pg. 1304 is part of Doc. 903], 1310–1312 [Pgs. 1310–1312 include portions of Doc. 906 and Doc. 907], 1315–1316 [Pg. 1315 is part of Doc. 910], 1321n [Pg. 1321 includes portions of Doc. 913, Doc. 914, and Doc. 915], 1324–1325 [Pg. 1324 is part of Doc. 918], 1326n [Pg. 1326 includes portions of Doc. 918 and Doc. 919], 1329 [Pg. 1329 is part of Doc. 922], 1336n [Pg. 1336 is part of Doc. 928], 1338 [Pg. 1338 includes portions of Doc. 929 and Doc. 930], 1357 [Pg. 1357 includes portions of Doc. 940 and Doc. 941], 1369 [Pg. 1369 includes portions of Doc. 951 and Doc. 952], 1375 [Pg. 1375 includes portions of Doc. 956 and Doc. 957], 1388 [Pg. 1388 includes portions of Doc. 963, Doc. 964, and Doc. 965], 1455 [Pg. 1455 includes portions of Doc. 1011 and Doc. 1012]

Portugal, 233 [Pg. 233 includes portions of Doc. 106 and Doc. 107]

Potsdam Conference, 1945, 50 [Pg. 50 is part of Doc. 8]

Power, Thomas F., 851n [Pg. 851 includes portions of Doc. 541 and Doc. 542], 868–869 [Pgs. 868–869 include portions of Doc. 555 and Doc. 556], 1342n [Pg. 1342 includes portions of Doc. 932 and Doc. 933]

Prica, Srdja, 380 [Pg. 380 includes portions of Doc. 196, Doc. 197, and Doc. 198]

Price, Byron, 1422 [Pg. 1422 is part of Doc. 989]

Protopapadakis, Aristides, 245n [Pg. 245 includes portions of Doc. 115, Doc. 116, and Doc. 117]

Pryce, Capt. R. F., 1557 [Pg. 1557 is part of Doc. 1086]

Pyman, Gen., 200 [Pg. 200 is part of Doc. 91]

Qaru Island, 94–95 [Pgs. 94–95 include portions of Doc. 15 and Doc. 16]

Qatar, 83 [Pg. 83 is part of Doc. 12], 121–125 [Pgs. 121–125 include portions of Doc. 30, Doc. 31, Doc. 32, Doc. 33, and Doc. 34], 134–135 [Pgs. 134–135 include portions of Doc. 43, Doc. 44, and Doc. 45], 152 [Pg. 152 is part of Doc. 60]

Qavam, Ahmad, 521 [Pg. 521 is part of Doc. 302]

Qudsi, Nazim al-, 1416 [Pg. 1416 is part of Doc. 984], 1482n [Pg. 1482 includes portions of Doc. 1027 and Doc. 1028]

Quwatly. see Kuwatly.

Radford, Vice Adm. Arthur W., 1640 [Pg. 1640 includes portions of Doc. 1140 and Doc. 1141]

Rahim, Mohamed Kamil Abdul, 622 [Pg. 622 includes portions of Doc. 360, Doc. 361, Doc. 362, and Doc. 363], 693–695 [Pgs. 693–695 include portions of Doc. 419, Doc. 420, Doc. 421, and Doc. 422], 719n [Pg. 719 is part of Doc. 444], 725–727 [Pgs. 725–727 include portions of Doc. 449, Doc. 450, and Doc. 451], 731 [Pg. 731 includes portions of Doc. 453 and Doc. 454], 753–754 [Pgs. 753–754 include portions of Doc. 469, Doc. 470, and Doc. 471], 759 [Pg. 759 includes portions of Doc. 476 and Doc. 477], 1249 [Pg. 1249 includes portions of Doc. 852, Doc. 853, Doc. 854, and Doc. 855], 1486–1488 [Pgs. 1486–1488 include portions of Doc. 1029, Doc. 1030, and Doc. 1031], 1535 [Pg. 1535 includes portions of Doc. 1069 and Doc. 1070]

Rahmany, M. K. el, 699 [Pg. 699 includes portions of Doc. 425 and Doc. 426]

Rajagopalachari, Shri Chakravarti, 1739 [Pg. 1739 is part of Doc. 1209]

Rankin, Karl, 237n [Pg. 237 is part of Doc. 111], 292n [Pg. 292 includes portions of Doc. 142 and Doc. 143], 295–297 [Pgs. 295–297 include portions of Doc. 144, Doc. 145, and Doc. 146]

Ranković, Alexander, 251 [Pg. 251 is part of Doc. 119]

Rau, Sir Benegal Rama, 1761 [Pg. 1761 is part of Doc. 1220], 1768–1770 [Pgs. 1768–1770 include portions of Doc. 1224, Doc. 1225, and Doc. 1226], 1775 [Pg. 1775 includes portions of Doc. 1229, Doc. 1230, and Doc. 1231]

Ray, George W., 95–96 [Pgs. 95–96 include portions of Doc. 16 and Doc. 17], 98–103 [Pgs. 98–103 include portions of Doc. 17 and Doc. 18], 105–107 [Pgs. 105–107 include portions of Doc. 20, Doc. 21, and Doc. 22]

Raynor, G. Hadyn, 774 [Pg. 774 includes portions of Doc. 490 and Doc. 491]

Razmara, Maj. Gen. Ali, 473 [Pg. 473 is part of Doc. 263], 475 [Pg. 475 includes portions of Doc. 264 and Doc. 265], 487–488 [Pgs. 487–488 include portions of Doc. 274, Doc. 275, and Doc. 276], 495–496 [Pgs. 495–496 include portions of Doc. 279, Doc. 280, and Doc. 281], 505 [Pg. 505 includes portions of Doc. 288 and Doc. 289], 515 [Pg. 515 is part of Doc. 298], 518–519 [Pgs. 518–519 include portions of Doc. 300, Doc. 301, and Doc. 302], 523n [Pg. 523 includes portions of Doc. 303 and Doc. 304], 526–527 [Pgs. 526–527 include portions of Doc. 305, Doc. 306, and Doc. 307], 529n [Pg. 529 includes portions of Doc. 309 and Doc. 310], 530 [Pg. 530 is part of Doc. 310]

Rebus sic stantibus doctrine, 504 [Pg. 504 includes portions of Doc. 287 and Doc. 288]

Recognition questions, 261 [Pg. 261 is part of Doc. 126], 615 [Pg. 615 includes portions of Doc. 355 and Doc. 356], 648 [Pg. 648 is part of Doc. 383], 673–674 [Pg. 673 is part of Doc. 402], 676 [Pg. 676 is part of Doc. 403], 680 [Pg. 680 includes portions of Doc. 406 and Doc. 407], 691 [Pg. 691 includes portions of Doc. 417 and Doc. 418], 693–696 [Pgs. 693–696 include portions of Doc. 419, Doc. 420, Doc. 421, Doc. 422, and Doc. 423], 702–703 [Pgs. 702–703 include portions of Doc. 427, Doc. 428, and Doc. 429], 711–714 [Pgs. 711–714 include portions of Doc. 434, Doc. 435, Doc. 436, Doc. 437, Doc. 438, and Doc. 439], 715n [Pg. 715 includes portions of Doc. 439 and Doc. 440], 719 [Pg. 719 is part of Doc. 444], 722 [Pg. 722 includes portions of Doc. 446 and Doc. 447], 758–759 [Pgs. 758–759 include portions of Doc. 475, Doc. 476, and Doc. 477], 769 [Pg. 769 includes portions of Doc. 486 and Doc. 487], 957 [Pg. 957 includes portions of Doc. 616 and Doc. 617], 1002 [Pg. 1002 is part of Doc. 652], 1009 [Pg. 1009 is part of Doc. 659], 1011 [Pg. 1011 is part of Doc. 659], 1432–1433 [Pg. 1432 is part of Doc. 997], 1630–1637 [Pgs. 1630–1637 include portions of Doc. 1132, Doc. 1133, Doc. 1134, Doc. 1135, Doc. 1136, Doc. 1137, and Doc. 1138], 1668 [Pg. 1668 is part of Doc. 1152], 1752 [Pg. 1752 includes portions of Doc. 1216 and Doc. 1217], 1755–1756 [Pg. 1755 is part of Doc. 1217]

Reconstruction Finance Corporation, 665 [Pg. 665 includes portions of Doc. 394 and Doc. 395], 870n [Pg. 870 is part of Doc. 557], 899 [Pg. 899 includes portions of Doc. 583, Doc. 584, and Doc. 585]

Reedman, John, 689–690 [Pgs. 689–690 include portions of Doc. 415 and Doc. 416], 755–756 [Pgs. 755–756 include portions of Doc. 471, Doc. 472, Doc. 473, and Doc. 474], 1132–1133 [Pgs. 1132–1133 include portions of Doc. 758 and Doc. 759]

Rendis, Constantine, 239n [Pg. 239 is part of Doc. 112], 245n [Pg. 245 includes portions of Doc. 115, Doc. 116, and Doc. 117], 310 [Pg. 310 is part of Doc. 151], 358–359 [Pgs. 358–359 include portions of Doc. 181 and Doc. 182], 428 [Pg. 428 includes portions of Doc. 230, Doc. 231, and Doc. 232], 465 [Pg. 465 includes portions of Doc. 257, Doc. 258, and Doc. 259]

Rhmazi, Mahmud, 955 [Pg. 955 is part of Doc. 615]

Riaz, Mamdoun, 197n [Pg. 197 includes portions of Doc. 89 and Doc. 90]

Richmond, John, 780 [Pg. 780 includes portions of Doc. 494 and Doc. 495]

Rifai, Samir Pasha, 609 [Pg. 609 includes portions of Doc. 352 and Doc. 353], 647–650 [Pgs. 647–650 include portions of Doc. 382, Doc. 383, Doc. 384, and Doc. 385], 667 [Pg. 667 includes portions of Doc. 397 and Doc. 398], 882 [Pg. 882 is part of Doc. 567], 1483 [Pg. 1483 includes portions of Doc. 1028 and Doc. 1029], 1513–1514 [Pgs. 1513–1514 include portions of Doc. 1049 and Doc. 1050], 1517–1520 [Pgs. 1517–1520 include portions of Doc. 1053, Doc. 1054, Doc. 1055, and Doc. 1056], 1533–1534 [Pgs. 1533–1534 include portions of Doc. 1067, Doc. 1068, and Doc. 1069], 1545–1547 [Pgs. 1545–1547 include portions of Doc. 1079 and Doc. 1080], 1558–1562 [Pgs. 1558–1562 include portions of Doc. 1086, Doc. 1087, Doc. 1088, Doc. 1089, Doc. 1090, and Doc. 1091]

Riley, Brig. Gen. William E., 597 [Pg. 597 is part of Doc. 344], 622 [Pg. 622 includes portions of Doc. 360, Doc. 361, Doc. 362, and Doc. 363], 697 [Pg. 697 includes portions of Doc. 423 and Doc. 424], 699–700 [Pgs. 699–700 include portions of Doc. 425, Doc. 426, and Doc. 427], 793 [Pg. 793 is part of Doc. 506], 810 [Pg. 810 includes portions of Doc. 517 and Doc. 518], 845n [Pg. 845 is part of Doc. 536], 846 [Pg. 846 includes portions of Doc. 536 and Doc. 537], 867 [Pg. 867 is part of Doc. 554], 931 [Pg. 931 is part of Doc. 605], 977n [Pg. 977 includes portions of Doc. 633 and Doc. 634], 980 [Pg. 980 includes portions of Doc. 637 and Doc. 638], 1008 [Pg. 1008 includes portions of Doc. 657 and Doc. 658], 1030–1031 [Pgs. 1030–1031 include portions of Doc. 670 and Doc. 671], 1046 [Pg. 1046 includes portions of Doc. 684 and Doc. 685], 1053 [Pg. 1053 includes portions of Doc. 689 and Doc. 690], 1055 [Pg. 1055 includes portions of Doc. 690 and Doc. 691], 1063 [Pg. 1063 includes portions of Doc. 697 and Doc. 698], 1098 [Pg. 1098 is part of Doc. 732], 1112 [Pg. 1112 includes portions of Doc. 742, Doc. 743, and Doc. 744], 1114 [Pg. 1114 includes portions of Doc. 744 and Doc. 745], 1118 [Pg. 1118 is part of Doc. 748], 1120n [Pg. 1120 is part of Doc. 749], 1121 [Pg. 1121 is part of Doc. 750], 1127 [Pg. 1127 includes portions of Doc. 754 and Doc. 755], 1131 [Pg. 1131 includes portions of Doc. 757 and Doc. 758], 1133 [Pg. 1133 includes portions of Doc. 758 and Doc. 759], 1153–1154 [Pgs. 1153–1154 include portions of Doc. 772, Doc. 773, and Doc. 774], 1157n [Pg. 1157 includes portions of Doc. 777 and Doc. 778], 1158–1159 [Pgs. 1158–1159 include portions of Doc. 778, Doc. 779, and Doc. 780], 1163 [Pg. 1163 includes portions of Doc. 782 and Doc. 783], 1168 [Pg. 1168 includes portions of Doc. 787 and Doc. 788], 1178–1179 [Pgs. 1178–1179 include portions of Doc. 791, Doc. 792, and Doc. 793], 1182–1184 [Pgs. 1182–1184 include portions of Doc. 794, Doc. 795, and Doc. 796], 1206n [Pg. 1206 includes portions of Doc. 814 and Doc. 815], 1216 [Pg. 1216 is part of Doc. 823], 1225 [Pg. 1225 includes portions of Doc. 829 and Doc. 830], 1231 [Pg. 1231 includes portions of Doc. 834 and Doc. 835], 1233 [Pg. 1233 includes portions of Doc. 836 and Doc. 837], 1235 [Pg. 1235 includes portions of Doc. 838 and Doc. 839], 1240 [Pg. 1240 includes portions of Doc. 845 and Doc. 846], 1242 [Pg. 1242 includes portions of Doc. 846 and Doc. 847], 1273 [Pg. 1273 includes portions of Doc. 876 and Doc. 877], 1278 [Pg. 1278 is part of Doc. 882], 1309n [Pg. 1309 is part of Doc. 905], 1314 [Pg. 1314 includes portions of Doc. 908 and Doc. 909], 1398–1399 [Pgs. 1398–1399 include portions of Doc. 974 and Doc. 975], 1407 [Pg. 1407 includes portions of Doc. 978 and Doc. 979], 1420–1421 [Pgs. 1420–1421 include portions of Doc. 987 and Doc. 988], 1444n [Pg. 1444 includes portions of Doc. 999 and Doc. 1000], 1446 [Pg. 1446 is part of Doc. 1001], 1448–1449 [Pgs. 1448–1449 include portions of Doc. 1002, Doc. 1003, Doc. 1004, and Doc. 1005], 1471n [Pg. 1471 includes portions of Doc. 1023 and Doc. 1024], 1483–1485 [Pgs. 1483–1485 include portions of Doc. 1028 and Doc. 1029], 1508n [Pg. 1508 includes portions of Doc. 1042 and Doc. 1043], 1512 [Pg. 1512 includes portions of Doc. 1047, Doc. 1048, and Doc. 1049], 1528 [Pg. 1528 includes portions of Doc. 1061 and Doc. 1062]

Ritchie, Brig. Gen. William L., 1640n [Pg. 1640 includes portions of Doc. 1140 and Doc. 1141]

Roberts, Randolph, 1512 [Pg. 1512 includes portions of Doc. 1047, Doc. 1048, and Doc. 1049]

Robertson, David A., 48n [Pg. 48 includes portions of Doc. 6 and Doc. 7], 55–59 [Pgs. 55–59 include portions of Doc. 9, Doc. 10, and Doc. 11], 1625 [Pg. 1625 is part of Doc. 1129], 1627 [Pg. 1627 includes portions of Doc. 1129 and Doc. 1130]

Rockefeller, Nelson, 840 [Pg. 840 is part of Doc. 533]

Rockefeller, Winthrop, 840 [Pg. 840 is part of Doc. 533]

Rockwell, Stuart W., 633–635 [Pgs. 633–635 include portions of Doc. 371 and Doc. 372], 645 [Pg. 645 is part of Doc. 382], 670n [Pg. 670 includes portions of Doc. 400 and Doc. 401], 693–694 [Pgs. 693–694 include portions of Doc. 419, Doc. 420, and Doc. 421], 708 [Pg. 708 includes portions of Doc. 431 and Doc. 432], 725n [Pg. 725 includes portions of Doc. 449 and Doc. 450], 774 [Pg. 774 includes portions of Doc. 490 and Doc. 491], 783–784 [Pgs. 783–784 include portions of Doc. 496, Doc. 497, and Doc. 498], 853 [Pg. 853 includes portions of Doc. 543 and Doc. 544], 856n [Pg. 856 includes portions of Doc. 544 and Doc. 545], 878n [Pg. 878 includes portions of Doc. 563 and Doc. 564], 1083n [Pg. 1083 is part of Doc. 717], 1148 [Pg. 1148 is part of Doc. 772], 1238–1239 [Pgs. 1238–1239 include portions of Doc. 840, Doc. 841, Doc. 842, Doc. 843, and Doc. 844], 1260 [Pg. 1260 includes portions of Doc. 863 and Doc. 864], 1284n [Pg. 1284 includes portions of Doc. 886 and Doc. 887], 1298–1301 [Pgs. 1298–1301 include portions of Doc. 897, Doc. 898, Doc. 899, and Doc. 900], 1313–1314 [Pgs. 1313–1314 include portions of Doc. 907, Doc. 908, and Doc. 909], 1319 [Pg. 1319 includes portions of Doc. 912 and Doc. 913], 1321–1322 [Pgs. 1321–1322 include portions of Doc. 913, Doc. 914, Doc. 915, and Doc. 916], 1336–1338 [Pgs. 1336–1338 include portions of Doc. 928, Doc. 929, and Doc. 930], 1349–1350 [Pgs. 1349–1350 include portions of Doc. 935, Doc. 936, and Doc. 937], 1354–1356 [Pgs. 1354–1356 include portions of Doc. 937, Doc. 938, Doc. 939, and Doc. 940], 1361–1362 [Pgs. 1361–1362 include portions of Doc. 944, Doc. 945, Doc. 946, and Doc. 947], 1375 [Pg. 1375 includes portions of Doc. 956 and Doc. 957], 1387–1388 [Pgs. 1387–1388 include portions of Doc. 962, Doc. 963, Doc. 964, and Doc. 965], 1465 [Pg. 1465 includes portions of Doc. 1018 and Doc. 1019], 1495 [Pg. 1495 includes portions of Doc. 1035 and Doc. 1036], 1497 [Pg. 1497 is part of Doc. 1036], 1543–1544 [Pg. 1543 is part of Doc. 1078]

Rodopoulas, Konstantinos, 310 [Pg. 310 is part of Doc. 151]

Romania, 15 [Pg. 15 is part of Doc. 3], 266 [Pg. 266 is part of Doc. 131], 328 [Pg. 328 is part of Doc. 163], 342 [Pg. 342 is part of Doc. 171], 406 [Pg. 406 is part of Doc. 215], 775 [Pg. 775 includes portions of Doc. 491 and Doc. 492], 1668 [Pg. 1668 is part of Doc. 1152]

Romulo, Brig. Gen. Carlos P., 417 [Pg. 417 includes portions of Doc. 220 and Doc. 221], 439 [Pg. 439 includes portions of Doc. 240 and Doc. 241], 452 [Pg. 452 is part of Doc. 248], 457 [Pg. 457 is part of Doc. 251], 468–470 [Pg. 468 is part of Doc. 261]

Roosevelt, Franklin D., 516n [Pg. 516 includes portions of Doc. 298 and Doc. 299], 587 [Pg. 587 is part of Doc. 336], 592 [Pg. 592 includes portions of Doc. 339 and Doc. 340], 790 [Pg. 790 is part of Doc. 505]

Roosevelt, Franklin D., Jr., 1083n [Pg. 1083 is part of Doc. 717]

Roosevelt, Kermit, 840 [Pg. 840 is part of Doc. 533]

Root, John F., 1476–1481 [Pgs. 1476–1481 include portions of Doc. 1025, Doc. 1026, and Doc. 1027]

Rosenson, Alexander M., 1799 [Pg. 1799 is part of Doc. 1238]

Ross, John C., 399 [Pg. 399 includes portions of Doc. 211 and Doc. 212], 609–610 [Pgs. 609–610 include portions of Doc. 352 and Doc. 353], 622–625 [Pgs. 622–625 include portions of Doc. 360, Doc. 361, Doc. 362, Doc. 363, Doc. 364, and Doc. 365], 629n [Pg. 629 includes portions of Doc. 368 and Doc. 369], 643n [Pg. 643 includes portions of Doc. 379 and Doc. 380], 727 [Pg. 727 includes portions of Doc. 450 and Doc. 451], 756 [Pg. 756 includes portions of Doc. 472, Doc. 473, and Doc. 474], 869 [Pg. 869 is part of Doc. 556], 1096n [Pg. 1096 includes portions of Doc. 730 and Doc. 731], 1114 [Pg. 1114 includes portions of Doc. 744 and Doc. 745], 1116n [Pg. 1116 is part of Doc. 747], 1131–1133 [Pgs. 1131–1133 include portions of Doc. 757, Doc. 758, and Doc. 759], 1213n [Pg. 1213 includes portions of Doc. 820 and Doc. 821], 1253 [Pg. 1253 includes portions of Doc. 856 and Doc. 857], 1254n [Pg. 1254 includes portions of Doc. 857 and Doc. 858], 1255 [Pg. 1255 includes portions of Doc. 858 and Doc. 859], 1269–1271 [Pgs. 1269–1271 include portions of Doc. 871, Doc. 872, Doc. 873, and Doc. 874], 1274–1275 [Pgs. 1274–1275 include portions of Doc. 877, Doc. 878, and Doc. 879], 1280 [Pg. 1280 includes portions of Doc. 882 and Doc. 883], 1291n [Pg. 1291 includes portions of Doc. 892 and Doc. 893], 1342n [Pg. 1342 includes portions of Doc. 932 and Doc. 933], 1358 [Pg. 1358 includes portions of Doc. 941, Doc. 942, and Doc. 943], 1409 [Pg. 1409 includes portions of Doc. 980 and Doc. 981], 1411 [Pg. 1411 is part of Doc. 981], 1514 [Pg. 1514 includes portions of Doc. 1049 and Doc. 1050], 1520 [Pg. 1520 includes portions of Doc. 1055 and Doc. 1056], 1530 [Pg. 1530 includes portions of Doc. 1065 and Doc. 1066], 1536n [Pg. 1536 includes portions of Doc. 1070 and Doc. 1071]

Rotstein, F. A., 504 [Pg. 504 includes portions of Doc. 287 and Doc. 288]

Rountree, William M., 292n [Pg. 292 includes portions of Doc. 142 and Doc. 143], 315 [Pg. 315 includes portions of Doc. 154 and Doc. 155], 318 [Pg. 318 is part of Doc. 157], 434 [Pg. 434 includes portions of Doc. 236 and Doc. 237], 468n [Pg. 468 is part of Doc. 261]

Royall, Kenneth C., 39–40 [Pg. 39 is part of Doc. 4], 238–239 [Pgs. 238–239 include portions of Doc. 111 and Doc. 112], 246 [Pg. 246 is part of Doc. 117], 372 [Pg. 372 is part of Doc. 193], 865 [Pg. 865 is part of Doc. 552], 1087 [Pg. 1087 includes portions of Doc. 721 and Doc. 722], 1640–1641 [Pgs. 1640–1641 include portions of Doc. 1140 and Doc. 1141]

Ruhr, proposed Four-Power control over the, 50 [Pg. 50 is part of Doc. 8]

Rumbold, Sir Horace Anthony, 370–371 [Pgs. 370–371 include portions of Doc. 191, Doc. 192, and Doc. 193], 416–417 [Pgs. 416–417 include portions of Doc. 219, Doc. 220, and Doc. 221], 1670–1671 [Pgs. 1670–1671 include portions of Doc. 1152, Doc. 1153, and Doc. 1154]

Rusk, Dean: Egyptian participation in Anglo-American military staff talks, 203–204 [Pg. 203 is part of Doc. 92]

Greek question, 301–309 [Pgs. 301–309 include portions of Doc. 148, Doc. 149, Doc. 150, and Doc. 151], 320–325 [Pgs. 320–325 include portions of Doc. 158, Doc. 159, Doc. 160, Doc. 161, Doc. 162, and Doc. 163], 329–333 [Pgs. 329–333 include portions of Doc. 163, Doc. 164, Doc. 165, and Doc. 166], 336 [Pg. 336 is part of Doc. 167], 338 [Pg. 338 is part of Doc. 169], 341 [Pg. 341 includes portions of Doc. 170 and Doc. 171], 343n [Pg. 343 is part of Doc. 171], 344n [Pg. 344 includes portions of Doc. 171 and Doc. 172], 347 [Pg. 347 includes portions of Doc. 173 and Doc. 174], 348n [Pg. 348 is part of Doc. 175], 356 [Pg. 356 is part of Doc. 180], 365n [Pg. 365 is part of Doc. 188], 389–392 [Pgs. 389–392 include portions of Doc. 204, Doc. 205, Doc. 206, and Doc. 207], 401–403 [Pgs. 401–403 include portions of Doc. 213 and Doc. 214], 408 [Pg. 408 is part of Doc. 215]

Near and Middle East: Anglo-American talks regarding, 60 [Pg. 60 includes portions of Doc. 11 and Doc. 12]; U.S. policy, 165n [Pg. 165 is part of Doc. 71], 167n [Pg. 167 includes portions of Doc. 71 and Doc. 72]

Palestine question, 609 [Pg. 609 includes portions of Doc. 352 and Doc. 353], 610n [Pg. 610 is part of Doc. 353], 622 [Pg. 622 includes portions of Doc. 360, Doc. 361, Doc. 362, and Doc. 363], 624 [Pg. 624 is part of Doc. 364], 653–654 [Pgs. 653–654 include portions of Doc. 387, Doc. 388, and Doc. 389], 674 [Pg. 674 is part of Doc. 402], 702n [Pg. 702 includes portions of Doc. 427 and Doc. 428], 709 [Pg. 709 is part of Doc. 432], 742n [Pg. 742 includes portions of Doc. 459 and Doc. 460], 826n [Pg. 826 is part of Doc. 532], 869 [Pg. 869 is part of Doc. 556], 875 [Pg. 875 is part of Doc. 562], 878n [Pg. 878 includes portions of Doc. 563 and Doc. 564], 880–881 [Pg. 880 is part of Doc. 566], 886n [Pg. 886 includes portions of Doc. 572 and Doc. 573], 890 [Pg. 890 is part of Doc. 577], 893 [Pg. 893 is part of Doc. 577], 943n [Pg. 943 includes portions of Doc. 608 and Doc. 609], 948 [Pg. 948 includes portions of Doc. 611 and Doc. 612], 952 [Pg. 952 includes portions of Doc. 612 and Doc. 613], 1058 [Pg. 1058 includes portions of Doc. 695 and Doc. 696], 1069 [Pg. 1069 includes portions of Doc. 702 and Doc. 703], 1071 [Pg. 1071 includes portions of Doc. 703 and Doc. 704], 1081 [Pg. 1081 is part of Doc. 715], 1083n [Pg. 1083 is part of Doc. 717], 1085 [Pg. 1085 includes portions of Doc. 719 and Doc. 720], 1094 [Pg. 1094 includes portions of Doc. 728 and Doc. 729], 1107 [Pg. 1107 is part of Doc. 737], 1137 [Pg. 1137 includes portions of Doc. 762 and Doc. 763], 1139n [Pg. 1139 is part of Doc. 763], 1148 [Pg. 1148 is part of Doc. 772], 1164n [Pg. 1164 includes portions of Doc. 783 and Doc. 784], 1165–1167 [Pgs. 1165–1167 include portions of Doc. 784, Doc. 785, Doc. 786, and Doc. 787], 1174 [Pg. 1174 includes portions of Doc. 789 and Doc. 790], 1177–1178 [Pgs. 1177–1178 include portions of Doc. 790, Doc. 791, and Doc. 792], 1189–1190 [Pgs. 1189–1190 include portions of Doc. 801 and Doc. 802], 1196 [Pg. 1196 is part of Doc. 808], 1218n [Pg. 1218 includes portions of Doc. 825 and Doc. 826], 1235n [Pg. 1235 includes portions of Doc. 838 and Doc. 839], 1252n [Pg. 1252 includes portions of Doc. 855 and Doc. 856], 1261–1264 [Pgs. 1261–1264 include portions of Doc. 865, Doc. 866, and Doc. 867], 1269 [Pg. 1269 includes portions of Doc. 871 and Doc. 872], 1272n [Pg. 1272 includes portions of Doc. 874 and Doc. 875], 1277–1280 [Pgs. 1277–1280 include portions of Doc. 881, Doc. 882, and Doc. 883], 1288n [Pg. 1288 is part of Doc. 890], 1312 [Pg. 1312 is part of Doc. 907], 1315n [Pg. 1315 is part of Doc. 910], 1332 [Pg. 1332 is part of Doc. 924], 1339 [Pg. 1339 includes portions of Doc. 930 and Doc. 931], 1366–1367 [Pgs. 1366–1367 include portions of Doc. 949, Doc. 950, and Doc. 951], 1396–1397 [Pgs. 1396–1397 include portions of Doc. 972 and Doc. 973], 1399n [Pg. 1399 includes portions of Doc. 974 and Doc. 975], 1403 [Pg. 1403 includes portions of Doc. 975 and Doc. 976], 1409–1412 [Pgs. 1409–1412 include portions of Doc. 980 and Doc. 981], 1419 [Pg. 1419 includes portions of Doc. 986 and Doc. 987], 1441 [Pg. 1441 is part of Doc. 998], 1524 [Pg. 1524 includes portions of Doc. 1059 and Doc. 1060], 1536–1538 [Pgs. 1536–1538 include portions of Doc. 1070, Doc. 1071, and Doc. 1072], 1555 [Pg. 1555 includes portions of Doc. 1083 and Doc. 1084]

Palestinian refugees, 788 [Pg. 788 is part of Doc. 503], 818 [Pg. 818 includes portions of Doc. 524, Doc. 525, and Doc. 526], 827 [Pg. 827 is part of Doc. 533], 842n [Pg. 842 includes portions of Doc. 533 and Doc. 534], 918 [Pg. 918 includes portions of Doc. 595 and Doc. 596], 1005 [Pg. 1005 includes portions of Doc. 655 and Doc. 656], 1029 [Pg. 1029 includes portions of Doc. 668 and Doc. 669], 1051–1053 [Pgs. 1051–1053 include portions of Doc. 688, Doc. 689, and Doc. 690], 1150 [Pg. 1150 is part of Doc. 772]

Saudi Arabia, U.S. relations with, 1616 [Pg. 1616 includes portions of Doc. 1122 and Doc. 1123]

Turkey, U.S. relations with, 1681n [Pg. 1681 is part of Doc. 1160], 1685 [Pg. 1685 includes portions of Doc. 1162, Doc. 1163, and Doc. 1164]

Visit by the Shah of Iran to the United States, 568 [Pg. 568 includes portions of Doc. 326 and Doc. 327], 588–589 [Pgs. 588–589 include portions of Doc. 336, Doc. 337, and Doc. 338]

Saadawi, Boshir Bey, 76 [Pg. 76 is part of Doc. 12]

Sabini, John A., 1780 [Pg. 1780 is part of Doc. 1235]

Sadak, Necmettin, 1640 [Pg. 1640 includes portions of Doc. 1140 and Doc. 1141], 1643–1644 [Pgs. 1643–1644 include portions of Doc. 1142, Doc. 1143, and Doc. 1144], 1646–1654 [Pgs. 1646–1654 include portions of Doc. 1144, Doc. 1145, Doc. 1146, Doc. 1147, and Doc. 1148], 1656–1659 [Pgs. 1656–1659 include portions of Doc. 1149, Doc. 1150, and Doc. 1151], 1662–1663 [Pg. 1662 is part of Doc. 1152], 1670 [Pg. 1670 includes portions of Doc. 1152 and Doc. 1153], 1673 [Pg. 1673 is part of Doc. 1155], 1685 [Pg. 1685 includes portions of Doc. 1162, Doc. 1163, and Doc. 1164]

Sadchikov, I. V., 480–481 [Pgs. 480–481 include portions of Doc. 269, Doc. 270, and Doc. 271], 490 [Pg. 490 is part of Doc. 277], 492–494 [Pgs. 492–494 include portions of Doc. 277, Doc. 278, and Doc. 279], 495n [Pg. 495 includes portions of Doc. 279 and Doc. 280], 496 [Pg. 496 includes portions of Doc. 280 and Doc. 281], 498 [Pg. 498 is part of Doc. 282], 509 [Pg. 509 is part of Doc. 294]

Saed, Mohammad, 121 [Pg. 121 includes portions of Doc. 30 and Doc. 31], 128 [Pg. 128 includes portions of Doc. 36 and Doc. 37], 150 [Pg. 150 includes portions of Doc. 57 and Doc. 58], 509–516 [Pgs. 509–516 include portions of Doc. 294, Doc. 295, Doc. 296, Doc. 297, Doc. 298, and Doc. 299], 521 [Pg. 521 is part of Doc. 302], 523–526 [Pgs. 523–526 include portions of Doc. 303, Doc. 304, Doc. 305, and Doc. 306], 528–529 [Pgs. 528–529 include portions of Doc. 308, Doc. 309, and Doc. 310], 542 [Pg. 542 includes portions of Doc. 313 and Doc. 314]

Saint Aubin, Mr., 836 [Pg. 836 is part of Doc. 533]

Saleh, Mohamed, 510 [Pg. 510 includes portions of Doc. 294 and Doc. 295], 667 [Pg. 667 includes portions of Doc. 397 and Doc. 398]

Salt, Barbara, 1476 [Pg. 1476 includes portions of Doc. 1025 and Doc. 1026]

Sandifer, Durward V., 948n [Pg. 948 includes portions of Doc. 611 and Doc. 612], 1028n [Pg. 1028 includes portions of Doc. 667 and Doc. 668], 1198–1202 [Pgs. 1198–1202 include portions of Doc. 810, Doc. 811, and Doc. 812], 1272n [Pg. 1272 includes portions of Doc. 874 and Doc. 875], 1280n [Pg. 1280 includes portions of Doc. 882 and Doc. 883], 1295–1297 [Pgs. 1295–1297 include portions of Doc. 896 and Doc. 897], 1399n [Pg. 1399 includes portions of Doc. 974 and Doc. 975], 1403n [Pg. 1403 includes portions of Doc. 975 and Doc. 976], 1465 [Pg. 1465 includes portions of Doc. 1018 and Doc. 1019], 1467 [Pg. 1467 is part of Doc. 1019], 1500n [Pg. 1500 is part of Doc. 1038]

Sands, William L., 147 [Pg. 147 includes portions of Doc. 54 and Doc. 55]

Sanger, Richard H., 91–93 [Pgs. 91–93 include portions of Doc. 14 and Doc. 15], 96–103 [Pgs. 96–103 include portions of Doc. 17 and Doc. 18], 105–107 [Pgs. 105–107 include portions of Doc. 20, Doc. 21, and Doc. 22], 120n [Pg. 120 includes portions of Doc. 29 and Doc. 30], 122–124 [Pgs. 122–124 include portions of Doc. 31 and Doc. 32], 132n [Pg. 132 is part of Doc. 41], 136–137 [Pgs. 136–137 include portions of Doc. 45, Doc. 46, Doc. 47, and Doc. 48], 158n [Pg. 158 is part of Doc. 66], 1585 [Pg. 1585 is part of Doc. 1110], 1616n [Pg. 1616 includes portions of Doc. 1122 and Doc. 1123]

Sarper, Selim, 298 [Pg. 298 includes portions of Doc. 146 and Doc. 147], 316–317 [Pgs. 316–317 include portions of Doc. 155 and Doc. 156], 322 [Pg. 322 includes portions of Doc. 159 and Doc. 160], 439 [Pg. 439 includes portions of Doc. 240 and Doc. 241], 913 [Pg. 913 is part of Doc. 592]

Sassoon, Elias (also Sasson, Eliahu), 599n [Pg. 599 includes portions of Doc. 345 and Doc. 346], 684 [Pg. 684 includes portions of Doc. 409 and Doc. 410], 685n [Pg. 685 includes portions of Doc. 410 and Doc. 411], 721–722 [Pgs. 721–722 include portions of Doc. 446 and Doc. 447], 733 [Pg. 733 is part of Doc. 455], 823 [Pg. 823 includes portions of Doc. 529 and Doc. 530], 922 [Pg. 922 is part of Doc. 599], 955 [Pg. 955 is part of Doc. 615], 988 [Pg. 988 is part of Doc. 641], 1056 [Pg. 1056 includes portions of Doc. 691, Doc. 692, and Doc. 693], 1072 [Pg. 1072 includes portions of Doc. 704 and Doc. 705], 1082 [Pg. 1082 includes portions of Doc. 716 and Doc. 717], 1083n [Pg. 1083 is part of Doc. 717], 1095 [Pg. 1095 includes portions of Doc. 729 and Doc. 730], 1097 [Pg. 1097 includes portions of Doc. 731 and Doc. 732], 1124 [Pg. 1124 includes portions of Doc. 752 and Doc. 753], 1128 [Pg. 1128 is part of Doc. 756], 1142–1143 [Pgs. 1142–1143 include portions of Doc. 765, Doc. 766, Doc. 767, and Doc. 768], 1145–1146 [Pgs. 1145–1146 include portions of Doc. 769 and Doc. 770], 1288 [Pg. 1288 is part of Doc. 890], 1299 [Pg. 1299 is part of Doc. 899], 1366 [Pg. 1366 includes portions of Doc. 949 and Doc. 950], 1468n [Pg. 1468 includes portions of Doc. 1019 and Doc. 1020], 1508n [Pg. 1508 includes portions of Doc. 1042 and Doc. 1043], 1509 [Pg. 1509 includes portions of Doc. 1043, Doc. 1044, and Doc. 1045], 1510n [Pg. 1510 includes portions of Doc. 1045 and Doc. 1046], 1513 [Pg. 1513 is part of Doc. 1049], 1517–1518 [Pgs. 1517–1518 include portions of Doc. 1053, Doc. 1054, and Doc. 1055], 1528 [Pg. 1528 includes portions of Doc. 1061 and Doc. 1062], 1542 [Pg. 1542 includes portions of Doc. 1076 and Doc. 1077], 1545 [Pg. 1545 is part of Doc. 1079], 1558–1559 [Pgs. 1558–1559 include portions of Doc. 1086, Doc. 1087, and Doc. 1088], 1562 [Pg. 1562 is part of Doc. 1091]

Satterthwaite, Joseph C., 25n [Pg. 25 is part of Doc. 3], 189–191 [Pgs. 189–191 include portions of Doc. 84 and Doc. 85], 192n [Pg. 192 includes portions of Doc. 86 and Doc. 87], 194n [Pg. 194 includes portions of Doc. 87 and Doc. 88], 203n [Pg. 203 is part of Doc. 92], 227–230 [Pg. 227 is part of Doc. 105], 279n [Pg. 279 includes portions of Doc. 133 and Doc. 134], 287–288 [Pgs. 287–288 include portions of Doc. 138 and Doc. 139], 300n [Pg. 300 is part of Doc. 148], 473n [Pg. 473 is part of Doc. 263], 506 [Pg. 506 is part of Doc. 290], 516–517 [Pgs. 516–517 include portions of Doc. 298, Doc. 299, and Doc. 300], 600n [Pg. 600 is part of Doc. 347], 609 [Pg. 609 includes portions of Doc. 352 and Doc. 353], 610n [Pg. 610 is part of Doc. 353], 611 [Pg. 611 is part of Doc. 354], 620–622 [Pgs. 620–622 include portions of Doc. 359, Doc. 360, Doc. 361, Doc. 362, and Doc. 363], 627–628 [Pgs. 627–628 include portions of Doc. 366 and Doc. 367], 633 [Pg. 633 includes portions of Doc. 371 and Doc. 372], 635–637 [Pgs. 635–637 include portions of Doc. 372, Doc. 373, and Doc. 374], 647–649 [Pgs. 647–649 include portions of Doc. 382, Doc. 383, and Doc. 384], 653 [Pg. 653 includes portions of Doc. 387 and Doc. 388], 680–681 [Pgs. 680–681 include portions of Doc. 406, Doc. 407, and Doc. 408], 693–694 [Pgs. 693–694 include portions of Doc. 419, Doc. 420, and Doc. 421], 708 [Pg. 708 includes portions of Doc. 431 and Doc. 432], 725 [Pg. 725 includes portions of Doc. 449 and Doc. 450], 739–741 [Pgs. 739–741 include portions of Doc. 458 and Doc. 459], 742n [Pg. 742 includes portions of Doc. 459 and Doc. 460], 753–754 [Pgs. 753–754 include portions of Doc. 469, Doc. 470, and Doc. 471], 781–783 [Pgs. 781–783 include portions of Doc. 495, Doc. 496, and Doc. 497], 792 [Pg. 792 is part of Doc. 505], 811n [Pg. 811 is part of Doc. 518], 828n [Pg. 828 is part of Doc. 533], 844–846 [Pgs. 844–846 include portions of Doc. 535, Doc. 536, and Doc. 537], 853 [Pg. 853 includes portions of Doc. 543 and Doc. 544], 856n [Pg. 856 includes portions of Doc. 544 and Doc. 545], 863–864 [Pgs. 863–864 include portions of Doc. 550, Doc. 551, and Doc. 552], 886 [Pg. 886 includes portions of Doc. 572 and Doc. 573], 897–898 [Pgs. 897–898 include portions of Doc. 581, Doc. 582, and Doc. 583], 900n [Pg. 900 includes portions of Doc. 585 and Doc. 586], 944 [Pg. 944 includes portions of Doc. 609 and Doc. 610], 948–952 [Pgs. 948–952 include portions of Doc. 611, Doc. 612, and Doc. 613], 973–974 [Pgs. 973–974 include portions of Doc. 631 and Doc. 632], 1030n [Pg. 1030 includes portions of Doc. 670 and Doc. 671], 1074n [Pg. 1074 includes portions of Doc. 705 and Doc. 706], 1083n [Pg. 1083 is part of Doc. 717], 1094–1095 [Pgs. 1094–1095 include portions of Doc. 728, Doc. 729, and Doc. 730], 1107n [Pg. 1107 is part of Doc. 737], 1284n [Pg. 1284 includes portions of Doc. 886 and Doc. 887], 1312 [Pg. 1312 is part of Doc. 907], 1642–1643 [Pgs. 1642–1643 include portions of Doc. 1141, Doc. 1142, and Doc. 1143], 1647 [Pg. 1647 is part of Doc. 1146], 1653 [Pg. 1653 includes portions of Doc. 1146 and Doc. 1147], 1654n [Pg. 1654 includes portions of Doc. 1147 and Doc. 1148], 1710–1712 [Pgs. 1710–1712 include portions of Doc. 1187 and Doc. 1188]

Satterthwaite, Livingston L., 414 [Pg. 414 includes portions of Doc. 218 and Doc. 219], 1376 [Pg. 1376 includes portions of Doc. 957 and Doc. 958]

Saud, Prince, 1584 [Pg. 1584 includes portions of Doc. 1109 and Doc. 1110], 1588 [Pg. 1588 is part of Doc. 1110], 1592–1593 [Pg. 1592 is part of Doc. 1111], 1618 [Pg. 1618 is part of Doc. 1124], 1621 [Pg. 1621 is part of Doc. 1125], 1626 [Pg. 1626 is part of Doc. 1129]

Saudi Arabia (see also Saudi Arabian subheadings under Palestine question): Boundary questions, 83 [Pg. 83 is part of Doc. 12], 92–93 [Pgs. 92–93 include portions of Doc. 14 and Doc. 15], 122–125 [Pgs. 122–125 include portions of Doc. 31, Doc. 32, Doc. 33, and Doc. 34], 128–129 [Pgs. 128–129 include portions of Doc. 36, Doc. 37, and Doc. 38], 136–137 [Pgs. 136–137 include portions of Doc. 45, Doc. 46, Doc. 47, and Doc. 48], 151–152 [Pgs. 151–152 include portions of Doc. 59 and Doc. 60]

British military survey mission, 1620 [Pg. 1620 includes portions of Doc. 1124 and Doc. 1125]

British policy, 83 [Pg. 83 is part of Doc. 12], 88–89 [Pgs. 88–89 include portions of Doc. 12 and Doc. 13], 129n [Pg. 129 includes portions of Doc. 37 and Doc. 38], 136–137 [Pgs. 136–137 include portions of Doc. 45, Doc. 46, Doc. 47, and Doc. 48], 152 [Pg. 152 is part of Doc. 60], 155n [Pg. 155 is part of Doc. 63], 626 [Pg. 626 is part of Doc. 365], 1595–1596 [Pgs. 1595–1596 include portions of Doc. 1113 and Doc. 1114], 1618–1621 [Pgs. 1618–1621 include portions of Doc. 1124 and Doc. 1125], 1623 [Pg. 1623 includes portions of Doc. 1126 and Doc. 1127]

Communist threat, 1595 [Pg. 1595 is part of Doc. 1113]

Dhahran airbase agreement, renewal of, 32–33 [Pg. 32 is part of Doc. 4], 46–47 [Pgs. 46–47 include portions of Doc. 5 and Doc. 6], 58–59 [Pgs. 58–59 include portions of Doc. 10 and Doc. 11], 70 [Pg. 70 is part of Doc. 12], 200 [Pg. 200 is part of Doc. 91], 216 [Pg. 216 is part of Doc. 96], 1573–1585 [Pgs. 1573–1585 include portions of Doc. 1099, Doc. 1100, Doc. 1101, Doc. 1102, Doc. 1103, Doc. 1104, Doc. 1105, Doc. 1106, Doc. 1107, Doc. 1108, Doc. 1109, and Doc. 1110], 1588–1594 [Pgs. 1588–1594 include portions of Doc. 1110, Doc. 1111, and Doc. 1112], 1596 [Pg. 1596 includes portions of Doc. 1113 and Doc. 1114], 1598–1612 [Pgs. 1598–1612 include portions of Doc. 1116, Doc. 1117, Doc. 1118, and Doc. 1119], 1614–1616 [Pgs. 1614–1616 include portions of Doc. 1120, Doc. 1121, Doc. 1122, and Doc. 1123], 1623 [Pg. 1623 includes portions of Doc. 1126 and Doc. 1127], 1626 [Pg. 1626 is part of Doc. 1129], 1628–1629 [Pgs. 1628–1629 include portions of Doc. 1130 and Doc. 1131]

Economic development, 78 [Pg. 78 is part of Doc. 12]

Greater Syria, attitude toward, 1578–1581 [Pgs. 1578–1581 include portions of Doc. 1103, Doc. 1104, Doc. 1105, Doc. 1106, and Doc. 1107], 1595 [Pg. 1595 is part of Doc. 1113], 1618–1619 [Pg. 1618 is part of Doc. 1124], 1621 [Pg. 1621 is part of Doc. 1125], 1623 [Pg. 1623 includes portions of Doc. 1126 and Doc. 1127], 1627–1628 [Pgs. 1627–1628 include portions of Doc. 1129, Doc. 1130, and Doc. 1131]

Hashemite dynasties, concern regarding, 88–89 [Pgs. 88–89 include portions of Doc. 12 and Doc. 13], 183 [Pg. 183 is part of Doc. 78], 1613 [Pg. 1613 includes portions of Doc. 1119 and Doc. 1120], 1618–1619 [Pg. 1618 is part of Doc. 1124], 1621 [Pg. 1621 is part of Doc. 1125], 1623 [Pg. 1623 includes portions of Doc. 1126 and Doc. 1127]

Joint U.S. Survey Group, 1601 [Pg. 1601 is part of Doc. 1118], 1613–1615 [Pgs. 1613–1615 include portions of Doc. 1119, Doc. 1120, Doc. 1121, and Doc. 1122], 1618 [Pg. 1618 is part of Doc. 1124], 1620–1627 [Pgs. 1620–1627 include portions of Doc. 1124, Doc. 1125, Doc. 1126, Doc. 1127, Doc. 1128, Doc. 1129, and Doc. 1130], 1629 [Pg. 1629 is part of Doc. 1131]

Kuwait, policy toward, 1567 [Pg. 1567 is part of Doc. 1096]

Mediterranean pact, proposed inclusion in, 1011 [Pg. 1011 is part of Doc. 659]

Palestinian refugees, attitude toward, 876–877 [Pg. 876 is part of Doc. 563], 936–937 [Pg. 936 is part of Doc. 608], 969 [Pg. 969 includes portions of Doc. 628 and Doc. 629], 1029 [Pg. 1029 includes portions of Doc. 668 and Doc. 669], 1352 [Pg. 1352 is part of Doc. 937], 1414 [Pg. 1414 is part of Doc. 983], 1617 [Pg. 1617 is part of Doc. 1123]

Petroleum concessions, 104–105 [Pgs. 104–105 include portions of Doc. 19, Doc. 20, and Doc. 21]

Security of, 1618–1621 [Pgs. 1618–1621 include portions of Doc. 1124 and Doc. 1125], 1623–1624 [Pgs. 1623–1624 include portions of Doc. 1126, Doc. 1127, and Doc. 1128], 1626 [Pg. 1626 is part of Doc. 1129], 1628–1629 [Pgs. 1628–1629 include portions of Doc. 1130 and Doc. 1131]

Soviet policy, 43 [Pg. 43 is part of Doc. 4]

Soviet Union, attitude toward, 626 [Pg. 626 is part of Doc. 365]

Territorial offshore limits, claims concerning, 84 [Pg. 84 is part of Doc. 12], 91–93 [Pgs. 91–93 include portions of Doc. 14 and Doc. 15], 96–109 [Pgs. 96–109 include portions of Doc. 17, Doc. 18, Doc. 19, Doc. 20, Doc. 21, Doc. 22, Doc. 23, and Doc. 24], 111–122 [Pgs. 111–122 include portions of Doc. 24, Doc. 25, Doc. 26, Doc. 27, Doc. 28, Doc. 29, Doc. 30, Doc. 31, and Doc. 32], 125 [Pg. 125 includes portions of Doc. 33 and Doc. 34], 127–129 [Pgs. 127–129 include portions of Doc. 34, Doc. 35, Doc. 36, Doc. 37, and Doc. 38], 132–135 [Pgs. 132–135 include portions of Doc. 41, Doc. 42, Doc. 43, Doc. 44, and Doc. 45], 151–161 [Pgs. 151–161 include portions of Doc. 59, Doc. 60, Doc. 61, Doc. 62, Doc. 63, Doc. 64, Doc. 65, Doc. 66, Doc. 67, and Doc. 68]

Treaty of alliance with the United States and the United Kingdom, proposed, 1581 [Pg. 1581 includes portions of Doc. 1106 and Doc. 1107], 1587 [Pg. 1587 is part of Doc. 1110], 1596 [Pg. 1596 includes portions of Doc. 1113 and Doc. 1114], 1599n [Pg. 1599 includes portions of Doc. 1116 and Doc. 1117], 1618–1620 [Pgs. 1618–1620 include portions of Doc. 1124 and Doc. 1125], 1623n [Pg. 1623 includes portions of Doc. 1126 and Doc. 1127]

U.S. economic and technical assistance, 1573 [Pg. 1573 is part of Doc. 1099], 1616–1617 [Pgs. 1616–1617 include portions of Doc. 1122 and Doc. 1123]

U.S. Legation, elevation to Embassy of, 1573–1574 [Pgs. 1573–1574 include portions of Doc. 1099 and Doc. 1100], 1586 [Pg. 1586 is part of Doc. 1110]

U.S. military assistance, 32 [Pg. 32 is part of Doc. 4], 42n [Pg. 42 is part of Doc. 4], 46–47 [Pgs. 46–47 include portions of Doc. 5 and Doc. 6], 70 [Pg. 70 is part of Doc. 12], 172 [Pg. 172 is part of Doc. 73], 1573 [Pg. 1573 is part of Doc. 1099], 1578–1581 [Pgs. 1578–1581 include portions of Doc. 1103, Doc. 1104, Doc. 1105, Doc. 1106, and Doc. 1107], 1595 [Pg. 1595 is part of Doc. 1113], 1598–1601 [Pgs. 1598–1601 include portions of Doc. 1116, Doc. 1117, and Doc. 1118], 1604 [Pg. 1604 is part of Doc. 1119], 1615–1616 [Pgs. 1615–1616 include portions of Doc. 1121, Doc. 1122, and Doc. 1123], 1618 [Pg. 1618 is part of Doc. 1124], 1623–1629 [Pgs. 1623–1629 include portions of Doc. 1126, Doc. 1127, Doc. 1128, Doc. 1129, Doc. 1130, and Doc. 1131]

U.S. policy, 31 [Pg. 31 includes portions of Doc. 3 and Doc. 4], 43 [Pg. 43 is part of Doc. 4], 46 [Pg. 46 is part of Doc. 5], 111–116 [Pgs. 111–116 include portions of Doc. 24 and Doc. 25], 169–170 [Pg. 169 is part of Doc. 73], 626 [Pg. 626 is part of Doc. 365], 1582 [Pg. 1582 includes portions of Doc. 1107 and Doc. 1108], 1584–1589 [Pgs. 1584–1589 include portions of Doc. 1109, Doc. 1110, and Doc. 1111], 1596–1600 [Pgs. 1596–1600 include portions of Doc. 1113, Doc. 1114, Doc. 1115, Doc. 1116, Doc. 1117, and Doc. 1118], 1621 [Pg. 1621 is part of Doc. 1125], 1628–1629 [Pgs. 1628–1629 include portions of Doc. 1130 and Doc. 1131]

Sayre, Francis B., 1538n [Pg. 1538 includes portions of Doc. 1071 and Doc. 1072], 1553–1554 [Pg. 1553 is part of Doc. 1083]

Scandinavia, 50 [Pg. 50 is part of Doc. 8]

Schuman, Robert, 357 [Pg. 357 is part of Doc. 180], 662 [Pg. 662 is part of Doc. 393], 673 [Pg. 673 is part of Doc. 402], 1077 [Pg. 1077 is part of Doc. 710], 1316n [Pg. 1316 is part of Doc. 910], 1663 [Pg. 1663 is part of Doc. 1152], 1745 [Pg. 1745 includes portions of Doc. 1212 and Doc. 1213]

Schwartz, Harry A., 1781 [Pg. 1781 is part of Doc. 1235]

Seif el Dine, Col. Mohamed Ibrahim, 649 [Pg. 649 includes portions of Doc. 383 and Doc. 384], 699 [Pg. 699 includes portions of Doc. 425 and Doc. 426], 1446 [Pg. 1446 is part of Doc. 1001]

Selo, Fezi, 919 [Pg. 919 includes portions of Doc. 596 and Doc. 597]

Sen, B. R., 1710–1712 [Pgs. 1710–1712 include portions of Doc. 1187 and Doc. 1188]

Senator, David W., 1405 [Pg. 1405 includes portions of Doc. 977 and Doc. 978], 1407 [Pg. 1407 includes portions of Doc. 978 and Doc. 979], 1471 [Pg. 1471 includes portions of Doc. 1023 and Doc. 1024]

Servoise, René F., 799n [Pg. 799 includes portions of Doc. 508 and Doc. 509], 1447 [Pg. 1447 is part of Doc. 1002]

Sharett, Moshe (also Shertok, Moshe), 138 [Pg. 138 is part of Doc. 48], 594 [Pg. 594 is part of Doc. 341], 602n [Pg. 602 includes portions of Doc. 348 and Doc. 349], 605–607 [Pgs. 605–607 include portions of Doc. 351 and Doc. 352], 610n [Pg. 610 is part of Doc. 353], 616–617 [Pgs. 616–617 include portions of Doc. 356, Doc. 357, Doc. 358, and Doc. 359], 627 [Pg. 627 includes portions of Doc. 366 and Doc. 367], 629 [Pg. 629 includes portions of Doc. 368 and Doc. 369], 631n [Pg. 631 is part of Doc. 370], 632–634 [Pgs. 632–634 include portions of Doc. 370, Doc. 371, and Doc. 372], 645–646 [Pg. 645 is part of Doc. 382], 651 [Pg. 651 includes portions of Doc. 385 and Doc. 386], 695 [Pg. 695 includes portions of Doc. 421 and Doc. 422], 700–701 [Pgs. 700–701 include portions of Doc. 426 and Doc. 427], 705 [Pg. 705 includes portions of Doc. 429 and Doc. 430], 711 [Pg. 711 includes portions of Doc. 434 and Doc. 435], 713–716 [Pgs. 713–716 include portions of Doc. 436, Doc. 437, Doc. 438, Doc. 439, Doc. 440, and Doc. 441], 724n [Pg. 724 is part of Doc. 448], 731–732 [Pgs. 731–732 include portions of Doc. 453, Doc. 454, and Doc. 455], 734–737 [Pgs. 734–737 include portions of Doc. 455, Doc. 456, and Doc. 457], 740 [Pg. 740 is part of Doc. 458], 741n [Pg. 741 includes portions of Doc. 458 and Doc. 459], 748–749 [Pgs. 748–749 include portions of Doc. 465, Doc. 466, and Doc. 467], 750n [Pg. 750 includes portions of Doc. 467 and Doc. 468], 752 [Pg. 752 includes portions of Doc. 468 and Doc. 469], 759–761 [Pgs. 759–761 include portions of Doc. 476, Doc. 477, Doc. 478, and Doc. 479], 772–775 [Pgs. 772–775 include portions of Doc. 489, Doc. 490, Doc. 491, and Doc. 492], 777–778 [Pgs. 777–778 include portions of Doc. 493 and Doc. 494], 787 [Pg. 787 includes portions of Doc. 501 and Doc. 502], 802 [Pg. 802 is part of Doc. 511], 804 [Pg. 804 includes portions of Doc. 513 and Doc. 514], 805n [Pg. 805 includes portions of Doc. 514 and Doc. 515], 806n [Pg. 806 is part of Doc. 515], 811 [Pg. 811 is part of Doc. 518], 821–823 [Pgs. 821–823 include portions of Doc. 528, Doc. 529, and Doc. 530], 826 [Pg. 826 is part of Doc. 532], 845–848 [Pgs. 845–848 include portions of Doc. 536, Doc. 537, Doc. 538, and Doc. 539], 851 [Pg. 851 includes portions of Doc. 541 and Doc. 542], 853–856 [Pgs. 853–856 include portions of Doc. 543, Doc. 544, and Doc. 545], 863 [Pg. 863 includes portions of Doc. 550 and Doc. 551], 872 [Pg. 872 is part of Doc. 560], 877 [Pg. 877 is part of Doc. 563], 880 [Pg. 880 is part of Doc. 566], 886 [Pg. 886 includes portions of Doc. 572 and Doc. 573], 887n [Pg. 887 includes portions of Doc. 573 and Doc. 574], 890–894 [Pgs. 890–894 include portions of Doc. 577 and Doc. 578], 897–898 [Pgs. 897–898 include portions of Doc. 581, Doc. 582, and Doc. 583], 900 [Pg. 900 includes portions of Doc. 585 and Doc. 586], 911 [Pg. 911 includes portions of Doc. 591 and Doc. 592], 945–947 [Pgs. 945–947 include portions of Doc. 610 and Doc. 611], 949 [Pg. 949 is part of Doc. 612], 951 [Pg. 951 is part of Doc. 612], 955–956 [Pgs. 955–956 include portions of Doc. 615 and Doc. 616], 957n [Pg. 957 includes portions of Doc. 616 and Doc. 617], 959 [Pg. 959 includes portions of Doc. 618 and Doc. 619], 961 [Pg. 961 includes portions of Doc. 620 and Doc. 621], 966–967 [Pgs. 966–967 include portions of Doc. 625, Doc. 626, and Doc. 627], 974–975 [Pgs. 974–975 include portions of Doc. 632 and Doc. 633], 977–978 [Pgs. 977–978 include portions of Doc. 633, Doc. 634, and Doc. 635], 980–982 [Pgs. 980–982 include portions of Doc. 637, Doc. 638, and Doc. 639], 1005 [Pg. 1005 includes portions of Doc. 655 and Doc. 656], 1028 [Pg. 1028 includes portions of Doc. 667 and Doc. 668], 1036 [Pg. 1036 is part of Doc. 675], 1046 [Pg. 1046 includes portions of Doc. 684 and Doc. 685], 1051 [Pg. 1051 includes portions of Doc. 688 and Doc. 689], 1058 [Pg. 1058 includes portions of Doc. 695 and Doc. 696], 1060 [Pg. 1060 is part of Doc. 697], 1074–1075 [Pgs. 1074–1075 include portions of Doc. 705, Doc. 706, and Doc. 707], 1085 [Pg. 1085 includes portions of Doc. 719 and Doc. 720], 1102n [Pg. 1102 includes portions of Doc. 735 and Doc. 736], 1111–1112 [Pgs. 1111–1112 include portions of Doc. 742, Doc. 743, and Doc. 744], 1115 [Pg. 1115 includes portions of Doc. 745, Doc. 746, and Doc. 747], 1124–1125 [Pgs. 1124–1125 include portions of Doc. 752 and Doc. 753], 1129 [Pg. 1129 is part of Doc. 756], 1144n [Pg. 1144 includes portions of Doc. 768 and Doc. 769], 1150 [Pg. 1150 is part of Doc. 772], 1154 [Pg. 1154 includes portions of Doc. 773 and Doc. 774], 1155n [Pg. 1155 includes portions of Doc. 774 and Doc. 775], 1164–1166 [Pgs. 1164–1166 include portions of Doc. 783, Doc. 784, Doc. 785, and Doc. 786], 1174 [Pg. 1174 includes portions of Doc. 789 and Doc. 790], 1178–1179 [Pgs. 1178–1179 include portions of Doc. 791, Doc. 792, and Doc. 793], 1182–1183 [Pgs. 1182–1183 include portions of Doc. 794 and Doc. 795], 1187 [Pg. 1187 includes portions of Doc. 799 and Doc. 800], 1190 [Pg. 1190 is part of Doc. 802], 1193 [Pg. 1193 includes portions of Doc. 804 and Doc. 805], 1195 [Pg. 1195 includes portions of Doc. 806 and Doc. 807], 1202 [Pg. 1202 includes portions of Doc. 810, Doc. 811, and Doc. 812], 1215–1217 [Pgs. 1215–1217 include portions of Doc. 822, Doc. 823, Doc. 824, and Doc. 825], 1225–1226 [Pgs. 1225–1226 include portions of Doc. 829, Doc. 830, and Doc. 831], 1238 [Pg. 1238 includes portions of Doc. 840, Doc. 841, and Doc. 842], 1243 [Pg. 1243 includes portions of Doc. 847 and Doc. 848], 1249–1250 [Pgs. 1249–1250 include portions of Doc. 852, Doc. 853, Doc. 854, and Doc. 855], 1257n [Pg. 1257 includes portions of Doc. 861 and Doc. 862], 1259 [Pg. 1259 is part of Doc. 863], 1262 [Pg. 1262 is part of Doc. 866], 1265 [Pg. 1265 is part of Doc. 868], 1273 [Pg. 1273 includes portions of Doc. 876 and Doc. 877], 1309n [Pg. 1309 is part of Doc. 905], 1390–1392 [Pgs. 1390–1392 include portions of Doc. 966, Doc. 967, and Doc. 968], 1396 [Pg. 1396 includes portions of Doc. 972 and Doc. 973], 1398 [Pg. 1398 is part of Doc. 974], 1410 [Pg. 1410 is part of Doc. 981], 1412n [Pg. 1412 is part of Doc. 981], 1420 [Pg. 1420 includes portions of Doc. 987 and Doc. 988], 1421n [Pg. 1421 is part of Doc. 988], 1425 [Pg. 1425 is part of Doc. 993], 1441n [Pg. 1441 is part of Doc. 998], 1444–1445 [Pgs. 1444–1445 include portions of Doc. 999 and Doc. 1000], 1484 [Pg. 1484 is part of Doc. 1029], 1502 [Pg. 1502 includes portions of Doc. 1038 and Doc. 1039], 1524–1527 [Pgs. 1524–1527 include portions of Doc. 1059, Doc. 1060, and Doc. 1061], 1533 [Pg. 1533 includes portions of Doc. 1067 and Doc. 1068], 1558n [Pg. 1558 includes portions of Doc. 1086, Doc. 1087, and Doc. 1088], 1565 [Pg. 1565 is part of Doc. 1095]

Sheehan, Robert M., 1781 [Pg. 1781 is part of Doc. 1235]

Shell Oil Company, 1795 [Pg. 1795 is part of Doc. 1236]

Sherburne, Col. Thomas L., 1613 [Pg. 1613 includes portions of Doc. 1119 and Doc. 1120]

Sherer, Albert W., 1780–1781 [Pg. 1780 is part of Doc. 1235]

Sheringham, J.G.T., 66 [Pg. 66 is part of Doc. 12], 142 [Pg. 142 includes portions of Doc. 50 and Doc. 51], 147–148 [Pgs. 147–148 include portions of Doc. 54 and Doc. 55], 1465n [Pg. 1465 includes portions of Doc. 1018 and Doc. 1019], 1476 [Pg. 1476 includes portions of Doc. 1025 and Doc. 1026], 1479 [Pg. 1479 is part of Doc. 1026]

Sherman, Vice Adm. Forrest P., 373–374 [Pg. 373 is part of Doc. 194]

Shertok. see Sharett.

Shibir, Ragheb Bey Nasha, 1247 [Pg. 1247 includes portions of Doc. 851 and Doc. 852]

Shiloah, Reuven, 598–599 [Pgs. 598–599 include portions of Doc. 344, Doc. 345, and Doc. 346], 627 [Pg. 627 includes portions of Doc. 366 and Doc. 367], 629–630 [Pgs. 629–630 include portions of Doc. 368, Doc. 369, and Doc. 370], 631n [Pg. 631 is part of Doc. 370], 665 [Pg. 665 includes portions of Doc. 394 and Doc. 395], 700–701 [Pgs. 700–701 include portions of Doc. 426 and Doc. 427], 716 [Pg. 716 includes portions of Doc. 440 and Doc. 441], 732 [Pg. 732 includes portions of Doc. 454 and Doc. 455], 734–735 [Pgs. 734–735 include portions of Doc. 455, Doc. 456, and Doc. 457], 752–753 [Pgs. 752–753 include portions of Doc. 468, Doc. 469, and Doc. 470], 785n [Pg. 785 includes portions of Doc. 499 and Doc. 500], 814 [Pg. 814 includes portions of Doc. 519 and Doc. 520], 817 [Pg. 817 includes portions of Doc. 522, Doc. 523, and Doc. 524], 822–823 [Pgs. 822–823 include portions of Doc. 529 and Doc. 530], 846n [Pg. 846 includes portions of Doc. 536 and Doc. 537], 899 [Pg. 899 includes portions of Doc. 583, Doc. 584, and Doc. 585], 967 [Pg. 967 includes portions of Doc. 626 and Doc. 627], 980 [Pg. 980 includes portions of Doc. 637 and Doc. 638], 1095 [Pg. 1095 includes portions of Doc. 729 and Doc. 730], 1096n [Pg. 1096 includes portions of Doc. 730 and Doc. 731], 1148 [Pg. 1148 is part of Doc. 772], 1150 [Pg. 1150 is part of Doc. 772], 1152–1153 [Pgs. 1152–1153 include portions of Doc. 772 and Doc. 773], 1188n [Pg. 1188 includes portions of Doc. 800 and Doc. 801], 1197 [Pg. 1197 is part of Doc. 809], 1207–1208 [Pgs. 1207–1208 include portions of Doc. 815, Doc. 816, and Doc. 817], 1237 [Pg. 1237 includes portions of Doc. 839 and Doc. 840], 1239 [Pg. 1239 includes portions of Doc. 842, Doc. 843, and Doc. 844], 1254 [Pg. 1254 includes portions of Doc. 857 and Doc. 858], 1257n [Pg. 1257 includes portions of Doc. 861 and Doc. 862], 1260 [Pg. 1260 includes portions of Doc. 863 and Doc. 864], 1262 [Pg. 1262 is part of Doc. 866], 1266 [Pg. 1266 is part of Doc. 869], 1271 [Pg. 1271 includes portions of Doc. 872, Doc. 873, and Doc. 874], 1276 [Pg. 1276 includes portions of Doc. 879, Doc. 880, and Doc. 881], 1281–1282 [Pgs. 1281–1282 include portions of Doc. 884 and Doc. 885], 1288 [Pg. 1288 is part of Doc. 890], 1291 [Pg. 1291 includes portions of Doc. 892 and Doc. 893], 1312n [Pg. 1312 is part of Doc. 907], 1324 [Pg. 1324 is part of Doc. 918], 1349 [Pg. 1349 includes portions of Doc. 935 and Doc. 936], 1350n [Pg. 1350 includes portions of Doc. 936 and Doc. 937], 1393n [Pg. 1393 includes portions of Doc. 969 and Doc. 970], 1410–1421 [Pgs. 1410–1421 include portions of Doc. 981, Doc. 982, Doc. 983, Doc. 984, Doc. 985, Doc. 986, Doc. 987, and Doc. 988], 1446 [Pg. 1446 is part of Doc. 1001], 1510n [Pg. 1510 includes portions of Doc. 1045 and Doc. 1046], 1513 [Pg. 1513 is part of Doc. 1049], 1516–1518 [Pgs. 1516–1518 include portions of Doc. 1051, Doc. 1052, Doc. 1053, Doc. 1054, and Doc. 1055], 1528–1529 [Pgs. 1528–1529 include portions of Doc. 1061, Doc. 1062, and Doc. 1063], 1532 [Pg. 1532 includes portions of Doc. 1066 and Doc. 1067], 1545 [Pg. 1545 is part of Doc. 1079], 1546n [Pg. 1546 is part of Doc. 1079], 1558–1559 [Pgs. 1558–1559 include portions of Doc. 1086, Doc. 1087, and Doc. 1088], 1561 [Pg. 1561 includes portions of Doc. 1089 and Doc. 1090], 1565 [Pg. 1565 is part of Doc. 1095]

Shirine, Ismail, 1508 [Pg. 1508 includes portions of Doc. 1042 and Doc. 1043], 1528 [Pg. 1528 includes portions of Doc. 1061 and Doc. 1062], 1542 [Pg. 1542 includes portions of Doc. 1076 and Doc. 1077]

Shishakli, Col. Adib, 1637n [Pg. 1637 is part of Doc. 1138]

Shone, Sir Terrence, 628 [Pg. 628 is part of Doc. 367]

Shtylla, Behar, 299n [Pg. 299 is part of Doc. 147], 319 [Pg. 319 is part of Doc. 158]

Shukri, Haidar Bey, 647 [Pg. 647 includes portions of Doc. 382 and Doc. 383]

Shullaw, J. Harold, 1799 [Pg. 1799 is part of Doc. 1238], 1805n [Pg. 1805 includes portions of Doc. 1240 and Doc. 1241]

Sirraj, Hussein Bey, 859–860 [Pgs. 859–860 include portions of Doc. 546 and Doc. 547], 867 [Pg. 867 is part of Doc. 554]

Sirry Pasha, Hussein, 156 [Pg. 156 includes portions of Doc. 63, Doc. 64, and Doc. 65], 222 [Pg. 222 includes portions of Doc. 100 and Doc. 101], 223n [Pg. 223 includes portions of Doc. 102 and Doc. 103], 1322 [Pg. 1322 includes portions of Doc. 915 and Doc. 916], 1374 [Pg. 1374 includes portions of Doc. 954 and Doc. 955], 1405 [Pg. 1405 includes portions of Doc. 977 and Doc. 978], 1415 [Pg. 1415 is part of Doc. 984], 1419 [Pg. 1419 includes portions of Doc. 986 and Doc. 987]

Sitler, Charles, 1781 [Pg. 1781 is part of Doc. 1235]

Slim, Field Marshal Sir William J., 198–202 [Pgs. 198–202 include portions of Doc. 90 and Doc. 91], 205 [Pg. 205 includes portions of Doc. 92, Doc. 93, and Doc. 94], 285–287 [Pgs. 285–287 include portions of Doc. 136, Doc. 137, Doc. 138, and Doc. 139], 290–292 [Pgs. 290–292 include portions of Doc. 140, Doc. 141, Doc. 142, and Doc. 143], 300–301 [Pgs. 300–301 include portions of Doc. 148 and Doc. 149], 1077 [Pg. 1077 is part of Doc. 710]

Sloan, Ruth C., 1781 [Pg. 1781 is part of Doc. 1235]

Smith, A.C., 1760 [Pg. 1760 includes portions of Doc. 1219 and Doc. 1220]

Smith, Bromley K., 191n [Pg. 191 includes portions of Doc. 84 and Doc. 85]

Smith, Rufus G., 888 [Pg. 888 includes portions of Doc. 574 and Doc. 575]

Smith, Walter Bedell, 494 [Pg. 494 includes portions of Doc. 278 and Doc. 279], 875 [Pg. 875 is part of Doc. 562]

Smith-Mundt Act, 510 [Pg. 510 includes portions of Doc. 294 and Doc. 295], 525 [Pg. 525 is part of Doc. 304], 559 [Pg. 559 is part of Doc. 320], 565–566 [Pgs. 565–566 include portions of Doc. 323, Doc. 324, and Doc. 325], 1617 [Pg. 1617 is part of Doc. 1123], 1663 [Pg. 1663 is part of Doc. 1152], 1713 [Pg. 1713 is part of Doc. 1189]

Smuts, Field Marshal Jan Christiaan, 357 [Pg. 357 is part of Doc. 180]

Snyder, John W., 371–372 [Pgs. 371–372 include portions of Doc. 192 and Doc. 193], 376–378 [Pgs. 376–378 include portions of Doc. 194, Doc. 195, and Doc. 196], 965 [Pg. 965 includes portions of Doc. 623, Doc. 624, and Doc. 625], 1189 [Pg. 1189 includes portions of Doc. 801 and Doc. 802], 1440n [Pg. 1440 includes portions of Doc. 997 and Doc. 998], 1675 [Pg. 1675 includes portions of Doc. 1156 and Doc. 1157]

Socony-Vacuum Oil Company, 110 [Pg. 110 is part of Doc. 24], 839 [Pg. 839 is part of Doc. 533]

Somaliland, 1543 [Pg. 1543 is part of Doc. 1078]

Somerville, James, 471–472 [Pgs. 471–472 include portions of Doc. 262 and Doc. 263], 475 [Pg. 475 includes portions of Doc. 264 and Doc. 265], 477–486 [Pgs. 477–486 include portions of Doc. 267, Doc. 268, Doc. 269, Doc. 270, Doc. 271, Doc. 272, and Doc. 273]

Souers, Sidney W., 11n [Pg. 11 is part of Doc. 3], 545n [Pg. 545 includes portions of Doc. 314 and Doc. 315], 1009 [Pg. 1009 is part of Doc. 659], 1089n [Pg. 1089 is part of Doc. 722], 1323 [Pg. 1323 includes portions of Doc. 916, Doc. 917, and Doc. 918], 1329 [Pg. 1329 is part of Doc. 922], 1339 [Pg. 1339 includes portions of Doc. 930 and Doc. 931], 1440n [Pg. 1440 includes portions of Doc. 997 and Doc. 998]

Souphoulis, Thermistocles, 233–234 [Pgs. 233–234 include portions of Doc. 106 and Doc. 107], 237n [Pg. 237 is part of Doc. 111], 238–239 [Pgs. 238–239 include portions of Doc. 111 and Doc. 112], 241–242 [Pgs. 241–242 include portions of Doc. 114 and Doc. 115], 244 [Pg. 244 is part of Doc. 115], 245n [Pg. 245 includes portions of Doc. 115, Doc. 116, and Doc. 117], 246 [Pg. 246 is part of Doc. 117], 248–249 [Pgs. 248–249 include portions of Doc. 117 and Doc. 118], 283 [Pg. 283 is part of Doc. 136], 295–296 [Pgs. 295–296 include portions of Doc. 144 and Doc. 145], 300n [Pg. 300 is part of Doc. 148], 309–310 [Pgs. 309–310 include portions of Doc. 150 and Doc. 151], 322 [Pg. 322 includes portions of Doc. 159 and Doc. 160], 325–326 [Pg. 325 is part of Doc. 163], 337 [Pg. 337 includes portions of Doc. 167 and Doc. 168], 347–349 [Pgs. 347–349 include portions of Doc. 173, Doc. 174, and Doc. 175], 362n [Pg. 362 is part of Doc. 185], 450 [Pg. 450 is part of Doc. 247]

South Asia: Anglo-American collaboration and cooperation, 10 [Pg. 10 is part of Doc. 3], 27–29 [Pg. 27 is part of Doc. 3]; British policy, 11 [Pg. 11 is part of Doc. 3], 13–14 [Pg. 13 is part of Doc. 3], 27 [Pg. 27 is part of Doc. 3]; Commonwealth role, 22 [Pg. 22 is part of Doc. 3]; Communist movement, 15–16 [Pg. 15 is part of Doc. 3]; Czechoslovak: policy, 15 [Pg. 15 is part of Doc. 3]; Hungarian policy, 15 [Pg. 15 is part of Doc. 3]; military forces, 21–23 [Pg. 21 is part of Doc. 3]; Polish policy, 15 [Pg. 15 is part of Doc. 3]; Romanian policy, 15 [Pg. 15 is part of Doc. 3]; South Asian regional pact, proposed, 37 [Pg. 37 is part of Doc. 4]; Soviet policy, 10 [Pg. 10 is part of Doc. 3], 12 [Pg. 12 is part of Doc. 3], 14–16 [Pg. 14 is part of Doc. 3], 22 [Pg. 22 is part of Doc. 3], 30–31 [Pgs. 30–31 include portions of Doc. 3 and Doc. 4]; strategic materials, U.S. program for purchase of, 20 [Pg. 20 is part of Doc. 3]; U.S. economic and technical assistance, 9–10 [Pg. 9 is part of Doc. 3], 12 [Pg. 12 is part of Doc. 3], 23 [Pg. 23 is part of Doc. 3]; U.S. information and exchange program, 21 [Pg. 21 is part of Doc. 3]; U.S. military assistance, 9–10 [Pg. 9 is part of Doc. 3], 12 [Pg. 12 is part of Doc. 3], 23–30 [Pg. 23 is part of Doc. 3]; U.S. policy, 8–31 [Pgs. 8–31 include portions of Doc. 1, Doc. 2, Doc. 3, and Doc. 4], 48 [Pg. 48 includes portions of Doc. 6 and Doc. 7]; U.S. security interests in, 1–49 [Pgs. 1–49 include portions of Doc. 1, Doc. 2, Doc. 3, Doc. 4, Doc. 5, Doc. 6, and Doc. 7]; Yugoslav policy, 15 [Pg. 15 is part of Doc. 3]

Southeast Asia: Australian position, 52 [Pg. 52 is part of Doc. 8]; British policy, 50–52 [Pg. 50 is part of Doc. 8], 54 [Pg. 54 includes portions of Doc. 8 and Doc. 9]; Communist pressures, 576 [Pg. 576 is part of Doc. 330]; New Zealand position, 52 [Pg. 52 is part of Doc. 8]; Southeast Asian conference, proposed, 52 [Pg. 52 is part of Doc. 8]; U.S. policy, 11 [Pg. 11 is part of Doc. 3], 52 [Pg. 52 is part of Doc. 8]

Sovereignty, questions relating to, 34 [Pg. 34 is part of Doc. 4], 100 [Pg. 100 is part of Doc. 18], 103 [Pg. 103 is part of Doc. 18], 112–113 [Pg. 112 is part of Doc. 25], 129n [Pg. 129 includes portions of Doc. 37 and Doc. 38], 132 [Pg. 132 is part of Doc. 41], 139n [Pg. 139 is part of Doc. 48], 261 [Pg. 261 is part of Doc. 126], 336 [Pg. 336 is part of Doc. 167], 339 [Pg. 339 includes portions of Doc. 169 and Doc. 170], 474 [Pg. 474 is part of Doc. 264], 508 [Pg. 508 is part of Doc. 293], 546 [Pg. 546 is part of Doc. 315], 662 [Pg. 662 is part of Doc. 393], 667 [Pg. 667 includes portions of Doc. 397 and Doc. 398], 683 [Pg. 683 includes portions of Doc. 408 and Doc. 409], 685n [Pg. 685 includes portions of Doc. 410 and Doc. 411], 710 [Pg. 710 is part of Doc. 433], 739–740 [Pg. 739 is part of Doc. 458], 784 [Pg. 784 includes portions of Doc. 497 and Doc. 498], 822 [Pg. 822 is part of Doc. 529], 838 [Pg. 838 is part of Doc. 533], 961 [Pg. 961 includes portions of Doc. 620 and Doc. 621], 993 [Pg. 993 includes portions of Doc. 644 and Doc. 645], 1097 [Pg. 1097 includes portions of Doc. 731 and Doc. 732], 1130–1131 [Pgs. 1130–1131 include portions of Doc. 756, Doc. 757, and Doc. 758], 1159–1160 [Pgs. 1159–1160 include portions of Doc. 779 and Doc. 780], 1178n [Pg. 1178 includes portions of Doc. 791 and Doc. 792], 1294 [Pg. 1294 is part of Doc. 895], 1319 [Pg. 1319 includes portions of Doc. 912 and Doc. 913], 1349n [Pg. 1349 includes portions of Doc. 935 and Doc. 936], 1377 [Pg. 1377 is part of Doc. 958], 1391 [Pg. 1391 is part of Doc. 967], 1457 [Pg. 1457 is part of Doc. 1013], 1498 [Pg. 1498 includes portions of Doc. 1036 and Doc. 1037], 1519 [Pg. 1519 is part of Doc. 1055], 1534–1535 [Pgs. 1534–1535 include portions of Doc. 1068, Doc. 1069, and Doc. 1070], 1540 [Pg. 1540 includes portions of Doc. 1073 and Doc. 1074], 1546 [Pg. 1546 is part of Doc. 1079], 1552 [Pg. 1552 is part of Doc. 1083], 1558 [Pg. 1558 includes portions of Doc. 1086, Doc. 1087, and Doc. 1088], 1560 [Pg. 1560 is part of Doc. 1089], 1565 [Pg. 1565 is part of Doc. 1095], 1582–1583 [Pgs. 1582–1583 include portions of Doc. 1107, Doc. 1108, and Doc. 1109], 1587 [Pg. 1587 is part of Doc. 1110], 1592 [Pg. 1592 is part of Doc. 1111], 1603 [Pg. 1603 is part of Doc. 1119], 1664 [Pg. 1664 is part of Doc. 1152], 1703 [Pg. 1703 includes portions of Doc. 1181 and Doc. 1182], 1717 [Pg. 1717 includes portions of Doc. 1192 and Doc. 1193], 1768–1769 [Pgs. 1768–1769 include portions of Doc. 1224 and Doc. 1225], 1782 [Pg. 1782 is part of Doc. 1235]

Soviet satellites, 2–3 [Pg. 2 is part of Doc. 1], 15 [Pg. 15 is part of Doc. 3], 42 [Pg. 42 is part of Doc. 4], 261 [Pg. 261 is part of Doc. 126], 263n [Pg. 263 includes portions of Doc. 128 and Doc. 129], 264n [Pg. 264 is part of Doc. 129], 266 [Pg. 266 is part of Doc. 131], 270 [Pg. 270 is part of Doc. 133], 275–276 [Pg. 275 is part of Doc. 133], 279 [Pg. 279 includes portions of Doc. 133 and Doc. 134], 289–290 [Pgs. 289–290 include portions of Doc. 140 and Doc. 141], 327–328 [Pg. 327 is part of Doc. 163], 340 [Pg. 340 is part of Doc. 170], 346 [Pg. 346 is part of Doc. 173], 349 [Pg. 349 is part of Doc. 175], 351 [Pg. 351 is part of Doc. 177], 353–354 [Pgs. 353–354 include portions of Doc. 177 and Doc. 178], 365 [Pg. 365 is part of Doc. 188], 368n [Pg. 368 is part of Doc. 190], 402n [Pg. 402 is part of Doc. 214], 411 [Pg. 411 is part of Doc. 216], 417 [Pg. 417 includes portions of Doc. 220 and Doc. 221], 447 [Pg. 447 includes portions of Doc. 244, Doc. 245, and Doc. 246], 451 [Pg. 451 includes portions of Doc. 247 and Doc. 248], 466–467 [Pgs. 466–467 include portions of Doc. 259 and Doc. 260], 1433 [Pg. 1433 is part of Doc. 997], 1525 [Pg. 1525 is part of Doc. 1060], 1660 [Pg. 1660 includes portions of Doc. 1151 and Doc. 1152], 1667 [Pg. 1667 is part of Doc. 1152]

Soviet Union (see also Soviet subheadings under individual countries): Jewish emigration, restrictions on, 1433 [Pg. 1433 is part of Doc. 997]; peace offensive, 262 [Pg. 262 is part of Doc. 127]; political and military objectives, 29 [Pg. 29 is part of Doc. 3], 40 [Pg. 40 is part of Doc. 4], 50 [Pg. 50 is part of Doc. 8], 199 [Pg. 199 is part of Doc. 91], 265–267 [Pgs. 265–267 include portions of Doc. 130, Doc. 131, and Doc. 132], 271 [Pg. 271 is part of Doc. 133], 279–280 [Pgs. 279–280 include portions of Doc. 133, Doc. 134, and Doc. 135], 288 [Pg. 288 is part of Doc. 139], 467n [Pg. 467 is part of Doc. 260]; U.S. civil aviation policy toward, 1667n [Pg. 1667 is part of Doc. 1152]; U.S. containment policy, 30 [Pg. 30 is part of Doc. 3], 453 [Pg. 453 is part of Doc. 249], 1754 [Pg. 1754 is part of Doc. 1217]

Spaak, Paul-Henri, 1663 [Pg. 1663 is part of Doc. 1152]

Spain, 1636 [Pg. 1636 is part of Doc. 1137]

Spanish Morocco, 1791 [Pg. 1791 is part of Doc. 1236]

Sparks, Joseph S., 1735 [Pg. 1735 is part of Doc. 1207], 1752–1756 [Pgs. 1752–1756 include portions of Doc. 1216 and Doc. 1217]

Spears, Gen. Sir Edward, 1212 [Pg. 1212 includes portions of Doc. 819 and Doc. 820]

Spellman, Francis Cardinal, 946 [Pg. 946 is part of Doc. 610], 1015–1017 [Pgs. 1015–1017 include portions of Doc. 660, Doc. 661, and Doc. 662], 1293–1294 [Pg. 1293 is part of Doc. 895], 1348–1349 [Pgs. 1348–1349 include portions of Doc. 934, Doc. 935, and Doc. 936], 1498–1499 [Pgs. 1498–1499 include portions of Doc. 1036 and Doc. 1037]

Sproul, Allen, 1654n [Pg. 1654 includes portions of Doc. 1147 and Doc. 1148]

Spurlock, Mr., 98 [Pg. 98 is part of Doc. 17], 103 [Pg. 103 is part of Doc. 18], 107 [Pg. 107 includes portions of Doc. 21 and Doc. 22], 116 [Pg. 116 is part of Doc. 25]

Sri Lanka: Independence, 11 [Pg. 11 is part of Doc. 3]; Israel, policy toward, 694 [Pg. 694 includes portions of Doc. 419, Doc. 420, and Doc. 421]; military forces, 21 [Pg. 21 is part of Doc. 3]; Soviet policy, 15 [Pg. 15 is part of Doc. 3]; U.N. membership, proposed, 774 [Pg. 774 includes portions of Doc. 490 and Doc. 491]; U.S. economic and technical assistance, 20 [Pg. 20 is part of Doc. 3], U.S. policy, 9 [Pg. 9 is part of Doc. 3], 27 [Pg. 27 is part of Doc. 3], 29 [Pg. 29 is part of Doc. 3]

Stabler, Wells, 603–604 [Pgs. 603–604 include portions of Doc. 349 and Doc. 350], 630–632 [Pgs. 630–632 include portions of Doc. 369, Doc. 370, and Doc. 371], 644 [Pg. 644 is part of Doc. 381], 665 [Pg. 665 includes portions of Doc. 394 and Doc. 395], 666n [Pg. 666 includes portions of Doc. 396 and Doc. 397], 667–668 [Pgs. 667–668 include portions of Doc. 397, Doc. 398, and Doc. 399], 685 [Pg. 685 includes portions of Doc. 410 and Doc. 411], 687–688 [Pgs. 687–688 include portions of Doc. 413, Doc. 414, and Doc. 415], 702–703 [Pgs. 702–703 include portions of Doc. 427, Doc. 428, and Doc. 429], 732–734 [Pgs. 732–734 include portions of Doc. 454, Doc. 455, and Doc. 456], 744 [Pg. 744 includes portions of Doc. 461, Doc. 462, and Doc. 463], 767–769 [Pgs. 767–769 include portions of Doc. 484, Doc. 485, Doc. 486, and Doc. 487], 808 [Pg. 808 is part of Doc. 516], 810 [Pg. 810 includes portions of Doc. 517 and Doc. 518], 823–826 [Pgs. 823–826 include portions of Doc. 529, Doc. 530, Doc. 531, and Doc. 532], 845n [Pg. 845 is part of Doc. 536], 851–852 [Pgs. 851–852 include portions of Doc. 541 and Doc. 542], 859–862 [Pgs. 859–862 include portions of Doc. 546, Doc. 547, Doc. 548, and Doc. 549], 866–867 [Pgs. 866–867 include portions of Doc. 553 and Doc. 554], 871–874 [Pgs. 871–874 include portions of Doc. 557, Doc. 558, Doc. 559, Doc. 560, and Doc. 561], 879n [Pg. 879 includes portions of Doc. 564 and Doc. 565], 886–887 [Pgs. 886–887 include portions of Doc. 572, Doc. 573, and Doc. 574], 916–917 [Pgs. 916–917 include portions of Doc. 592, Doc. 593, and Doc. 594], 919–920 [Pgs. 919–920 include portions of Doc. 596, Doc. 597, and Doc. 598], 922 [Pg. 922 is part of Doc. 599], 962–964 [Pgs. 962–964 include portions of Doc. 621, Doc. 622, and Doc. 623], 980–982 [Pgs. 980–982 include portions of Doc. 637, Doc. 638, and Doc. 639], 1040n [Pg. 1040 is part of Doc. 678], 1049–1051 [Pgs. 1049–1051 include portions of Doc. 687, Doc. 688, and Doc. 689], 1056–1057 [Pgs. 1056–1057 include portions of Doc. 691, Doc. 692, Doc. 693, Doc. 694, and Doc. 695], 1083n [Pg. 1083 is part of Doc. 717], 1097–1098 [Pgs. 1097–1098 include portions of Doc. 731 and Doc. 732], 1099n [Pg. 1099 is part of Doc. 733], 1118n [Pg. 1118 is part of Doc. 748], 1121 [Pg. 1121 is part of Doc. 750], 1141–1142 [Pgs. 1141–1142 include portions of Doc. 764, Doc. 765, Doc. 766, and Doc. 767], 1145 [Pg. 1145 is part of Doc. 769], 1158–1159 [Pgs. 1158–1159 include portions of Doc. 778, Doc. 779, and Doc. 780], 1186n [Pg. 1186 includes portions of Doc. 798 and Doc. 799], 1207n [Pg. 1207 includes portions of Doc. 815 and Doc. 816], 1231n [Pg. 1231 includes portions of Doc. 834 and Doc. 835], 1247–1248 [Pgs. 1247–1248 include portions of Doc. 851 and Doc. 852], 1268–1269 [Pgs. 1268–1269 include portions of Doc. 871 and Doc. 872], 1388n [Pg. 1388 includes portions of Doc. 963, Doc. 964, and Doc. 965], 1395 [Pg. 1395 is part of Doc. 972], 1405n [Pg. 1405 includes portions of Doc. 977 and Doc. 978], 1409 [Pg. 1409 includes portions of Doc. 980 and Doc. 981], 1440 [Pg. 1440 includes portions of Doc. 997 and Doc. 998], 1465–1468 [Pgs. 1465–1468 include portions of Doc. 1018, Doc. 1019, and Doc. 1020], 1486 [Pg. 1486 includes portions of Doc. 1029 and Doc. 1030], 1495–1498 [Pgs. 1495–1498 include portions of Doc. 1035, Doc. 1036, and Doc. 1037], 1510n [Pg. 1510 includes portions of Doc. 1045 and Doc. 1046], 1512–1514 [Pgs. 1512–1514 include portions of Doc. 1047, Doc. 1048, Doc. 1049, and Doc. 1050], 1518–1520 [Pgs. 1518–1520 include portions of Doc. 1053, Doc. 1054, Doc. 1055, and Doc. 1056], 1523–1524 [Pgs. 1523–1524 include portions of Doc. 1058, Doc. 1059, and Doc. 1060], 1536n [Pg. 1536 includes portions of Doc. 1070 and Doc. 1071]

Stalin, Iosif V., 251n [Pg. 251 is part of Doc. 119], 345 [Pg. 345 includes portions of Doc. 172 and Doc. 173], 415 [Pg. 415 is part of Doc. 219], 516n [Pg. 516 includes portions of Doc. 298 and Doc. 299], 592 [Pg. 592 includes portions of Doc. 339 and Doc. 340]

Standard Oil Company of California, 839 [Pg. 839 is part of Doc. 533]

Standard Oil Company of New Jersey, 110 [Pg. 110 is part of Doc. 24], 839 [Pg. 839 is part of Doc. 533]

Standard Oil Company of New York, 839–840 [Pg. 839 is part of Doc. 533]

State–Army–Navy–Air Force Coordinating Committee, 8–31 [Pgs. 8–31 include portions of Doc. 1, Doc. 2, Doc. 3, and Doc. 4], 40n [Pg. 40 is part of Doc. 4], 46 [Pg. 46 is part of Doc. 5], 245 [Pg. 245 includes portions of Doc. 115, Doc. 116, and Doc. 117], 271n [Pg. 271 is part of Doc. 133], 272 [Pg. 272 is part of Doc. 133], 277 [Pg. 277 is part of Doc. 133], 1638 [Pg. 1638 includes portions of Doc. 1139 and Doc. 1140]

Stephanopoulos, Stephanos, 310 [Pg. 310 is part of Doc. 151]

Stewart, John L., 1781 [Pg. 1781 is part of Doc. 1235]

Stewart, M. N. F., 199 [Pg. 199 is part of Doc. 91], 202 [Pg. 202 is part of Doc. 91]

Steyn, Colin Fraser, 1802 [Pg. 1802 includes portions of Doc. 1238 and Doc. 1239]

Strang, Sir William, 1099 [Pg. 1099 is part of Doc. 733]

Struble, Vice Adm. A. D., 194n [Pg. 194 includes portions of Doc. 87 and Doc. 88]

Sudan: British policy, 1077 [Pg. 1077 is part of Doc. 710]; status of, 186 [Pg. 186 is part of Doc. 81], 209 [Pg. 209 is part of Doc. 96], 216 [Pg. 216 is part of Doc. 96]; U.S. access to British-controlled air facilities in, 32 [Pg. 32 is part of Doc. 4]; U.S. policy, 31 [Pg. 31 includes portions of Doc. 3 and Doc. 4], 209 [Pg. 209 is part of Doc. 96]

Suez Canal, 42 [Pg. 42 is part of Doc. 4], 80 [Pg. 80 is part of Doc. 12], 148n [Pg. 148 is part of Doc. 55], 156 [Pg. 156 includes portions of Doc. 63, Doc. 64, and Doc. 65], 157n [Pg. 157 includes portions of Doc. 65 and Doc. 66], 203n [Pg. 203 is part of Doc. 92], 204 [Pg. 204 is part of Doc. 92], 206 [Pg. 206 is part of Doc. 94], 217 [Pg. 217 includes portions of Doc. 96 and Doc. 97], 224 [Pg. 224 includes portions of Doc. 103 and Doc. 104], 226 [Pg. 226 is part of Doc. 104], 611 [Pg. 611 is part of Doc. 354], 1010 [Pg. 1010 is part of Doc. 659]

Suez Canal Company, 195–197 [Pgs. 195–197 include portions of Doc. 88, Doc. 89, and Doc. 90]

Sulaiman, Shaikh Abdullah, 127 [Pg. 127 includes portions of Doc. 34 and Doc. 35], 133 [Pg. 133 is part of Doc. 42], 161 [Pg. 161 includes portions of Doc. 67 and Doc. 68], 1605 [Pg. 1605 is part of Doc. 1119]

Sulzberger, Cyrus L., 238 [Pg. 238 includes portions of Doc. 111 and Doc. 112], 355n [Pg. 355 includes portions of Doc. 178 and Doc. 179], 364n [Pg. 364 includes portions of Doc. 186 and Doc. 187], 1095 [Pg. 1095 includes portions of Doc. 729 and Doc. 730]

Sweden, 1270 [Pg. 1270 is part of Doc. 872], 1523 [Pg. 1523 includes portions of Doc. 1058 and Doc. 1059], 1526 [Pg. 1526 is part of Doc. 1060]

Switzerland, 413 [Pg. 413 is part of Doc. 218], 1665 [Pg. 1665 is part of Doc. 1152]

Symonds, Frank, 1760–1761 [Pgs. 1760–1761 include portions of Doc. 1219 and Doc. 1220]

Syria (see also Syrian subheadings under Palestine question): Arms shipments to, 1153 [Pg. 1153 includes portions of Doc. 772 and Doc. 773]; British policy, 181 [Pg. 181 includes portions of Doc. 76 and Doc. 77], 907 [Pg. 907 is part of Doc. 590]; British recognition of new government, 1002 [Pg. 1002 is part of Doc. 652], 1630–1631 [Pgs. 1630–1631 include portions of Doc. 1132 and Doc. 1133], 1633n [Pg. 1633 includes portions of Doc. 1134 and Doc. 1135], 1636 [Pg. 1636 is part of Doc. 1137]; economic development, 78 [Pg. 78 is part of Doc. 12], 907 [Pg. 907 is part of Doc. 590]; Egyptian recognition of new government, 1631 [Pg. 1631 includes portions of Doc. 1132 and Doc. 1133], 1634 [Pg. 1634 includes portions of Doc. 1135 and Doc. 1136], 1636 [Pg. 1636 is part of Doc. 1137]; foreign policy, 641 [Pg. 641 includes portions of Doc. 377 and Doc. 378], 742–743 [Pgs. 742–743 include portions of Doc. 459, Doc. 460, and Doc. 461], 770 [Pg. 770 is part of Doc. 488]; French arms for, 1056 [Pg. 1056 includes portions of Doc. 691, Doc. 692, and Doc. 693], 1057n [Pg. 1057 includes portions of Doc. 693, Doc. 694, and Doc. 695]; French monetary agreement, 799n [Pg. 799 includes portions of Doc. 508 and Doc. 509]; French recognition of new government, 1002 [Pg. 1002 is part of Doc. 652], 1630 [Pg. 1630 is part of Doc. 1132], 1631 [Pg. 1631 includes portions of Doc. 1132 and Doc. 1133], 1633n [Pg. 1633 includes portions of Doc. 1134 and Doc. 1135], 1636 [Pg. 1636 is part of Doc. 1137]; Greater Syria, attitude toward, 666 [Pg. 666 includes portions of Doc. 396 and Doc. 397], 1618 [Pg. 1618 is part of Doc. 1124]; Iraq, proposed merger with, 55 [Pg. 55 is part of Doc. 9], 70 [Pg. 70 is part of Doc. 12], 166 [Pg. 166 is part of Doc. 71], 169n [Pg. 169 is part of Doc. 73], 174–175 [Pg. 174 is part of Doc. 73], 180–185 [Pgs. 180–185 include portions of Doc. 76, Doc. 77, Doc. 78, Doc. 79, and Doc. 80], 1440–1441 [Pgs. 1440–1441 include portions of Doc. 997 and Doc. 998], 1456 [Pg. 1456 includes portions of Doc. 1012 and Doc. 1013], 1482 [Pg. 1482 includes portions of Doc. 1027 and Doc. 1028], 1507n [Pg. 1507 is part of Doc. 1042], 1561 [Pg. 1561 includes portions of Doc. 1089 and Doc. 1090], 1619 [Pg. 1619 is part of Doc. 1124], 1621 [Pg. 1621 is part of Doc. 1125], 1627 [Pg. 1627 includes portions of Doc. 1129 and Doc. 1130]; Iraqi policy toward, 1636 [Pg. 1636 is part of Doc. 1137]; Lebanese recognition of new government, 1630n [Pg. 1630 is part of Doc. 1132], 1636 [Pg. 1636 is part of Doc. 1137]; Palestinian refugees, 51 [Pg. 51 is part of Doc. 8], 829 [Pg. 829 is part of Doc. 533], 842 [Pg. 842 includes portions of Doc. 533 and Doc. 534], 857 [Pg. 857 includes portions of Doc. 545 and Doc. 546], 897 [Pg. 897 includes portions of Doc. 581 and Doc. 582], 907–908 [Pg. 907 is part of Doc. 590], 926 [Pg. 926 is part of Doc. 602], 935–937 [Pg. 935 is part of Doc. 608], 965 [Pg. 965 includes portions of Doc. 623, Doc. 624, and Doc. 625], 984–986 [Pg. 984 is part of Doc. 640], 989 [Pg. 989 is part of Doc. 641], 1007 [Pg. 1007 includes portions of Doc. 656 and Doc. 657], 1008n [Pg. 1008 includes portions of Doc. 657 and Doc. 658], 1014 [Pg. 1014 is part of Doc. 660], 1031 [Pg. 1031 is part of Doc. 671], 1054 [Pg. 1054 is part of Doc. 690], 1226–1228 [Pgs. 1226–1228 include portions of Doc. 830, Doc. 831, and Doc. 832], 1233n [Pg. 1233 includes portions of Doc. 836 and Doc. 837], 1235 [Pg. 1235 includes portions of Doc. 838 and Doc. 839], 1245–1246 [Pgs. 1245–1246 include portions of Doc. 849 and Doc. 850], 1267 [Pg. 1267 is part of Doc. 870], 1271 [Pg. 1271 includes portions of Doc. 872, Doc. 873, and Doc. 874], 1317 [Pg. 1317 is part of Doc. 911], 1337 [Pg. 1337 includes portions of Doc. 928 and Doc. 929], 1354 [Pg. 1354 includes portions of Doc. 937 and Doc. 938], 1376 [Pg. 1376 includes portions of Doc. 957 and Doc. 958], 1378 [Pg. 1378 is part of Doc. 958], 1425 [Pg. 1425 is part of Doc. 993], 1464 [Pg. 1464 is part of Doc. 1018]; petroleum pipeline concessions, 109–110 [Pgs. 109–110 include portions of Doc. 23 and Doc. 24], 183 [Pg. 183 is part of Doc. 78], 743 [Pg. 743 includes portions of Doc. 460 and Doc. 461], 799n [Pg. 799 includes portions of Doc. 508 and Doc. 509], 986 [Pg. 986 is part of Doc. 640]; political situation, 901 [Pg. 901 is part of Doc. 586], 905 [Pg. 905 includes portions of Doc. 588 and Doc. 589]; Saudi Arabian recognition of new government, 1631 [Pg. 1631 includes portions of Doc. 1132 and Doc. 1133], 1634 [Pg. 1634 includes portions of Doc. 1135 and Doc. 1136], 1636 [Pg. 1636 is part of Doc. 1137]; Turkish policy, 1631 [Pg. 1631 includes portions of Doc. 1132 and Doc. 1133], 1636 [Pg. 1636 is part of Doc. 1137], 1668 [Pg. 1668 is part of Doc. 1152]; U.S. military assistance, request for, 1271 [Pg. 1271 includes portions of Doc. 872, Doc. 873, and Doc. 874]; U.S. policy, 31 [Pg. 31 includes portions of Doc. 3 and Doc. 4], 33 [Pg. 33 is part of Doc. 4], 172 [Pg. 172 is part of Doc. 73], 770–771 [Pgs. 770–771 include portions of Doc. 488 and Doc. 489]; U.S. recognition of new governments, 957 [Pg. 957 includes portions of Doc. 616 and Doc. 617], 1002 [Pg. 1002 is part of Doc. 652], 1630–1637 [Pgs. 1630–1637 include portions of Doc. 1132, Doc. 1133, Doc. 1134, Doc. 1135, Doc. 1136, Doc. 1137, and Doc. 1138], 1756 [Pg. 1756 is part of Doc. 1217]

Tabatabai, Sadeq, 480 [Pg. 480 includes portions of Doc. 269 and Doc. 270]

Taft, Orray, 1781 [Pg. 1781 is part of Doc. 1235], 1785 [Pg. 1785 is part of Doc. 1235]

Tait, George, 1780 [Pg. 1780 is part of Doc. 1235]

Tangier, International Zone of, 1791 [Pg. 1791 is part of Doc. 1236], 1794 [Pg. 1794 is part of Doc. 1236]

Tarazi, 980 [Pg. 980 includes portions of Doc. 637 and Doc. 638]

Tardini, Domenieo, 1308 [Pg. 1308 includes portions of Doc. 904 and Doc. 905], 1348 [Pg. 1348 includes portions of Doc. 934 and Doc. 935], 1349n [Pg. 1349 includes portions of Doc. 935 and Doc. 936]

Taufiq (Tawfiq, Tewfiq), Ahmed Bey, 96 [Pg. 96 is part of Doc. 17], 100 [Pg. 100 is part of Doc. 18], 111 [Pg. 111 includes portions of Doc. 24 and Doc. 25], 116 [Pg. 116 is part of Doc. 25], 120 [Pg. 120 includes portions of Doc. 29 and Doc. 30], 124 [Pg. 124 is part of Doc. 32]

Tel, Lt. Col. Abdullah el-, 598 [Pg. 598 includes portions of Doc. 344 and Doc. 345], 599n [Pg. 599 includes portions of Doc. 345 and Doc. 346], 608 [Pg. 608 is part of Doc. 352], 630 [Pg. 630 includes portions of Doc. 369 and Doc. 370], 631n [Pg. 631 is part of Doc. 370], 633 [Pg. 633 includes portions of Doc. 371 and Doc. 372], 644 [Pg. 644 is part of Doc. 381], 661 [Pg. 661 includes portions of Doc. 392 and Doc. 393], 663 [Pg. 663 includes portions of Doc. 393 and Doc. 394], 665 [Pg. 665 includes portions of Doc. 394 and Doc. 395], 668–669 [Pgs. 668–669 include portions of Doc. 398, Doc. 399, and Doc. 400], 680n [Pg. 680 includes portions of Doc. 406 and Doc. 407], 683n [Pg. 683 includes portions of Doc. 408 and Doc. 409], 684 [Pg. 684 includes portions of Doc. 409 and Doc. 410], 729 [Pg. 729 includes portions of Doc. 451 and Doc. 452], 745 [Pg. 745 is part of Doc. 463], 747 [Pg. 747 includes portions of Doc. 464 and Doc. 465], 808 [Pg. 808 is part of Doc. 516], 851–853 [Pgs. 851–853 include portions of Doc. 541, Doc. 542, Doc. 543, and Doc. 544], 859 [Pg. 859 includes portions of Doc. 546 and Doc. 547], 873 [Pg. 873 includes portions of Doc. 560 and Doc. 561], 901 [Pg. 901 is part of Doc. 586], 978 [Pg. 978 includes portions of Doc. 634 and Doc. 635], 980 [Pg. 980 includes portions of Doc. 637 and Doc. 638], 1041–1042 [Pgs. 1041–1042 include portions of Doc. 678, Doc. 679, and Doc. 680]

Tennessee Valley Authority, 1351–1352 [Pg. 1351 is part of Doc. 937]

Tewfik, Abul Houda, 120 [Pg. 120 includes portions of Doc. 29 and Doc. 30], 124 [Pg. 124 is part of Doc. 32], 631 [Pg. 631 is part of Doc. 370], 667 [Pg. 667 includes portions of Doc. 397 and Doc. 398], 722 [Pg. 722 includes portions of Doc. 446 and Doc. 447], 744–746 [Pgs. 744–746 include portions of Doc. 461, Doc. 462, and Doc. 463], 852 [Pg. 852 is part of Doc. 542], 866–867 [Pgs. 866–867 include portions of Doc. 553 and Doc. 554], 872–874 [Pgs. 872–874 include portions of Doc. 560 and Doc. 561], 886n [Pg. 886 includes portions of Doc. 572 and Doc. 573], 917 [Pg. 917 is part of Doc. 594], 922 [Pg. 922 is part of Doc. 599], 962–963 [Pgs. 962–963 include portions of Doc. 621 and Doc. 622], 964n [Pg. 964 includes portions of Doc. 622 and Doc. 623], 980–982 [Pgs. 980–982 include portions of Doc. 637, Doc. 638, and Doc. 639], 1018 [Pg. 1018 includes portions of Doc. 662 and Doc. 663], 1034 [Pg. 1034 is part of Doc. 673], 1044–1045 [Pgs. 1044–1045 include portions of Doc. 682 and Doc. 683], 1056 [Pg. 1056 includes portions of Doc. 691, Doc. 692, and Doc. 693], 1080 [Pg. 1080 includes portions of Doc. 713 and Doc. 714], 1141 [Pg. 1141 includes portions of Doc. 764 and Doc. 765], 1158 [Pg. 1158 includes portions of Doc. 778 and Doc. 779], 1469 [Pg. 1469 includes portions of Doc. 1020 and Doc. 1021], 1485 [Pg. 1485 is part of Doc. 1029], 1546 [Pg. 1546 is part of Doc. 1079], 1559–1560 [Pgs. 1559–1560 include portions of Doc. 1088 and Doc. 1089], 1562 [Pg. 1562 is part of Doc. 1091]

Texas Oil Company, 840 [Pg. 840 is part of Doc. 533]

Thomas, Lowell, 840 [Pg. 840 is part of Doc. 533]

Thompson, Charles Oliver, 1703 [Pg. 1703 includes portions of Doc. 1181 and Doc. 1182]

Thompson, Llewellyn E., 265 [Pg. 265 includes portions of Doc. 130 and Doc. 131], 279 [Pg. 279 includes portions of Doc. 133 and Doc. 134], 414–415 [Pgs. 414–415 include portions of Doc. 218 and Doc. 219], 438n [Pg. 438 is part of Doc. 240], 487n [Pg. 487 includes portions of Doc. 274 and Doc. 275]

Thorp, Willard L., 526 [Pg. 526 includes portions of Doc. 305 and Doc. 306], 562 [Pg. 562 includes portions of Doc. 321 and Doc. 322], 568 [Pg. 568 includes portions of Doc. 326 and Doc. 327], 574 [Pg. 574 includes portions of Doc. 329 and Doc. 330], 577–581 [Pgs. 577–581 include portions of Doc. 330, Doc. 331, Doc. 332, and Doc. 333], 585 [Pg. 585 includes portions of Doc. 335 and Doc. 336], 1311 [Pg. 1311 includes portions of Doc. 906 and Doc. 907], 1332 [Pg. 1332 is part of Doc. 924], 1653–1654 [Pgs. 1653–1654 include portions of Doc. 1146, Doc. 1147, and Doc. 1148], 1657–1659 [Pgs. 1657–1659 include portions of Doc. 1149, Doc. 1150, and Doc. 1151], 1675n [Pg. 1675 includes portions of Doc. 1156 and Doc. 1157], 1799–1800 [Pg. 1799 is part of Doc. 1238]

Thurston, Ray L., 1 [Pg. 1 is part of Doc. 1], 1687 [Pg. 1687 includes portions of Doc. 1165 and Doc. 1166]

Tito, Marshal Josip Broz, 250–252 [Pg. 250 is part of Doc. 119], 255 [Pg. 255 is part of Doc. 121], 257–258 [Pgs. 257–258 include portions of Doc. 122, Doc. 123, and Doc. 124], 261–262 [Pgs. 261–262 include portions of Doc. 126 and Doc. 127], 266–268 [Pgs. 266–268 include portions of Doc. 131 and Doc. 132], 276 [Pg. 276 is part of Doc. 133], 285 [Pg. 285 includes portions of Doc. 136 and Doc. 137], 287–288 [Pgs. 287–288 include portions of Doc. 138 and Doc. 139], 292n [Pg. 292 includes portions of Doc. 142 and Doc. 143], 293 [Pg. 293 is part of Doc. 143], 328 [Pg. 328 is part of Doc. 163], 341–342 [Pgs. 341–342 include portions of Doc. 170 and Doc. 171], 344 [Pg. 344 includes portions of Doc. 171 and Doc. 172], 363–365 [Pgs. 363–365 include portions of Doc. 185, Doc. 186, Doc. 187, and Doc. 188], 367–370 [Pgs. 367–370 include portions of Doc. 189, Doc. 190, Doc. 191, and Doc. 192], 374–375 [Pg. 374 is part of Doc. 194], 380–381 [Pgs. 380–381 include portions of Doc. 196, Doc. 197, Doc. 198, Doc. 199, and Doc. 200], 383–384 [Pg. 383 is part of Doc. 200], 394 [Pg. 394 is part of Doc. 208], 415 [Pg. 415 is part of Doc. 219], 417 [Pg. 417 includes portions of Doc. 220 and Doc. 221], 423 [Pg. 423 includes portions of Doc. 225 and Doc. 226], 467 [Pg. 467 is part of Doc. 260], 1755 [Pg. 1755 is part of Doc. 1217]

Tomlinson, John D., 1471 [Pg. 1471 includes portions of Doc. 1023 and Doc. 1024]

Torres, Abdel Khalik, 1784 [Pg. 1784 is part of Doc. 1235]

Touqan, Ahmad, 917n [Pg. 917 is part of Doc. 594]

Toucsan, Nairn Bey, 853 [Pg. 853 includes portions of Doc. 543 and Doc. 544], 917n [Pg. 917 is part of Doc. 594]

Tozan, Satvet Lufti, 1679–1680 [Pgs. 1679–1680 include portions of Doc. 1158 and Doc. 1159]

Trans-Arabian Pipeline, 986 [Pg. 986 is part of Doc. 640]

Transjordan. see Jordan.

Treasury, U.S. Department of the, 164n [Pg. 164 is part of Doc. 70], 970 [Pg. 970 includes portions of Doc. 629 and Doc. 630], 1023n [Pg. 1023 includes portions of Doc. 666 and Doc. 667], 1666 [Pg. 1666 is part of Doc. 1152], 1674 [Pg. 1674 includes portions of Doc. 1155 and Doc. 1156]

Treaties, conventions, agreements, etc. (see also under individual countries): Agreement between the United States and Saudi Arabia, 1933, 1588 [Pg. 1588 is part of Doc. 1110], 1597 [Pg. 1597 is part of Doc. 1115]

Air transport agreement between the United States and Egypt, 214 [Pg. 214 is part of Doc. 96]

Anglo-Burmese treaty of 1947, 11 [Pg. 11 is part of Doc. 3]

Anglo-Egyptian treaty of 1936 (see also under Egypt), 208–209 [Pg. 208 is part of Doc. 96], 533 [Pg. 533 is part of Doc. 311], 594 [Pg. 594 is part of Doc. 341], 605–606 [Pg. 605 is part of Doc. 351], 618n [Pg. 618 is part of Doc. 359], 625 [Pg. 625 includes portions of Doc. 364 and Doc. 365], 646 [Pg. 646 is part of Doc. 382], 670 [Pg. 670 includes portions of Doc. 400 and Doc. 401], 832 [Pg. 832 is part of Doc. 533], 953 [Pg. 953 is part of Doc. 613], 1012 [Pg. 1012 is part of Doc. 659], 1682 [Pg. 1682 includes portions of Doc. 1160 and Doc. 1161].

Anglo-Iraq treaty, 1930, 75 [Pg. 75 is part of Doc. 12], 89 [Pg. 89 includes portions of Doc. 12 and Doc. 13], 118 [Pg. 118 includes portions of Doc. 27 and Doc. 28], 143n [Pg. 143 is part of Doc. 51], 175 [Pg. 175 is part of Doc. 73], 181 [Pg. 181 includes portions of Doc. 76 and Doc. 77], 625 [Pg. 625 includes portions of Doc. 364 and Doc. 365], 832 [Pg. 832 is part of Doc. 533], 953 [Pg. 953 is part of Doc. 613], 1012 [Pg. 1012 is part of Doc. 659], 1618 [Pg. 1618 is part of Doc. 1124], 1682 [Pg. 1682 includes portions of Doc. 1160 and Doc. 1161]

Anglo-Jordan treaty, 66 [Pg. 66 is part of Doc. 12], 75 [Pg. 75 is part of Doc. 12], 89 [Pg. 89 includes portions of Doc. 12 and Doc. 13], 533 [Pg. 533 is part of Doc. 311], 613n [Pg. 613 is part of Doc. 354], 618n [Pg. 618 is part of Doc. 359], 625 [Pg. 625 includes portions of Doc. 364 and Doc. 365], 633 [Pg. 633 includes portions of Doc. 371 and Doc. 372], 646 [Pg. 646 is part of Doc. 382], 670 [Pg. 670 includes portions of Doc. 400 and Doc. 401], 738 [Pg. 738 is part of Doc. 457], 812 [Pg. 812 is part of Doc. 518], 850 [Pg. 850 is part of Doc. 540], 915 [Pg. 915 is part of Doc. 592], 927 [Pg. 927 includes portions of Doc. 602 and Doc. 603], 953 [Pg. 953 is part of Doc. 613], 1012 [Pg. 1012 is part of Doc. 659], 1056 [Pg. 1056 includes portions of Doc. 691, Doc. 692, and Doc. 693], 1078 [Pg. 1078 includes portions of Doc. 710 and Doc. 711], 1081–1084 [Pgs. 1081–1084 include portions of Doc. 715, Doc. 716, Doc. 717, Doc. 718, and Doc. 719], 1090 [Pg. 1090 includes portions of Doc. 723 and Doc. 724], 1099 [Pg. 1099 is part of Doc. 733], 1126–1127 [Pgs. 1126–1127 include portions of Doc. 754 and Doc. 755], 1448 [Pg. 1448 includes portions of Doc. 1002, Doc. 1003, and Doc. 1004], 1514 [Pg. 1514 includes portions of Doc. 1049 and Doc. 1050], 1519 [Pg. 1519 is part of Doc. 1055], 1521 [Pg. 1521 is part of Doc. 1057], 1528 [Pg. 1528 includes portions of Doc. 1061 and Doc. 1062], 1534 [Pg. 1534 includes portions of Doc. 1068 and Doc. 1069], 1545–1546 [Pg. 1545 is part of Doc. 1079], 1556 [Pg. 1556 is part of Doc. 1085], 1618 [Pg. 1618 is part of Doc. 1124], 1682 [Pg. 1682 includes portions of Doc. 1160 and Doc. 1161]

Anglo-Russian treaty regarding interests in Persia, Afghanistan, and Tibet, 1907, 508n [Pg. 508 is part of Doc. 293]

Anglo-Turkish agreement, 1913–1914, 123 [Pg. 123 is part of Doc. 32]

Barter agreement between the Soviet Union and Egypt, 1948, 211n [Pg. 211 is part of Doc. 96]

Brussels pact, 206 [Pg. 206 is part of Doc. 94]

Bulgarian peace treaty, 336 [Pg. 336 is part of Doc. 167]

Civil aviation policies, Bermuda agreement on, 1946, 214 [Pg. 214 is part of Doc. 96]

Customs agreement between the United States and Egypt, 1931, 211 [Pg. 211 is part of Doc. 96]

Dhahran airbase, agreement between the United States and Saudi Arabia regarding (see also under Saudi Arabia), 1574 [Pg. 1574 includes portions of Doc. 1099 and Doc. 1100], 1576–1578 [Pgs. 1576–1578 include portions of Doc. 1101, Doc. 1102, Doc. 1103, and Doc. 1104], 1583n [Pg. 1583 includes portions of Doc. 1108 and Doc. 1109], 1590 [Pg. 1590 is part of Doc. 1111], 1592 [Pg. 1592 is part of Doc. 1111], 1594 [Pg. 1594 includes portions of Doc. 1111 and Doc. 1112]

Faisal–Weizmann agreements, 1919, 772 [Pg. 772 includes portions of Doc. 489 and Doc. 490]

General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade, 1947, 211 [Pg. 211 is part of Doc. 96], 1664 [Pg. 1664 is part of Doc. 1152]

Genocide Convention, 1451 [Pg. 1451 includes portions of Doc. 1006 and Doc. 1007]

Inter-American Treaty of Reciprocal Assistance (Rio pact), 1947, 448 [Pg. 448 is part of Doc. 246], 1616 [Pg. 1616 includes portions of Doc. 1122 and Doc. 1123]

International Trade Organization Charter, 210–211 [Pg. 210 is part of Doc. 96], 1664 [Pg. 1664 is part of Doc. 1152]

Montreux Convention, 210 [Pg. 210 is part of Doc. 96]

North Atlantic Treaty, Apr. 4, 1949, 8 [Pg. 8 includes portions of Doc. 1, Doc. 2, and Doc. 3], 29 [Pg. 29 is part of Doc. 3], 31–38 [Pgs. 31–38 include portions of Doc. 3 and Doc. 4], 44 [Pg. 44 is part of Doc. 4], 70 [Pg. 70 is part of Doc. 12], 176 [Pg. 176 is part of Doc. 74], 206 [Pg. 206 is part of Doc. 94], 229–230 [Pg. 229 is part of Doc. 105], 233 [Pg. 233 includes portions of Doc. 106 and Doc. 107], 262 [Pg. 262 is part of Doc. 127], 271 [Pg. 271 is part of Doc. 133], 285 [Pg. 285 includes portions of Doc. 136 and Doc. 137], 341 [Pg. 341 includes portions of Doc. 170 and Doc. 171], 376 [Pg. 376 includes portions of Doc. 194 and Doc. 195], 448 [Pg. 448 is part of Doc. 246], 460 [Pg. 460 includes portions of Doc. 253 and Doc. 254], 464 [Pg. 464 is part of Doc. 257], 473n [Pg. 473 is part of Doc. 263], 481n [Pg. 481 includes portions of Doc. 270 and Doc. 271], 491 [Pg. 491 is part of Doc. 277], 493–495 [Pgs. 493–495 include portions of Doc. 278, Doc. 279, and Doc. 280], 500–501 [Pgs. 500–501 include portions of Doc. 282, Doc. 283, Doc. 284, Doc. 285, and Doc. 286], 503 [Pg. 503 includes portions of Doc. 286 and Doc. 287], 510 [Pg. 510 includes portions of Doc. 294 and Doc. 295], 550 [Pg. 550 is part of Doc. 315], 551n [Pg. 551 is part of Doc. 315], 571 [Pg. 571 is part of Doc. 328], 579–580 [Pgs. 579–580 include portions of Doc. 330, Doc. 331, and Doc. 332], 672 [Pg. 672 is part of Doc. 402], 770 [Pg. 770 is part of Doc. 488], 791 [Pg. 791 is part of Doc. 505], 953 [Pg. 953 is part of Doc. 613], 1011 [Pg. 1011 is part of Doc. 659], 1018 [Pg. 1018 includes portions of Doc. 662 and Doc. 663], 1582 [Pg. 1582 includes portions of Doc. 1107 and Doc. 1108], 1587 [Pg. 1587 is part of Doc. 1110], 1628 [Pg. 1628 includes portions of Doc. 1130 and Doc. 1131], 1647–1653 [Pgs. 1647–1653 include portions of Doc. 1146 and Doc. 1147], 1655 [Pg. 1655 is part of Doc. 1148], 1657 [Pg. 1657 includes portions of Doc. 1149 and Doc. 1150], 1662–1663 [Pg. 1662 is part of Doc. 1152], 1669–1671 [Pgs. 1669–1671 include portions of Doc. 1152, Doc. 1153, and Doc. 1154], 1680 [Pg. 1680 is part of Doc. 1159], 1682–1683 [Pgs. 1682–1683 include portions of Doc. 1160 and Doc. 1161], 1684n [Pg. 1684 is part of Doc. 1162], 1685 [Pg. 1685 includes portions of Doc. 1162, Doc. 1163, and Doc. 1164], 1805 [Pg. 1805 includes portions of Doc. 1240 and Doc. 1241]

Pact of the League of Arab states, 1945, 35 [Pg. 35 is part of Doc. 4], 1506–1507 [Pgs. 1506–1507 include portions of Doc. 1041 and Doc. 1042], 1545 [Pg. 1545 is part of Doc. 1079]

Portsmouth treaty between Iraq and the United Kingdom, 143n [Pg. 143 is part of Doc. 51], 175 [Pg. 175 is part of Doc. 73]

Saadabad Pact, 1937, 35 [Pg. 35 is part of Doc. 4], 503 [Pg. 503 includes portions of Doc. 286 and Doc. 287]

Soviet-Iranian treaty of 1921. see under Iran.

Soviet-Iranian treaty of 1927, 493 [Pg. 493 is part of Doc. 278], 532 [Pg. 532 is part of Doc. 311]

Suez Canal Convention, 1888, 147–148 [Pgs. 147–148 include portions of Doc. 54 and Doc. 55], 217 [Pg. 217 includes portions of Doc. 96 and Doc. 97], 1368 [Pg. 1368 is part of Doc. 951]

Surplus property agreement between the United States and Egypt, 1946, 212 [Pg. 212 is part of Doc. 96]

Tehran Declaration, 1943, 516 [Pg. 516 includes portions of Doc. 298 and Doc. 299], 524 [Pg. 524 is part of Doc. 304], 570 [Pg. 570 is part of Doc. 328], 587 [Pg. 587 is part of Doc. 336], 592 [Pg. 592 includes portions of Doc. 339 and Doc. 340]

Treaty of alliance between Turkey, France, and the United Kingdom, 1939, 1662 [Pg. 1662 is part of Doc. 1152], 1667 [Pg. 1667 is part of Doc. 1152], 1680 [Pg. 1680 is part of Doc. 1159], 1682 [Pg. 1682 includes portions of Doc. 1160 and Doc. 1161], 1684n [Pg. 1684 is part of Doc. 1162], 1685 [Pg. 1685 includes portions of Doc. 1162, Doc. 1163, and Doc. 1164]

Treaty of commerce and navigation between the United States and Turkey, 1929, 1665 [Pg. 1665 is part of Doc. 1152]

Treaty of establishment and sojourn between the United States and Turkey, 1931, 1665 [Pg. 1665 is part of Doc. 1152]

United Nations Charter, 1945, 33 [Pg. 33 is part of Doc. 4], 37–39 [Pg. 37 is part of Doc. 4], 45 [Pg. 45 includes portions of Doc. 4 and Doc. 5], 56 [Pg. 56 is part of Doc. 10], 276 [Pg. 276 is part of Doc. 133], 326 [Pg. 326 is part of Doc. 163], 353 [Pg. 353 includes portions of Doc. 177 and Doc. 178], 375 [Pg. 375 is part of Doc. 194], 383 [Pg. 383 is part of Doc. 200], 400 [Pg. 400 includes portions of Doc. 212 and Doc. 213], 406 [Pg. 406 is part of Doc. 215], 418 [Pg. 418 includes portions of Doc. 221 and Doc. 222], 468 [Pg. 468 is part of Doc. 261], 490–491 [Pg. 490 is part of Doc. 277], 493 [Pg. 493 is part of Doc. 278], 499 [Pg. 499 is part of Doc. 282], 505 [Pg. 505 includes portions of Doc. 288 and Doc. 289], 508 [Pg. 508 is part of Doc. 293], 513–514 [Pgs. 513–514 include portions of Doc. 296, Doc. 297, and Doc. 298], 531–535 [Pg. 531 is part of Doc. 311], 547 [Pg. 547 is part of Doc. 315], 550–551 [Pg. 550 is part of Doc. 315], 593 [Pg. 593 is part of Doc. 340], 605–606 [Pg. 605 is part of Doc. 351], 660 [Pg. 660 is part of Doc. 392], 745 [Pg. 745 is part of Doc. 463], 771 [Pg. 771 includes portions of Doc. 488 and Doc. 489], 789 [Pg. 789 includes portions of Doc. 503, Doc. 504, and Doc. 505], 792n [Pg. 792 is part of Doc. 505], 820 [Pg. 820 includes portions of Doc. 527 and Doc. 528], 876 [Pg. 876 is part of Doc. 563], 921 [Pg. 921 is part of Doc. 598], 951 [Pg. 951 is part of Doc. 612], 993 [Pg. 993 includes portions of Doc. 644 and Doc. 645], 1001–1002 [Pgs. 1001–1002 include portions of Doc. 651 and Doc. 652], 1004 [Pg. 1004 includes portions of Doc. 654 and Doc. 655], 1008 [Pg. 1008 includes portions of Doc. 657 and Doc. 658], 1019 [Pg. 1019 is part of Doc. 663], 1105–1106 [Pg. 1105 is part of Doc. 736], 1113n [Pg. 1113 is part of Doc. 744], 1156 [Pg. 1156 includes portions of Doc. 776 and Doc. 777], 1171 [Pg. 1171 is part of Doc. 788], 1176 [Pg. 1176 is part of Doc. 790], 1240–1242 [Pgs. 1240–1242 include portions of Doc. 845, Doc. 846, and Doc. 847], 1294 [Pg. 1294 is part of Doc. 895], 1303 [Pg. 1303 is part of Doc. 902], 1506–1507 [Pgs. 1506–1507 include portions of Doc. 1041 and Doc. 1042], 1575 [Pg. 1575 is part of Doc. 1101], 1656 [Pg. 1656 is part of Doc. 1149], 1737 [Pg. 1737 is part of Doc. 1208], 1773 [Pg. 1773 includes portions of Doc. 1227 and Doc. 1228].

Trevelyan, Humphrey, 1057n [Pg. 1057 includes portions of Doc. 693, Doc. 694, and Doc. 695]

Trieste, 368–369 [Pgs. 368–369 include portions of Doc. 190 and Doc. 191], 447 [Pg. 447 includes portions of Doc. 244, Doc. 245, and Doc. 246]

Tripolitania. see under Libya.

Trott, Alan C., 625–626 [Pgs. 625–626 include portions of Doc. 364 and Doc. 365]

Troutbeck, Sir John, 780 [Pg. 780 includes portions of Doc. 494 and Doc. 495], 906 [Pg. 906 includes portions of Doc. 589 and Doc. 590], 909–910 [Pgs. 909–910 include portions of Doc. 590 and Doc. 591]

Troutman, Sir John M., 992–994 [Pgs. 992–994 include portions of Doc. 643, Doc. 644, Doc. 645, and Doc. 646], 1003 [Pg. 1003 includes portions of Doc. 652, Doc. 653, and Doc. 654], 1135–1136 [Pgs. 1135–1136 include portions of Doc. 760 and Doc. 761], 1154–1155 [Pgs. 1154–1155 include portions of Doc. 773, Doc. 774, and Doc. 775]

Trucial states, 83 [Pg. 83 is part of Doc. 12], 122–124 [Pgs. 122–124 include portions of Doc. 31 and Doc. 32], 135n [Pg. 135 includes portions of Doc. 44 and Doc. 45]

Truman, Harry S.: Asia, U.S. policy toward, 11n [Pg. 11 is part of Doc. 3], 49 [Pg. 49 is part of Doc. 7]

Assistance to Greece and Turkey, report to Congress on, Mar. 17, 1949, 261n [Pg. 261 is part of Doc. 126]

China, U.S. policy toward, 576 [Pg. 576 is part of Doc. 330]

Conversations with: U.S. Ambassador McDonald, 1328n [Pg. 1328 includes portions of Doc. 921 and Doc. 922]; British Ambassador Franks, 652 [Pg. 652 is part of Doc. 386]; Greek Prime Minister Tsaldaris, 457 [Pg. 457 is part of Doc. 251]; Indian Prime Minister Nehru, 1750–1752 [Pgs. 1750–1752 include portions of Doc. 1216 and Doc. 1217]; Iranian Shah, 568 [Pg. 568 includes portions of Doc. 326 and Doc. 327], 572–574 [Pgs. 572–574 include portions of Doc. 329 and Doc. 330], 578 [Pg. 578 is part of Doc. 330], 580 [Pg. 580 includes portions of Doc. 331 and Doc. 332], 584–585 [Pgs. 584–585 include portions of Doc. 335 and Doc. 336], 592–593 [Pgs. 592–593 include portions of Doc. 339 and Doc. 340]; Israeli President Weizmann, 943–944 [Pgs. 943–944 include portions of Doc. 608, Doc. 609, and Doc. 610], 957 [Pg. 957 includes portions of Doc. 616 and Doc. 617], 959 [Pg. 959 includes portions of Doc. 618 and Doc. 619], 974 [Pg. 974 is part of Doc. 632], 1058 [Pg. 1058 includes portions of Doc. 695 and Doc. 696]; Jordanian representative Rifai, 650 [Pg. 650 includes portions of Doc. 384 and Doc. 385]

Correspondence with: Francis Cardinal Spellman, 1015–1017 [Pgs. 1015–1017 include portions of Doc. 660, Doc. 661, and Doc. 662], 1498 [Pg. 1498 includes portions of Doc. 1036 and Doc. 1037]; Indian Prime Minister Nehru, 51 [Pg. 51 is part of Doc. 8], 1733–1734 [Pgs. 1733–1734 include portions of Doc. 1205 and Doc. 1206], 1736–1738 [Pgs. 1736–1738 include portions of Doc. 1207, Doc. 1208, and Doc. 1209], 1759 [Pg. 1759 includes portions of Doc. 1218 and Doc. 1219]; Iranian Shah, 478n [Pg. 478 includes portions of Doc. 267, Doc. 268, and Doc. 269], 486n [Pg. 486 is part of Doc. 273], 552n [Pg. 552 is part of Doc. 316]; Israeli President Weizmann, 600–601 [Pgs. 600–601 include portions of Doc. 347 and Doc. 348], 670–671 [Pgs. 670–671 include portions of Doc. 400, Doc. 401, and Doc. 402], 741–742 [Pgs. 741–742 include portions of Doc. 458, Doc. 459, and Doc. 460], 947–948 [Pgs. 947–948 include portions of Doc. 610, Doc. 611, and Doc. 612], 954 [Pg. 954 includes portions of Doc. 613 and Doc. 614], 1168–1173 [Pgs. 1168–1173 include portions of Doc. 787, Doc. 788, and Doc. 789], 1305–1308 [Pgs. 1305–1308 include portions of Doc. 904 and Doc. 905], 1323–1324 [Pgs. 1323–1324 include portions of Doc. 916, Doc. 917, and Doc. 918]; Israeli Prime Minister Ben-Gurion, 1102 [Pg. 1102 includes portions of Doc. 735 and Doc. 736], 1107 [Pg. 1107 is part of Doc. 737]; Jordanian King Abdullah, 649–651 [Pgs. 649–651 include portions of Doc. 383, Doc. 384, Doc. 385, and Doc. 386], 871–873 [Pgs. 871–873 include portions of Doc. 557, Doc. 558, Doc. 559, Doc. 560, and Doc. 561], 878–879 [Pgs. 878–879 include portions of Doc. 563, Doc. 564, and Doc. 565], 916 [Pg. 916 includes portions of Doc. 592, Doc. 593, and Doc. 594], 924 [Pg. 924 includes portions of Doc. 600 and Doc. 601], 929 [Pg. 929 is part of Doc. 604], 932–933 [Pgs. 932–933 include portions of Doc. 605, Doc. 606, and Doc. 607], 963 [Pg. 963 is part of Doc. 622], 1121n [Pg. 1121 is part of Doc. 750], 1470 [Pg. 1470 includes portions of Doc. 1021 and Doc. 1022], 1489 [Pg. 1489 is part of Doc. 1031], 1515–1516 [Pgs. 1515–1516 include portions of Doc. 1051, Doc. 1052, and Doc. 1053], 1564 [Pg. 1564 includes portions of Doc. 1093 and Doc. 1094]; Pakistani Prime Minister Liaquat Ali Khan, 1733–1734 [Pgs. 1733–1734 include portions of Doc. 1205 and Doc. 1206], 1740–1742 [Pgs. 1740–1742 include portions of Doc. 1209, Doc. 1210, and Doc. 1211], 1759 [Pg. 1759 includes portions of Doc. 1218 and Doc. 1219]; Saudi Arabian King Ibn Saud, 1594 [Pg. 1594 includes portions of Doc. 1111 and Doc. 1112], 1596 [Pg. 1596 includes portions of Doc. 1113 and Doc. 1114], 1599–1600 [Pgs. 1599–1600 include portions of Doc. 1116, Doc. 1117, and Doc. 1118]; Turkish President Inonu, 1646 [Pg. 1646 includes portions of Doc. 1144 and Doc. 1145], 1647n [Pg. 1647 is part of Doc. 1146], 1656–1657 [Pgs. 1656–1657 include portions of Doc. 1149 and Doc. 1150]

Eastern Mediterranean and the Middle East, U.S. security interests in, 39 [Pg. 39 is part of Doc. 4], 40n [Pg. 40 is part of Doc. 4], 44 [Pg. 44 is part of Doc. 4]

Euphrates development scheme, 52 [Pg. 52 is part of Doc. 8]

European Recovery Program, 52 [Pg. 52 is part of Doc. 8]

Greece: Security of, 8 [Pg. 8 includes portions of Doc. 1, Doc. 2, and Doc. 3]; U.S. economic and military assistance, 229–230 [Pg. 229 is part of Doc. 105], 1661n [Pg. 1661 is part of Doc. 1152]; U.S. policy, 269 [Pg. 269 is part of Doc. 133], 271 [Pg. 271 is part of Doc. 133], 278n [Pg. 278 is part of Doc. 133], 284n [Pg. 284 is part of Doc. 136], 303n [Pg. 303 includes portions of Doc. 149 and Doc. 150], 321 [Pg. 321 includes portions of Doc. 160 and Doc. 161], 323 [Pg. 323 includes portions of Doc. 161 and Doc. 162], 345 [Pg. 345 includes portions of Doc. 172 and Doc. 173], 348 [Pg. 348 is part of Doc. 175], 371n [Pg. 371 includes portions of Doc. 192 and Doc. 193], 378 [Pg. 378 includes portions of Doc. 195 and Doc. 196], 424n [Pg. 424 is part of Doc. 227], 425n [Pg. 425 includes portions of Doc. 227 and Doc. 228], 427–428 [Pgs. 427–428 include portions of Doc. 229, Doc. 230, Doc. 231, and Doc. 232], 448 [Pg. 448 is part of Doc. 246], 462 [Pg. 462 includes portions of Doc. 255 and Doc. 256], 1644 [Pg. 1644 includes portions of Doc. 1143 and Doc. 1144]

Inaugural address, Jan. 20, 1949, 9 [Pg. 9 is part of Doc. 3], 559 [Pg. 559 is part of Doc. 320], 587 [Pg. 587 is part of Doc. 336], 697 [Pg. 697 includes portions of Doc. 423 and Doc. 424], 792 [Pg. 792 is part of Doc. 505], 798 [Pg. 798 includes portions of Doc. 507 and Doc. 508], 807 [Pg. 807 is part of Doc. 515], 905 [Pg. 905 includes portions of Doc. 588 and Doc. 589], 1014 [Pg. 1014 is part of Doc. 660], 1587 [Pg. 1587 is part of Doc. 1110], 1600 [Pg. 1600 includes portions of Doc. 1117 and Doc. 1118], 1666 [Pg. 1666 is part of Doc. 1152], 1670 [Pg. 1670 includes portions of Doc. 1152 and Doc. 1153]

Iran: Security of, 8 [Pg. 8 includes portions of Doc. 1, Doc. 2, and Doc. 3], 580 [Pg. 580 includes portions of Doc. 331 and Doc. 332]; U.S. policy, 487 [Pg. 487 includes portions of Doc. 274 and Doc. 275], 500 [Pg. 500 includes portions of Doc. 282, Doc. 283, and Doc. 284], 550–551 [Pg. 550 is part of Doc. 315], 559 [Pg. 559 is part of Doc. 320], 577–578 [Pg. 577 is part of Doc. 330], 586 [Pg. 586 is part of Doc. 336]

Iraqi-Syrian union, proposed, 181–182 [Pgs. 181–182 include portions of Doc. 76, Doc. 77, and Doc. 78], 184n [Pg. 184 includes portions of Doc. 78 and Doc. 79]

Israel: U.S. de jure recognition, 702–703 [Pgs. 702–703 include portions of Doc. 427, Doc. 428, and Doc. 429]; U.S. policy, 1063 [Pg. 1063 includes portions of Doc. 697 and Doc. 698], 1073–1075 [Pgs. 1073–1075 include portions of Doc. 705, Doc. 706, and Doc. 707], 1095 [Pg. 1095 includes portions of Doc. 729 and Doc. 730], 1102n [Pg. 1102 includes portions of Doc. 735 and Doc. 736], 1107 [Pg. 1107 is part of Doc. 737], 1109–1110 [Pgs. 1109–1110 include portions of Doc. 739, Doc. 740, Doc. 741, and Doc. 742], 1115 [Pg. 1115 includes portions of Doc. 745, Doc. 746, and Doc. 747], 1126 [Pg. 1126 is part of Doc. 754], 1128–1130 [Pgs. 1128–1130 include portions of Doc. 756 and Doc. 757], 1164 [Pg. 1164 includes portions of Doc. 783 and Doc. 784], 1311 [Pg. 1311 includes portions of Doc. 906 and Doc. 907]

Jerusalem, future status of, 1015–1017 [Pgs. 1015–1017 include portions of Doc. 660, Doc. 661, and Doc. 662], 1249 [Pg. 1249 includes portions of Doc. 852, Doc. 853, Doc. 854, and Doc. 855], 1251 [Pg. 1251 is part of Doc. 855], 1293 [Pg. 1293 is part of Doc. 895], 1444n [Pg. 1444 includes portions of Doc. 999 and Doc. 1000], 1498–1499 [Pgs. 1498–1499 include portions of Doc. 1036 and Doc. 1037], 1522 [Pg. 1522 includes portions of Doc. 1057 and Doc. 1058], 1551 [Pg. 1551 includes portions of Doc. 1081, Doc. 1082, and Doc. 1083], 1555n [Pg. 1555 includes portions of Doc. 1083 and Doc. 1084]

Jordan, U.S. policy toward, 1080 [Pg. 1080 includes portions of Doc. 713 and Doc. 714]

Kashmir dispute between India and Pakistan, 23–24 [Pg. 23 is part of Doc. 3], 1691 [Pg. 1691 includes portions of Doc. 1169, Doc. 1170, and Doc. 1171], 1696 [Pg. 1696 includes portions of Doc. 1174 and Doc. 1175], 1720 [Pg. 1720 includes portions of Doc. 1194 and Doc. 1195], 1728–1729 [Pgs. 1728–1729 include portions of Doc. 1202, Doc. 1203, and Doc. 1204], 1733–1736 [Pgs. 1733–1736 include portions of Doc. 1205, Doc. 1206, Doc. 1207, and Doc. 1208], 1738 [Pg. 1738 includes portions of Doc. 1208 and Doc. 1209], 1740–1744 [Pgs. 1740–1744 include portions of Doc. 1209, Doc. 1210, Doc. 1211, and Doc. 1212], 1749 [Pg. 1749 is part of Doc. 1215], 1751 [Pg. 1751 is part of Doc. 1216], 1759 [Pg. 1759 includes portions of Doc. 1218 and Doc. 1219]

Macedonia, proposed establishment of autonomous state of, 261n [Pg. 261 is part of Doc. 126]

Military assistance program, 1806 [Pg. 1806 is part of Doc. 1241]

Near and Middle East: U.N. Economic Survey Mission, 178 [Pg. 178 is part of Doc. 75]; U.S. policy, 52 [Pg. 52 is part of Doc. 8], 178 [Pg. 178 is part of Doc. 75], 502n [Pg. 502 is part of Doc. 286], 519 [Pg. 519 includes portions of Doc. 301 and Doc. 302], 546n [Pg. 546 is part of Doc. 315], 673 [Pg. 673 is part of Doc. 402], 674n [Pg. 674 is part of Doc. 402], 890 [Pg. 890 is part of Doc. 577], 898 [Pg. 898 includes portions of Doc. 582 and Doc. 583]

North Atlantic Treaty, 44 [Pg. 44 is part of Doc. 4], 500 [Pg. 500 includes portions of Doc. 282, Doc. 283, and Doc. 284], 502 [Pg. 502 is part of Doc. 286], 519 [Pg. 519 includes portions of Doc. 301 and Doc. 302]

Palestine question, 594–596 [Pgs. 594–596 include portions of Doc. 341, Doc. 342, and Doc. 343], 599–601 [Pgs. 599–601 include portions of Doc. 345, Doc. 346, Doc. 347, and Doc. 348], 605 [Pg. 605 is part of Doc. 351], 610n [Pg. 610 is part of Doc. 353], 628 [Pg. 628 is part of Doc. 367], 639–640 [Pgs. 639–640 include portions of Doc. 374, Doc. 375, and Doc. 376], 654 [Pg. 654 includes portions of Doc. 388 and Doc. 389], 658 [Pg. 658 includes portions of Doc. 391 and Doc. 392], 670–671 [Pgs. 670–671 include portions of Doc. 400, Doc. 401, and Doc. 402], 674n [Pg. 674 is part of Doc. 402], 677–678 [Pgs. 677–678 include portions of Doc. 404 and Doc. 405], 692n [Pg. 692 is part of Doc. 418], 696 [Pg. 696 includes portions of Doc. 422 and Doc. 423], 723n [Pg. 723 includes portions of Doc. 447 and Doc. 448], 726–730 [Pgs. 726–730 include portions of Doc. 450, Doc. 451, Doc. 452, and Doc. 453], 741 [Pg. 741 includes portions of Doc. 458 and Doc. 459], 747 [Pg. 747 includes portions of Doc. 464 and Doc. 465], 765 [Pg. 765 includes portions of Doc. 480 and Doc. 481], 801 [Pg. 801 is part of Doc. 510], 810 [Pg. 810 includes portions of Doc. 517 and Doc. 518], 812–813 [Pgs. 812–813 include portions of Doc. 518 and Doc. 519], 826n [Pg. 826 is part of Doc. 532], 854 [Pg. 854 is part of Doc. 544], 863 [Pg. 863 includes portions of Doc. 550 and Doc. 551], 871–873 [Pgs. 871–873 include portions of Doc. 557, Doc. 558, Doc. 559, Doc. 560, and Doc. 561], 875–876 [Pgs. 875–876 include portions of Doc. 562 and Doc. 563], 878–879 [Pgs. 878–879 include portions of Doc. 563, Doc. 564, and Doc. 565], 881 [Pg. 881 is part of Doc. 566], 886 [Pg. 886 includes portions of Doc. 572 and Doc. 573], 887n [Pg. 887 includes portions of Doc. 573 and Doc. 574], 890–891 [Pg. 890 is part of Doc. 577], 894n [Pg. 894 includes portions of Doc. 577 and Doc. 578], 900 [Pg. 900 includes portions of Doc. 585 and Doc. 586], 905 [Pg. 905 includes portions of Doc. 588 and Doc. 589], 915 [Pg. 915 is part of Doc. 592], 923–924 [Pgs. 923–924 include portions of Doc. 600 and Doc. 601], 929 [Pg. 929 is part of Doc. 604], 943–944 [Pgs. 943–944 include portions of Doc. 608, Doc. 609, and Doc. 610], 947 [Pg. 947 includes portions of Doc. 610 and Doc. 611], 954 [Pg. 954 includes portions of Doc. 613 and Doc. 614], 957 [Pg. 957 includes portions of Doc. 616 and Doc. 617], 1060 [Pg. 1060 is part of Doc. 697], 1072–1075 [Pgs. 1072–1075 include portions of Doc. 704, Doc. 705, Doc. 706, and Doc. 707], 1085 [Pg. 1085 includes portions of Doc. 719 and Doc. 720], 1090 [Pg. 1090 includes portions of Doc. 723 and Doc. 724], 1092 [Pg. 1092 includes portions of Doc. 726 and Doc. 727], 1100 [Pg. 1100 includes portions of Doc. 733, Doc. 734, and Doc. 735], 1102n [Pg. 1102 includes portions of Doc. 735 and Doc. 736], 1107 [Pg. 1107 is part of Doc. 737], 1109 [Pg. 1109 includes portions of Doc. 739 and Doc. 740], 1115–1116 [Pgs. 1115–1116 include portions of Doc. 745, Doc. 746, and Doc. 747], 1121 [Pg. 1121 is part of Doc. 750], 1125n [Pg. 1125 is part of Doc. 753], 1126 [Pg. 1126 is part of Doc. 754], 1128–1130 [Pgs. 1128–1130 include portions of Doc. 756 and Doc. 757], 1137n [Pg. 1137 includes portions of Doc. 762 and Doc. 763], 1144 [Pg. 1144 includes portions of Doc. 768 and Doc. 769], 1146 [Pg. 1146 includes portions of Doc. 769 and Doc. 770], 1148 [Pg. 1148 is part of Doc. 772], 1155 [Pg. 1155 includes portions of Doc. 774 and Doc. 775], 1163 [Pg. 1163 includes portions of Doc. 782 and Doc. 783], 1166–1173 [Pgs. 1166–1173 include portions of Doc. 785, Doc. 786, Doc. 787, Doc. 788, and Doc. 789], 1174n [Pg. 1174 includes portions of Doc. 789 and Doc. 790], 1180 [Pg. 1180 is part of Doc. 793], 1185 [Pg. 1185 includes portions of Doc. 797 and Doc. 798], 1196 [Pg. 1196 is part of Doc. 808], 1221 [Pg. 1221 includes portions of Doc. 826 and Doc. 827], 1223 [Pg. 1223 includes portions of Doc. 827 and Doc. 828], 1235–1236 [Pgs. 1235–1236 include portions of Doc. 838 and Doc. 839], 1237n [Pg. 1237 includes portions of Doc. 839 and Doc. 840], 1249–1252 [Pgs. 1249–1252 include portions of Doc. 852, Doc. 853, Doc. 854, Doc. 855, and Doc. 856], 1261 [Pg. 1261 includes portions of Doc. 865 and Doc. 866], 1272 [Pg. 1272 includes portions of Doc. 874 and Doc. 875], 1280 [Pg. 1280 includes portions of Doc. 882 and Doc. 883], 1291 [Pg. 1291 includes portions of Doc. 892 and Doc. 893], 1305–1308 [Pgs. 1305–1308 include portions of Doc. 904 and Doc. 905], 1316 [Pg. 1316 is part of Doc. 910], 1320 [Pg. 1320 is part of Doc. 913], 1323–1324 [Pgs. 1323–1324 include portions of Doc. 916, Doc. 917, and Doc. 918], 1327 [Pg. 1327 includes portions of Doc. 919, Doc. 920, and Doc. 921], 1328n [Pg. 1328 includes portions of Doc. 921 and Doc. 922], 1332 [Pg. 1332 is part of Doc. 924], 1341–1342 [Pgs. 1341–1342 include portions of Doc. 931, Doc. 932, and Doc. 933], 1348 [Pg. 1348 includes portions of Doc. 934 and Doc. 935], 1353 [Pg. 1353 is part of Doc. 937], 1388n [Pg. 1388 includes portions of Doc. 963, Doc. 964, and Doc. 965], 1438 [Pg. 1438 is part of Doc. 997], 1440n [Pg. 1440 includes portions of Doc. 997 and Doc. 998], 1455 [Pg. 1455 includes portions of Doc. 1011 and Doc. 1012], 1470 [Pg. 1470 includes portions of Doc. 1021 and Doc. 1022], 1489 [Pg. 1489 is part of Doc. 1031], 1494 [Pg. 1494 includes portions of Doc. 1034 and Doc. 1035], 1515–1516 [Pgs. 1515–1516 include portions of Doc. 1051, Doc. 1052, and Doc. 1053], 1564 [Pg. 1564 includes portions of Doc. 1093 and Doc. 1094]

Palestinian refugees, relief for, 663 [Pg. 663 includes portions of Doc. 393 and Doc. 394], 665n [Pg. 665 includes portions of Doc. 394 and Doc. 395], 677 [Pg. 677 includes portions of Doc. 404 and Doc. 405], 698 [Pg. 698 includes portions of Doc. 424 and Doc. 425], 723 [Pg. 723 includes portions of Doc. 447 and Doc. 448], 762 [Pg. 762 is part of Doc. 479], 827 [Pg. 827 is part of Doc. 533], 830 [Pg. 830 is part of Doc. 533], 862–863 [Pgs. 862–863 include portions of Doc. 548, Doc. 549, Doc. 550, and Doc. 551], 870n [Pg. 870 is part of Doc. 557], 891–893 [Pg. 891 is part of Doc. 577], 899 [Pg. 899 includes portions of Doc. 583, Doc. 584, and Doc. 585], 905–906 [Pgs. 905–906 include portions of Doc. 588, Doc. 589, and Doc. 590], 916 [Pg. 916 includes portions of Doc. 592, Doc. 593, and Doc. 594], 932–933 [Pgs. 932–933 include portions of Doc. 605, Doc. 606, and Doc. 607], 941 [Pg. 941 is part of Doc. 608], 957 [Pg. 957 includes portions of Doc. 616 and Doc. 617], 959 [Pg. 959 includes portions of Doc. 618 and Doc. 619], 963–965 [Pgs. 963–965 include portions of Doc. 622, Doc. 623, Doc. 624, and Doc. 625], 970–971 [Pgs. 970–971 include portions of Doc. 629, Doc. 630, and Doc. 631], 974 [Pg. 974 is part of Doc. 632], 983 [Pg. 983 includes portions of Doc. 639 and Doc. 640], 984n [Pg. 984 is part of Doc. 640], 1014 [Pg. 1014 is part of Doc. 660], 1017 [Pg. 1017 includes portions of Doc. 661 and Doc. 662], 1022–1023 [Pgs. 1022–1023 include portions of Doc. 665, Doc. 666, and Doc. 667], 1033 [Pg. 1033 is part of Doc. 672], 1042 [Pg. 1042 includes portions of Doc. 679 and Doc. 680], 1047–1048 [Pgs. 1047–1048 include portions of Doc. 685, Doc. 686, and Doc. 687], 1051 [Pg. 1051 includes portions of Doc. 688 and Doc. 689], 1056 [Pg. 1056 includes portions of Doc. 691, Doc. 692, and Doc. 693], 1058 [Pg. 1058 includes portions of Doc. 695 and Doc. 696], 1060 [Pg. 1060 is part of Doc. 697], 1063 [Pg. 1063 includes portions of Doc. 697 and Doc. 698], 1070 [Pg. 1070 is part of Doc. 703], 1072–1073 [Pgs. 1072–1073 include portions of Doc. 704 and Doc. 705], 1095 [Pg. 1095 includes portions of Doc. 729 and Doc. 730], 1135n [Pg. 1135 includes portions of Doc. 760 and Doc. 761], 1139 [Pg. 1139 is part of Doc. 763], 1156 [Pg. 1156 includes portions of Doc. 776 and Doc. 777], 1203 [Pg. 1203 includes portions of Doc. 812 and Doc. 813], 1211 [Pg. 1211 is part of Doc. 818], 1214 [Pg. 1214 includes portions of Doc. 821 and Doc. 822], 1220 [Pg. 1220 is part of Doc. 826], 1236 [Pg. 1236 is part of Doc. 839], 1249–1251 [Pgs. 1249–1251 include portions of Doc. 852, Doc. 853, Doc. 854, and Doc. 855], 1282–1283 [Pgs. 1282–1283 include portions of Doc. 884, Doc. 885, and Doc. 886], 1297 [Pg. 1297 includes portions of Doc. 896 and Doc. 897], 1306–1307 [Pg. 1306 is part of Doc. 904], 1460–1461 [Pgs. 1460–1461 include portions of Doc. 1014, Doc. 1015, and Doc. 1016], 1505–1506 [Pgs. 1505–1506 include portions of Doc. 1041 and Doc. 1042], 1563–1564 [Pgs. 1563–1564 include portions of Doc. 1092, Doc. 1093, and Doc. 1094]

Point Four program, 9 [Pg. 9 is part of Doc. 3], 52 [Pg. 52 is part of Doc. 8], 77 [Pg. 77 is part of Doc. 12], 176 [Pg. 176 is part of Doc. 74], 178 [Pg. 178 is part of Doc. 75], 525 [Pg. 525 is part of Doc. 304], 540 [Pg. 540 is part of Doc. 313], 559 [Pg. 559 is part of Doc. 320], 587 [Pg. 587 is part of Doc. 336], 792 [Pg. 792 is part of Doc. 505], 798 [Pg. 798 includes portions of Doc. 507 and Doc. 508], 807 [Pg. 807 is part of Doc. 515], 859 [Pg. 859 includes portions of Doc. 546 and Doc. 547], 905 [Pg. 905 includes portions of Doc. 588 and Doc. 589], 1014 [Pg. 1014 is part of Doc. 660], 1587 [Pg. 1587 is part of Doc. 1110], 1600 [Pg. 1600 includes portions of Doc. 1117 and Doc. 1118], 1615 [Pg. 1615 includes portions of Doc. 1121 and Doc. 1122], 1666 [Pg. 1666 is part of Doc. 1152], 1670 [Pg. 1670 includes portions of Doc. 1152 and Doc. 1153], 1793 [Pg. 1793 is part of Doc. 1236]

Saudi Arabia, U.S. relations with, 1573–1574 [Pgs. 1573–1574 include portions of Doc. 1099 and Doc. 1100], 1594 [Pg. 1594 includes portions of Doc. 1111 and Doc. 1112], 1596 [Pg. 1596 includes portions of Doc. 1113 and Doc. 1114], 1599–1601 [Pgs. 1599–1601 include portions of Doc. 1116, Doc. 1117, and Doc. 1118], 1614–1616 [Pgs. 1614–1616 include portions of Doc. 1120, Doc. 1121, Doc. 1122, and Doc. 1123], 1621 [Pg. 1621 is part of Doc. 1125]

Stalin, proposed talks with, 345 [Pg. 345 includes portions of Doc. 172 and Doc. 173]

Syria, U.S. relations with, 901 [Pg. 901 is part of Doc. 586], 1630–1632 [Pgs. 1630–1632 include portions of Doc. 1132, Doc. 1133, and Doc. 1134], 1634–1635 [Pgs. 1634–1635 include portions of Doc. 1135, Doc. 1136, and Doc. 1137], 1636n [Pg. 1636 is part of Doc. 1137]

Turkey, U.S. relations with, 8 [Pg. 8 includes portions of Doc. 1, Doc. 2, and Doc. 3], 269 [Pg. 269 is part of Doc. 133], 271 [Pg. 271 is part of Doc. 133], 278n [Pg. 278 is part of Doc. 133], 1644n [Pg. 1644 includes portions of Doc. 1143 and Doc. 1144], 1646–1647 [Pgs. 1646–1647 include portions of Doc. 1144, Doc. 1145, and Doc. 1146], 1649–1652 [Pg. 1649 is part of Doc. 1146], 1653n [Pg. 1653 includes portions of Doc. 1146 and Doc. 1147], 1654n [Pg. 1654 includes portions of Doc. 1147 and Doc. 1148], 1656–1657 [Pgs. 1656–1657 include portions of Doc. 1149 and Doc. 1150], 1661n [Pg. 1661 is part of Doc. 1152], 1662 [Pg. 1662 is part of Doc. 1152]

U.S. airfields in the United Kingdom and the Cairo–Suez area, proposed construction of, 205 [Pg. 205 includes portions of Doc. 92, Doc. 93, and Doc. 94]

U.S. territorial jurisdiction over natural resources in coastal areas and the high seas, proclamation concerning, 1945, 98 [Pg. 98 is part of Doc. 17], 102 [Pg. 102 is part of Doc. 18], 104 [Pg. 104 includes portions of Doc. 19 and Doc. 20], 107 [Pg. 107 includes portions of Doc. 21 and Doc. 22], 112–113 [Pg. 112 is part of Doc. 25], 115–118 [Pgs. 115–118 include portions of Doc. 25, Doc. 26, Doc. 27, and Doc. 28], 121–122 [Pgs. 121–122 include portions of Doc. 30, Doc. 31, and Doc. 32], 128n [Pg. 128 includes portions of Doc. 36 and Doc. 37], 131–132 [Pgs. 131–132 include portions of Doc. 40 and Doc. 41], 135 [Pg. 135 includes portions of Doc. 44 and Doc. 45]

Visit to the United States by the Prime Minister of Pakistan, proposed, 1483 [Pg. 1483 includes portions of Doc. 1028 and Doc. 1029]

Yugoslavia, U.S. relations with, 253 [Pg. 253 includes portions of Doc. 119, Doc. 120, and Doc. 121], 412 [Pg. 412 includes portions of Doc. 216, Doc. 217, and Doc. 218]

Truman Doctrine, 179 [Pg. 179 is part of Doc. 75], 271n [Pg. 271 is part of Doc. 133], 341 [Pg. 341 includes portions of Doc. 170 and Doc. 171], 454 [Pg. 454 is part of Doc. 249], 510 [Pg. 510 includes portions of Doc. 294 and Doc. 295], 570–571 [Pg. 570 is part of Doc. 328], 587–588 [Pgs. 587–588 include portions of Doc. 336 and Doc. 337], 906 [Pg. 906 includes portions of Doc. 589 and Doc. 590], 1647n [Pg. 1647 is part of Doc. 1146], 1661n [Pg. 1661 is part of Doc. 1152], 1670 [Pg. 1670 includes portions of Doc. 1152 and Doc. 1153], 1676 [Pg. 1676 is part of Doc. 1158]

Tsakalotos, Gen., 354 [Pg. 354 is part of Doc. 178]

Tsaldaris, Constantine, 230 [Pg. 230 is part of Doc. 105], 233–234 [Pgs. 233–234 include portions of Doc. 106 and Doc. 107], 241 [Pg. 241 is part of Doc. 114], 245n [Pg. 245 includes portions of Doc. 115, Doc. 116, and Doc. 117], 248 [Pg. 248 includes portions of Doc. 117 and Doc. 118], 258 [Pg. 258 includes portions of Doc. 123 and Doc. 124], 268 [Pg. 268 is part of Doc. 132], 295–296 [Pgs. 295–296 include portions of Doc. 144 and Doc. 145], 309 [Pg. 309 includes portions of Doc. 150 and Doc. 151], 311 [Pg. 311 includes portions of Doc. 151 and Doc. 152], 315 [Pg. 315 includes portions of Doc. 154 and Doc. 155], 317 [Pg. 317 is part of Doc. 156], 322 [Pg. 322 includes portions of Doc. 159 and Doc. 160], 325–326 [Pg. 325 is part of Doc. 163], 340 [Pg. 340 is part of Doc. 170], 345 [Pg. 345 includes portions of Doc. 172 and Doc. 173], 349–350 [Pgs. 349–350 include portions of Doc. 175 and Doc. 176], 362 [Pg. 362 is part of Doc. 185], 363n [Pg. 363 includes portions of Doc. 185 and Doc. 186], 373 [Pg. 373 is part of Doc. 194], 381–382 [Pgs. 381–382 include portions of Doc. 199 and Doc. 200], 384–385 [Pgs. 384–385 include portions of Doc. 200 and Doc. 201], 389 [Pg. 389 includes portions of Doc. 204, Doc. 205, and Doc. 206], 392 [Pg. 392 includes portions of Doc. 206 and Doc. 207], 401 [Pg. 401 includes portions of Doc. 213 and Doc. 214], 419–420 [Pgs. 419–420 include portions of Doc. 222 and Doc. 223], 424–425 [Pgs. 424–425 include portions of Doc. 227 and Doc. 228], 447–449 [Pgs. 447–449 include portions of Doc. 244, Doc. 245, and Doc. 246], 457 [Pg. 457 is part of Doc. 251], 460 [Pg. 460 includes portions of Doc. 253 and Doc. 254], 466 [Pg. 466 is part of Doc. 259], 1683 [Pg. 1683 is part of Doc. 1161]

Tsarapkin, S. K., 1290 [Pg. 1290 includes portions of Doc. 891 and Doc. 892], 1530 [Pg. 1530 includes portions of Doc. 1065 and Doc. 1066]

Tsatsos, Constantinos, 241 [Pg. 241 is part of Doc. 114], 310 [Pg. 310 is part of Doc. 151]

Tsiang, Tingfu F., 1755 [Pg. 1755 is part of Doc. 1217]

Tsourkaris, John, 259–260 [Pgs. 259–260 include portions of Doc. 124, Doc. 125, and Doc. 126]

Tuck, S. Pinkney, 618 [Pg. 618 is part of Doc. 359]

Tunisia. see under French North Africa.

Turkey (see also Turkish position under Palestine question): American Mission for Aid to Turkey, 1641–1642 [Pgs. 1641–1642 include portions of Doc. 1141 and Doc. 1142], 1661n [Pg. 1661 is part of Doc. 1152], 1673n [Pg. 1673 is part of Doc. 1155], 1674 [Pg. 1674 includes portions of Doc. 1155 and Doc. 1156]

Arab states, relations with, 1668 [Pg. 1668 is part of Doc. 1152], 1683 [Pg. 1683 is part of Doc. 1161]

Balkan pact, proposed inclusion in, 449 [Pg. 449 is part of Doc. 246], 460 [Pg. 460 includes portions of Doc. 253 and Doc. 254]

British policy, 3 [Pg. 3 is part of Doc. 1], 8 [Pg. 8 includes portions of Doc. 1, Doc. 2, and Doc. 3], 50 [Pg. 50 is part of Doc. 8], 1667 [Pg. 1667 is part of Doc. 1152]

British-American aerial mapping project, proposed, 1641 [Pg. 1641 is part of Doc. 1141], 1671–1672 [Pgs. 1671–1672 include portions of Doc. 1153 and Doc. 1154], 1681–1682 [Pgs. 1681–1682 include portions of Doc. 1160 and Doc. 1161]

Bulgaria, relations with, 1668 [Pg. 1668 is part of Doc. 1152]

Communist movement, 1660 [Pg. 1660 includes portions of Doc. 1151 and Doc. 1152], 1663 [Pg. 1663 is part of Doc. 1152], 1667 [Pg. 1667 is part of Doc. 1152]

Coordinator of the Armed Forces Group, American Mission for Aid to Turkey. see McBride.

Council of Western Europe, membership in, 35 [Pg. 35 is part of Doc. 4], 1671 [Pg. 1671 includes portions of Doc. 1153 and Doc. 1154]

Cyprus, claim to, 171 [Pg. 171 is part of Doc. 73]

European Recovery Program, participation in, 1663 [Pg. 1663 is part of Doc. 1152], 1666 [Pg. 1666 is part of Doc. 1152], 1676 [Pg. 1676 is part of Doc. 1158]

Export-Import Bank credits, 1666n [Pg. 1666 is part of Doc. 1152]

France, relations with, 1667 [Pg. 1667 is part of Doc. 1152]

Greece, relations with, 1667 [Pg. 1667 is part of Doc. 1152]

Iran, relations with, 1642–1643 [Pgs. 1642–1643 include portions of Doc. 1141, Doc. 1142, and Doc. 1143], 1667–1668 [Pg. 1667 is part of Doc. 1152], 1684 [Pg. 1684 is part of Doc. 1162]

Iraq, relations with, 1668 [Pg. 1668 is part of Doc. 1152], 1683 [Pg. 1683 is part of Doc. 1161]

Israel, de facto recognition of, 1668 [Pg. 1668 is part of Doc. 1152]

Joint American Military Mission for Aid to Turkey, 1641n [Pg. 1641 is part of Doc. 1141]

Jordan, relations with, 1668 [Pg. 1668 is part of Doc. 1152]

Lebanon, relations with, 1668 [Pg. 1668 is part of Doc. 1152]

Looted gold, negotiations regarding restitution of, 1665–1666 [Pg. 1665 is part of Doc. 1152]

Mediterranean pact, proposed inclusion in, 1011 [Pg. 1011 is part of Doc. 659], 1648 [Pg. 1648 is part of Doc. 1146], 1650 [Pg. 1650 is part of Doc. 1146], 1652 [Pg. 1652 is part of Doc. 1146], 1655 [Pg. 1655 is part of Doc. 1148], 1662–1663 [Pg. 1662 is part of Doc. 1152]

Middle East pact, attitude toward proposed, 36–37 [Pg. 36 is part of Doc. 4]

North Atlantic Treaty Organization, proposed membership in, 34–35 [Pg. 34 is part of Doc. 4], 233 [Pg. 233 includes portions of Doc. 106 and Doc. 107], 271 [Pg. 271 is part of Doc. 133], 1647–1648 [Pg. 1647 is part of Doc. 1146], 1650 [Pg. 1650 is part of Doc. 1146], 1652 [Pg. 1652 is part of Doc. 1146], 1655 [Pg. 1655 is part of Doc. 1148], 1662 [Pg. 1662 is part of Doc. 1152], 1669–1671 [Pgs. 1669–1671 include portions of Doc. 1152, Doc. 1153, and Doc. 1154], 1680 [Pg. 1680 is part of Doc. 1159], 1682–1683 [Pgs. 1682–1683 include portions of Doc. 1160 and Doc. 1161], 1684n [Pg. 1684 is part of Doc. 1162], 1685 [Pg. 1685 includes portions of Doc. 1162, Doc. 1163, and Doc. 1164]

Security of, 8 [Pg. 8 includes portions of Doc. 1, Doc. 2, and Doc. 3], 495n [Pg. 495 includes portions of Doc. 279 and Doc. 280], 572 [Pg. 572 is part of Doc. 329], 576 [Pg. 576 is part of Doc. 330], 1639 [Pg. 1639 is part of Doc. 1140], 1650–1652 [Pg. 1650 is part of Doc. 1146], 1653n [Pg. 1653 includes portions of Doc. 1146 and Doc. 1147], 1655 [Pg. 1655 is part of Doc. 1148], 1657 [Pg. 1657 includes portions of Doc. 1149 and Doc. 1150], 1662 [Pg. 1662 is part of Doc. 1152], 1669 [Pg. 1669 is part of Doc. 1152], 1671 [Pg. 1671 includes portions of Doc. 1153 and Doc. 1154], 1685 [Pg. 1685 includes portions of Doc. 1162, Doc. 1163, and Doc. 1164]

Soviet policy, 3 [Pg. 3 is part of Doc. 1], 5 [Pg. 5 is part of Doc. 1], 39 [Pg. 39 is part of Doc. 4], 41–42 [Pg. 41 is part of Doc. 4], 270 [Pg. 270 is part of Doc. 133], 287 [Pg. 287 includes portions of Doc. 138 and Doc. 139], 342 [Pg. 342 is part of Doc. 171], 474 [Pg. 474 is part of Doc. 264], 545 [Pg. 545 includes portions of Doc. 314 and Doc. 315], 554 [Pg. 554 is part of Doc. 316], 1638–1640 [Pgs. 1638–1640 include portions of Doc. 1139, Doc. 1140, and Doc. 1141], 1648–1649 [Pg. 1648 is part of Doc. 1146], 1653n [Pg. 1653 includes portions of Doc. 1146 and Doc. 1147], 1655 [Pg. 1655 is part of Doc. 1148], 1660–1662 [Pgs. 1660–1662 include portions of Doc. 1151 and Doc. 1152], 1667 [Pg. 1667 is part of Doc. 1152], 1669–1670 [Pgs. 1669–1670 include portions of Doc. 1152 and Doc. 1153], 1676 [Pg. 1676 is part of Doc. 1158], 1684 [Pg. 1684 is part of Doc. 1162]

Syrian claim to Alexandretta (Hatay), 1668 [Pg. 1668 is part of Doc. 1152]

Tobacco export to Germany, 1664–1665 [Pg. 1664 is part of Doc. 1152]

U.S. air facilities, 269n [Pg. 269 is part of Doc. 133], 1644–1645 [Pgs. 1644–1645 include portions of Doc. 1143 and Doc. 1144], 1654 [Pg. 1654 includes portions of Doc. 1147 and Doc. 1148], 1672 [Pg. 1672 is part of Doc. 1154]

U.S. aviation gas stockpile, 1645 [Pg. 1645 is part of Doc. 1144], 1654–1655 [Pgs. 1654–1655 include portions of Doc. 1147 and Doc. 1148], 1672 [Pg. 1672 is part of Doc. 1154]

U.S. economic and military assistance, 1–3 [Pg. 1 is part of Doc. 1], 42 [Pg. 42 is part of Doc. 4], 45n [Pg. 45 includes portions of Doc. 4 and Doc. 5], 57 [Pg. 57 is part of Doc. 10], 70 [Pg. 70 is part of Doc. 12], 176–177 [Pg. 176 is part of Doc. 74], 228–229 [Pg. 228 is part of Doc. 105], 232–233 [Pgs. 232–233 include portions of Doc. 106 and Doc. 107], 245 [Pg. 245 includes portions of Doc. 115, Doc. 116, and Doc. 117], 261n [Pg. 261 is part of Doc. 126], 270 [Pg. 270 is part of Doc. 133], 272–273 [Pg. 272 is part of Doc. 133], 275 [Pg. 275 is part of Doc. 133], 277–279 [Pgs. 277–279 include portions of Doc. 133 and Doc. 134], 378 [Pg. 378 includes portions of Doc. 195 and Doc. 196], 429 [Pg. 429 includes portions of Doc. 232 and Doc. 233], 461n [Pg. 461 includes portions of Doc. 254 and Doc. 255], 472–473 [Pgs. 472–473 include portions of Doc. 262 and Doc. 263], 475 [Pg. 475 includes portions of Doc. 264 and Doc. 265], 502–507 [Pgs. 502–507 include portions of Doc. 286, Doc. 287, Doc. 288, Doc. 289, Doc. 290, Doc. 291, Doc. 292, and Doc. 293], 514–516 [Pgs. 514–516 include portions of Doc. 297, Doc. 298, and Doc. 299], 521 [Pg. 521 is part of Doc. 302], 523–524 [Pgs. 523–524 include portions of Doc. 303 and Doc. 304], 526 [Pg. 526 includes portions of Doc. 305 and Doc. 306], 530 [Pg. 530 is part of Doc. 310], 537 [Pg. 537 is part of Doc. 312], 539 [Pg. 539 is part of Doc. 312], 547 [Pg. 547 is part of Doc. 315], 552–553 [Pg. 552 is part of Doc. 316], 556 [Pg. 556 is part of Doc. 317], 558 [Pg. 558 includes portions of Doc. 319 and Doc. 320], 574 [Pg. 574 includes portions of Doc. 329 and Doc. 330], 587 [Pg. 587 is part of Doc. 336], 618n [Pg. 618 is part of Doc. 359], 697 [Pg. 697 includes portions of Doc. 423 and Doc. 424], 1586 [Pg. 1586 is part of Doc. 1110], 1616 [Pg. 1616 includes portions of Doc. 1122 and Doc. 1123], 1638–1641 [Pgs. 1638–1641 include portions of Doc. 1139, Doc. 1140, and Doc. 1141], 1643–1645 [Pgs. 1643–1645 include portions of Doc. 1142, Doc. 1143, and Doc. 1144], 1647 [Pg. 1647 is part of Doc. 1146], 1649–1651 [Pg. 1649 is part of Doc. 1146], 1653–1654 [Pgs. 1653–1654 include portions of Doc. 1146, Doc. 1147, and Doc. 1148], 1656–1661 [Pgs. 1656–1661 include portions of Doc. 1149, Doc. 1150, Doc. 1151, and Doc. 1152], 1663–1670 [Pgs. 1663–1670 include portions of Doc. 1152 and Doc. 1153], 1673n [Pg. 1673 is part of Doc. 1155], 1674–1678 [Pgs. 1674–1678 include portions of Doc. 1155, Doc. 1156, Doc. 1157, and Doc. 1158], 1679n [Pg. 1679 includes portions of Doc. 1158 and Doc. 1159], 1680 [Pg. 1680 is part of Doc. 1159]

U.S. policy, 8 [Pg. 8 includes portions of Doc. 1, Doc. 2, and Doc. 3], 31–32 [Pgs. 31–32 include portions of Doc. 3 and Doc. 4], 34 [Pg. 34 is part of Doc. 4], 39 [Pg. 39 is part of Doc. 4], 42 [Pg. 42 is part of Doc. 4], 44 [Pg. 44 is part of Doc. 4], 56 [Pg. 56 is part of Doc. 10], 171 [Pg. 171 is part of Doc. 73], 345 [Pg. 345 includes portions of Doc. 172 and Doc. 173], 495n [Pg. 495 includes portions of Doc. 279 and Doc. 280], 500 [Pg. 500 includes portions of Doc. 282, Doc. 283, and Doc. 284], 519 [Pg. 519 includes portions of Doc. 301 and Doc. 302], 1650 [Pg. 1650 is part of Doc. 1146], 1652–1653 [Pgs. 1652–1653 include portions of Doc. 1146 and Doc. 1147], 1655–1657 [Pgs. 1655–1657 include portions of Doc. 1148, Doc. 1149, and Doc. 1150], 1660–1670 [Pgs. 1660–1670 include portions of Doc. 1151, Doc. 1152, and Doc. 1153]

U.S. security interests in, 40–41 [Pg. 40 is part of Doc. 4], 56–57 [Pg. 56 is part of Doc. 10], 245 [Pg. 245 includes portions of Doc. 115, Doc. 116, and Doc. 117], 278–279 [Pgs. 278–279 include portions of Doc. 133 and Doc. 134], 453 [Pg. 453 is part of Doc. 249], 553 [Pg. 553 is part of Doc. 316], 1638 [Pg. 1638 includes portions of Doc. 1139 and Doc. 1140], 1650n [Pg. 1650 is part of Doc. 1146]

Visit by Treasury Secretary Snyder, 1676–1679 [Pgs. 1676–1679 include portions of Doc. 1158 and Doc. 1159]

Visit by U.S. Fleet, 1640–1642 [Pgs. 1640–1642 include portions of Doc. 1140, Doc. 1141, and Doc. 1142]

Voice of America relay facilities, 1641 [Pg. 1641 is part of Doc. 1141]

Yugoslav policy, 1668 [Pg. 1668 is part of Doc. 1152]

Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, 1270 [Pg. 1270 is part of Doc. 872], 1302 [Pg. 1302 includes portions of Doc. 900, Doc. 901, and Doc. 902]

Umm al Maradium Island, 94–95 [Pgs. 94–95 include portions of Doc. 15 and Doc. 16]

Union of South Africa: Import controls, discussions regarding adverse effects on U.S. shipping of, 1799–1802 [Pgs. 1799–1802 include portions of Doc. 1238 and Doc. 1239], 1804–1805 [Pgs. 1804–1805 include portions of Doc. 1240 and Doc. 1241]; imports from United Kingdom, 573 [Pg. 573 is part of Doc. 329]; U.S. economic and military assistance, 1799–1802 [Pgs. 1799–1802 include portions of Doc. 1238 and Doc. 1239], 1804 [Pg. 1804 is part of Doc. 1240], 1806–1808 [Pgs. 1806–1808 include portions of Doc. 1241 and Doc. 1242]

Union of Soviet Socialist Republic. see Soviet Union.

United Jewish Appeal, 1110 [Pg. 1110 includes portions of Doc. 741 and Doc. 742]

United Kingdom (see also British sub-headings under individual countries): U.S. airfields, proposed construction of, 205 [Pg. 205 includes portions of Doc. 92, Doc. 93, and Doc. 94]; U.S. military assistance, 277 [Pg. 277 is part of Doc. 133]

United Nations (see also U.N. subheadings under Greece, Iran, Kashmir dispute, etc., and Palestine question): Economic and Social Council, 357 [Pg. 357 is part of Doc. 180]

General Assembly: British position, 71 [Pg. 71 is part of Doc. 12], 73–75 [Pg. 73 is part of Doc. 12], 1756 [Pg. 1756 is part of Doc. 1217]

China question, 1754 [Pg. 1754 is part of Doc. 1217].-1756 [Pg. 1756 is part of Doc. 1217]

Committees: Ad Hoc Political Committee, 66 [Pg. 66 is part of Doc. 12], 302n [Pg. 302 is part of Doc. 149], 973–974 [Pgs. 973–974 include portions of Doc. 631 and Doc. 632], 979 [Pg. 979 is part of Doc. 636], 995–997 [Pgs. 995–997 include portions of Doc. 646, Doc. 647, and Doc. 648], 1017 [Pg. 1017 includes portions of Doc. 661 and Doc. 662], 1021 [Pg. 1021 includes portions of Doc. 664 and Doc. 665], 1029 [Pg. 1029 includes portions of Doc. 668 and Doc. 669], 1034 [Pg. 1034 is part of Doc. 673], 1103 [Pg. 1103 is part of Doc. 736], 1106 [Pg. 1106 is part of Doc. 736], 1113n [Pg. 1113 is part of Doc. 744], 1161 [Pg. 1161 is part of Doc. 781], 1176 [Pg. 1176 is part of Doc. 790], 1499 [Pg. 1499 is part of Doc. 1037], 1509 [Pg. 1509 includes portions of Doc. 1043, Doc. 1044, and Doc. 1045], 1511 [Pg. 1511 includes portions of Doc. 1046 and Doc. 1047], 1514 [Pg. 1514 includes portions of Doc. 1049 and Doc. 1050], 1518 [Pg. 1518 includes portions of Doc. 1053, Doc. 1054, and Doc. 1055], 1520 [Pg. 1520 includes portions of Doc. 1055 and Doc. 1056], 1525 [Pg. 1525 is part of Doc. 1060], 1527–1530 [Pgs. 1527–1530 include portions of Doc. 1060, Doc. 1061, Doc. 1062, Doc. 1063, Doc. 1064, Doc. 1065, and Doc. 1066]; Committee I., 71–73 [Pg. 71 is part of Doc. 12], 254n [Pg. 254 is part of Doc. 121], 299 [Pg. 299 is part of Doc. 147], 302 [Pg. 302 is part of Doc. 149], 321 [Pg. 321 includes portions of Doc. 160 and Doc. 161], 391–392 [Pgs. 391–392 include portions of Doc. 206 and Doc. 207], 404–406 [Pgs. 404–406 include portions of Doc. 214 and Doc. 215], 408 [Pg. 408 is part of Doc. 215], 429–430 [Pgs. 429–430 include portions of Doc. 232 and Doc. 233], 439 [Pg. 439 includes portions of Doc. 240 and Doc. 241], 445n [Pg. 445 includes portions of Doc. 243 and Doc. 244], 450–452 [Pgs. 450–452 include portions of Doc. 247 and Doc. 248], 456–457 [Pgs. 456–457 include portions of Doc. 249, Doc. 250, and Doc. 251], 612 [Pg. 612 is part of Doc. 354], 659 [Pg. 659 is part of Doc. 392], 722 [Pg. 722 includes portions of Doc. 446 and Doc. 447], 736 [Pg. 736 is part of Doc. 457], 742 [Pg. 742 includes portions of Doc. 459 and Doc. 460], 923n [Pg. 923 is part of Doc. 600], 1294 [Pg. 1294 is part of Doc. 895], 1370–1371 [Pg. 1370 is part of Doc. 953], 1454 [Pg. 1454 includes portions of Doc. 1009 and Doc. 1010], 1468 [Pg. 1468 includes portions of Doc. 1019 and Doc. 1020]; Committee III, 834 [Pg. 834 is part of Doc. 533], 870 [Pg. 870 is part of Doc. 557], 1370–1372 [Pg. 1370 is part of Doc. 953]; Committee V., 1370 [Pg. 1370 is part of Doc. 953]; General, 1370 [Pg. 1370 is part of Doc. 953]

Italian colonies, disposition of former, 88 [Pg. 88 is part of Doc. 12], 302 [Pg. 302 is part of Doc. 149]

Soviet position, 1756 [Pg. 1756 is part of Doc. 1217]

Treatment of Indians in the Union of South Africa, 1803–1804 [Pgs. 1803–1804 include portions of Doc. 1239 and Doc. 1240]

U.N. Security Guard, proposed, 302n [Pg. 302 is part of Doc. 149]

U.S. position, 71 [Pg. 71 is part of Doc. 12], 74 [Pg. 74 is part of Doc. 12], 1756 [Pg. 1756 is part of Doc. 1217]

Secretary-General (see also Lie, Trygve), 38 [Pg. 38 is part of Doc. 4], 273 [Pg. 273 is part of Doc. 133], 302n [Pg. 302 is part of Doc. 149], 312 [Pg. 312 includes portions of Doc. 152 and Doc. 153], 352 [Pg. 352 is part of Doc. 177], 396 [Pg. 396 is part of Doc. 209], 407 [Pg. 407 is part of Doc. 215], 642–643 [Pgs. 642–643 include portions of Doc. 378, Doc. 379, and Doc. 380], 649 [Pg. 649 includes portions of Doc. 383 and Doc. 384], 664 [Pg. 664 is part of Doc. 394], 685–687 [Pgs. 685–687 include portions of Doc. 410, Doc. 411, Doc. 412, Doc. 413, and Doc. 414], 691 [Pg. 691 includes portions of Doc. 417 and Doc. 418], 706 [Pg. 706 is part of Doc. 430], 714 [Pg. 714 includes portions of Doc. 438 and Doc. 439], 743n [Pg. 743 includes portions of Doc. 460 and Doc. 461], 756 [Pg. 756 includes portions of Doc. 472, Doc. 473, and Doc. 474], 786 [Pg. 786 includes portions of Doc. 500 and Doc. 501], 820 [Pg. 820 includes portions of Doc. 527 and Doc. 528], 870 [Pg. 870 is part of Doc. 557], 876 [Pg. 876 is part of Doc. 563], 879 [Pg. 879 includes portions of Doc. 564 and Doc. 565], 884 [Pg. 884 includes portions of Doc. 569 and Doc. 570], 918 [Pg. 918 includes portions of Doc. 595 and Doc. 596], 950 [Pg. 950 is part of Doc. 612], 1064 [Pg. 1064 includes portions of Doc. 698 and Doc. 699], 1164 [Pg. 1164 includes portions of Doc. 783 and Doc. 784], 1201 [Pg. 1201 is part of Doc. 810], 1219–1221 [Pgs. 1219–1221 include portions of Doc. 826 and Doc. 827], 1242 [Pg. 1242 includes portions of Doc. 846 and Doc. 847], 1258 [Pg. 1258 is part of Doc. 862], 1289 [Pg. 1289 includes portions of Doc. 890 and Doc. 891], 1291 [Pg. 1291 includes portions of Doc. 892 and Doc. 893], 1303 [Pg. 1303 is part of Doc. 902], 1334 [Pg. 1334 is part of Doc. 926], 1336 [Pg. 1336 is part of Doc. 928], 1356 [Pg. 1356 includes portions of Doc. 939 and Doc. 940], 1359 [Pg. 1359 includes portions of Doc. 943 and Doc. 944], 1361n [Pg. 1361 includes portions of Doc. 944, Doc. 945, and Doc. 946], 1413–1414 [Pgs. 1413–1414 include portions of Doc. 982 and Doc. 983], 1422–1423 [Pgs. 1422–1423 include portions of Doc. 989, Doc. 990, and Doc. 991], 1443 [Pg. 1443 is part of Doc. 999], 1447 [Pg. 1447 is part of Doc. 1002], 1454 [Pg. 1454 includes portions of Doc. 1009 and Doc. 1010], 1460–1461 [Pgs. 1460–1461 include portions of Doc. 1014, Doc. 1015, and Doc. 1016], 1464 [Pg. 1464 is part of Doc. 1018], 1469 [Pg. 1469 includes portions of Doc. 1020 and Doc. 1021], 1471 [Pg. 1471 includes portions of Doc. 1023 and Doc. 1024], 1500–1502 [Pgs. 1500–1502 include portions of Doc. 1038 and Doc. 1039], 1686 [Pg. 1686 is part of Doc. 1165], 1691n [Pg. 1691 includes portions of Doc. 1169, Doc. 1170, and Doc. 1171], 1692–1693 [Pgs. 1692–1693 include portions of Doc. 1171 and Doc. 1172], 1715 [Pg. 1715 includes portions of Doc. 1190 and Doc. 1191], 1756 [Pg. 1756 is part of Doc. 1217], 1765 [Pg. 1765 is part of Doc. 1223]

Security Council: Anglo-Egyptian treaty of 1936, revision of, 208–209 [Pg. 208 is part of Doc. 96], 533 [Pg. 533 is part of Doc. 311]

Atomic Energy Commission, 1774 [Pg. 1774 includes portions of Doc. 1228 and Doc. 1229]

Egyptian position, 208 [Pg. 208 is part of Doc. 96]

Indian membership, proposed, 1725 [Pg. 1725 includes portions of Doc. 1200 and Doc. 1201], 1745 [Pg. 1745 includes portions of Doc. 1212 and Doc. 1213]

Indonesian question, 1746 [Pg. 1746 is part of Doc. 1213]

Jordanian membership in the United Nations, proposed, 774 [Pg. 774 includes portions of Doc. 490 and Doc. 491]

Soviet position, 676 [Pg. 676 is part of Doc. 403], 774–775 [Pgs. 774–775 include portions of Doc. 490, Doc. 491, and Doc. 492], 1754 [Pg. 1754 is part of Doc. 1217]

Sri Lanka membership in the United Nations, proposed, 774 [Pg. 774 includes portions of Doc. 490 and Doc. 491]

Veto question, 37 [Pg. 37 is part of Doc. 4], 274 [Pg. 274 is part of Doc. 133], 404 [Pg. 404 includes portions of Doc. 214 and Doc. 215], 550–551 [Pg. 550 is part of Doc. 315], 676 [Pg. 676 is part of Doc. 403], 774 [Pg. 774 includes portions of Doc. 490 and Doc. 491], 1773–1774 [Pgs. 1773–1774 include portions of Doc. 1227, Doc. 1228, and Doc. 1229], 1776 [Pg. 1776 is part of Doc. 1231]

Yugoslav election to, 458 [Pg. 458 includes portions of Doc. 252 and Doc. 253]

Trusteeship Council (see also U.N. Trusteeship Council under Palestine question), 1543 [Pg. 1543 is part of Doc. 1078]

U.N. Committee of Investigation on Eritrea, 72 [Pg. 72 is part of Doc. 12], 88 [Pg. 88 is part of Doc. 12]

U.N. Declaration of Human Rights, 1948, 210 [Pg. 210 is part of Doc. 96], 950 [Pg. 950 is part of Doc. 612], 1027 [Pg. 1027 is part of Doc. 667], 1160–1161 [Pgs. 1160–1161 include portions of Doc. 780 and Doc. 781], 1320 [Pg. 1320 is part of Doc. 913], 1451 [Pg. 1451 includes portions of Doc. 1006 and Doc. 1007]

U.N. Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, 525 [Pg. 525 is part of Doc. 304], 1352 [Pg. 1352 is part of Doc. 937], 1500 [Pg. 1500 is part of Doc. 1038], 1502 [Pg. 1502 includes portions of Doc. 1038 and Doc. 1039]

U.N. International Children’s Emergency Fund, 806 [Pg. 806 is part of Doc. 515], 829 [Pg. 829 is part of Doc. 533], 1422 [Pg. 1422 is part of Doc. 989], 1473 [Pg. 1473 is part of Doc. 1025], 1480 [Pg. 1480 is part of Doc. 1026], 1500 [Pg. 1500 is part of Doc. 1038], 1502 [Pg. 1502 includes portions of Doc. 1038 and Doc. 1039]

U.N. Relief and Rehabilitation Administration, 2 [Pg. 2 is part of Doc. 1], 273 [Pg. 273 is part of Doc. 133]

U.S. Tariff Commission, 212 [Pg. 212 is part of Doc. 96]

Upton, J. M., 531 [Pg. 531 is part of Doc. 311]

Usher, R. B., 1742 [Pg. 1742 includes portions of Doc. 1210 and Doc. 1211]

Utter, John E., 90 [Pg. 90 is part of Doc. 13]

Van de Kerchove d’Hallebast, Robert, 1695 [Pg. 1695 is part of Doc. 1173], 1769 [Pg. 1769 is part of Doc. 1225]

Vandenberg, Arthur H., 1048 [Pg. 1048 includes portions of Doc. 686 and Doc. 687], 1333 [Pg. 1333 is part of Doc. 925]

Vande Velde, Lt. Col. Robert W., 752 [Pg. 752 includes portions of Doc. 468 and Doc. 469]

Van Fleet, Lt. Gen. James A., 239 [Pg. 239 is part of Doc. 112], 245n [Pg. 245 includes portions of Doc. 115, Doc. 116, and Doc. 117], 246–247 [Pg. 246 is part of Doc. 117], 300n [Pg. 300 is part of Doc. 148], 359–361 [Pgs. 359–361 include portions of Doc. 181, Doc. 182, Doc. 183, and Doc. 184], 373 [Pg. 373 is part of Doc. 194], 389 [Pg. 389 includes portions of Doc. 204, Doc. 205, and Doc. 206], 429 [Pg. 429 includes portions of Doc. 232 and Doc. 233], 432n [Pg. 432 is part of Doc. 234], 437n [Pg. 437 is part of Doc. 239], 443 [Pg. 443 is part of Doc. 243], 453–456 [Pgs. 453–456 include portions of Doc. 249, Doc. 250, and Doc. 251], 461 [Pg. 461 includes portions of Doc. 254 and Doc. 255]

Van Langehove, Fernard, 298 [Pg. 298 includes portions of Doc. 146 and Doc. 147], 322 [Pg. 322 includes portions of Doc. 159 and Doc. 160]

Van Roijen (Royan), J. H., 53 [Pg. 53 is part of Doc. 8]

Vassiliadis, Gerasimos, 245n [Pg. 245 includes portions of Doc. 115, Doc. 116, and Doc. 117]

Vatican, 1300–1301 [Pgs. 1300–1301 include portions of Doc. 899 and Doc. 900], 1308 [Pg. 1308 includes portions of Doc. 904 and Doc. 905], 1322 [Pg. 1322 includes portions of Doc. 915 and Doc. 916], 1348 [Pg. 1348 includes portions of Doc. 934 and Doc. 935], 1349n [Pg. 1349 includes portions of Doc. 935 and Doc. 936], 1384 [Pg. 1384 is part of Doc. 962], 1498 [Pg. 1498 includes portions of Doc. 1036 and Doc. 1037], 1522 [Pg. 1522 includes portions of Doc. 1057 and Doc. 1058], 1525 [Pg. 1525 is part of Doc. 1060], 1532–1533 [Pgs. 1532–1533 include portions of Doc. 1066, Doc. 1067, and Doc. 1068], 1537–1538 [Pgs. 1537–1538 include portions of Doc. 1071 and Doc. 1072], 1548 [Pg. 1548 includes portions of Doc. 1080 and Doc. 1081], 1552–1554 [Pg. 1552 is part of Doc. 1083]

Venezuela, 126 [Pg. 126 is part of Doc. 34], 149 [Pg. 149 includes portions of Doc. 55, Doc. 56, and Doc. 57], 1636 [Pg. 1636 is part of Doc. 1137]

Venizelos, Sophocles, 241 [Pg. 241 is part of Doc. 114], 1032 [Pg. 1032 includes portions of Doc. 671 and Doc. 672]

Venizelos, Sophocles, 241 [Pg. 241 is part of Doc. 114], 296 [Pg. 296 is part of Doc. 145], 309 [Pg. 309 includes portions of Doc. 150 and Doc. 151], 362 [Pg. 362 is part of Doc. 185], 389 [Pg. 389 includes portions of Doc. 204, Doc. 205, and Doc. 206], 424 [Pg. 424 is part of Doc. 227], 425n [Pg. 425 includes portions of Doc. 227 and Doc. 228], 457–460 [Pgs. 457–460 include portions of Doc. 251, Doc. 252, Doc. 253, and Doc. 254]

Vigier, Henri, 610 [Pg. 610 is part of Doc. 353], 787 [Pg. 787 includes portions of Doc. 501 and Doc. 502], 846 [Pg. 846 includes portions of Doc. 536 and Doc. 537], 918 [Pg. 918 includes portions of Doc. 595 and Doc. 596], 1000–1001 [Pgs. 1000–1001 include portions of Doc. 650, Doc. 651, and Doc. 652], 1003 [Pg. 1003 includes portions of Doc. 652, Doc. 653, and Doc. 654], 1030 [Pg. 1030 includes portions of Doc. 670 and Doc. 671], 1046 [Pg. 1046 includes portions of Doc. 684 and Doc. 685], 1053 [Pg. 1053 includes portions of Doc. 689 and Doc. 690], 1100 [Pg. 1100 includes portions of Doc. 733, Doc. 734, and Doc. 735], 1131 [Pg. 1131 includes portions of Doc. 757 and Doc. 758], 1178n [Pg. 1178 includes portions of Doc. 791 and Doc. 792], 1225 [Pg. 1225 includes portions of Doc. 829 and Doc. 830], 1231 [Pg. 1231 includes portions of Doc. 834 and Doc. 835], 1466 [Pg. 1466 is part of Doc. 1019], Vincent, John Carter, 668–669 [Pgs. 668–669 include portions of Doc. 398, Doc. 399, and Doc. 400], 968–969 [Pgs. 968–969 include portions of Doc. 627, Doc. 628, and Doc. 629], 988–989 [Pg. 988 is part of Doc. 641], 1013–1015 [Pgs. 1013–1015 include portions of Doc. 660 and Doc. 661], 1036–1038 [Pgs. 1036–1038 include portions of Doc. 675 and Doc. 676], 1065–1071 [Pgs. 1065–1071 include portions of Doc. 699, Doc. 700, Doc. 701, Doc. 702, Doc. 703, and Doc. 704], 1112–1114 [Pgs. 1112–1114 include portions of Doc. 742, Doc. 743, Doc. 744, and Doc. 745], 1122–1123 [Pgs. 1122–1123 include portions of Doc. 751 and Doc. 752], 1142–1143 [Pgs. 1142–1143 include portions of Doc. 765, Doc. 766, Doc. 767, and Doc. 768]

Vladiguerov, Todar, 299 [Pg. 299 is part of Doc. 147], 319 [Pg. 319 is part of Doc. 158]

Vyshinsky, Andrey Y., 262n [Pg. 262 is part of Doc. 127], 333n [Pg. 333 includes portions of Doc. 165 and Doc. 166], 493 [Pg. 493 is part of Doc. 278]

Wadsworth, George, 167–168 [Pgs. 167–168 include portions of Doc. 71, Doc. 72, and Doc. 73], 1639–1642 [Pgs. 1639–1642 include portions of Doc. 1140, Doc. 1141, and Doc. 1142], 1656n [Pg. 1656 is part of Doc. 1149], 1673–1674 [Pgs. 1673–1674 include portions of Doc. 1155 and Doc. 1156], 1676–1679 [Pgs. 1676–1679 include portions of Doc. 1158 and Doc. 1159], 1681 [Pg. 1681 is part of Doc. 1160]

Wagner, Joseph J., 536–537 [Pg. 536 is part of Doc. 312], 539n [Pg. 539 is part of Doc. 312]

Wagner, Marcel E., 136 [Pg. 136 includes portions of Doc. 45 and Doc. 46]

Wainright, Gen. Jonathan M., 1688 [Pg. 1688 is part of Doc. 1166]

Walker, C., Michael, 531 [Pg. 531 is part of Doc. 311], 1708–1710 [Pgs. 1708–1710 include portions of Doc. 1186, Doc. 1187, and Doc. 1188], 1742 [Pg. 1742 includes portions of Doc. 1210 and Doc. 1211], 1745 [Pg. 1745 includes portions of Doc. 1212 and Doc. 1213]

Wallinger, Geoffrey A., 262 [Pg. 262 is part of Doc. 127], 265 [Pg. 265 includes portions of Doc. 130 and Doc. 131]

War, possibility of global, 4–6 [Pg. 4 is part of Doc. 1], 10 [Pg. 10 is part of Doc. 3], 24 [Pg. 24 is part of Doc. 3], 30–31 [Pgs. 30–31 include portions of Doc. 3 and Doc. 4], 41 [Pg. 41 is part of Doc. 4], 43 [Pg. 43 is part of Doc. 4], 57–58 [Pg. 57 is part of Doc. 10], 201 [Pg. 201 is part of Doc. 91], 220–221 [Pgs. 220–221 include portions of Doc. 98, Doc. 99, and Doc. 100], 279 [Pg. 279 includes portions of Doc. 133 and Doc. 134], 374 [Pg. 374 is part of Doc. 194], 454–455 [Pg. 454 is part of Doc. 249], 495 [Pg. 495 includes portions of Doc. 279 and Doc. 280], 519 [Pg. 519 includes portions of Doc. 301 and Doc. 302], 524 [Pg. 524 is part of Doc. 304], 547 [Pg. 547 is part of Doc. 315], 550 [Pg. 550 is part of Doc. 315], 574 [Pg. 574 includes portions of Doc. 329 and Doc. 330], 641 [Pg. 641 includes portions of Doc. 377 and Doc. 378], 1010 [Pg. 1010 is part of Doc. 659], 1012 [Pg. 1012 is part of Doc. 659], 1134 [Pg. 1134 is part of Doc. 760], 1805 [Pg. 1805 includes portions of Doc. 1240 and Doc. 1241]

Warren, George L., 1422 [Pg. 1422 is part of Doc. 989], 1430n [Pg. 1430 includes portions of Doc. 995, Doc. 996, and Doc. 997]

Waterlow, C., 906 [Pg. 906 includes portions of Doc. 589 and Doc. 590]

Webb, James E.: Albania, U.S. policy toward, 422–423 [Pgs. 422–423 include portions of Doc. 224, Doc. 225, and Doc. 226]

Anglo-American military staff talks on the Middle East, proposed, 207n [Pg. 207 includes portions of Doc. 94 and Doc. 95]

Egypt, U. S. policy toward, 224–226 [Pgs. 224–226 include portions of Doc. 103 and Doc. 104]

Greece, U.S. policy toward, 269n [Pg. 269 is part of Doc. 133], 279n [Pg. 279 includes portions of Doc. 133 and Doc. 134], 336–338 [Pgs. 336–338 include portions of Doc. 167, Doc. 168, and Doc. 169], 344–345 [Pgs. 344–345 include portions of Doc. 171, Doc. 172, and Doc. 173], 348 [Pg. 348 is part of Doc. 175], 350–353 [Pgs. 350–353 include portions of Doc. 176, Doc. 177, and Doc. 178], 358–359 [Pgs. 358–359 include portions of Doc. 181 and Doc. 182], 424–429 [Pgs. 424–429 include portions of Doc. 227, Doc. 228, Doc. 229, Doc. 230, Doc. 231, Doc. 232, and Doc. 233], 431 [Pg. 431 is part of Doc. 234], 461–462 [Pgs. 461–462 include portions of Doc. 254, Doc. 255, and Doc. 256]

Haifa oil refinery, proposed reopening of, 156–157 [Pgs. 156–157 include portions of Doc. 63, Doc. 64, Doc. 65, and Doc. 66]

Iran, U.S. policy toward, 518 [Pg. 518 includes portions of Doc. 300 and Doc. 301], 522–528 [Pgs. 522–528 include portions of Doc. 302, Doc. 303, Doc. 304, Doc. 305, Doc. 306, Doc. 307, Doc. 308, and Doc. 309], 561–562 [Pgs. 561–562 include portions of Doc. 320, Doc. 321, and Doc. 322], 567–569 [Pgs. 567–569 include portions of Doc. 325, Doc. 326, Doc. 327, and Doc. 328]

Iraqi-Syrian merger, proposed, 181–182 [Pgs. 181–182 include portions of Doc. 76, Doc. 77, and Doc. 78]

Israeli request for U.S. military technical assistance, 898–899 [Pgs. 898–899 include portions of Doc. 582, Doc. 583, Doc. 584, and Doc. 585], 1087 [Pg. 1087 includes portions of Doc. 721 and Doc. 722]

Kashmir dispute, 1698n [Pg. 1698 includes portions of Doc. 1175, Doc. 1176, and Doc. 1177], 1713–1716 [Pgs. 1713–1716 include portions of Doc. 1189, Doc. 1190, Doc. 1191, and Doc. 1192], 1747–1748 [Pgs. 1747–1748 include portions of Doc. 1213, Doc. 1214, and Doc. 1215]

Near and Middle East, U.S. policy toward, 165 [Pg. 165 is part of Doc. 71], 167n [Pg. 167 includes portions of Doc. 71 and Doc. 72]

Palestine question, 723n [Pg. 723 includes portions of Doc. 447 and Doc. 448], 800–801 [Pgs. 800–801 include portions of Doc. 509 and Doc. 510], 865 [Pg. 865 is part of Doc. 552], 875 [Pg. 875 is part of Doc. 562], 1046–1047 [Pgs. 1046–1047 include portions of Doc. 684, Doc. 685, and Doc. 686], 1057 [Pg. 1057 includes portions of Doc. 693, Doc. 694, and Doc. 695], 1060–1063 [Pgs. 1060–1063 include portions of Doc. 697 and Doc. 698], 1072–1075 [Pgs. 1072–1075 include portions of Doc. 704, Doc. 705, Doc. 706, and Doc. 707], 1077–1083 [Pgs. 1077–1083 include portions of Doc. 710, Doc. 711, Doc. 712, Doc. 713, Doc. 714, Doc. 715, Doc. 716, and Doc. 717], 1090–1096 [Pgs. 1090–1096 include portions of Doc. 723, Doc. 724, Doc. 725, Doc. 726, Doc. 727, Doc. 728, Doc. 729, Doc. 730, and Doc. 731], 1100–1102 [Pgs. 1100–1102 include portions of Doc. 733, Doc. 734, Doc. 735, and Doc. 736], 1107–1109 [Pgs. 1107–1109 include portions of Doc. 737, Doc. 738, Doc. 739, and Doc. 740], 1111 [Pg. 1111 is part of Doc. 742], 1115–1117 [Pgs. 1115–1117 include portions of Doc. 745, Doc. 746, Doc. 747, and Doc. 748], 1123–1124 [Pgs. 1123–1124 include portions of Doc. 751, Doc. 752, and Doc. 753], 1125n [Pg. 1125 is part of Doc. 753], 1126–1127 [Pgs. 1126–1127 include portions of Doc. 754 and Doc. 755], 1137 [Pg. 1137 includes portions of Doc. 762 and Doc. 763], 1143 [Pg. 1143 includes portions of Doc. 767 and Doc. 768], 1146 [Pg. 1146 includes portions of Doc. 769 and Doc. 770], 1148–1166 [Pgs. 1148–1166 include portions of Doc. 772, Doc. 773, Doc. 774, Doc. 775, Doc. 776, Doc. 777, Doc. 778, Doc. 779, Doc. 780, Doc. 781, Doc. 782, Doc. 783, Doc. 784, Doc. 785, and Doc. 786], 1174n [Pg. 1174 includes portions of Doc. 789 and Doc. 790], 1179 [Pg. 1179 includes portions of Doc. 792 and Doc. 793], 1185 [Pg. 1185 includes portions of Doc. 797 and Doc. 798], 1197n [Pg. 1197 is part of Doc. 809], 1218n [Pg. 1218 includes portions of Doc. 825 and Doc. 826], 1327 [Pg. 1327 includes portions of Doc. 919, Doc. 920, and Doc. 921], 1328n [Pg. 1328 includes portions of Doc. 921 and Doc. 922], 1332 [Pg. 1332 is part of Doc. 924], 1404–1405 [Pgs. 1404–1405 include portions of Doc. 976, Doc. 977, and Doc. 978], 1409 [Pg. 1409 includes portions of Doc. 980 and Doc. 981], 1413–1414 [Pgs. 1413–1414 include portions of Doc. 982 and Doc. 983], 1418 [Pg. 1418 includes portions of Doc. 984, Doc. 985, and Doc. 986], 1423 [Pg. 1423 includes portions of Doc. 990 and Doc. 991], 1455 [Pg. 1455 includes portions of Doc. 1011 and Doc. 1012], 1486–1488 [Pgs. 1486–1488 include portions of Doc. 1029, Doc. 1030, and Doc. 1031], 1491–1494 [Pgs. 1491–1494 include portions of Doc. 1032, Doc. 1033, Doc. 1034, and Doc. 1035], 1511–1512 [Pgs. 1511–1512 include portions of Doc. 1046, Doc. 1047, Doc. 1048, and Doc. 1049], 1535 [Pg. 1535 includes portions of Doc. 1069 and Doc. 1070]

Palestinian refugees, 788 [Pg. 788 is part of Doc. 503], 827 [Pg. 827 is part of Doc. 533], 842n [Pg. 842 includes portions of Doc. 533 and Doc. 534], 918 [Pg. 918 includes portions of Doc. 595 and Doc. 596], 1042 [Pg. 1042 includes portions of Doc. 679 and Doc. 680], 1047–1048 [Pgs. 1047–1048 include portions of Doc. 685, Doc. 686, and Doc. 687], 1051–1053 [Pgs. 1051–1053 include portions of Doc. 688, Doc. 689, and Doc. 690], 1056 [Pg. 1056 includes portions of Doc. 691, Doc. 692, and Doc. 693], 1063–1065 [Pgs. 1063–1065 include portions of Doc. 697, Doc. 698, Doc. 699, and Doc. 700], 1156–1157 [Pgs. 1156–1157 include portions of Doc. 776, Doc. 777, and Doc. 778], 1422 [Pg. 1422 is part of Doc. 989], 1460–1461 [Pgs. 1460–1461 include portions of Doc. 1014, Doc. 1015, and Doc. 1016], 1505 [Pg. 1505 is part of Doc. 1041]

Persian Gulf territorial questions, 131–132 [Pgs. 131–132 include portions of Doc. 40 and Doc. 41], 135–136 [Pgs. 135–136 include portions of Doc. 44, Doc. 45, and Doc. 46]

Turkey, U.S. relations with, 1671–1672 [Pgs. 1671–1672 include portions of Doc. 1153 and Doc. 1154], 1682 [Pg. 1682 includes portions of Doc. 1160 and Doc. 1161]

Under Secretary of State, appointment as, 232n [Pg. 232 is part of Doc. 106]

Union of South Africa, U.S. relations with, 1803 [Pg. 1803 includes portions of Doc. 1239 and Doc. 1240], 1805–1807 [Pgs. 1805–1807 include portions of Doc. 1240, Doc. 1241, and Doc. 1242]

U.N. Special Committee on the Balkans, 339 [Pg. 339 includes portions of Doc. 169 and Doc. 170]

Weizmann, Chaim, 595–596 [Pgs. 595–596 include portions of Doc. 341, Doc. 342, and Doc. 343], 600–601 [Pgs. 600–601 include portions of Doc. 347 and Doc. 348], 670 [Pg. 670 includes portions of Doc. 400 and Doc. 401], 736 [Pg. 736 is part of Doc. 457], 741–742 [Pgs. 741–742 include portions of Doc. 458, Doc. 459, and Doc. 460], 772 [Pg. 772 includes portions of Doc. 489 and Doc. 490], 886 [Pg. 886 includes portions of Doc. 572 and Doc. 573], 887n [Pg. 887 includes portions of Doc. 573 and Doc. 574], 890n [Pg. 890 is part of Doc. 577], 943–948 [Pgs. 943–948 include portions of Doc. 608, Doc. 609, Doc. 610, Doc. 611, and Doc. 612], 954 [Pg. 954 includes portions of Doc. 613 and Doc. 614], 957 [Pg. 957 includes portions of Doc. 616 and Doc. 617], 959 [Pg. 959 includes portions of Doc. 618 and Doc. 619], 974 [Pg. 974 is part of Doc. 632], 1015 [Pg. 1015 includes portions of Doc. 660 and Doc. 661], 1017 [Pg. 1017 includes portions of Doc. 661 and Doc. 662], 1058 [Pg. 1058 includes portions of Doc. 695 and Doc. 696], 1168–1173 [Pgs. 1168–1173 include portions of Doc. 787, Doc. 788, and Doc. 789], 1190 [Pg. 1190 is part of Doc. 802], 1202 [Pg. 1202 includes portions of Doc. 810, Doc. 811, and Doc. 812], 1305 [Pg. 1305 is part of Doc. 904], 1307–1308 [Pgs. 1307–1308 include portions of Doc. 904 and Doc. 905], 1323–1324 [Pgs. 1323–1324 include portions of Doc. 916, Doc. 917, and Doc. 918], 1494–1495 [Pgs. 1494–1495 include portions of Doc. 1034, Doc. 1035, and Doc. 1036], 1533 [Pg. 1533 includes portions of Doc. 1067 and Doc. 1068]

West Germany, 35–36 [Pg. 35 is part of Doc. 4], 1651 [Pg. 1651 is part of Doc. 1146]

Western Europe, 5 [Pg. 5 is part of Doc. 1], 7–8 [Pgs. 7–8 include portions of Doc. 1, Doc. 2, and Doc. 3], 22 [Pg. 22 is part of Doc. 3], 29 [Pg. 29 is part of Doc. 3], 36 [Pg. 36 is part of Doc. 4], 44 [Pg. 44 is part of Doc. 4], 50 [Pg. 50 is part of Doc. 8], 52 [Pg. 52 is part of Doc. 8], 309 [Pg. 309 includes portions of Doc. 150 and Doc. 151], 448 [Pg. 448 is part of Doc. 246], 453 [Pg. 453 is part of Doc. 249], 455 [Pg. 455 is part of Doc. 249], 464 [Pg. 464 is part of Doc. 257], 473n [Pg. 473 is part of Doc. 263], 495n [Pg. 495 includes portions of Doc. 279 and Doc. 280], 518 [Pg. 518 includes portions of Doc. 300 and Doc. 301], 554 [Pg. 554 is part of Doc. 316], 1650 [Pg. 1650 is part of Doc. 1146], 1806 [Pg. 1806 is part of Doc. 1241]

Western European Union, 29 [Pg. 29 is part of Doc. 3], 201 [Pg. 201 is part of Doc. 91], 579 [Pg. 579 includes portions of Doc. 330 and Doc. 331], 587 [Pg. 587 is part of Doc. 336], 694 [Pg. 694 includes portions of Doc. 419, Doc. 420, and Doc. 421], 1647 [Pg. 1647 is part of Doc. 1146], 1649 [Pg. 1649 is part of Doc. 1146]

Wheatley, H.H., 118–119 [Pgs. 118–119 include portions of Doc. 27, Doc. 28, and Doc. 29], 139 [Pg. 139 is part of Doc. 48]

Whitman, Roswell H., 1312 [Pg. 1312 is part of Doc. 907]

Wight, William L., 1490 [Pg. 1490 includes portions of Doc. 1031 and Doc. 1032]

Wiley, John C., 91 [Pg. 91 is part of Doc. 14], 104 [Pg. 104 includes portions of Doc. 19 and Doc. 20], 121 [Pg. 121 includes portions of Doc. 30 and Doc. 31], 125–128 [Pgs. 125–128 include portions of Doc. 33, Doc. 34, Doc. 35, Doc. 36, and Doc. 37], 130 [Pg. 130 is part of Doc. 39], 134 [Pg. 134 includes portions of Doc. 43 and Doc. 44], 141–142 [Pgs. 141–142 include portions of Doc. 49, Doc. 50, and Doc. 51], 149–150 [Pgs. 149–150 include portions of Doc. 55, Doc. 56, Doc. 57, and Doc. 58], 168 [Pg. 168 includes portions of Doc. 72 and Doc. 73], 473 [Pg. 473 is part of Doc. 263], 475–477 [Pgs. 475–477 include portions of Doc. 264, Doc. 265, Doc. 266, and Doc. 267], 480 [Pg. 480 includes portions of Doc. 269 and Doc. 270], 488–489 [Pgs. 488–489 include portions of Doc. 275, Doc. 276, and Doc. 277], 492–497 [Pgs. 492–497 include portions of Doc. 277, Doc. 278, Doc. 279, Doc. 280, and Doc. 281], 498n [Pg. 498 is part of Doc. 282], 499n [Pg. 499 is part of Doc. 282], 500n [Pg. 500 includes portions of Doc. 282, Doc. 283, and Doc. 284], 501–503 [Pgs. 501–503 include portions of Doc. 284, Doc. 285, Doc. 286, and Doc. 287], 504n [Pg. 504 includes portions of Doc. 287 and Doc. 288], 505–519 [Pgs. 505–519 include portions of Doc. 288, Doc. 289, Doc. 290, Doc. 291, Doc. 292, Doc. 293, Doc. 294, Doc. 295, Doc. 296, Doc. 297, Doc. 298, Doc. 299, Doc. 300, Doc. 301, and Doc. 302], 520n [Pg. 520 is part of Doc. 302], 521–523 [Pgs. 521–523 include portions of Doc. 302, Doc. 303, and Doc. 304], 525n [Pg. 525 is part of Doc. 304], 526–530 [Pgs. 526–530 include portions of Doc. 305, Doc. 306, Doc. 307, Doc. 308, Doc. 309, and Doc. 310], 536–539 [Pg. 536 is part of Doc. 312], 552–557 [Pgs. 552–557 include portions of Doc. 316, Doc. 317, and Doc. 318], 560 [Pg. 560 is part of Doc. 320], 562–567 [Pgs. 562–567 include portions of Doc. 321, Doc. 322, Doc. 323, Doc. 324, Doc. 325, and Doc. 326], 571 [Pg. 571 is part of Doc. 328], 582–583 [Pgs. 582–583 include portions of Doc. 333, Doc. 334, and Doc. 335], 589 [Pg. 589 includes portions of Doc. 337 and Doc. 338], 591 [Pg. 591 is part of Doc. 339], 1642–1643 [Pgs. 1642–1643 include portions of Doc. 1141, Doc. 1142, and Doc. 1143]

Wilkins, Fraser, 64 [Pg. 64 is part of Doc. 12], 184 [Pg. 184 includes portions of Doc. 78 and Doc. 79], 599 [Pg. 599 includes portions of Doc. 345 and Doc. 346], 611 [Pg. 611 is part of Doc. 354], 624 [Pg. 624 is part of Doc. 364], 635 [Pg. 635 is part of Doc. 372], 647 [Pg. 647 includes portions of Doc. 382 and Doc. 383], 654 [Pg. 654 includes portions of Doc. 388 and Doc. 389], 846–848 [Pgs. 846–848 include portions of Doc. 536, Doc. 537, Doc. 538, and Doc. 539], 869n [Pg. 869 is part of Doc. 556], 924 [Pg. 924 includes portions of Doc. 600 and Doc. 601], 999 [Pg. 999 includes portions of Doc. 649 and Doc. 650], 1252n [Pg. 1252 includes portions of Doc. 855 and Doc. 856], 1255 [Pg. 1255 includes portions of Doc. 858 and Doc. 859], 1261 [Pg. 1261 includes portions of Doc. 865 and Doc. 866], 1264 [Pg. 1264 includes portions of Doc. 866 and Doc. 867], 1305n [Pg. 1305 is part of Doc. 904], 1310 [Pg. 1310 is part of Doc. 906], 1323 [Pg. 1323 includes portions of Doc. 916, Doc. 917, and Doc. 918], 1405–1409 [Pgs. 1405–1409 include portions of Doc. 977, Doc. 978, Doc. 979, Doc. 980, and Doc. 981], 1411 [Pg. 1411 is part of Doc. 981], 1418 [Pg. 1418 includes portions of Doc. 984, Doc. 985, and Doc. 986], 1426–1427 [Pgs. 1426–1427 include portions of Doc. 993 and Doc. 994], 1440 [Pg. 1440 includes portions of Doc. 997 and Doc. 998], 1451n [Pg. 1451 includes portions of Doc. 1006 and Doc. 1007], 1452n [Pg. 1452 includes portions of Doc. 1007 and Doc. 1008], 1465 [Pg. 1465 includes portions of Doc. 1018 and Doc. 1019], 1471n [Pg. 1471 includes portions of Doc. 1023 and Doc. 1024], 1495 [Pg. 1495 includes portions of Doc. 1035 and Doc. 1036], 1512 [Pg. 1512 includes portions of Doc. 1047, Doc. 1048, and Doc. 1049], 1523–1524 [Pgs. 1523–1524 include portions of Doc. 1058, Doc. 1059, and Doc. 1060], 1536 [Pg. 1536 includes portions of Doc. 1070 and Doc. 1071], 1543 [Pg. 1543 is part of Doc. 1078]

Williams, W. L. S., 1725 [Pg. 1725 includes portions of Doc. 1200 and Doc. 1201]

Williams, Alan M., 164n [Pg. 164 is part of Doc. 70]

Wilson, Edwin C., 1647 [Pg. 1647 is part of Doc. 1146], 1653 [Pg. 1653 includes portions of Doc. 1146 and Doc. 1147]

Wilson, Evan M., 471–472 [Pgs. 471–472 include portions of Doc. 262 and Doc. 263]

Winckler, Jean-Claude, 356–357 [Pg. 356 is part of Doc. 180], 381–384 [Pgs. 381–384 include portions of Doc. 199 and Doc. 200], 423n [Pg. 423 includes portions of Doc. 225 and Doc. 226]

Winship, North, 1802–1803 [Pgs. 1802–1803 include portions of Doc. 1238, Doc. 1239, and Doc. 1240], 1807–1809 [Pgs. 1807–1809 include portions of Doc. 1241 and Doc. 1242]

Wolf, Franklin W., 1740–1742 [Pgs. 1740–1742 include portions of Doc. 1209, Doc. 1210, and Doc. 1211]

World Federation of Trade Unions, 1791 [Pg. 1791 is part of Doc. 1236]

World Health Organization, 147–148 [Pgs. 147–148 include portions of Doc. 54 and Doc. 55], 525 [Pg. 525 is part of Doc. 304], 858 [Pg. 858 is part of Doc. 546], 910 [Pg. 910 includes portions of Doc. 590 and Doc. 591], 1352 [Pg. 1352 is part of Doc. 937], 1422 [Pg. 1422 is part of Doc. 989], 1473 [Pg. 1473 is part of Doc. 1025], 1500 [Pg. 1500 is part of Doc. 1038], 1502 [Pg. 1502 includes portions of Doc. 1038 and Doc. 1039]

World Peace Congress, 305n [Pg. 305 is part of Doc. 150]

Wright, Michael, 54–55 [Pgs. 54–55 include portions of Doc. 8 and Doc. 9], 59–61 [Pgs. 59–61 include portions of Doc. 10, Doc. 11, and Doc. 12], 63–90 [Pgs. 63–90 include portions of Doc. 12 and Doc. 13], 156 [Pg. 156 includes portions of Doc. 63, Doc. 64, and Doc. 65], 164 [Pg. 164 is part of Doc. 70], 166–167 [Pgs. 166–167 include portions of Doc. 71 and Doc. 72], 172 [Pg. 172 is part of Doc. 73], 195n [Pg. 195 includes portions of Doc. 88 and Doc. 89], 205 [Pg. 205 includes portions of Doc. 92, Doc. 93, and Doc. 94], 627–628 [Pgs. 627–628 include portions of Doc. 366 and Doc. 367], 742n [Pg. 742 includes portions of Doc. 459 and Doc. 460], 906–910 [Pgs. 906–910 include portions of Doc. 589, Doc. 590, and Doc. 591], 969–970 [Pgs. 969–970 include portions of Doc. 628, Doc. 629, and Doc. 630], 1057n [Pg. 1057 includes portions of Doc. 693, Doc. 694, and Doc. 695], 1077–1078 [Pgs. 1077–1078 include portions of Doc. 710 and Doc. 711], 1081–1082 [Pgs. 1081–1082 include portions of Doc. 715, Doc. 716, and Doc. 717], 1084 [Pg. 1084 includes portions of Doc. 718 and Doc. 719], 1090 [Pg. 1090 includes portions of Doc. 723 and Doc. 724], 1099 [Pg. 1099 is part of Doc. 733], 1123 [Pg. 1123 includes portions of Doc. 751 and Doc. 752], 1180n [Pg. 1180 is part of Doc. 793], 1229n [Pg. 1229 includes portions of Doc. 832 and Doc. 833], 1247 [Pg. 1247 includes portions of Doc. 851 and Doc. 852], 1462 [Pg. 1462 includes portions of Doc. 1016 and Doc. 1017], 1476–1478 [Pgs. 1476–1478 include portions of Doc. 1025 and Doc. 1026], 1481–1482 [Pgs. 1481–1482 include portions of Doc. 1026, Doc. 1027, and Doc. 1028], 1500n [Pg. 1500 is part of Doc. 1038], 1511 [Pg. 1511 includes portions of Doc. 1046 and Doc. 1047], 1563 [Pg. 1563 includes portions of Doc. 1092 and Doc. 1093], 1572 [Pg. 1572 includes portions of Doc. 1097 and Doc. 1098], 1623 [Pg. 1623 includes portions of Doc. 1126 and Doc. 1127]

Yadin, Col. Yigael, 699 [Pg. 699 includes portions of Doc. 425 and Doc. 426], 749n [Pg. 749 includes portions of Doc. 466 and Doc. 467], 752 [Pg. 752 includes portions of Doc. 468 and Doc. 469], 860 [Pg. 860 is part of Doc. 547], 867 [Pg. 867 is part of Doc. 554], 980 [Pg. 980 includes portions of Doc. 637 and Doc. 638]

Yalcin, Hussein, 737 [Pg. 737 is part of Doc. 457], 745 [Pg. 745 is part of Doc. 463], 748 [Pg. 748 includes portions of Doc. 465 and Doc. 466], 751n [Pg. 751 is part of Doc. 468], 776 [Pg. 776 includes portions of Doc. 492 and Doc. 493], 787 [Pg. 787 includes portions of Doc. 501 and Doc. 502], 857 [Pg. 857 includes portions of Doc. 545 and Doc. 546], 884 [Pg. 884 includes portions of Doc. 569 and Doc. 570], 902–903 [Pgs. 902–903 include portions of Doc. 586 and Doc. 587], 911 [Pg. 911 includes portions of Doc. 591 and Doc. 592], 913 [Pg. 913 is part of Doc. 592], 1039 [Pg. 1039 includes portions of Doc. 676, Doc. 677, and Doc. 678], 1096 [Pg. 1096 includes portions of Doc. 730 and Doc. 731], 1122–1123 [Pgs. 1122–1123 include portions of Doc. 751 and Doc. 752], 1136 [Pg. 1136 is part of Doc. 761], 1154 [Pg. 1154 includes portions of Doc. 773 and Doc. 774], 1164 [Pg. 1164 includes portions of Doc. 783 and Doc. 784], 1423 [Pg. 1423 includes portions of Doc. 990 and Doc. 991], 1448 [Pg. 1448 includes portions of Doc. 1002, Doc. 1003, and Doc. 1004], 1465–1468 [Pgs. 1465–1468 include portions of Doc. 1018, Doc. 1019, and Doc. 1020], 1472 [Pg. 1472 includes portions of Doc. 1024 and Doc. 1025]

Yazici, Bülent, 1654n [Pg. 1654 includes portions of Doc. 1147 and Doc. 1148], 1659 [Pg. 1659 includes portions of Doc. 1150 and Doc. 1151]

Yelton, Elmer E., 1781 [Pg. 1781 is part of Doc. 1235]

Yemen, 704 [Pg. 704 is part of Doc. 429], 715–716 [Pgs. 715–716 include portions of Doc. 439, Doc. 440, and Doc. 441], 721 [Pg. 721 is part of Doc. 446], 877 [Pg. 877 is part of Doc. 563], 955 [Pg. 955 is part of Doc. 615], 1240 [Pg. 1240 includes portions of Doc. 845 and Doc. 846], 1488 [Pg. 1488 includes portions of Doc. 1030 and Doc. 1031], 1595 [Pg. 1595 is part of Doc. 1113], 1618 [Pg. 1618 is part of Doc. 1124], 1621 [Pg. 1621 is part of Doc. 1125]

Yenisey (Yenissey), Tarik Emin, 787 [Pg. 787 includes portions of Doc. 501 and Doc. 502], 911 [Pg. 911 includes portions of Doc. 591 and Doc. 592], 913 [Pg. 913 is part of Doc. 592], 999 [Pg. 999 includes portions of Doc. 649 and Doc. 650], 1286 [Pg. 1286 includes portions of Doc. 888 and Doc. 889]

Young, Norman, 906 [Pg. 906 includes portions of Doc. 589 and Doc. 590], 909 [Pg. 909 is part of Doc. 590]

Young, Richard, 95–97 [Pgs. 95–97 include portions of Doc. 16 and Doc. 17], 99–102 [Pgs. 99–102 include portions of Doc. 17 and Doc. 18], 104–106 [Pgs. 104–106 include portions of Doc. 19, Doc. 20, and Doc. 21], 111–112 [Pgs. 111–112 include portions of Doc. 24 and Doc. 25]

Joussef, Hassan, 1243n [Pg. 1243 includes portions of Doc. 847 and Doc. 848], 1508–1509 [Pgs. 1508–1509 include portions of Doc. 1042, Doc. 1043, Doc. 1044, and Doc. 1045], 1542 [Pg. 1542 includes portions of Doc. 1076 and Doc. 1077]

Yugoslavia (see also Yugoslav subheadings under Greece): Austria, claims against, 265 [Pg. 265 includes portions of Doc. 130 and Doc. 131]; Balkan pact, proposed inclusion in, 449 [Pg. 449 is part of Doc. 246], 460 [Pg. 460 includes portions of Doc. 253 and Doc. 254]; British policy, 360n [Pg. 360 includes portions of Doc. 182, Doc. 183, and Doc. 184], 363–364 [Pgs. 363–364 include portions of Doc. 185, Doc. 186, and Doc. 187], 366n [Pg. 366 includes portions of Doc. 188 and Doc. 189], 414n [Pg. 414 includes portions of Doc. 218 and Doc. 219]; Carinthian question, 368 [Pg. 368 is part of Doc. 190]; Communist Information Bureau, split from, 341 [Pg. 341 includes portions of Doc. 170 and Doc. 171], 360n [Pg. 360 includes portions of Doc. 182, Doc. 183, and Doc. 184], 364 [Pg. 364 includes portions of Doc. 186 and Doc. 187], 366n [Pg. 366 includes portions of Doc. 188 and Doc. 189], 368 [Pg. 368 is part of Doc. 190], 375 [Pg. 375 is part of Doc. 194], 381 [Pg. 381 includes portions of Doc. 199 and Doc. 200], 394 [Pg. 394 is part of Doc. 208], 408 [Pg. 408 is part of Doc. 215], 412 [Pg. 412 includes portions of Doc. 216, Doc. 217, and Doc. 218], 453 [Pg. 453 is part of Doc. 249], 459 [Pg. 459 is part of Doc. 253], 463 [Pg. 463 includes portions of Doc. 256 and Doc. 257], 467 [Pg. 467 is part of Doc. 260]; South Asia, policy toward, 15 [Pg. 15 is part of Doc. 3]; Soviet policy, 262–264 [Pgs. 262–264 include portions of Doc. 127, Doc. 128, and Doc. 129], 266 [Pg. 266 is part of Doc. 131], 292–293 [Pgs. 292–293 include portions of Doc. 142 and Doc. 143], 327–328 [Pg. 327 is part of Doc. 163], 368n [Pg. 368 is part of Doc. 190], 412 [Pg. 412 includes portions of Doc. 216, Doc. 217, and Doc. 218], 417 [Pg. 417 includes portions of Doc. 220 and Doc. 221]; Trieste question, 368–369 [Pgs. 368–369 include portions of Doc. 190 and Doc. 191]; Turkey, policy toward, 1668 [Pg. 1668 is part of Doc. 1152]; U.N. Security Council, election to, 458 [Pg. 458 includes portions of Doc. 252 and Doc. 253]; U.S. policy, 267 [Pg. 267 includes portions of Doc. 131 and Doc. 132], 276 [Pg. 276 is part of Doc. 133], 360 [Pg. 360 includes portions of Doc. 182, Doc. 183, and Doc. 184], 364 [Pg. 364 includes portions of Doc. 186 and Doc. 187], 374 [Pg. 374 is part of Doc. 194], 412 [Pg. 412 includes portions of Doc. 216, Doc. 217, and Doc. 218], 414n [Pg. 414 includes portions of Doc. 218 and Doc. 219], 447 [Pg. 447 includes portions of Doc. 244, Doc. 245, and Doc. 246]

Yusuf (Yusef) Yassin, Shaikh, 133 [Pg. 133 is part of Doc. 42], 155 [Pg. 155 is part of Doc. 63], 160–161 [Pgs. 160–161 include portions of Doc. 66, Doc. 67, and Doc. 68], 626n [Pg. 626 is part of Doc. 365], 712n [Pg. 712 includes portions of Doc. 435 and Doc. 436], 720 [Pg. 720 includes portions of Doc. 444 and Doc. 445], 756 [Pg. 756 includes portions of Doc. 472, Doc. 473, and Doc. 474], 1423–1424 [Pgs. 1423–1424 include portions of Doc. 990, Doc. 991, and Doc. 992], 1574 [Pg. 1574 includes portions of Doc. 1099 and Doc. 1100], 1577–1578 [Pgs. 1577–1578 include portions of Doc. 1102, Doc. 1103, and Doc. 1104], 1579n [Pg. 1579 includes portions of Doc. 1104 and Doc. 1105], 1581–1582 [Pgs. 1581–1582 include portions of Doc. 1106, Doc. 1107, and Doc. 1108], 1590 [Pg. 1590 is part of Doc. 1111], 1602–1603 [Pgs. 1602–1603 include portions of Doc. 1118 and Doc. 1119], 1606–1607 [Pg. 1606 is part of Doc. 1119], 1612–1613 [Pgs. 1612–1613 include portions of Doc. 1119 and Doc. 1120], 1624 [Pg. 1624 includes portions of Doc. 1127 and Doc. 1128], 1627–1629 [Pgs. 1627–1629 include portions of Doc. 1129, Doc. 1130, and Doc. 1131]

Zachariades, Nikos, 250–252 [Pg. 250 is part of Doc. 119]

Zafrulla Khan, Chaudri Sir Muhammad, 1695 [Pg. 1695 is part of Doc. 1173], 1704 [Pg. 1704 is part of Doc. 1182], 1723 [Pg. 1723 includes portions of Doc. 1197 and Doc. 1198], 1744–1745 [Pgs. 1744–1745 include portions of Doc. 1211, Doc. 1212, and Doc. 1213], 1761–1764 [Pgs. 1761–1764 include portions of Doc. 1220, Doc. 1221, Doc. 1222, and Doc. 1223], 1771–1772 [Pgs. 1771–1772 include portions of Doc. 1226 and Doc. 1227], 1775 [Pg. 1775 includes portions of Doc. 1229, Doc. 1230, and Doc. 1231]

Zaim, Husni, 110 [Pg. 110 is part of Doc. 24], 180 [Pg. 180 is part of Doc. 76], 901 [Pg. 901 is part of Doc. 586], 917 [Pg. 917 is part of Doc. 594], 927 [Pg. 927 includes portions of Doc. 602 and Doc. 603], 962n [Pg. 962 includes portions of Doc. 621 and Doc. 622], 965–966 [Pgs. 965–966 include portions of Doc. 623, Doc. 624, Doc. 625, and Doc. 626], 977 [Pg. 977 includes portions of Doc. 633 and Doc. 634], 980 [Pg. 980 includes portions of Doc. 637 and Doc. 638], 989–990 [Pgs. 989–990 include portions of Doc. 641, Doc. 642, and Doc. 643], 1000 [Pg. 1000 includes portions of Doc. 650 and Doc. 651], 1007 [Pg. 1007 includes portions of Doc. 656 and Doc. 657], 1031–1032 [Pgs. 1031–1032 include portions of Doc. 671 and Doc. 672], 1046 [Pg. 1046 includes portions of Doc. 684 and Doc. 685], 1053 [Pg. 1053 includes portions of Doc. 689 and Doc. 690], 1102n [Pg. 1102 includes portions of Doc. 735 and Doc. 736], 1119–1120 [Pgs. 1119–1120 include portions of Doc. 748 and Doc. 749], 1151 [Pg. 1151 is part of Doc. 772], 1156n [Pg. 1156 includes portions of Doc. 776 and Doc. 777], 1165–1166 [Pgs. 1165–1166 include portions of Doc. 784, Doc. 785, and Doc. 786], 1179 [Pg. 1179 includes portions of Doc. 792 and Doc. 793], 1226 [Pg. 1226 includes portions of Doc. 830 and Doc. 831], 1231 [Pg. 1231 includes portions of Doc. 834 and Doc. 835], 1245–1246 [Pgs. 1245–1246 include portions of Doc. 849 and Doc. 850], 1257 [Pg. 1257 includes portions of Doc. 861 and Doc. 862], 1271 [Pg. 1271 includes portions of Doc. 872, Doc. 873, and Doc. 874], 1318 [Pg. 1318 is part of Doc. 911], 1378 [Pg. 1378 is part of Doc. 958], 1630–1633 [Pgs. 1630–1633 include portions of Doc. 1132, Doc. 1133, Doc. 1134, and Doc. 1135], 1635 [Pg. 1635 includes portions of Doc. 1136 and Doc. 1137]

Zasuk, Col., 967 [Pg. 967 includes portions of Doc. 626 and Doc. 627]

Zaynaldin, Farid, 1234 [Pg. 1234 is part of Doc. 838]

Zeineddine, Farid Bey, 656 [Pg. 656 includes portions of Doc. 390 and Doc. 391], 989 [Pg. 989 is part of Doc. 641]

Zionism, 790 [Pg. 790 is part of Doc. 505], 792n [Pg. 792 is part of Doc. 505], 929 [Pg. 929 is part of Doc. 604]

Zionist references, 215 [Pg. 215 is part of Doc. 96], 619 [Pg. 619 is part of Doc. 359], 622 [Pg. 622 includes portions of Doc. 360, Doc. 361, Doc. 362, and Doc. 363], 629n [Pg. 629 includes portions of Doc. 368 and Doc. 369], 637–638 [Pgs. 637–638 include portions of Doc. 373 and Doc. 374], 652 [Pg. 652 is part of Doc. 386], 657 [Pg. 657 is part of Doc. 391], 678 [Pg. 678 is part of Doc. 405], 767n [Pg. 767 includes portions of Doc. 484 and Doc. 485], 929 [Pg. 929 is part of Doc. 604]

Zionists, 138 [Pg. 138 is part of Doc. 48], 217 [Pg. 217 includes portions of Doc. 96 and Doc. 97], 637–639 [Pgs. 637–639 include portions of Doc. 373, Doc. 374, and Doc. 375], 656 [Pg. 656 includes portions of Doc. 390 and Doc. 391], 667 [Pg. 667 includes portions of Doc. 397 and Doc. 398], 695n [Pg. 695 includes portions of Doc. 421 and Doc. 422], 719n [Pg. 719 is part of Doc. 444], 742n [Pg. 742 includes portions of Doc. 459 and Doc. 460], 759n [Pg. 759 includes portions of Doc. 476 and Doc. 477], 798 [Pg. 798 includes portions of Doc. 507 and Doc. 508], 804 [Pg. 804 includes portions of Doc. 513 and Doc. 514], 966n [Pg. 966 includes portions of Doc. 625 and Doc. 626], 1304 [Pg. 1304 is part of Doc. 903], 1419 [Pg. 1419 includes portions of Doc. 986 and Doc. 987]

Zirickly, Khairadeen Bey, 1604 [Pg. 1604 is part of Doc. 1119]
